(...) OR, THE BURNING OF LONDON IN THE YEAR 1666.

Commemorated and improved in a CX. Discourses, Meditations, and Contemplations.

Divided into four Parts, Treating of I. The sins, or Spiritual causes
procuring that Judgment. II. The Natural causes of Fire, morally applied. III.
The most remarkable passages and Circumstances of that dreadful Fire. IV.
Counsels and Comfort unto such as are sufferers by the said Judgment.


BY SAMVEL ROLL, Minister of the Word, and sometime Fellow of Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Nathaniel Ranew, and Jonathan Robinson. 1667.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
THe two first, and preliminary Discourses (as I have called them) being a
genuine Preface to the ensuing Book, I might and should have forborne to have
written any thing by way of Epistle, but that I was willing to tell thee what
is the method, and what the design of this Treatise, not knowing but it might
gratify thee, (as it uses to do my self) to have a kind of Synopsis, or
general view of the Authors drift, and scope, in, and throughout his whole
Book: as also, for that I was willing to make a just Apology, for some few
things, which I knew not but the more critical sort of Readers might object
against; as namely, the length of the Book, the Independency of one Discourse
upon another, etc. First as for the Book it self, it consists of four parts:
The first of which (having dispatched those Preliminary Discourses, which are
in the nature of a Preface) proceeds to treat of all, or most of those sins,
whereby (as Scripture informs us) God has been provoked first, and last, to
bring the Judgment of Fire.

The second part contains some few strictures of Philosophy, touching the
nature and Physical causes of Fire, which after the sad and wonderful effects
we have seen of it, one would think should put every ingenious Man upon
inquiry, what this same Fire is, which as an instrument in Gods hand has done
such great things, and laid so famous a City (or the most of it) flat, in less
than four days time. Some part even of the second part is intelligible enough
even by those that are no Scholars; yet because some passages therein are not
to be understood by others, I have made that part as much shorter than the
other three, (which they that run may read and understand) as the number of
Persons in England, that are competently Scholars, may be supposed to fall
short of their number that are in no wise such, it being, though a fourth
division, yet not about a twelfth or fourteenth part in proportion to the bulk
and bigness of the whole Book, and yet not without its moral applications
neither, easy enough to be understood.

The third part reflecteth upon all the remarkable passages, and circumstances,
of the late dreadful Fire, (which the Author could well think, or inform
himself of,) endeavoring to make some practical use and improvement of all or
most of them: as also glanceth at some few other things, either passages of
Scripture, or otherwise, that seem cognate, or to have competent affinity with
the subject in hand, as namely those analogical Fires (if I may so term them)
which we read of in Holy Writ, viz. The Tongues of Men, the Word of God, and
the Heavenly Angels, etc.

The fourth and last part is wholly and only conversant in wholesome Counsels,
and sure Foundations of support, and comfort, calculated, and proposed, for the
direction, and consolation of those that are under any kind of sufferings; but
more particularly under this, viz. by the late Fire.

Having given you this bill of fare (if I may so call it) or account of what
you are here to expect, suffer me to do my self that right, as to prevent (so
far as I may) some obvious (and yet I hope) groundless objections, which the
more severe sort of Readers, may be inclined to make against the ensuing
Treatise. Some I doubt will say it is too long and may fear it will tire them
ere they get to the end of it. Such may please to consider that so long a
judgment (as I may call it in reference to the consequences of it, though not
to the continuance of the Fire its self) could scarce be solemnly enough
commemorated by a short Discourse, nor would a Book that might presently be
perused, cause Men and Women to dwell long enough upon the remembrance of such a
Calamity as that, which ought never to be forgotten. Moreover, Discourses to
the number of a hundred and upwards (which number has been occasioned,
much-what, by the desire I had to gather up all the fragments (circumstances I
mean) of this Judgment, that nothing might be lost) could not easily be couched
or contained in a very small room. And as for matter of tiring or wearying your
selves, with the prolixity of this Book, I think that need not be, if you will
but rest and pause a while at every stage, there being above a hundred stages,
or resting places, (for each particular Meditation and Discourse, I reckon to
be such) where you may take breath, and refresh your selves, as long as you
please, before you proceed in your journey, and upon such terms even pthisical
and short winded persons are able to travel, were it a hundred miles an end.

Some it may be, will think I have reflected too much upon the Popish party (or
rather upon some of them:) in relation to the Fire: others again, that I have
reflected upon them too little, not positively and confidently enough. To the
former, give me leave to say, that if I have here and there insinuated, that
some of the same Religion with those that did hatch the 5. of November
Powder Plot, (I say some, not all, nor it may be the most of them) are strongly
presumed, and vehemently suspected to have had a hand in the burning of London;
it is but what most of those Treatises concerning the late fire that I have
seen, (which got into the World before this, though this were almost ready for
the birth long since.)

I say it is but what the most of them have given shrewd intimations of; so
that I am not the first that has entertained any such hard thoughts concerning
some of them, nor do believe I shall be the last. Manifest it is that Hubert,
(for so was his name that confessed himself guilty of the burning of London,
and was executed at Tyburn for it) did die in the profession of the Romish
faith. For that he earnestly denied himself to have been a Hugonite; did
declare that he did believe confession to a Priest was necessary to his
salvation, and was accordingly confessed by a Popish Priest, and did make use
of Avie Mary's, for his usual prayer, Had he not been of that persuasion before
the commission of this fact, or had he been really a madman, Papists would
have been well conten that so infamous and odious a Person should have
professed himself a Hugonite, at his death, neither would they have been
ambitious to have proselited either so great a Malefactor (as others account
him) or one that was really mad. To imagine he should do such a thing without
instigation from others, (yea without the combination and conspiracy of others
joining with him) is no less besides reason, than (if I mistake not) contrary
to his own confession. If the Committee of Parliament which were appointed to
examine how the Fire came, and was carried on, did manifest no small jealousy,
that it was by Popish treachery (after they had received the testimonies and
informations of many sufficient witnesses, as in reference to the Fire) yea if
the Parliament its self, did since the Fire manifest a greater zeal and hotter
displeasure against the Papists than ever before, publishing to the World that
they had been filled with complaints of the great Insolences of the Papists in
several Counties; and if it be well known to many, that many Romanists have
been very jocund and full of triumph since that Fire (as who should say, ah,
ah, so they would have it, or as one brings them in, saying Ah, this hit better
than the Powder Plot.) I say if all these things may not warrant so much as a
rational suspicion that more Catholics than that one that was executed for it,
did promote the burning of London: I say, if from hence we have not a
sufficient ground to suspect some of those who are the enemies of Protestants
as such (and vehement suspicion is all I have insinuated, leaving it to God in
his due time, to make a further discovery of that matter, one way or other) let
me pass for vainly censorious, which yet methinks I should not, when so great
Authors have appeared to have the same sentiments and suspicions. Moreover when
the Papists falsely say in their Apology, that he was a Hugonite Protestant,
that said he burnt the City (throwing the Odium of such an action upon
Protestants) (yet seeming tender of charging him too deep, in that they really
absolve him as to the fact, whilst they accuse him of a vain, that is false
confession (which had they taken him for a Protestant, they would scarce have
done;) why may not we say (as the truth is) that he was a professed Papist, and
that at his very death? at which time Men least dare to dissemble. Yet on the
other hand, I am positive and absolute in charging no Man with the guilt of
that fire, whom the Law its self has not charged with and condemned for it;
nay I shall go further than so, and say, that if I should ever be sure that no
more Papists than one had a hand in it, I should be heartily sorry that I ever
harbored a mistrustful thought of any more of them, upon that account. I am or
would be as earnestly desirous that all Papists may appear innocent in this
particular, in case they be so, as manifestly guilty, if they be guilty indeed:
neither would I that a hair of any of their heads should be singed for the
burning of London, unless it can be proved demonstratively that it was burnt by
their means. As for a bare suspicion that they did it, they deserve, and
invite no less, by manifesting a great deal of joy (as some of them are said
to have expressed) since the time it was done.

Some it may be will wish, that more of connection and dependency, ( viz. of
one Chapter upon another) had been made use of, than is in some part of this
Treatise; but as to that, it is well known (if it be but as well considered)
that books of this nature, viz. consisting of various Meditations and
reflections, are usually Miscellaneous, and like books of Proverbs, in which
little coherence is to be found (witness the Proverbs of Solomon) which in the
Hebrew Language are called (...) or Kingly sayings, therefore happily because
each of them has a kind of independent Jurisdiction, and territory to its
self; or we may compare both Proverbs and Meditations to Beads, which though
many of them hang upon one and the same string, yet each of them is incohering
and entire of its self.

I fear least some should be offended (if not forewarned) at my taking such a
liberty (and that but now and then) as did the Prophet Elijah, when he spoke
Ironically to Baals Prophets, 1 King. 18.27. where the Text says, Elijah
mocked them and said, Cry aloud, for he is a God, either he is talking, or he
is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or he sleeps, and must be awaked. If this
were no levity in that good Prophet, (as doubtless it was not) why should it be
counted so in others, when with like sarcasmes they reflect upon Idolaters (or
worshippers of graven Images) who ought to be cuttingly reproved ((...)) and
for that purpose, I hope we may be allowed something of an edge.

Lastly, some it may be (if not prevented) will censure me for prefixing more
names than one, of my worthy and honored friends to this little book (at
leastwise for so doing before each of the four parts and divisions of it.) But
I am conscious to my self that a grateful sense of their respects and favors
toward me (which is usually testified in such a way as this, and which at
present I knew not how to testify to the world otherwise) was my great, if not
only inducement so to do; and if to be grateful be a fault, as David said,
when Michal scoffed at him, he would be yet more vile; so give me leave to say,
I must be grateful still, and yet more grateful, if I knew how to be so: Only
mistake me not, as if in so saying; I did threaten the world with another Book,
for if I had resolved to clog the Press, it is like I should have reserved to
another opportunity several of these names which I have now inserted (as it
were in album amicorum.) If I have erred in multiplicity of Dedications, it is
not without president from that great master of Contemplations, Bishop Hall (of
precious memory) whose practice (if I mistake not) is sufficient to authorize,
at least to excuse in me a matter of this nature. Reader, if thou think there
be here and there a passage that wants a grain or two of that sadness which
thou did desire should have been used upon this occasion, do what thou will
with it, provided only, that wheresoever thou do meet with convincing
rebukes, and expressions awakening to Repentance, with serious observations,
with seasonable counsels, with right methods for acquiring true happiness and
comfort (even under such a stroke as this.) I say, provided where thou meetest
with any such things as those throughout this book, thou will receive such
truths in the love of them. Praise shall wait for God, from the mouth and heart
of his poor servant, the Author of this work, if he shall hear of any good that
shall be done by these his mean labors; which God forbid that he should sin in
ceasing to second with his earnest prayers, that (assisted by the spirit of
God) they may kindly cooperate together with the late judgment (and all
others) upon the heart both of the writer and readers. The Author doubts not,
but there is a great deal of hay and stubble in the superstructure of this
work of his (as in and with all other his performances (and it may be thine
too, though not so much.) Pray for the pardon of his defects and miscarriages,
(as he would do of thine) cover them with love (which covers a multitude of
infirmities) if there be any passage in this work, one or more that God shall
make to thee as Gold, Silver, or precious Stones, give God the glory of it (for
he it is must make it so) and take to thy self these following words on the
unworthy Author his behalf, viz. that though all that hay and stubble which is
found upon him, or upon any service of his, must be burnt up, yet himself may
be saved, though as by Fire: in which and all other needful requests, he
desires heartily to reciprocate ^^^h thee, who is

Yet an unprofitable Servant to Christ and his Church, but desirous to be
otherwise. S. R.

THE Heads of the ensuing Discourses, Meditations, and Contemplations.
PART. I.
Discourses 1. OF the great duty of Considering, in an evil time. Discourses 2.
Of Gods being a consuming Fire. Meditations 1. Of the sins for which God sent
Fire upon Sod^m and Gomorrah. Meditations 2. Of destroying Fire, procured by
offering strange Fire. Meditations 3. Of Fire enkindled by murmuring.
Meditations 4. Of Rebellion against Moses and Aaron, procuring a destructive
Fire, Numb. ^6. Meditations 5. Of Sabbath-breaking, mentioned in Scripture, as
one great (...) Gods punishing a people by Fire. Meditations 6. Of Gods (...)
by Fire, for the sins of Idolatry and S^^^r (...) Meditations 7. Of (...),
Theft, Deceit, false Balances, mention^ (...) Scripture, as causes of Gods
contending by Fire. Meditations 8. Of lying, s^^aring and for-swearing, as
further causes of Gods contending by Fire. Meditations 9. Of the abounding of
Drunkenness, as one cause of the Fire. Meditations 10 Of Gods punishing a
People by Fire, for their great unprofitableness. Meditations 11. Of the
universal Corruption and Debauchery of a people, punished by God with Fire.
Meditations 12. Of Gods bringing Fire upon a people for their incorrigibleness
under other Judgments. Meditations 13. Of the Aggravations of the sins of
London.
PART. II.
Contemplations 1. COncerning the Nature of Fire, and the use that may be made
of that Contemplation. Contemplations 2. Touching the Nature of Sulphur, which
is the principal matter and cause of Fire, and how it comes to be so
mischeivous in the World. Contemplations 3. Concerning the true cause of
Combustibility, or what it is that does make Bodies obnoxious to fire: together
with the improvement of that consideration. Contemplations 4. Of Fire kindled
by Fire. Contemplations 5. Of Fire kindled by Putrefaction. Contemplations 6.
Of Fire kindled by the collision of two hard bodies. Contemplations 7. Of Fire
kindled for want of vent, as in Hay, etc. Contemplations 8. Of Fire kindled by
pouring on Water, as in Lime.
PART III.
Meditations 1. OF the weight of Gods hand in the destruction of London by
fire. Meditations 2. Upon sight of the weekly Bill since the fire. Meditations
3. Upon the discourses occasioned by the late fire, both then and since.
Meditations 4. Upon the dishonest Carters that exacted excessive rates.
Meditations 5. Upon those that stole what they could in the time of the fire.
Meditations 6. Upon unconscionable Landlords demanding excessive Fines and
Rents, since the Fire. Meditations 7. Upon the burning down of many Churches.
Meditations 8. Upon the burning multitudes of Books of all sorts. Meditations
9. Upon the burning of the Royal Exchange. Meditations 10. Upon the burning of
Hospitals, and Rents thereunto belonging. Meditations 11. Upon the burning of
public Halls. Meditations 12. Of the burning of public Schools. Meditations
13. Upon the burning of Tombs and Graves, and dead bodies that were buried
therein. Meditations 14. Upon the burning of Writings, as Bills, Bonds, etc.
Meditations 15. On the burning of St. Paul's Church and the unconsumed body of
Bishop Brabrooke. Meditations 16. Upon the visibleness of Gods hand, in the
destruction of London. Meditations 17. Upon burning of the Sessions House in
the Old Bailey. Meditations 18. On the Gates and Prisons of London that were
burnt. Meditations 19. Upon the Conflagration of the Universe. Meditations 20.
Upon the Fire of Hell. Meditations 21. Upon the coming of that most dreadful
Fire in so idolized a year as 1666. Meditations 22. Upon the Fire its beginning
on the Lords day. Meditations 23. Upon the place where this dreadful Fire
began, viz. at a Bakers-house in Pudding-lane. Meditations 24. Upon the great
pity that ought to be extended to Londoners since the Fire. Meditations 25.
Upon those that have lost all by the Fire. Meditations 26. On those that have
lost but half their Estates by this Fire, or some such proportion. Meditations
25. Upon those that have lost nothing by the Fire. Meditations 26. Upon those
that were gainers by the late Fire. Meditations 27. Upon the enducements unto
rebuilding of London, and some ways of promoting it. Meditations 28. Upon the
Wines and Oile^ that swa^^ in the streets, and did augment the flames.
Meditations 29. Upon the water running down hill so fast, as that they could
not stop it for their use. Meditations 30. Upon men's being unwilling there
should be no Fire, though Fire has done so much hurt. Meditations 31. Upon the
usefulness of Fire in its proper place, and the danger of it elsewhere.
Meditations 32. Upon the blowing up of houses. Meditations 31. Upon preventing
the beginning of evils. Meditations 32. Upon the City Ministers, whose Churches
were saved from the fire. Meditations 33. Upon those Ministers, whose Churches
were burned. Meditations 34. Upon the killing of several people, by the fall of
some parts of ruinous Churches. Meditations 35. Upon the Fire, its not
exceeding the Liberties of the City. Meditations 36. Upon the Suburbs coming
into more request than ever since the Fire. Meditations 37. Upon the Tongue its
being a Fire, etc. Meditations 38. Upon the Angels, their being called flames
of fire. Meditations 39. Upon the Word of God, its being compared to Fire.
Meditations 40. Upon the spoiling of Conduits, and other Aqueducts, by this
Fire. Meditations 41. Upon the retorts and reproaches of Papists occasioned by
this Fire. Meditations 42. On the pains which the Kings Majesty is said to have
taken, in helping to extinguish the Fire. Meditations 43. Upon mere Worldlings,
who lost their All by this Fire. Meditations 44. Upon that forbearance which it
becomes Citizens to use one toward another, since the Fire. Meditations 45.
Upon such as are said, or supposed to have rejoiced, at the coming and
consequences of this Fire. Meditations 46. Of the burning of Sodom and
Gomorrah, compared with the burning of London. Meditations 47 Of the burning of
Troy, compared with the burning of London. Meditations 48. Upon the burning of
Jerusalem, compared with that of London. Meditations 49. Upon people taking the
first and greatest care, to save those things from the Fire which they did most
value. Meditations 50. Of people scarce knowing wh^re their houses stood, soon
after the Fire. Meditations 51. Of the Statue of Sir Thomas Gresham, left
standing after the Fire, in the Old Exchange. Meditations 52. Of the Pillar of
Brass or Stone, appointed to be erected in remembrance of the Fire. Meditations
53. Of the Anniversary Fast, perpetually to be observed in remembrance of the
Fire. Meditations 54. Of the burning of Sion-Colledge. Meditations 55. Of
Citizens dwelling in Booths, or House: like Booths, as in Moor-fields, etc.
Meditations 56. Of certain Timber-houses, and other slight buildings, at which
the Fire stopped, as in Smith-field. etc. Meditations 57. Upon the warning which
other places may and ought to take by the burning of London.
Reader, take notice that through mistake, the Numbers 25, 26, 31 and 32. in
the third part, are twice printed, which makes them end with 57. instead of 61.

PART IV.
Discourses 1. OF Deliverance under losses and troubles, as well as out of
them. Discourses 2. Of this, that the life of man consists not in the abundance
of what he possesses. Discourses 3. Of the Lessons of an afflicted estate well
learnt, their making way for prosperity to ensue. Discourses 4. Of being
content with Food and Raiment. Discourses 5. Of the way to be assured of Food
and Raiment. Discourses 6. Of a good conscience being a continual feast.
Discourses 7. Of getting, and living upon a stock of spiritual comfort.
Discourses 8. Of its being a great mercy to most Men, that their lives are
continued, though their livelihoods are greatly impaired. Discourses 9. Of the
comfort that may be received by doing good more than ever. Discourses 10. Of
abstracting from fancy, and looking at those that are below our selves, rather
than at others. Discourses 11. Of near Relations and Friends, being greater
comforts each to other than they had wont to be. Discourses 12. Of training up
children in Religion, that they may come to have God for their portion.
Discourses 13. Of that comfort under trouble, which may be drawn from the
consideration of Gods nature. Discourses 14. Of drawing the waters of comfort
under affliction out of the Wells of Gods Promises. Discourses 15. Of fetching
comfort, from the usual proceedings of God, with his people, in and under
affliction. Discourses 16. Of that relief and support which the commonness of
the case of affliction may afford us. Discourses 17. Of the lightness of all
temporal afflictions. Discourses 18. Of the shortness of temporal Afflictions.
Discourses 19. Of the needfulness and usefulness of Affliction. Discourses 20.
Of the mixture of mercies with judgments. Discourses 21. Of the Discommodities
of Prosperity, and Benefits of Affliction. Discourses 22. Of the gracious ends
and intendments of God in afflicting his people. Discourses 23. Of Resignation
to God, and acquiescing in his good pleasure. Discourses 24. Of taking occasion
by this, to study the vanity and uncertainty of all earthly things. Discourses
25. Of not being too eager upon the world, after this great loss. Discourses
26. Of choosing rather to continue under affliction, than to escape by sin.
Discourses 27. Of preparing for our own dissolution, now we have seen the
destruction of London.
Next to this, place the Title Part I. and the Epistle to the Earl of
Northumberland.

PRELIMINARY DISCOURSES: AND Meditations OF THE SINS FOR Which God has first
and last brought THE JUDGMENT OF FIRE,

PART I.

By SAMVEL ROLL Minister of the Word, and sometime Fellow of Trinity College
in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Tho. Parkhurst, Nath. Ranew, and Jonathan
Robinson, 1667.

To the Right Honorable ALGERNOON, Earl of Northumberland, Baron Percy,
Poinings, Fitz-pain, and Bryan, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter,
and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Manchester, Baron of Kimbolton, Knight
of the most noble Order of the Garter, Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household,
and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.

AND To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS INGRAM Chancellor of the Duchy, and
one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.

S. R. Sometime Minister of Thistleworth, and your Honors much obliged
Servant, humbly dedicateth the ensuing Discourses and Meditations, with
Apprecation of all Grace and Happiness.

Preliminary Discourses.
DISCOURSE I. Of the great duty of Considering in an evil time.
HE that would see my Commission for engaging in the work of meditation at such
a time as this (in which few men know what to do, or say, or think) may read it
in those words of Solomon, Eccles. 7.14. But in the day of Adversity consider.
Times of extraordinary trouble, as they afford most matter to the Pen of an
Historian, so likewise to the mind and heart of an observing Christian. Not
considering in such times, is called, not seeing the hand of God when it is
lifted up, or refusing to see it, (For the word translated here consider, is in
the Hebrew (...) that is, see.) Now says the Prophet, They will not see when
thy hand is lifted up: but they shall see, and be ashamed, etc. Yea the fire of
thine enemies shall devour them. Isa. 26.11. Wherefore is it that God does call
upon his people to enter into their chambers, shut their doors upon them, hide
themselves till the indignation be overpast, for the Lord comes out of his
place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquities. Isa. 26.20.
Is it not that men might then and there consider what God has done, and is
doing? He can do little in his chamber, as a christian (that might not be done
elsewhere) that knows not how to meditate and pray there: nor can the latter be
well performed without the former. Therefore the Psalmist does well join those
two together, Psalm. 19.14. saying, Let the words of my mouth, and the
meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord. Sure I am,
Affliction calls for a great deal of seriousness, even to a degree of sadness.
James 5.1. Go to now you rich men, weep and houl for your miseries which shall
come upon you. And should they not weep as much for those that are come upon
them already, and can no ways be prevented? Now great seriousness there cannot
be, where there is no musing, and considering; and wheresoever considering is
(such as ought to be) there must needs be seriousness. I shall think that man
despises the chastening of the Lord (which is strictly forbidden Heb. 12.5.)
who is not thereby put upon considering such things as are behooveful for him,
and suitable to the circumstances under which he is. So much is hinted to us by
these words, Isa. 5.12. They regarded not the work of the Lord, neither
consider the operation of his hands. Methinks the punishment threatened in that
case, seems to speak that there is contempt of God in the sin (said I only
threatened, yea executed.) For there is not only a woe to such v. 11. but in the
13. verse is added, Therefore my people are gone into captivity. And v. 14.
Therefore hell has enlarged her self, and their glory, and their multitude
shall descend into it. Doubtless it is a great sin in Gods account that
procures so great a punishment. Who can perform the grand duties of an
afflicted state without considering? who must not of necessity consider (and as
the Poet calls it, in sese descendere, go down into himself) if he will search
and try his wales, and turn to the Lord, as that afflicted Church is exhorted
to do, Lam. 3.40. But surely that proof is ex abundanti, which is more than the
express command in the first cited text, and in others parallel with it. Deuteronomy.
8.5. Thou shall consider, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord
chasteneth thee: where both the matter and manner of their chastisement seems
to be proposed to their consideration, viz. that God had punished them, and
how. But I have produced these proofs rather as motives to excite our wills and
affections to so hard a work, than as arguments to prove so easy and manifest
a truth.

If the question be put, what are the things we should consider of in an evil
day? it must here receive but a general answer, for to answer it particularly,
and with reference to that amazing judgment by fire, which lately befell the
great City, will be the drift and substance of all our ensuing Meditations and
Discourses? Yet I shall venture so far forth to prevent my self, and anticipate
what is behind, as to say, that it is our duty in an evil day to consider,
first, what may make for our own humiliation, and principally these two things,
viz. the greatness of our own sins. Lam. 3.8. Jerusalem has grievously sinned,
therefore she is removed. Also the greatness of the judgments of God that are
upon us. (For as sins, so judgments ought not to be extenuated.) Lam. 4.6. The
punishment of the daughter of my people, is greater than the punishment of the
sin of Sodom, that was overthrown in a moment. Secondly, what may make for the
vindication of God, as just and righteous in all that he has done against us.
To that purpose are the ensuing expressions of Scripture, Job 34.23. God will
not lay upon man more than is right, that he should enter into judgment with
him. Pharaoh himself could say, The Lord is righteous, but I and my people are
wicked. And this was when God rained down bail and fire upon him. Exodus 9.27.
and so said Rehoboam, when Shishak came against him, 2 Chronicles. 12.2. Shall such
as they justify God, and shall not we? saying with the Prophet Jeremy, Lam.
1.18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled, etc. And as he elsewhere, Man
for the punishment of his sin. And then the causes of our Afflictions, those we
should also consider of, remembering that trouble springs not out of the dust.
We should look at God as the efficient cause of all out miseries. Lam. 2.17.
The Lord has done that which he has devised, he has thrown down, and has
not pitied; and in that Chapter we find the hand of God owned in every verse
for ten verses together.

Neither is it less needful to consider what are the meritorious and procuring
causes of all our miseries. So Lam. 3.42. We have transgressed and rebelled,
thou have not pardoned. And Lam. 1.6. Jerusalem remembered not her last end,
therefore she came down wonderfully. Nor may we forget the final cause, or Gods
primary end in sending them (which is of all the rest most comfortable to
consider.) So says Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy, 8.2. Thou shall remember the
way which the Lord thy God led thee, this forty years in the Wilderness to
humble thee, and to prove thee, etc. Also, Heb. 12.10. But he chasteneth us for
our profit, that we might be made partakers of his holiness. Again, we ought to
consider, what are the duties that are incumbent on us in a time of Adversity;
what is the Law, and the Decorum of that condition; and how we ought to behave
our selves under the rod of the Almighty, viz. Humbly, Patiently,
Circumspectly, etc. of which we shall have occasion to discourse more fully
hereafter. The next thing to be considered at such a time, is, how and
wherewithal we may be able to support and bear up our own hearts, and the
hearts of others in an evil day. David says, Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort
in my affliction, for thy word has quickened me. Which may be thus construed,
that it was a comfort to him in his afflictions, to think that the Word of God
had been a quickening and inlivening word to him, which to many others is but as
a dead letter. One end of Gods vouchsafing us his Word, is said to be, that we
through patience and comfort in the Scripture might have hope, Rom 15.4. and
that we should endeavor to comfort others, is evident, from 2 Cor. 1.4. where
God is said, to comfort his people in all their tribulations, that they may be
able to comfort others that are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith
themselves are comforted of God. One thing more I think of, that should be
considered by us in a time of adversity; but shall not presume to say that and
the rest I have mentioned, are all; and that is, how and by what means we may
in Gods way, and without sin, in Gods due time obtain deliverance, as Paul in
another case cries out, who shall deliver? we read in 1 Cor. 10.13. that God
will together with the temptation also make a way to escape. How to find out a
way of escaping, is the care of all men, or of the most, but how to find out
that way which God has made for our escape (which is always a lawful and a
regular way,) that should fall under our consideration; as also how to avoid
and shun all other ways of escaping, though ever so easy to us. Now have we
so many things to consider of in an evil day? then O my soul here is work for
thee, as much as ever thou can turn thy self to; Gird up thy loins and set
about it. Now if ever, is a time for serious consideration, for who knows not
that it is a time of great adversity and rebuke, and needs it must, when the
most famous City in these three Kingdoms (that was lately such) is become a
very ruinous heap, Now London, the glory of three renowned Kingdoms, is made
almost like unto Sodom and to Gomorrah. Surely that man has lost his thinking
faculty, that cannot think of this; and he that is not sensible of it, is past
all feeling, and seared as with a hot Iron. O my soul, I scarce know what to
think of thee, that thou have considered this no more: Much less know I what to
think of those that have not considered it so much, as seeming to think of
nothing else, but how they may make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof. How many thought they could have said when time was, If I forget
thee O London, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, which yet have
almost forgotten poor London? and now God has burned it round about, scarce
lay it to their hearts. Methinks we are in an age in which are more Pharaohs
than of any other sort of men; infinite wisdom, can scarce invent judgments
that will awaken and make us look about us, and consider. The Iron age is a
name too good for us. Fire with the addition of some small matter besides, as
vinegar, etc. will melt Iron, but will not melt us, it will make that capable
of any impression, or to be cast into any mould, but it will not do so by us.

Lord I see the heart of man will yield to nothing but thy self. It can play
with judgments and plagues, though they were greater than those which came upon
Pharaoh, and so far forth contemn them as scarce seriously to consider of them,
at leastwise when past and gone. Nor yet whilst present, and incumbent as they
ought to do. Thou who have created a day of great adversity, such as we never
looked for, create I beseech thee in me, and in others, a heart duly to consider
it, and together with it, the things that do belong both to our present, and
future, to our temporal and eternal peace.

DISCOURSE II.
Of God's being a consuming Fire.
THree several times do I call to mind the holy Scripture, saying expressly
(besides what it mentions elsewhere to the same effect) that our God is a
consuming Fire, twice in the old Testament, and once in the new. First by way
of caution, Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24. Take heed to your selves, least you forget the
Covenant of the Lord your God, which he has made with you, and make you a
graven Image, or the likeness of any thing, which the Lord thy God has
forbidden thee. For the Lord thy God is a consuming Fire, even a jealous God.
Secondly, by way of comfort, Deuteronomy. 9.3. The Lord thy God is he which goes over
before thee as a consuming Fire, (meaning) to their enemies, as the next words
do show, he shall destroy them, viz. those children of Anak, of whom they had
learned to say who can stand before them? verse. 2. them and their Cities great
and fenced up to Heaven, as they are called, verse. 1. Thirdly by way of counsel
or positive exhortation unto serving God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear, Heb. 12.28. For says the text, verse. 29. Our God is a consuming Fire.
And well may God be so styled, not only effective, as he is the first cause and
author of all those fires that consume houses, Towns, and Cities, as God is
pleased to own, Isa. 42.25. That he had set Jacob and Israel on fire round
about, nor cares the great God who knows, yea he would have all the World to
know that all evil of punishment, as such, and so far forth as it is only such
is from himself, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not
done it? But not only in that sense may God be called a consuming Fire, for
that he is so essicienter (as Christ upon such, an account is called the
resurrection and the life) but also and chiefly because the fire, of all
Elements, yea of all inanimate creatures, seems to bear the greatest
resemblance of God, in respect of more than one of his glorious attributes, as
namely of his irresistible power, his awful presence, and affrighting Majesty,
his impartial and devouring severity, his consuming anger, etc.

Of the strength and power of Fire.
What creature here below so powerful as fire? who or what can stand before
it? how applicable unto fire are many of those expressions, whereby God in his
answer to Job, sets forth some of the most untameable creatures, as that which
is spoken of the wild Ass, Job 39.7. He scorneth the multitude of the City.
Did not the fire do so? and that of God, concerning Behemoth, Job 41.4. Will he
make a Covenant with thee? will thou take him for a servant for ever? Who can
master fire, though it be never good, but when it is as a servant? also in some
sense those words in the 27. verse. may be applied to this powerful Element. It
esteems Iron as straw, and Brass as rotten wood: also those words in the last
verse, He beholds all high things, He is a King over all the children of
pride. Methinks some lofty expressions which are used concerning God himself,
are more applicable to fire, than to any other creature. It is said of God,
Isa. 40.15. That he takes up the Islands as a very little thing. So does fire,
though not whole Islands, yet things of great bulk, as houses, Churches, and
such like, which are easily blown up by it, as it were at one breath or puff.
It darts them up into the air in an instant, like a fleet arrow shot from a
strong bow. Cranes though made on purpose to mount heavy things, yet are long
in doing it, yea seem to squeek and groan in raising one great beam at a time,
as if the burden were more than they could well bear, whereas this Giant Fire,
if I may so call it, makes nothing of it to take whole houses upon its back,
with all their weighty beams, massy stones, leaden roofes, lumbering goods,
and mount them into the air presently. Moreover it is said of God, verse. 16.
That Lebanon is not sufficient for him to burn, nor the beasts thereof,
sufficient for a burnt offering. Surely London was far before Lebanon, and yet
when the most of it was burnt up, did the fire say it was enough? Could not
that ravenous Lion have devoured the Suburbs presently, with as great an
appetite, as it had done the City, if the great God had not stopped its mouth, or
plucked away its prey?

Does not Solomon rank fire amongst the Cormorants that are never satisfied,
Prove. 30.16. Who can write (or almost think) what Fire can do? what building so
high, (be it beacon or steeple) that fire cannot presently climb to the top of
it? What mettle so hard that fire cannot melt it, such as the fire may be? It
was only for have that it left the outsides of Churches standing, picked out
the meat as it were, and left the bones untouched. In length of time it could
have so calcined those bricks and stones, as to have made them good for
nothing, but ready like the Apples of Sodom, presently to crumble to dust. But
should I think of all that fire can do, I must think of nothing else. I less
wonder at those Heathens that did worship fire, than at those who worshipped any
other creature, since no visible creature is so great an emblem, or so lively a
picture of the power of God. Yet did they very ill to worship it, since the
power of fire (though great) is but finite, and as much transcended by the
power of God, as it self transcends the power of other things.

Of the Power of God transcending the power of Fire.
If a little Fire, one single Fire, taking its rise, (it may be) but from a
spark or two, can do such great things, what cannot he do who made all the
Fires in the World, and that of Tophet or Hell to boot! which is greater than
all the rest, the Pile whereof is much wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a
mighty stream of brimstone kindles it. Isa. 30.33. How powerful is he that
has all the Fires in the World at his beck, ready to execute his pleasure?
Psalm. 148.8. Fire and hail fulfilling his Word. He that has an host of fires
wherewith to fight his battles, and avenge his quarrel, can easily encounter
all his enemies, if all the World were such. If it be made appear that the
power of God be far beyond that of all the fires in the World, who then can
deny his power to be incomparably great? and that it is so, we may plainly see,
for that God suspends the influence of fire at his pleasure. Witness the three
Children, who though in midst of a burning fiery furnace, yet not so much as a
hair of their heads was singed, nor had the smell of fire passed upon them,
Dan. 3.27. He can do more than fire, who can so limit fire its self, that it
can do just nothing. God forbid I should adore fire, as the heathen did: but he
that can do what he will by fire or without fire, yea against Fire it self, he
I say must needs be worthy of humblest adoration; and that in reference to his
power.

Of the dreadfulness and terribleness of fire.
Neither do we see in Fire a representation of the power of God only, but also
of his awful and terrifying presence. If we do but hear people crying out,
either by day or night Fire, Fire, how does it affright us, as if a potent
enemy were at out Gates! but if we come and see it is so indeed, and that we
are not abused with a false alarm, how much more terror does that strike us
with? (our eyes then affecting our hearts, and causing them even to sink and
die within us: how ghastly did men and women look? how distractedly did they
run about! how did their hair even stand an end! how little did they know what
they said or did, whilst with safety enough to their persons they did at a
sufficient distance gaze at the Fire, consuming their own and other men's
houses! had they themselves been in their houses at the same time, as at other
times, they might have been, burnt in their Beds, some fast asleep, others but
newly awake) the fire might possibly have had only dead Carcasses to consume,
as having been first killed by the greatness of their fears. Read Heb. 12.21.
where it is said, so terrible was the sight of Mount Sinai, that burned, verse.
18, that Moses said; I exceedingly fear and quake, (even that Moses, that did
not fear the wrath of Pharaoh, could not without trembling stand and behold
Mount Sinai all on fire. And yet what is it to see the most dreadful Fires, in
comparison of what it is to feel or live amidst the smallest flames? To lie or
think of lying one hour in a fiery Oven, were much more terrible, than to have
stood at a distance and beheld Sodom or any other City all in flames. Wonder
not then that sinners in Zion are afraid, whilst they say; who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? No execution so terrible to men as that which is performed by fire,
and therefore that is reserved for the greatest of malefactors, as wizards,
witches, and such like; unless when bloody Papists have had the dispensin^ of
it and then it was the portion of the choicest Christians, Saints and Martyrs.
They forsooth will provide fiery Chariots for Gods Elijah's to ascend up to
heaven in. But we know that kind of punishment is due only to the worst of men,
because the greatest of earthly punishments, and the most like to hell. If Fire
be not exceeding terrible, why did the generality of men fly before it as fast
as they could, and leave all that was near it, to its mercy, or rather cruelty?
yea it is commonly reported, that some of the strongest and most undaunted
bruits, as Wolves and Bears and Lions, are kept in awe by Fire, and dare not
approach it. So that Fire is as it were a wall of defense to Men against those
salvage enemies. If the Lion roar, says the Scripture, shall not all the
^easts of the Forest tremble? and yet himself trembles at the sight of Fire.
In a word, if it be the professed opinion of Papists, (as I think it is) that
all persons, and consequently themselves must abide, for some time more or
less, in the Fire of Purgatory: I wonder that every person so believing, should
not live in continual horror, crying out as those finners in Zion? Isa. 32.14.
Who can dwell with devouring fire? were it but for the space of a few months
or days, much more for many years together? (and in a smaller time, few of
them seem to expech a release from that place of torment; though they have
advantages for that purpose above most other persons.) If it were possible for
a man to lie but one day in fire unconsumed, and he did know and believe he
should do so; would not the expectation thereof anticipate the comfort of hi^
whole life? From that natural dread of fire that is in men, and every man's
apprehensiveness of that kind of torment, being intolerable; I am led to
think, that all Papists are either miserable, or hypocritical; miscrable in
believing an uncomfortable lie viz. the doctrine of Purgatory; or hypocritical,
in not believing that which they profess to own, as a great and necessary
truth. But enough as concerning the terribleness of our material Fire.

Of the terribleness of God.
Consider we now whether the great God be not also exceeding terrible in that
respect, fitly styled a consuming fire. Deuteronomy. 7.2. The Lord thy God is amongst
you, a mighty God and terrible also. Deuteronomy. 10.17. and Nehom. 1.5. The great and
terrible God, that keeps Covenant. And Job 37.22. With God is terrible
Majesty. And Psalm. 65.5. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer
us, O God, etc. and Psalm. 66.3. Say unto God how terrible art thou in thy
works? Psalm. 68.15. O God thou art terrible out of thy holy places. Psalm.
76.12. He is terrible to the Kings of the earth. Jacob had a great dread of
God, when God spoke no other than good and comfortable words to him: when he
saw God standing above the ladder, which was showed him in his dream, Gen:
28.13. see v. 16. and 17. And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and said, surely
the Lord is in this place. And he was afraid and said, How dreadful is this
place, This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of
Heaven. The gate of Heaven, and yet dreadful, as God was in that place. God at
that time spoke nothing but promises and encouragments, yet did Jacob tremble
at his presence. Our God is fearful even in praises. If Jacob did but dream of
God, he was filled with awe, and that not only whilst the dream lasted; but
when he aw^ke, and knew he had but dreampt. If God be so terrible when he is
pleased, what is he when he is angry? Psalm. 76.7. Who may stand in thy sight
when once thou art angry? God was friends with Moses when he told him, Gone.
33.20. Thou can not see my face, for no man can see me, and live. And v. 22.
whilst my glory passes by, I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will
cover thee with my hand whilst I pass by. v. 23. And thou shall see my back
parts, but my face shall not be seen. Much of the terribleness of God is
insinuated in that strange passage, Exodus 33.3. I will send an Angel before
thee; for I will not go up in the midst of thee, lest I consume thee. Here we
read of God wishing the Israelites to let him go from amongst them, because his
terror was such; but elsewhere concerning the men of Bethshemesh sending God
from amongst them (like those Gadarens that besought Christ to depart their
coast) 1 Samuel 6.20. Who is able (say they) to stand before this holy Lord God,
and to whom shall he go up from us? v. 21. And they sent to the inhabitants of
Kirjath-jearim, saying, Come ye and fetch the Ark of the Lord up to you.
Namely, because God had slain fifty thousand three score and ten of the
Bethshemites for looking into the Ark. Much like to this were the words of
Peter to Christ, Luke 5.8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. Let
the Prophet Isaiah tell you how awful the presence of God is, whom you find
thus crying out, Woe is me for I am undone, for I am a man of unclean lips; for
mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. How full is the 18. Psalm of
expressions setting forth the awful Majesty of Gods presence, from v. 7. Then
the earth shook and trembled, the foundations of the hills moved and were
shaken, because he was wroth. But to quote all that might be quoted to that
purpose, were to transcribe a great part of the Bible.

Of the Anger of God represented by Fire.
Therefore O my soul, pass on and think of something else, in which the
parallel holds betwixt such Fire, as that whereby our famous City was lately
burnt to ashes, and God himself, who is styled a consuming Fire. Once again, As
the power and awful presence of God are livelily represented to us by this
material Fire: so also is his anger, and that both as to the essence and nature
of it; as also to several attributes (if I may so call them) of that attribute
of God, viz. his wrath. As namely, the impartialness of it, like fire, that
spares neither one thing nor another: as also the fierceness of it, and its
consuming destroying nature, to which might be added the intollerableness of
it, etc. First we know it is the nature and property of Fire to act, as if it
were in a great passion, and yet it never is in any, nor is it capable of any.
Thus says God of himself, Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me; that is, I am in no
passion (neither can he be) yet adds, who will set the briars and thorns
against me in battle? I would go thorough them, I would burn them together.
Such things as are the usual effects of anger are frequently done by God, but
such an affection as wrath in Man is, can no ways consist with those
perfections which are in God, no more than with the nature of fire upon other
accounts.

I must not forget that I was even now speaking of the impartiality of Fire, as
one property of that Element by which it resembles God. Fire is no respecter
of persons or things: so their nature be but combustible, it spares neither one
nor the other. May I not allude to those words 1 Cor. 3.12. If any Man build
upon this foundation Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble. Here
are variety of superstructures mentioned; but the Fire buries all in one common
heap; lays the gold and precious stones amongst the rubbish, as well as the
wood, hay, and stubble. It mingles Flint stones and Diamonds: Pibbles and
Jewels in one and the same Grave. As is said of Death. Eque pulsat pauperam
Tabernas, Regu^^que turres; the like may be said of fire. It as soon takes hold
on the Palaces of Princes, as on the Cottages of Peasants. And is there not
the like impartiality in the great God? His anger knows no difference betwixt
small and great, high and low. Psalm. 76.12. He cutteth off the Spirits of
Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the Earth. Did he not sink rebellious
Pharaoh, as low in the red Sea, as any of his common Soldiers (...) did he not
give his carcass in common with theirs, to be meat to the fishes of that Sea?
See Isa. 9.14 15. The Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail: The ancient
and honorable, he is the head, etc. Isa. 10.12. I will punish the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks: verse. 26.
And the Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for him, according to the
slaughter of Midian at the Rock of Oreb: Judge. 7.25. and the Psalmist speaking
of Sisera and Jabin: the latter of which was the King of Ca^^^^, and had 9000
Chariots of Iron. Judge. 4.3. ((...) Sisera was his General) says of them, that
they perished at Endor, and that they became as (...) for the Earth. Psalm.
83.10. See what God did to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.21. He was driven from Men,
and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild
Asses: they fed him with Grass like Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of
Heaven, till he knew that the most high God rules in the Kingdom of Men, and
that he appoints over it whomsoever he will. Must Jehojakim needs be buried
in state, because he was the Son of Josiah King of Judah, and did succeed him
in the Throne? No, says God, Jer. 22.19. He shall be buried with the burial of
an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusalem. Thus the anger of
the great God (like fire) puts no difference betwixt them that sit on Thrones,
and those that go from door to door. Hence that in Psalm. 2.10. Be wise oh ye
Princes, etc. Serve the Lord with fear, etc.

I observe another property in fire, and that is great fierceness and
eagerness: so that for that matter there is no other creature comparable to it.
A she Bear robbed of her Whelps. A Bull in a Net, full of the sury of the
Lord, is not half so fierce as fire. I would see either of them two in an angry
humor gnaw great beams of Iron in sunder, and make them crumble to dust: or
let them but make some massy Oak beams presently fly in two, in token of their
rage; but if they can do neither, fire exceeds them in strength and
fierceness; but yet not so much as its self is exceeded by the fierceness of
the wrath of God; for whose wrath the Scripture has no Epithet more common,
than that of fierce, Number. 25.4, 32, 14. and Psalm. 88.16. Thy fierce wrath goes
over me: and in the abstract, Psalm. 78.49. He cast upon them the fierceness of
his anger: and Nahum. 1.6. Who can abide the fierceness of his anger? The power
and fierceness of fire may be conceived of, and we may fear as much or more
hurt than the fire can have opportunity to dous; yea this time, many of us did
fear it would have done more hurt: but the wrath of God is beyond all that our
minds can comprehend. Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even
according to thy fear, so is thy wrath: The wrath of God is a vast Ocean, (as I
may call it) his judgments are a great depth, and fire is but one stream of
that Ocean: and therefore fire can be nothing like so fierce as is the wrath of
God. Sword and Pestilence are two other streams of the wrath of God, and there
are many more, by which you may judge how fierce the main Ocean is, every arm
and rivulet whereof runs with such a mighty torrent. In how many channels of
distinct punishments did the wrath of God break out upon Pharaoh, and his
people? and yet toward them he did not stir up all his wrath neither.

But the next property of the wrath of God, viz. its consuming devouring nature
(which fire may represent to us as much as any earthly thing) will plainly
prove, that divine anger is exceeding fierce. Which of all the creatures God
has made is so able to destroy, so profound to make slaughter as fire is? And
is it not in that respect an Emblem of the wrath of God? What manner of
expressions are those, Deutr. 32.22. A fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall
burn unto the lowest Hell, and shall consume the Earth with her increase, and
set on fire the foundations of the Mountains: also Psalm. 90.5. They are like
the grass which grows up. In the morning it flourishes, in the evening it is
cut down, and withered. For we are consumed by thine anger. Also Psalm. 46.8.
Come behold the works of the Lord, what Desolations he has made in the Earth.
How does the wrath of God consume persons, not only as to their estates, but as
to their inward comforts, which are far more precious: Psalm. 39.11. When thou
with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume
away like a moth. Yea how the wrath of God consumes Families. Job 31.12. It is
a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all mine increase;
Meaning that the wrath and curse of God, which the sin he there purges himself
from, viz. Adultery, would procure that which would do so, that might root out
all his increase both as to estate and offspring, etc. might quite consume his
Family. Of Gods wrath consuming Towns and Cities, we have many sad instances,
as namely in Sodom and Gomorrah, in Jerusalem, Sometimes the glory of the whole
Earth. And a much more modern and sad instance as to our selves in London its
self (with tears be it spoken) which none of us ever thought to have survived.
Yea whole Kingdoms have been consumed by the wrath of God, and turned upside
down: witness the Chaldean, Persian, and Grecian Monarchies, with several
others, but when was it ever heard that a whole Kingdom was destroyed by Fire?
These things considered, the consumptions and desolations which are made by
Fire may justly put us in mind of those greater desolations which the wrath of
God is able to make on persons, families, and Kingdoms.

Of the intolerable pain that Fire can put men to.
There is one thing more in Fire, and that is the intolerableness of that pain
and misery which it is able to put us to, in reference to which I would yet
further parallel it with the wrath of God. I know no pain so exquisite as that
which proceeds from Fire. I know no person alive so patient, as that he is able
to bear it, if he be grievously burnt or scalded, till such time as the fire be
taken out; that is to say, bear it without doleful moans and outcries.

Of the greater intolerableness of the wrath of God.
I think there is no man whose heart would serve him to think of lying in a
siery surnace, such as the three children were cast into. Yet is not Fire its
self, got within us, or about us, so intolerable as the wrath of God. It goes
by the name of Fiery indignation, Heb. 10 27. not as if it were no worse than
fire, but as fire being the most tormenting creature, we know can best express
it. It is the sense of divine wrath that wounds the spirits of men, and
therefore it is said, A wounded spirit who can bear? that is, none can bear.
Prove. 18.14. I read Heman saying, Ps. 88.4. I am ready to die from my youth up,
whilst I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. And v. 16. Thy terrors have cut
me off. And David, Psalm. 38. There is no rest in my bones because of my sins.
And v. 8. I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart, as being
under a sense of Gods wrath. v. 1. Rebuke me not in thy wrath. Whosoever said
any thing may be borne but the wrath of God, doubtless meant very well; but he
had spoken better, and past all exception, if he had said, Any thing may be
borne better than the wrath of God. There is no vial that scalds like to that.
If Francis Spira whilst despairing in his bed, had been burning at a stake
instead thereof, I question whether that material fire would have put him to so
much misery as did the anguish of his mind, overwhelmed with the apprehensions
of divine wrath, and of his future dwelling with everlasting burnings. If hell
its self be a fire kindled by the breath of Gods wrath, as it is said of
Tophet, that the breath of the Lord like a mighty stream of Brimstone kindles
it. Surely the wrath of God is much more intolerable than any visible, or
culinary fire whatsoever.

I see then the Spirit of God, according to his manner, has couched much sense
in a few words, when he tells us that our God is a consuming fire. There being
such a likeness as is betwixt the Creator of all things and this creature; I
desire as often as I behold fire, to think of God, whilst I admire the scarcely
resistible power of Fire, let me ever adore the utterly irresistible power of
him that made and governs it. Whilst it amuseth me to think what work and
havoc Fire can make in a few days or hours. Be amazed, O my soul, to consider
what greater desolations God can make in the twinkling of an eye, and with a
word of his mouth. If he will but speak concerning a Nation, to pluck it up, or
pull it down, it will be done presently. Jer. 18. with him it is but a word and
a fatal blow. Methinks it does not only help my meditation of, but facilitate
my belief concerning the greatness of the power of God; Impartialness of his
revenging Justice: Severity and Fierceness of his anger: Intolerableness of his
displeasure: when I see so much of such things as these in one of his
creatures, which in our houses we prefer to no better place than our chimneys,
and are unwilling even there to place it, or suffer it to ascend too high. May
I think of Fire more frequently and solemnly than otherwise I should, for those
resemblances of God which are to be found in it. I confess, to think of God by
the name of Love, as he is called, 1 John 4.8. and 16. is more pleasing, and
may better suit us under great dejections, but to meditate of God as a
consuming fire, may profit us more, when our hearts (which is too usual) want
that due awe of God which should preserve them from sinning wilfully against
him. If God be Fire to sinners, let us not dare to be as Tinder, or as
Gunpowder to Sin and Temptation. If we come not near a dismal Fire but with
trembling hearts, let us not approach God but with holy reverence, and let us
learn to tremble at his word, which also is compared to fire. Yet lest I dwell
too long upon this one subject to the prejudice of others, I will content my
self with the addition of a few plain Corollaries, so easy to be drawn from
Gods being a consuming Fire (in the sense given of it) that he which runs may
read them. If God be Fire, woe to them that are bria^s and thorns. Isa. 27. he
will consume them. If God be Fire, it concerns us to prove our selves and our
work, for the Fire shall make all things manifest, 1 Cor. 3.12. If we lay chaff
and stubble, though upon a good foundation, our work will be burnt up, and our
selves saved, but so as by Fire, that is, with great difficulty, and much ado.
What impunity can great ones promise themselves, if God be as impartial toward
all sorts of sinners, as Fire is toward all combustible things? If the wrath
of God be more intolerable than Fire, who would not fear to offend him? If the
power of God be more irresistible than Fire it self, who would set himself
against him? or who can do it and prosp^r? yea, who would not labor to have
God on his side? For who can be against us (that is to any purpose) if God be
for us. Is God so able to destroy, let me be none of his enemies. Is he Fire,
then O that I might be Gold, for if so, though he may purge me, yet he will not
consume me. In a word, is God a consuming Fire, then knowing the terror of the
Lord, Let us consider what manner of persons we ought to be in all holy
conversation and godlyness.

Meditations and Discourses of the Reasons that are found in Scripture, of Gods
bringing the Judgment of Fire upon a person or people.
MEDITATION I. Of the sins for which God sent Fire upon Sodom and Gomorrah.
THe first pernicious Fire of which we read in Scripture, was that which fell
upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24. The general cause of it, was that which
was told Abraham, Genesis 18.20. And the Lord said, because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous, But their particular
crimes are set down, Ezekiel. 16.49. where God upbraiding Jerusalem, says, Behold
this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and
abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters, neither did she
s^rengthen the hand of the poor and needy v. 50. And they were haughty, and
committed abomination before me, therefore I took them away as I saw good. Now
what that abomination was which they committed, I think St. Jude tells us most
plainly, Jude 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the Cities about them, giving
themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternalsire. Now the three first
crimes charged upon them, viz. Pride, Idleness, and Fullness of bread, did make
way for the last, viz. their being given up to Fornication. Pride prepares for
uncleanness; as it disposes persons to those habits and gestures which tempt
others to tempt them to wantonness: witness the great pride which some take in
going extremely naked, whence it often happens to them as to Hezekiah after
that he had shown the King of Babylons messengers more of his treasure than was
fit for them to see. Isa. 39. it was not long after that the Babylonians came
and took away all he had from his children, and carried both them and theirs
into captivity. One meeting a boy with a basket of chickens wide open, asked him
how he would sell them, who answering him they were not to be sold, he replied
to the boy again, Then fool shut thy Basket. But that by the way.

It comes to pass by the judgment of God, that proud persons often prove
unclean, because uncleanness is a disgraceful sin, and so the more fit for
proud persons to be left unto, in order to making them more humble. For of him
that commits Adultery Solomon says, Prove. 6.33. A wound and a dishonor
shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. Persons by that sin are
said to dishonor their own bodies. Romans 1.24. Also that very complexion which
is most samed for proud, is generally observed as most prone to uncleanness,
and it is too commonly seen that a fantastical (which is a proud) habit, and a
filthy heart go together; and those places are generally most notorious for
lust, that are most infamous for pride; as if those two weeds delighted to grow
in the same soil; proud spirits and proud flesh go usually hand in hand. And as
for Fullness of bread, by which we are to understand Gluttony and Luxuriousness
in the use of meats, that is as great a handmaid to Lust as Pride can be. Jer.
5.7. When I fed them to the full, then they committed adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in the harlots houses. v. 8. They were as fed horses in
the morning, ever one neighed after his neighbors wife. (He adds v. 9. Shall I
not visit for these things, says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged of
such a Nation as this?) Sine Cerere and Baccho friget venus. But where Ceres
and Bacchus, that is, meats and drinks are used immoderately, Lust becomes
outrageous: and then if abundance of Idleness be superadded as a third pair of
Bellows to blow the Fire, it cannot but flame out excessively. For much
Idleness is that which imps Cupids wings as much as any thing, and is the very
feathers that make his darts to fly. The Poet knew that full well, who said,
Otia si tollas periere cupidinis arcus. No weed grows more generally in great
plenty in the soil of men's hearts, than lust does, in case they suffer them to
lie fallow, and unmanured, in case they be not ploughed up by honest labor and
sowed with the seeds of better things. Now these I have mentioned were but the
underling sins of Sodom, which had their eyes upon another sin (as the eyes of
a hand maid are toward her mistress.) The mistress whom they all served and did
homage to, that was the lust of the flesh, in which they received their
consummation, and as St. James says, ^^^st when it has conceived brings
forth sin, and sin when it is sinsshed brings forth death. So Pride,
Idleness, and fullness of bread, when they have conceived, bring forth lust. We
may not omit one sin more which is charged upon Sodom, and did help to burn it;
and it is set forth in these words, Neither did she strengthen the hands of the
poor and needy. She was too proud to look upon the poor; she had fullness of
bread, but supplied not the necessities of others, out of her own
superfluities; she was idle her self, but did not set the poor to work, or not
reward them for it, as those mentioned, Jam. 5.3, 4. The rust of your gold
shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Behold the hire of the laborers which is
kept back by you, cries, etc.

Now let us consider how proper and suitable it is for such offenses as these
to be punished with Fire. No cre^ture levels things, or brings them into the
dust sooner, or more than Fire. Therefore it is a fit punishment for pride,
which must take a fall. Idle persons are drones, and drones must be driven from
their hives (Ignavum fucos pecus a praesepibus arcent;) and what can do it so
easily as fire? And as for those that are given to luxury, or fullness of bread,
no such compendious way to punish them, as by setting that cormorant Fire, to
cat them out of house and home. Then as for uncleanness, it is no wonder if
that consume Towns and Cities, being a Fire it self, so called Job 31.12. It is
a fire that consumes to destruction, etc. Who can carry Fire in his bosom,
and not be burnt? We see that ordinarily burns the bodies of men (as to part)
and they express their mallady, by telling us they have got a Burn, or are
Burnt. Sometimes it costs them their noses, as if that organ of smelling had
rather quit the body, than endure that stench which the rottenness thereof
annoies it with. They that escape so, (though that be sufficiently
ill-favored, and no honorable scar) come off better than many of them do, who
mourn at last, when their flesh and their bodies are consumed, Prove. 5.11.
implying, that some do lose not only their noses (which are as it were the
spout of their bodies) in that cursed service, but as it were the main fabric,
this Fire burning down to the ground. But why should unmercifulness be punished
with Fire? L^^ St. James tell you the reason of that, Jam. 2.23. For he shall
have judgment without mercy, who has showed no mercy. No executioner of wrath
more sit to dispense judgment without mercy than fire is, and that is the
portion of them that show no mercy.

And now poor London, how loath am I to trample upon thy dust: or to speak so
harsh a word to thee in thy misery, as to say, that in the forementioned
respects thou might have shaken hands with Sodom, and called her fister, as
God was pleased to speak to Jerusalem, concerning her sister Sodom. Yet because
being deeply humbled under Gods hand, is the way to be lifted up; in order
thereunto give me leave to say that even in thee, O London, (though not in thee
only, nor in thee chiefly) were found Pride, Fullness of Bread, and abundance of
Idleness; neither did many of you strengthen the hands of the poor and needy,
as you might, and ought to have done. Nor caust thou purge thy self from the
guilt of much uncleanness, which was in the midst of thee (that abomination as
it is called in the sight of God. Ezekiel. 16.50.) Was it to be seen by the garb
of London, and the gallantry of Citizens living, and by that breadth and port
they did bear, that God had been taking them down several years together,
plucking off their plumes by a devouring Pestilence, consuming war, huge dearth
of trade, that God had been calling to them, to put off their ornaments, that
he might know what to do with them? I say was this to be discerned by the
equipage in which men lived? were not the expenses of many far above the
proportion of their estates (when yet they need^^ not to have been so) and
their spirits yet higher than their expenses? what may we call this but Pride?
And as for fullness of bread, I wish that Epicurizing had not been too much in
fashion, that there had not been slaying of Oxen, and killing of Sheep, eating
Flesh, and drinking Wine, when God called for weeping and mourning, as it is,
Isa. 22.12. For it is added, Sarely this iniquity shall not be purged away till
ye die. And whereas abundance of Idleness is further charged upon Sodom, it
were well if those expressions used Deuteronomy. 28.56. where we read of the tender
and delicate woman, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon
the ground, for delicateness and tenderness, were not applicable to too many of
that sex; and that others like the Athenians, had not spent most of their time
in hearing and telling some new thing. An idler people could not be, than many
were in that great City, whereof themselves would have been sensible, if they
had but seen the pains and industry which is used by many or most people
dwelling in Villages, and Countrey-places, that are always in action, as the
Poet says of the Husbandman, Redit labor actus in orbem. And as for matter of
uncleanness, why was it that very Apprentices were ready to pull down houses
upon that account (though having no commission either from God or man; they did
not well to attempt it) if Stews and Brothel-houses had not been too notorious?
As for not strengthening the hand of the poor and needy, that is by a due
relief, how could they otherwise choose than be guilty of it, who weakened their
estates by idleness, lavished them upon their pride, exhausted them by their
luxury, spent them upon their uncleanness, which as so many Cormorants devoured
that which might and ought to have been given to the poor: I see then there are
moral causes of evil as well as natural, and these are some of them. He is
brutish that thinks otherwise. Do not the ends and interests of men sway the
World, next to God himself, and what are they but moral causes: and if such be
to be taken notice of, why not sin, which is more considerable than all the
rest?

Then O ye late Inhabitants of that famous City, which is now in ashes, as
ever you desire it should flourish again, repent of your pride, fullness of
bread, abundance of idleness, neglect of the poor, and abominable uncleanness,
so many of you as were guilty of all, or any of these (for all were not;) and
let others mourn over them that have sinned, and have not repented, that God
may repent of the evil which he has brought upon you, and may build up your
waste places in his good time. Continue not in the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah,
lest their punishment be either not removed from you, or if so, again revived
upon you.

MEDITATION II. Of destroying Fire, procured by offering strange fire.
WE read concerning Nadab and Abihu, that there went out fire from the Lord and
devoured them, and they died before the Lord? Lev. 10.2. Why that heavy
judgment befell those two Sons of Aaron (the Saints of the Lord) the preceding
verse will tell us, viz. because they took their censers, put incense therein,
and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. Their
fault was this, God had sent down fire from heaven upon his Altar, Levit. 9.24.
It should seem it was the pleasure of God (and doubtless they knew it) that his
sacrifice (which one calls his meat, as the Altar his Table) should be kindled
and prepared with that fire only, which by continual adding of suel, (as need
required) was to be kept from ever going out, (as is supposed) Levit. 16.10.
There it is said, Aaron shall take a censer full of Coals of fire from off the
Altar, and his hands full of incense, and bring it within the veil. Now they
presumed to offer incense to God with common fire, which came not from the
Altar, before the Lord, and for this they were burnt to death. Upon this
passage Bishop Hall (worthily called our English Seneca) reflects thus. It is a
dangerous thing, says he, in the service of God to decline from his own
institutions; we have to do with a power, which is wise to prescribe his own
worship, just to require what he has prescribed, powerful to revenge that
which he has not required.

MEDITATION III. Of fire enkindled by murmuring.
IN Numb. 11. the first and third verses, I read these words, When the people
complained, it displeased the Lord, and the Lord heard it and his anger was
kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them, and consumed them that
were in the utmost parts of the Camp: And he called the name of the place
Taberah, because the fire of the Lord burnt among them. It does not much
concern our present purpose to enquire what the cause of this their murr^uring
was, which yet is thought to have been want of meat in the Wilderness, and
thence the place where they were punished, to have been called the graves of
lust, as our Margents do English, (kiberoth hattaavah) neither need we be
infallibly resolved what kind of fire it was that God sent amongst them for
their murmuring) it is all we need observe at the present, that they were
punished by fire, and that murmuring was the sin they were punished for. Our
punishment I am sure has been by fire as well as theirs; ought we not then to
examine whether cur provocation was not much-what by murmuring, even as theirs
was? were we contented when the City was standing? yea did we not grumble and
repine at one thing or other every day? and yet we think we should be more than
contented, that is to say, very thankful and joyful, if we had but London
again, if that great City Phenix-like might but rise out of the ashes, and our
places know us once more. It should seem then, we had enough then to be
contented with, and thankful for, but we knew it not, as it is said of
husbandmen, Faelices nimium sua si bona norant. If some were in worse condition
than formerly, would that justify their murmuring? were not the Israelites in
the Wilderness when they were punished for murmuring? and had they not enjoyed
a better condition than that in former times? Do we murmurers think that men
are to blame? and was not Shimei to blame when he cursed Daivd? and yet David
looking higher, viz. unto God, submissively replied, it may be the Lord has
bid him curse me. The Robbers and spoilers of Israel were in fault. Yet seeing
it was God that gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers, that was
reason enough why they should be dumb as a sheep before the Shearer, and not
open their mouths in any way of murmuring. If we so remember our miseries, as
to forget our mercies, if we aggravate our evil things, and extenuate our good,
if we be so vexed and displeased with men, as if they were sole authors of all
our troubles, and as if God (who owes and pays us such chastisements) had no
hand in them. If in our hearts we quarrel with God, as if he were a hard
master, and had done us wrong, if when we had food and raiment we were not
content; if when we had something, and that considerable (and how could our
loss have been considerable, if our enjoyment had not been so?) we were as
unsatisfied, as if we had just nothing. If so, do not these things plainly
prove that we were murmurets many of us? and whose experience does not tell him
that these things were so? how many things have we repined at, that men could
not help? as namely the pestilence; now in such cases it is evident, that we
have not murmured against men, but against the Lord, Exodus 16.8. Nay, if men be
punished far less than their sin^ deserve, and yet will not accept of that
their punishment, but fret at him that inflicted it, what must we call that but
murmuring? And was not that our case? I had almost said, that England even
before this fire, was so full of discontent, (whatsoever the cause were) as if
all the plagues of Egypt had been upon it, and how after this i^ can swell more
without bursting, is hard to conceive. So little had we learned good Eli's
note, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good to him.

Now if the Law of retaliation be burning for ^urning, as we read it was, Exodus
21.25. How just was it with the great God to send a Fire upon us, for our
grievous discontents and murmurings? Murmurers are full of heart-burnings
against God himself, discontent is a Fire within, that flies and flames up
against the great God, as Ahaz said: (who with his tongue did speak but the
language of the hearts of many others.) This evil is of the Lord, why should I
wait on him any longer? wonder not then if the anger of God have burnt against
those that did burn against him, if he has given us fire for fire. We were
always murmuring when we had no such cause as now we have, and now God has
given us, as it were something to murmur for, and yet let me recall my self,
that was spoken but vulgarly: For though God should punish us with Scorpions in
stead of Rods, he will no tallow us to murmur, but commands us to filence our
selves with such a question and answer as this. Why does the living man
complain? man for the punishment of his sin. Who so considers how unthankful
we were for what we had before the fire, will see no cause to wonder at what we
have lost, but rather to wonder at this, that such as have lost but a part, did
not lose all. For with Parents nothing is more common than to take away those
things from their Children quite and clean, for which they will not so much as
give them thanks, as not being satisfied with them. Then say Parents, give them
us again, you shall have none of them, they shall be given to them that will be
thankful for them, yea say they not sometimes in their anger, we will throw
such a thing in the fire, before such unthankful Children shall have it. I see
London full of open Cellars and Vaults, as it were so many open Graves, and
Earth lying by, ready to cover them. How unwilling am I to say that Kiberoth
Hat^aavah might justly be written upon them, that is, the graves of those that
lusted after more, and by that means lost what they had? If I were one of the
murmurers, (as there were few exempted from that guilt) O Lord, I have cause to
own thy justice in whatsoever this Fire has or shall contribute to my loss and
prejudice, and also to adore thy mercy, if my share in this loss were not
proportionably so great, as that of many others, and those my betters.

MEDITATION IV. Of Rebellion against Moses and Aaron, procuring a destructive
Fire, Numb. 16.
THe sixteenth Chapter of the Book called Numbers, in the 35 verse thereof,
tells us, how that a Fire came down from the Lord, and consumed no less then
250 Men that offered Incense, not their Houses, but their very Persons. Some
would hardly think that so small a crime (as opposition to Magistracy and
Ministry are in their account) should have been the only causes of so heavy a
judgment. And yet we find that alleged as the main, if not the only reason of
Corah and his Accomplices being consumed by fire. The Confederates of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram are said to have been 250 Princes of the Assembly, famous in
the Congregation, men of renown. Yet when such as they (who one would think
might better afford to do such a thing than meaner men) gathered themselves
together against Moses, and against Aaron, saying why lift ye up your selves
above the Cougregation of the Lord? and they themselves would be Priests and
Princes, as well as they, verse 10. Seek ye the Priesthood also? said Moses to
them (ye Sons of Levi.) And in the 13 verse, they qua^rel with Moses, for
making himself (which was false, for it was God that had made him so)
altogether a Prince over them, as who shall say, they would have no body above
themselves, either in Church or State. I say, when they showed this kind of
spirit and principle, you see how God punished it. These were right Levellers,
if I mistake not; they pretend they would have all to be alike, verse. 3. ye
take too much upon you, all the Congregation are holy, every one of them;
wherefore then, say they to Moses and Aaron, lift ye up your selves above
others? But to pretend they would have none inferior to them, surely was but a
stratagem to bring to pass that they might have no Superiors, or rather that
themselves might be superior to all others. This was like to come to good,
they would have neither head nor tail in Church or State, or else it should be
all head, or all tail. But from these principles of Anarchy and Ataxy set at
work (I say) from the displeasure of God against them upon that account) sprang
the fire which we there read of.

Much of this spirit has been in England within a few years past, when not a
few gloried in the name of Levellers, at leastwise in the character and
principles of men so called. If any of those embers be still raked up under
ashes, I should fear least a Fire of tumult and confusion might break out from
thence, and by their means as soon as any way: nor do I question at all, but
that the sin and guilt of such vile and antiscriptural tenets might help to
kindle that fire which lately devoured the City. God will not suffer two such
great Ordinances, as Magistracy and Ministry, which so greatly concern the good
of the World, nor either of them to be trampled upon. St. Jude speaks sharply
of such men, calling them filthy dreamers, who despise dominion: and speak evil
of dignities: they who would level these, the God of order will level them, for
such are said to perish in the gainsaying of Korah, Jude 11. Of such it is
said, in 2 Pet. 2.12. That as bruit Boasts, they are made to be taken, and to
be destroyed, and that they shall utterly perish in their own corruption.

But then if we consider Moses and Aaron, one as a holy Magistrate, the other
as a holy Minister* that did greatly aggravate the sin of Korah, and his
Accomplices in rising up against, and seeking to depose them, for as such they
had a double ^tamp of God upon them, viz. both as Magistrates, and as good. For
as such, they were not only called Gods, but also partakers of the divine
nature, and if we must be subject to Superiors, that are naught and froward, 1
Pet. 2.18. much more to them that are good and gentle: the destruction of
useful Magistrates and Ministers is one of the greatest disservices that can
be done to the World, and will as soon kindle the wrath of God, as almost any
sin that men commit. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But they mocked the messengers of God, and
misused his Prophets, till the wrath of God arose against them, till there was
no remedy. Mat. 23.36. There we find these words, O Jerusalem that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, etc. Behold your house is
left unto you desolate. in Numb. 16.11. Moses told Corah and his Company, that
they were gathered together against the Lord. For what is done against
Magistrates and Ministers, either as Officers ordained of God, or as good, in
their places, is done against God himself, as the abuse offered to a Minister
of State, is more against his Prince, than against himself. Those Rebels had
some pretense for their insurrection, namely that they were brought into a
miserable condition, verse. 14. Thou have not brought us into a Land that
sloweth with milk and honey, or given us fields or Vineyards, we will not come
up: meaning that Moses had brought them into a Wilderness, and therefore they
would not be subject to him. But we see that excuse would not serve their turns.

Neither the vices, nor the unhappiness of Rulers, and of their subjects under
them (the latter of which was charged upon Moses, though very unjustly) can
dispense with their obedience to them in lawful things. The Israelites were as
truly bound to obey Moses in the Wilderness, as if he and they bad dwelt and
flourished together in the Land of Canaan. Had Moses been a bramble, as they
represented him, from which they could receive neither fruit nor shelter, yet
might he have said, as that bramble did in Jothams parable, Judges 9.15. If in
truth ye anoint me King over you (or if God had done it) then come and put
your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble and
devour the Cedars of Lebanon. No Child can lawfully deny his Parents the
observance of their lawful commands, because they are not so loving to him, or
careful of him as they ought to be, neither have kept their own garments
unspoted of the present World. Though Noah discovered nakedness, yet his Sons
ought him reverence, and were some of them cursed for not paying what they did
owe. They might do no more than turn their backs upon him, (that their e^^s
might not behold his shame) and yet themselves draw near enough to cover it.
May I then live to see the day (or may my Children see it, if not I) in which
all and every the inhabitants of these three Kingdoms shall perfectly detest
those sins which brought fire (as it is called, whatsoever fire it was) upon
Korah, Dathan, and those that were joined with them; and that as we read, that
not so much as a dog opened his mouth against the Israelites when they came out
of Egypt; so neither may man, woman or child, either speak a word, or dart a
thought against those two great Ordinances of God, Magistracy and Ministry,
(which some of late years have greatly vilified) or against either of them;
but may reverence that stamp of God which is put upon them, remembering that
Ministers are called Angels in Scripture, and Magistrates are there called
Gods. And whereas good Magistrates and good Ministers are in Gods account (and
therefore in deed and in truth) more precious than the Gold of Ophir. May I
live to see all and every of them so esteemed, and so dealt with; and may none
of Gods Elijahs ever in any future age be tempted to imprecate fire from Heaven
(as he of old did, 2 King. 1.10.) upon any Officers coming toward them in a
hostile way, and with a bloody mind.

Nor may any man ever be so wicked and hardy, as to come toward any such in
any such way, lest God who has said, Touch not mine a^ointed, and do my
Prophets no harm: should send that curse which was not causeless, and rain down
fire upon them, as he did once and again upon those Captains that came to
seize upon Elijah; and once more, may I live to see that ^^^our perfectly
rooted out of the minds of men, viz. that subjects may give a bill of divorce
to their lawful Sovereigns; or at leastwise to their own due Allegiance, if
either they should prove vicious in their persons, or unhappy and unsuccessful
in their public Administrations, as those that told Moses he had not brought
them into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and therefore they would not come
up to him; whereas it is unquestionably our duty to come up to our Governors
in whatsoever lawfully we may, whatsoever themselves or their ill success be.
Let it suffice, O Lord, that so many fires have been formerly kindled in the
world, by men's following the way of Korah, and let the example of thy severity
upon him and his accomplices, and on others that have trod in their steps, for
ever deter men from kindling new fires upon the like accounts or (which is
worse) provoking thee to kindle a fire upon them, as thou lately did upon
that once famous City of London, which now lies in ashes.

MEDITATION V. Of Sabbath-breaking mentioned in Scripture, a^ one great cause
of Gods punishing a people by Fire.
TO them that shall carefully read what is spoken, Jer. 17.28. nothing will
more plainly appear than that God has sometimes contended by Fire, for the
pollution and profanation of his Sabbaths which he has bid us remember to keep
holy. The words are these, But if you will not hearken to me, to hallow the
Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden even entering at the gates of Jerusalem on
the Sabbath Day: then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall
devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. To this sin
amongst others did Jerusalem owe its destruction by Fire, which was afterward
accomplished. It is one of the complaints which the Prophet makes, Lam. 2.6.
that God had caused their solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion.
They would not keep them when they might, and afterward (such was their
distraction and confusion) they could hardly keep them if they would, and had
so discontinued the observation of them, that they had almost forgotten that
they had sometimes enjoyed such good days, and still ought to observe them. It
is said in Lam. 1.7. that the enemies saw her, viz. Jerusalem, and did mock at
her Sabbaths; which some expound, of their deriding the cessation of their
wonted public and solemn services, which the Temple being demolished they were
forced to intermit.

I wish there lay no guilt upon England, and upon London its self, in reference
to the profanation of Gods Sabbaths, and forgetting to keep them holy, as we
are commanded to do; when Saul told Samuel, that he had performed the
commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.14. Samuel replied, What means then this
bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
Alluding to that, I may answer such as shall pretend the Sabbath was strictly
kept; what then was the meaning of that poise of children and young folks, that
we saw and heard playing up and down the streets on the Lords day? or what
meant that vain and idle communication that we heard from the mouths of young
and old, both men and women, as we passed along the streets on those days? how
came the Fields adjacent to the City, to be so crowded with company, walking to
and fro, merely for their pleasure on the Lords day; yea, why was it thus, not
only before and after the time of public worship, but in the very season of
it? in so much that there was more company sometimes in the fields, on the
Lords day, than in the Churches? was it for want of Churches to repair to? how
could that be, when there were so many within the City it self, that now the
Fire has destroyed above fourscore, yet some remain? It could not be for want
of room in Churches, for many were almost empty, and some of those, in which I
doubt not, but the sincere milk of Gods Word might have been enjoyed. Why were
Taverns and Alehouses that stood in the fields, so frequented on the Lords
days, more than on working days, as if they had been the Churches, and
Bacchus the God that men ought to worship? yea, it is vehemently suspected,
that Stews and Baudy-houses were not without their customers on that day, as
well as on any others. Oh the wanton carriages that mine eyes have seen on that
day in the open fields. The greatest part of those I met, seemed to be on the
merry pin, laughing and jesting, and disporting themselves one with another,
both young men and maidens: By their behavior one would have took it for some
jovial time, rather than for a day holy to the Lord, in which men are enjoined,
not to think their own thoughts, speak their own words, or find their own
pleasures. How few have I heard taking the name of God into their months on
that day, otherwise than in vain, and by cursed oaths, as I have walked some
miles an end. I verily think that many people had wont to spend the Lords day
worse, generally, than any day in the whole week. Many did spend other days in
honest labor, who misspent the Lords day in dishonest recreations. So far
were most from preparing for it before it came, that few kept it holy when it
was come. Jews will not omit the preparations to their Sabbaths, but Christians
did not only so, but pollute the Lords day its self. I might speak of such as
did take the boldness to work on the Lords day, notwithstanding that they read
to the contrary in Neh. 13.15. Jer. 17.21. and expressly in the fourth
Commandment, in which it is said, Exodus 20.10. In it thou shall not do any
work, thou nor thy servant: and yet did not some hard masters exact all their
labors of their servants on those days, when they had have of work.

Have we not others set their wits on work to dispute against that day, and to
write against it; witness many ill Treatises extant to that purpose. And why
might they not as well have written against the other nine Commandments as
against the fourth? Why must that only be thought Ceremonial, when all the rest
are confessed to be Morral? If God have seemed to change it from the last to
the first day of the Week, can we take a just occasion from thence to abrogate
it? I doubt not but the day we now keep by the name of the Lords day, was
intended in the second Commandment as well as that which they under the Old
Testament kept, which was called the Sabbath. A seventh day, or one day in
every seven is provided for by that Commandment to be kept holy, but not
always the seventh day from the creation. For it is not said, that God blessed
the seventh day and hallowed it; but that he blessed the Sabbath Day, or that
day which himself had or should appoint to be kept as a Sabbath, or time of
holy rest; which under the Old Testament was the last, but under the New is the
first day of the week, called the Lords day, for that Christ rose again as on
that day. Although the first administration of the Lords Supper was in
unleavenned bread, yet the institution of it is for the use of bread, not of
that which is unleavenned. So, though God rested on the seventh day from the
Creation, yet his legal Ordinance does not precisely require the observation of
that day, but of one day in seven. Who doubts but baptism and the Lords Supper
are now as much in force by virtue of the second Commandment, as Circumcision
and the Passover were of old; that Commandment referring to such Ordinances as
God should appoint, as well as to those which he had appointed, and so the
fourth Commandment, to any day in seven that God should enjoin, as well as to
that which he had enjoined. Why should not the practice of the Apostles be a
sufficient warrant for changing of the day? 1 Cor. 16.2. On the first day of
the week let every of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him. It
appears that was their day of meeting for worship, because on that day they
made their Collections for the poor; and in Act. 20.7. it is said, that on the
first day of the week when the disciples met to break bread, Paul preached to
them; intimating, that was their day for partaking of the Lords Supper, and
therefore in all likelihood for other religious services. Now, would the
Apostles have ventured to change the day, without leave and command from God so
to do?

But if any man be not convinced by these arguments, that the day ought to be
so changed; yet let him show me the least color of reason for abrogating of
the fourth Commandment, and observing no day in the week as a Sabbath to the
Lord. Most men, if they must keep one day in the week holy, had as lieve it
should be the first day of the week as the last. Most of those that quarrel at
the observation of the first day, or Christian Sabbath, I fear do it because
they would observe none at all; but as for those that conscientiously observe a
seventh-day Sabbath. I dare not call them Jews, for Judaizing in that one
thing, but think they may be better Christians than many that are more Orthodox
as to the Time and Day. But as for those profane persons that have and do
refuse to dedicate either the last or first day of the week to God, as a
Sabbath or holy rest, I must be bold to tell them (if they be Englishmen) they
had a great hand in setting London on fire, which was a vast loss to the whole
Nation, and came doubtless for the sins of the whole Nation, as well as for the
sins of its inhabitants. I say, you had a great hand in it, and particularly by
your profanation of the Lords day, as the Text I quoted from Jer. 17.21. leads
me to think. I had almost said, that was become a National sin, as by the
general practice of it, so for want of due endeavors to restrain it, such as
Nehemiah used, ( Nehem. 13.16.) and therefore no wonder if God have punished
with that which was, is, and will be a sore stroke upon the body of the Nation.

But besides the gross profanation of the Lords day, whereof wicked men were
guilty, viz. by working, playing, and doing more wickedness then, than at other
times. I fear few of the better sort can wash their hands in innocence, as from
finding their own pleasure, and speaking their own words on Gods holy day,
which is forbidden, Isa. 58.13. or have called the Sabbath their delight, holy,
and honorable of the Lord, as became us. Or with John have been in the Spirit,
so as we ought, on the Lords day. Few of us have kept any one Sabbath, as a
Sabbath should be kept. Under pretense that we fear to act like Jews; it is
well if we forget not to act like Christians, as to the Lords day. We took Gods
day from him, and now he has taken our City from us; we robbed him of the best
day in the week, for all days are his, but this more especially; and he has
deprived us of the best City in the three Kingdoms. We committed Sacrilege in
robbing God of his days, which he had set apart for himself, and it prospered
with us no better than that Coal did which the Eagle stole from the Altar, and
therewith fired her own Nest. And now poor London, (if I may still call thee
London) thou enjoyest thy Sabbaths in that doleful sense, as was threatened,
Levit. 26.34. Then shall the Land enjoy its Sabbaths, as long as it lies
desolate. And the same reason may be given now as then, v. 35. As long as it
lies desolate it shall rest, because it did not rest in your Sabbaths when ye
dwelt upon it.

MEDITATION VI. Of Gods contending by Fire, for the sins of Idolatry and
Superstition.
I Dolatry is plainly and properly enough defined, to be the worshipping of a
false God (one or more) or else of the true God in a false manner. The former
is expressly forbidden in the first Commandment, which is in these words, Thou
shall have no other Gods before me; but the latter in the second, which says,
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. that is, Thou shall not
worship, or pretend to worship me in the use of Images, or of any thing else
which I my self have not instituted and appointed. Now whereas some may think
that the worshipping of graven Images, for Gods, or as if they were Gods
themselves, and not the worshipping of the true God, in the use of them, is the
sin forbidden in the second Commandment, because it is said, Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them. The contrary is evident enough. For the
worshipping of any other besides the true God, is that which the first
Commandment does directly forbid, and is the sum and substance of it; now we
must not make the first and second Commandments one and the same. Therefore the
sin forbidden in the second Commandment is the worshipping of God, in or by the
use of Images, and other things which he never appointed, as means, methods,
and parts of his worship. Now this latter branch of Idolatry is the same thing
with that which is called Superstition; which is as much as supra statutum, or
a being devout and religious, or rather seeming to be so, above what is
written, or was ever commanded by God. Of the first sort of Idolatry which
consists in professedly worshipping any other besides the true God, I shall
need to say nothing; because that is the Idolatry of Heathen only, and all
Christians profess to abhor it. But alas, how many calling themselves
Christians, are not ashamed to own and defend their worshipping of Images
relatively, (as they term it) though not absolutely, mediately, though not
ultimately. But if we can prove that this was all that many did, whom God was
pleased to charge with Idolatry, and to punish grievously, even with Fire, for
so doing; that will be to the point in hand. See for this Levit. 26.31. I will
make your Cities, waste, and bring your Sanctuaries to desolation (which was
afterward done by Fire, when themselves were carried into captivity, their
City and Temple burnt.) Now in what case does God threaten so to do, viz. in
case they should offer to set up any Images, to bow down to them. v. 1. and
should not repent of their so doing after they had been warned by lesser
judgments: If so, says God, I will make your Cities waste: and so he did by
Fire, for that very sin. Now the people thus threatened were the Israelites, who
had so much knowledge of the true God, that it was impossible for them to think
that those stocks and stones which they did bow to, were God himself; but only
they made them as representations and memorials of God (or little Temples for
God to repair to, if he pleased; or as sures to draw God to them (as one
calls them) and yet for this, they are charged with Idolatry; for those very
Images are called their Idols, v. 1. Ye shall make ye no Idols, or graven
Images; and by the greatness of that punishment which God inflicted for the
same, we may gather he reckoned it as Idolatry, for it was that ^in if any.
Moreover, that they intended no more by their Images, than only pictures and
resemblances of God, is intimated to us by those words, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Take heed
unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of Similitude, on the day that the Lord
spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the Fire. v. 16. Lest you make you
an Image, the similitude of any figure. As if he had said, that God did
therefore forbear at that time to assume any visible shape, because he would
not have any representations made of him, which to do were Idolatry; at
leastwise, if done in order to religious worship. Were not Aaron and the
Israeli^es charged with Idolatry, for making, and causing to be made, a Golden
call, Exodus 32.4. and sacrificing to it? v. 5. etc. (yet that people were far
from thinking the Calf they had made, to be the true God that brought them out
of Egypt^ No, they had made it for a representation, and a memorial of him: For
so they are to be understood, v. 4. Could any of them so far renounce reason,
and common sense (least of all could Aaron do so) as to think that Image
brought them out of Egypt, which was no Image till after their coming out of
Egypt, which had not been what it was, but that they made a Calf of it? which
they knew, of its self was neither able to do good nor evil. No surely, their
intent was to set up that only as a memorial of God, and to worship God in and
by it. For this Moses was so angry with them, and with the puppet which they
had made, that as we read v. 20. He took the Calf, burnt it in the fire, ground
it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, and made them drink of it. The
Apostle calls them Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.6. Neither be ye Idolaters, as were
some of them; which is quoted out of Exodus 32.6. If there were no Idolatry in
the Golden-calf so intended, why was Moses so angry with it? yea, why was God
so angry with them, as by Moses to give charge to the sons of Levi, to slay
every man his brother, and his companion, and his neighbor? v. 27. and all for
their sin in reference to that Golden-calf? and in v. 10. said God to Moses,
Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them. By which we may plainly see, that the Idolatry I have been speaking of,
which is against the second Commandment kindles fires, as well as that which
is against the first Commandment Therefore a Caveat is entered against Graven
images, Deuteronomy. 4.23. upon the account of Gods being a consuming fire, and a
jealous God; a fire that can burn, and full of jealousy (which is the rage of
God as well as of man) so that he will not spare in the day of his anger.

Now if any should think it harsh to call that which is intended as the worship
of the true God, by the name of worshipping Idols, when Idols are made use of
only as memorials of God, and helps to worship; let them consider, that if such
worship any thing really and truly, it is the Idol that is before them: for it
must be either that, or God; it is not God they worship, for he accepts it no
more than if they had cut off a dogs neck, or offered swines blood, Isa. 66.3.
See Acts 7.43. O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts, and
sacrifices by the space of forty years? yea, ye took up the Tabernacle of
Moleck. He denies they offered to him, because they corrupted his worship, and
so in effect he was not worshipped at all. Amot 5.25. and Isa. 1.11. Sring no
more vain Oblations. Therefore such persons doing that which God accounts now
orship to himself, are said to worship the Idol they pretend to worship by; and
so to bless an Idol. Isa. 66.3. and in 1 Cor. 10.20. The things which the
Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed to devils, not to God; not that they
intended their Sacrifices for the service of devils; least of all, when they
offered their sons and daughters. Psalm. 106.37. Yet because it was a sacrifice
acceptable to the devil, and abominable to God, it is said, that they
sacrificed their sons and their daughters to devils. That is, to the Idols of
Canaan, which they took for their Gods, and not for devils, v. 38. But moreover,

God punished worshipping by Idols, as if it were worshipping of Idols: because
the former leads to the latter; and will introduce it in time, and presently
too, amongst a great many. Many that are taught to worship before Images,
cannot distinguish of doing it Relatively not Absolutely, mediately, and not
ultimately; and so they do it absolutely and not relatively, ultimately and not
mediately. Idols are brought in by the help of distinctions, but when once
brought in, the distinctions are forgotten, and the Idols only are remembered,
and the more ignorant sort of people will turn perfect heathens, that is,
worshippers of stocks and stones. The jealous God foreseeing this, forbids all
use of Images in and about his worship, seeing that kind of dalliance and
kissing the calves, will end at last in going a whoring from him, by such
Idolatry as was amongst the blindest Heathens. Now God would prevent the
in-lets of evil, and therefore he would not permit the Nazarites so much as to
eat the stones of Grapes, lest it should bring them by degrees to drink Wine,
which they had vowed against; so neither will he suffer men to worship by, or
in the use of Images, lest they come at last to worship Images themselves. And
to the end the worship of God might be kept pure, care is taken in the second
Commandment, that men should present God with nothing as either medium, or pars
cultus, but what himself has prescribed; for by the same reason that
worshipping by Graven-images is forbidden, are we prohibited the use of every
other thing, as any means or part of divine worship which G^d has not
instituted. Hence those words, Mark 7.7. In vain do you worship me, teaching
for doctrine the traditions of men. For the Pharisees, to place Religion in
washing before they eat (whereas it was no more but cleanliness) Mark 7.3. was
very displeasing to our Savior Christ, Paul was very angry with those that
pretended to a voluntary humility, in worshipping Angels, Col. 2.18. that is,
they gave out that men ought to go to God by the mediation of Angels, as being
the more reverent way of addressing to God: but Paul says, they were vainly
puffed up with their fleshly mind, for that they intruded into those things,
which they had not seen any warrant for in Gods Word. And as for those
Galathians that did observe days, and months, and times, and years, the
Apostle says plainly, he was afraid he had bestowed upon them labor in vain;
namely, because they thought to please, and to worship God, in and by those
things which were never of his own appointment. I wish then that whosoever
shall read this Chapter, may become convinced, if not so before, how greatly
the sins of Idolattie and superstition do provoke God, and kindle the fire of
his wrath. Saul gave Samuel a superstitious reason, why the people took of the
Sheep and Oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly
destroyed; namely, that it was to sacrifice to the Lord in Gilgal. Yet this
their devotion, besides, and contrary to Gods command, is called Rebellion,
and said to be as the sin of witchcraft: and as for Idolatry, if Idolaters do
in Gods account sacrifice to devils: how just is it for Idolatry to be
reckoned as the sin of witchcraft. 1 Samuel 15.23. Witches are burnt by the Laws
of our Land. Now if that which God calls Witchcraft, should grow common amongst
us, viz. Idolatry, so called also in 2 Kings 9.22. which God forbid, and the
wisdom of our Governors will (I hope seek to prevent) we may expect more
burning yet behind, and such a fire of judgment to ensue, as will consume us to
utter and endless destruction. Now Lord, if those men whose Religion teaches
them to insist upon their merits, and if others have merited also, to fly to
their works of supererogation, (as their manner is to idolize themselves, and
their own works) if such shall attempt to break in upon us like a flood, grant
that thy Spirit poured out upon our Rulers, may lift up its self as a standard
against them.

MEDITATION VII. Of Oppression, Theft, Deceit, false Balances, mentioned in
Scripture, as causes of God's contending by Fire.
I Am forced to put several sins together, that have affinity each with other,
because there are so many to which the judgment of fire is attributed, (or
against which it is threatened) that to consider them singlely, would take up
too much time and room: I find God threatening the Jews Ezekiel. 22.20. That he
would put them into a Furnace, leave them there, and melt them. And the cause
thereof is assigned, verse. 29. The people of the Land have used oppression, and
have vexed the poor and needy, yea they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully,
verse. 31. Therefore have I consumed them with the fire of my wrath. And Amos
5.11. Forasmuch then as your treading is upon the poor, and ye have taken from
him burdens of wheat, ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not
dwell in them, etc.

And then for Theft, see Ezekiel. 22.29. The people of the Land have exercised
robbery: and Zechary 5.4. The curse shall enter into the house of the thief,
and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and with the stones thereof.

And lastly, as for deceit and false balances, see Amos 8.5. Hear ye this,
that say, when will the Sabbath be over, that we may set forth wheat, making
the Ephah small, and the Shekell great, that we may falsify the balances by
deceit? Take notice that the judgments denounced against that people, are
generally thus expressed, I will send a fire, etc. Chap. 10.2. Now one cause
was their deceit and false balances.

Now were not the sins forementioned too too common in the Land, and in the
great City which is now ruined? Did not many rich men oppress the poor by
griping usury, extorting, brokage, taking unmerciful forfeitures of pawns, and
pledges, by engrossing of commodities, and selling them at unreasonable rates,
by vexatious suites, by taking them at advantages, by working upon their
necessities, by withholding those debts and dues which poor men had not
wherewithal to recover, and several other ways? For I pretend not to know the
one half of that mystery of iniquity. Did not rich Lawayers oppress their poor
Clients, rich Physicians their poor Patients, rich Landlords their poor
Tenants, raising and racking their rents? Did they not grind the faces of the
poor, as it were to powder? and when time served, and particularly when the
fire was, did not the poor show, their hearts served them to oppress the rich?
If theft did not abound, why were so many condemned almost every Monthly
Sessions upon that account? (besides many that escaped undiscovered) how came
it to pass, that there was a formal society and corporation of thieves, keeping
a kind of order and government amongst themselves? Then as for deceit and false
balances, I doubt those things were more common than either of the two former;
though they might justly bear the name of either, viz. of deceit or theft,
though they went not commonly by the name of either. How much bad money was
knowingly put off, brass pieces, light gold, and such like? how many
unserviceable wares were vended at dear rates? how many rich commodities were
sophisticated, as Wines, Physical Drugs, and the like, to the great hazard, of
Men's health and lives? What trash was vended for Pearl, and Beazar, and for
other high prized things? All was looked upon as clear gains by many, in which
they could but overreach others, though the Scripture says, let no Man
defraud his brother, for God is an avenger of all such things. If a Man had not
his wits about him, he could go into few places, and not be cheated, whatsoever
he bought, if he did not understand it himself: so that it grew a proverb, that
Men knew not who to trust. Men would ask twice as much as they could take, and
yet would have taken all they did ask, if the buyer would have given it. As for
false balances, let the Quests that went about, speak what ill weights they
found in many places, heavier to buy by, and lighter to sell by. Let the full
Baskets of Bread which were given away almost every Market Day, because too
light to be sold, bear witness. Why was so much butter and bread taken from
the owners, and sent to the Prisons, but for want of due weight? If men did use
false balances in so cheap Commodities, and that were to come under the test,
what did they not do in those that were dearer, and they generally left to
their own consciences? in things as to which one dram of weight more or less
would turn to more profit than many loaves of bread, or pounds of butter?

I doubt not but there were those, and not a few, that would not have wronged a
customer in one grain of weight for the greatest profit: but were not the
generality of Tradesmen for all they could get, Per fas, ant nefas, that is, by
^ook or by crook? Reflecting upon the great deceit and cheating there was: I
wonder not that Constantinople stands, whilst London lies in ashes: For if we
may believe travelers, amongst the very Turks there was more common justice,
that is, righteousness and freedom from deceit in buying and selling, than
amongst us. Righteous art thou O Lord, yet let me plead with thee concerning
thy judgments, why were their shops and houses burnt down that used no deceit?
(and there were many such) but as for others, thy justice does most manifestly
appear in scourgeing those buyers and sellers out of house and home, by a fiery
Rod, who turned the famous City (which should have been a Mountain of
righteousness and justice) into a Den of thieves and robbers.

MEDITATION VIII. Of lying, swearing, and for-swearing, as further causes of
God's contending by Fire.
I find the Prophet Nahum. chap. 3. threatening Nineveh with fire, in the 13.
and 15. verses of that Chapter. The fire shall devour thy bars, etc. now one
cause he gives of that woe, was lying, verse. 1. We to the City, it is full of
lies and robbery. Fitly are those two put together, for probably many or most
of the lies they had wont to tell, were in a way of trade, in order to unjust
gain, which is no other than robbery in Gods account. Oh that London, in this
respect, had not been another Nineveh, for the multitude of lies that were
daily told in many parts of it, in order to robbery, that is, undue gain: A
good man would not have told so many wilful lies, for a whole World, as some
would tell, to get a few shillings, if not pence. This cost me so much, says
one, and by and by he sells it for less than he said it cost him, (which few
men will do) you shall have the very best, says another, and yet if he have
any worse than other, puts him off with that. I had so much for the very fellow
of this, had some wont to say, when there was no such matter. This is as good
as can be bought for money, would some say, when yet they knew that it was
stark naught, could such pretend themselves to be the people of God? who says,
Isa. 63.8. They are my people, Children that will not lie, so I was their
Savior. Could men thus abound with lies, and yet believe what is written. Rev.
21.8. All liars shall have their portion in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone: No wonder if that which kindles Hell it self, did help to fire a
City.

But to pass on to the sin of Swearing, either falsely or vainly, both of which
were too common in the great City, till the very time of its destruction by
fire, (though possibly as common or more in some other place.) Was it
considered at leastwise, it is now time to consider what is spoken, Zach. 5.4.
The curse shall enter into the House of him that swears falsely by my Name,
and shall consume it, with the timber and stones thereof. How was the Land
overrun with perjury? What if few causes were tried, in which there was not
oaths against oaths, men and Women swearing point blank one against another?
Both could not be true: Contradictoria non possent esse simul vera. How
ordinary was it with men to swear, what was impossible for them to perform? How
have oaths been bought and sold? were there not those that made a trade of
swearing, (Knights of the Post men called them) they would pleasure any man
with an oath, that would but pay them for it. How many have presumed, they
could carry almost any Cause, defend any title, how bad soever, by a pack of
swearers, which were ready to serve them upon all occasions? As long as they
could have oaths for their money, they feared nothing. England has driven a
mighty trade in oaths, forward and backward, and made them so common, that
with many men, they are grown contemptible, and they have learnt to play with
them, as is said of some, that they use Ludere Juramentis ut pueri tesseris.
Alas, how many made nothing of it, to swear a hundred oaths, they would do
this or that; as namely, they would pay such a debt by such a time, and yet
never mean to do it? O England, if thou had no sin but this, it were no
marvel that this Metropolis should now lie in the dust. For such oaths as
these does the great City (that was) yea and the whole Land suffering with it,
mourn at this day. Though some have exposed themselves to temporal ruin, for
fear of oaths, yet have not others desperately said, they would not be undone
by refusing oaths of what kind soever? they would trust God with their souls,
and not men with their estates. If this sin were not as oil to the late
flames, I know not what was. It is no whit strange that false swearing should
be punished with temporal fire, when mere lying or false speaking is threatened
with that fire which is eternal. Rev. 21.8.

But then, as for vain swearing, how common was it; as if men had never heard
of the third Commandment, which says, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain, for he will not hold them guiltless. Vain Oaths slew about
like so much Musket Shot, when two armies are in fight, so that they struck
every man (his cars at leastwise) that went along the streets. Who that heard
the needless Oaths men had wont to swear, could but think of David's words? Be
not merciful to any that transgress without a cause. I am confident there were
some that took a great pride in swearing, and thought it a great piece of
Gentility to abound in Oaths, though many Tinkers and Tapsters could swear as
fast as they: but could they have had the monopoly of swearing to themselves,
and a prohibition upon all poor men to swear, as well as they, would they not
have accounted it a very great honor and privilege? Thus did they glory in
their shame. Unless they vaunted themselves, in showing how bold they did dare
to make with God, I see not why they should be proud of their vain swearing.
What wit was there in rapping out an oath? Or what fool could not utter as many
oaths as they? who was so silly as to honor them for their swearing? Or who
did the rather believe them for it? yea who did not infer, that, because they
would swear without cause, they would also lie? How did men bid a daily
defiance to that text that says? Above all things swear not? and practice, as
if St. James had said, my brethren, above all things swear. When London was
become as full of oaths, (as the air is of motes) (which spoke the tongues of
men to be set on fire of hell) no wonder that there came a flying roll filled
with a curse, which consumed the timber thereof, and demolished the stones
thereof. Zach. 5.4. May then the horrid sins of lying, swearing, and
forswearing, be buried as it were in London's ruins, so as never to rise up
more; and may the late Inhabitants of the same mourn, as it were in dust and
ashes, for those great provocations, and if ever London be its self again, may
he pass for a monster, and become a hissing and by-vvord that after so great a
warning, shall presume to svvear falfly or vainly, or so much as to utter a
vvilfull lie.

MEDITATION IX. Of the abounding of Drunkenness, as one cause of the Fire.
Who can think of England's, yea of London's sins, and not remember
Drunkenness, which did so much abound? Or who can think of the fire, and that
sin together, and not recount that passage, Nahum. 1.10. Whilst they are drunk
as Drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. Methinks it was
but yesterday since London was as dry stubble before that Fire, which the
brutish sin of drunkenness, amongst others, did help to kindle. What havoc
that very sin can make, we may read, Isa. 28.1, 2. Woe to the Drunkards of
Ephraim. Behold the Lord has a mighty and strong one, (such was our fire)
which as a tempest of hail, and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty
Waters over flowing, shall cast down to the Earth with the hand. Was not that
Dutch-sin of Drunkenness grown to a very great height amongst us? Whilst we
were in War with their Nation, we were in league with their grand vice,
we were not more enemies to them than friends to it. Paul observes in his
time, that Those that were drunk, were so in the night. 1 These. 5.7. Better so
than in the day time, because it spoke them ashamed of what they did, but so
were not many of those Drunkards that helped to fire the City, who had the
boldness to re^le and stagger along the streets all hours of the day, so
declaring their sins like Sodom.

Great ones had taken up that pitiful sin, which men of their quality in
former time had wont to scorn? As they would have scorned to steal, so as much
almost to have been drunk: Was not the Proverb in old time, as drunk as an Ap^,
afterward it came to be, as drunk as a beggar, but now they say the Proverb
is, as drunk as a Lord. There seems to be a design amongst some men to bring
sin in credit, and to overthrow that saving of Solomon, that Sin is the
reproach of any people. Some think by their own espousing of this or that sin,
to put honor upon it, (as a Nobleman that by marrying of a Chambermaid,
advances her to the title of a Countess.) But alas they will find that be
they ever so honorable, sin can truly debase them, but they by their practice,
can never make sin its self truly honorable. Woe unto us that those sins
should now be clad in scarlet, which formerly did no more than embrace
dunghils, which were in use amongst few, but those mean and sordid persons that
did well become a Cage, or Stocks, or Whipping-post, the just reward of their
intemperance. We had wont to look upon drunken Gods (such as Bacchus) as only
the fictions of Poets; but have we not seen such things too often verified, if
men in authority be a kind of Gods, as the Scripture calls them. But if such
Gods as those expect adoration, few there are that can heartily give it them,
or half that reverence, which as Magistrates is their due. Drunkenness did so
abound amongst all sorts, that I persuade my self, more good liquors were
sacrificed to Men's lusts, than were spent upon their necessities. It grew to be
matter of emulation amongst many men, who should be able to drink most* such as
were strong in the sense spoken of, Isa. 8.22. Woe to them that are mighty to
drink wine; began to glory in that their woeful strength. He was accounted a
brave fellow that could drink down others under the Table, and keep above board
himself. Drinking with many was the work of the day, and the work of the night,
intituling them to that woe: Isa. 5.11. Woe to them that rise up early in the
morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue till night, till
Wine inflame them. Many forsook their callings for it in the day time, and
their sleep in the night. As some have their incentives to lust, so had not a
few their provocations of drunkenness, by their salt meats, and such like
ways, adding to drunkenness thirst, that to thirst they might add the more
pleasing drunkenness. As light as some would make of this, it has many great
sins in the womb of it, and many sad consequences following of it. Oh! the
woeful neglect of Men's callings, both general and particular, whilst they lay in
Taverns from day to day. Oh! the mis-spence of precious time that never can be
recalled. Oh! the wasting of men's estates, and making themselves worse than
Infidels, by not providing for their Families, whilst they made provision for
their lusts. Oh! the abuse of Gods good creatures to luxury, whilst others
wanted them for their necessity. Oh! the abuse that men offered to themselves,
to their persons, their parts, their places and offices, wherewith they were
entrusted, and to the image of God, which is upon them as men.

London in its ruins is not more unlike to what it was in its prosperity, than
some men by noon would be unlike what themselves were in the morning, more than
ordinary men were they when they rose; They could have spoke to any case,
dispatched any business, turned their hands to any affair, military or civil:
but less than men, ere they went to Bed again, and for the time almost as much
altered as Nebuchadnezzar was, when turned amongst the beasts of the field. If
an enemy were at hand ready to cut our throats, they have neither heads to
advise, nor legs to stand upon, nor hands to fight, were it to save their own
lives, who have all of these when they are themselves. Now nothing but
ribbaldry and bawdery, and nonsense is to be expected from them. Silly looks
and antic actions: one while you have them spuing like swine that had gorged
themselves; another while tumbling in their own vomit, like Sowes in the mire;
other-while you had them wrangling and quarrelling with every body, as if they
would kill and slay all they came near; other-while you might have seen them
all in gore blood, upon some groundless scuffle they had, Prove. 23.29. Who
has contentions, who has wounds without cause, they that tarry long at the
Wine. And what comes next, see verse. 33. Thine eyes shall behold strange women:
verse. 34. Yea thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or
as he that lies upon the top of a Mast, that is, in eminent danger. Neither
will they be warned by that, for it is said, verse. 35. When shall I awake? I
will seek it yet again. If this were the trade that many drove (as certainly it
was) if they took this course (as it were) to drown the City, no wonder that
God has destroyed it another way, viz. by Fire.

Men were grown into strange methods of drinking, (as I may call it) they would
enforce their company to drink healths, that is Aequalis calices. They would
have all to drink alike, or equal cups, though all could not bear it alike, as
if a kind of uniformity were necessary in drinking, as well as in other things:
I forbear to speak how the weaker vessels, did sometimes make too bold with the
stronger liquors, (and to the shame of their Sex) there were she-drunkards as
well as others. Things being brought to this pass, men would have thought that
God had been such a one as themselves, if his wrath had not been revealed from
heaven in some remarkable judgment. But now he that runs may read, that our God
is an enemy, as to other sins, so particularly to that beastly vice of
drunkenness. I had thought here to have dismissed the good fellows, (as they
call themselves) but a strange fancy came in my head, and it was this, that if
your great drunkards were able to retain all they receive, and to give it out
as good as they took it in, a few of them might be able to furnish a
well-custom'd Vintner with as much Wine of several sorts, as would serve him a
good while for his occasions, and each of them (upon one years collection) (O
monsters of men) might contain and yield more than the greatest Casks that
Vintners do ever use. Did these me^ look upon London as a body, surely they
took themselves to be the Glandulae or kernels to which it belongs, to suck up
superfluous moistures, or did they look upon themselves as the sinks and common
shoares, that all liquors were to pass through, or to pass into. Let me speak a
warm word to you, O ye Diveses, that use to drink Wine in Bowls till it
inflame you; if ye repent not, the time is hastening in which you will want
water to cool your tongues, and you that now indulge your selves great
draughts, will be to seek for one drop. Consider two texts well, and then be
drunk if you dare, viz. 1 Cor. 6.10. Drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom
of God. Also Luke 12.46. If that servant shall say, my Master delayeth his
coming, and shall begin to drink, and to be drunken. The Lord of that servant
will come when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and appoint him his
portion with unbelievers.

MEDITATION X. Of God's punishing a People by Fire, for their great
unprofitableness.
I Meet with a plain denunciation of fire against Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 15.6, 7. As
the Vine-Tree which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem. They shall go out from one Fire, and another Fire
shall devour them. Be the Fire there spoken of, literal or analogical, it may
come all to one. For what is Fire equivalently, is as terrible as what is
really so. Now, if I mistake not, great unprofitableness was the sin for which
God did threaten that Fire. See v. 2. and so onwards, What is the Vine-tree
(intending to compare the Jews thereunto) shall Wood be taken thereof to do any
work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon? v. 5. Behold
when it was whole it was meet for no work; how much less shall it be meet for
any work, when the Fire has devoured it, and it is burnt? As if God had told
them, that they were become as useless and good for nothing, as is a branch of
the Vine cut off from the Tree, and half burnt in the Fire. Now for this it was
that God told them, he would give them for fuel to the Fire, that were good
for nothing but to burn. May I presume to say (and why should I not, it being
manifestly true,) London did swarm, and a residue of England at this day does
swarm with useless persons, who did and do drink in the former and latter rain
of Gods good Ordinances and Blessings; but have brought, and do bring forth
nothing but briars and thorns; and concerning such ground, the Scripture says,
That it is nigh unto a curse, and the end of it is to be burned. Heb. 6.8.

It will be enough for me to tell what persons may be justly reckoned
unprofitable, and then leave it to others to judge, if there are not, and were
not many such in the midst of us, of all sorts and conditions, though blessed
be God all were not such. He is an unprofitable Christian whose converse
edifies no body; neither does his communication minister grace to any that hear
it. He is an unpofitable master of a family, or parent, who takes no care with
Joshua, that his far^ily might serve the Lord; nor does command his children
and household to keep the way of the Lord, as God testifies for Abraham that he
would do, Genesis 18.19. or that with old Eli, suffers those that are, under his
command to do what they list. He is an unprofitable Magistcate, that is neither
a terror to evil doers, nor an encouragement to them that do well; but much
more, if vice versa, he does worse than bear the sword in vain. He is an
unprofitable Minister, that neither instructs the people by wholesome doctrine,
nor by a holy life; that wants both Urim and Thummim, that does not calculate
his Sermons for the good of souls; that either shoots over peoples heads, by
too much profundity and ostentation of Learning, such as they understand not,
or shoots under their feet, by such weak and senseless discourses as make both
his person and doctrine contemptible. He that treats his people, as if
Nonsense were the only Nectar and Ambrosia for immortal people to feed upon,
(as one phraseth it.) In a word, he that studies only to provoke his souls by
meddling with what he should not; or only to please them, by not meddling with
what he should: and lastly, he that fleeceth the flock, but feeds it not, is an
unprofitable Minister, if he may so much as be called a Minister. Again, he is
unprofitably knowing and learned, that suffers no body to be the better (or as
we say, the wiser) for his knowledge and learning, though he might.

To be useless out of necessity, is but a man's misery; but to be so out of
choice, is a very great sin; and yet a greater sin it is to make many more
useless as well as our selves, by that old rule, Quod efficit tale, est magis
tale. The Pharisees who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither
going in themselves, nor suffering others that would, to enter, Matthew. 23.13.
were worse than unprofitable. Again, they are unprofitably rich, who have great
estates, but no hearts to do good with them; or to make to themselves friends
of the unrighteous Mammon, or to lend to God, in giving to the poor, that they
might be repaied with the most gainful interest. Such as are spoken of Jam.
5.2. Whose riches are corrupted, and their garments are moth-eaten; their gold
and silver is cankered, and the rust of them is a witness against them. But
especially such who are so far from being merciful, notwithstanding their great
estates, that they cannot find in their hearts to be just, Jam. 5.4. Behold
the hire of the laborers, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries. God has
sent them great crops, and they thought much to pay poor men for reaping of
them. The cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord
God of Sabbath; that is, of Hosts; who is pleased sometimes to fall upon such
misers in a hostile way, even by Fire and Sword, and snatch that from them,
which they would not voluntarily part with to any good uses. Moreover, he is an
unprofitable member of a Town, County, or Kingdom, that only seeks great things
for himself, and cares not what becomes of the public weal: whereas we see
that things without life, as Air and Water, and such like, will forsake their
own centers, and vary from their natural motion, to comply with the good of the
Universe, by preventing a vacuum. But worse than unprofitable are they, who as
our Proverb speaks, Do set other men's houses on fire to roast their own eggs;
that is, do others the greatest mischief, to do themselves a small courtesy.
Lastly, he is an unprofitable member of the world, who lives merely to eat and
drink, and rise up to play. The Apostle says, that the widow who lives in
pleasure, is dead whilst she lives. Seneca would say, such men might be said
to be (or have a being) but not to live. People that have no calling, nor know
how to betake themselves to any, but to be servants to diverse lusts and
pleasures, to read Romances and Play-books, and wanton Poems, to run about to
Play Houses, to court Ladies, to talk idly to women, that love such discourse;
to pass the time in Cards, and Dice, and Wine, and Jests, when the weather
constrains them to be within doors; and at other times in Hunting and Hawking,
and Fishing, and suchlike divertisements. Of such voluptuosoes (if I may so
call them) we read, Job 22.12. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at
the sound of the Organ. They spend their days in mirth, etc. and in a moment
go down to the grave. As they say, it is a Proverb amongst thieves, A merry
life, and a short life. For many such persons do shorten their days by their
excess, as to Wine and Women, and ride post out of the world upon the back of
those headstrong lusts which run away with them. The persons I have described
are past all question useless, and mere cumbergrounds; like dead trees, fit for
nothing but to burn.

I shall not take the boldness to say that England does, and London did, abound
with such persons as these; or that such walking carcasses carried about by
that evil spirit that possessed them, and did as it were assume them, were to
be seen every day; but whether it were so or no, they better know that know
London, and know all England better than I pretend to do. And if it were so
indeed, it is not so much wonder that the houses of such men were burnt, as
that their persons did escape, or that God did not rather consume their
persons, and spare their houses; like Lightning, that spares the Scabbard, and
melts the Sword. Sin had made a great part of the inhabitants, as much dry wood
in one sense, as want of rain had made their houses such. I marvel not then
that so great a Fire approaching such prepared fuel both within and without,
did so much execution, but rather that it did no more. May the issue of that
dismal Fire which was lately amongst us be the same that husbandmen effect or
design in burning their Lands, viz. that we, as they, which before were barren
and unprofitable, may become useful and fruitful, which Lord grant for Christ
his sake.

MEDITATION XI. Of the universal Corruption and Debauchery of a people,
punished by God with Fire.
I Need not go far from that Text on which I grafted the next preceding
meditation; To find another that will plainly prove the universal corruption
and degeneration of a people, to have as it were enforced God, though he be
slow to anger, and rich in mercy, to contend with them by Fire, yea and consume
them. The same Prophet furnishes me with a large instance in that kind, too
large to transcribe; and therefore I shall rehearse but part of it, and refer
to the rest. For it reaches from Ezekiel. 22.19. to the end of the 31 verse. Thus
says the Lord, because ye are all become dross, therefore I will gather you
into the midst of Jerusalem, v. 20. as silver into the midst of a furnace, and
I will leave you there, and melt you. v. 22. And ye shall know that I the Lord
have poured out my fury upon you. That they were all become Dross, signifies no
more but this, that they were universally depraved and debauched, as appears
plainly by that Indictment which is given in against their Priests and
Prophets, and Princes, and common people, that is, against persons of all ranks
and conditions, in the sequel of the Chapter. The like charge there is to be
found, Isa. 9.27. For every one is an hypocrite, and an evil doer, and every
mouth speaks folly. v. 14. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head
and tail, branch and rush in one day. v. 18. For wickedness burns as the
fire, it shall devour the briars and the thorns. That is, the wicked amongst
them, the best of which was as a briar, or as a thorny hedge. It is sad to
consider, that there have been certain times in which no sort of men have kept
themselves pure and unspotted, but all have defiled their garments, in which
the fire of sin has spread as much more than in other ages, as the late Fire
upon London, spread it self beyond all the Fires that City had known formerly.
Some time before the destruction of the old world by water, it is said, that
All flesh had corrupted his way, Genesis 6.11. and when God was about to rain Fire
and Brimstone upon Sodom, not ten righteous persons could be found to stand in
the gap. And a strange challenge it is which God makes, Jerem. 5.1. Run through
the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know if ye can find a man, if there
be any that executes judgment, and seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. Is
it so with us at this day, or is it not? Are we universally corrupt and
degenerate, and debauched, or are we not? Have all sorts of men corrupted their
ways, and done abominably, or have they not? Possibly in this our Sardis there
are some few names that have not defiled their garments: but alas, how few are
they? and what are so few names to the generality and body of a Nation? Are
those words of Isaiah applicable to us or not? There is no soundness, but
wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores, from the sole of the foot, even to
the head, Isa. 1.7. and then follows, your Country is desolate, your Cities
are burnt with Fire. Might I take leave to be particular, I would say, that
City, and Country, and Court, and Inns of Court, and Universities, all have
exceedingly corrupted their ways; what a corruption in judgment has
overspread us? some turning to Socinianism, others to Popery, others to
Atheism, yea great (and Leviathan-like) Atheism?

How great a corruption is there at this day in the habits, gates, and gestures
of men and women, which I would not trouble my self to speak of; but that as
little a thing as it may seem, it is a symptom of great evil within; for many
times the habits of the mind are signified by those of the body. A proud habit
and a proud heart, a wanton habit, and a wanton heart, do often, if not always
meet. For what modest woman would put on the attire of an harlot? or, who cares
to make show of more evil than is really in them; and not rather to conceal
that which is? A modest habit is not so sure a sign of a chaste heart (for that
may be worn for a cloak of dis-honesty) as an immodest habit is of one that is
unchaste. For what wo^an that is conscious to her own chastity, would render
her self suspected for a whore? It may seem a small matter for sick people to
play with feathers, and to make babies with their sheets; but it is an usual
forerunner, and consequently a sign of death. So the habits of men and women,
when they carry with them a great appearance of Pride, Levity, Wantonness.
Inconsistency of mind, Prodigality, Fantastickness, Inconstancy, do give great
jealousy to wise men, (who can discern much light sometimes through small
crevices) that the Age, or rather persons of this Age, do abound with such kind
of vices, and that there is some kind of Fatallity belonging to it, because
people use such antic postures and gestures, as dying persons are wont to use.
I wish the forementioned vices had get no nearer men than their skins, that
they were but skin-deep, but as the Itch and such like diseases are first
within, and then strike out, first insect the mass of blood, and not till
af^erwards, the habit and surface of the body, ye^ and often strike in again,
and corrupt the blood a second time; so it is to be feared, that men and women
are generally proud and wanton in heart, before they are so in habit; and
become so in habit, because they were first so in heart. Now if the hearts of
many be such, as their most fantastic and garish habits make show of; those
words of Solomon: Eccles. 9.3. Must needs be verified in them, The heart of the
Sons of Men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart whilst they live,
etc. Yet for all this, I would exercise charity concerning the habits of men
and women (though that be hard to do) did not the common practice, and course
of this Age assure me that it is universally corrupt and degenerate, and as it
were, expound the meaning of such suspicious habits.

It is no difficult thing to prove the sins of this Age, because men now adays
declare their sins like Sodom, and do as it were, spread a Tent in the face of
the Sun, as did Absalom. I am much mistaken (and so are many more) if the gross
sins of swearing, cursing, Sabbath breaking, drunkenness, whoredom, together
with too great a connivance at, and impunity to these and some others, be not
more chargable upon England at this day, than they had wont to be. Are not
these the things which malcontents do allege to justify their murmurings,
though neither are they, or can they be thereby justified, as I have plainly
showed in that Chapter, in which I have discoursed of Rebellion against Moses
and Aaron. We must keep our stations and do our duties, though other men should
refuse to do theirs. If a Wise play the harlot, may her Husband in requital
commit adultery? no such matter. This premised, I may the more boldly say,
whatsoever the matter is, and whence so ever it comes, a very general
corruption there is amongst us. What is said of the soul, viz. that it is Tota
in toto, and tota in qualibet part, wholly in the whole body, and wholly in
every part, may be applied to sin, as if it were become the very soul that did
animate and inform the Nation. I was about to say: I fear good men are
generally not so good, as they had wont to be, and bad men are become a great
deal worse: the former having suffered, like strong constitutions, that have
been impaired by bad air, and the other like unsound bodies, which are almost
brought to the Grave thereby. And now let me say with Jeremy: O that my head
were a fountain of tears, that I could weep day and night for the corruption
(as he said for the destruction) of the daughter of my people! and O that I
could say with David, mine eyes run down Rivers of tears, because men keep not
thy Laws, at leastwise that with righteous Lot, of whom it is said, without the
least hyperbole, that he did vex his righteous soul with the conversation of
the Sodomites, so could I mine with the sins of England, mine own and others. O
Lord thou see, how, even the whole Mass of English blood is woefully corrupted
by sin, (as it fares with those that have had a Dart struck thorough their
Liver, in that sense Solomon is by some supposed to intend it, ( viz. as a
periphrasis of the foul disease) so that there is hardly any good blood in all
our ^^ines and arteries, outward applications, whether of judgments or mercies
of themselves cannot cure us. Inwardly cleanse us we beseech thee by the
inspiration of thy spirit, and purge our Consciences from dead works to serve
thee, that thy wrath may no more burn against us as Fire, but that at length
thou may call us Heptzibah a people in whom thy soul may delight.

MEDITATION XII. Of God's bringing Fire upon a People for their
incorrigibleness under other Judgments.
WE have already spoken of twelve several causes of God's contending with a
people by Fire, and yet there is one behind, as much in fault as any of all the
rest, and that is the sin of incorrigibleness: I could presently produce three
sufficient witnesses, as it were to depose what I say. One is that text in
Isaiah Chap. 1. verse. 5, and 7. Compared together, Why should ye be smitten
any more, ye will revolt more and more? your Country is desolate, your Cities
are burnt with Fire. The next is, Isa. 9.13. compared with the 19. The People
turns not to him that smites them. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts
shall the People be as the Fuel of the Fire. But Amos speaks out yet more
plainly, if that can be, Amos 4.6. I have given you cleanness of teeth, yet
have you not returned to me, says the Lord, verse. 8. I have withheld the
Rain from you, verse. 9. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, etc. verse.
10. I have sent among you the Pestilence, after the manner of Egypt. Now the
burden of all the Indictment is, Yet have ye not returned to me, says the
Lord. Then in the next verse he brings in God speaking thus, I have overthrown
some of you as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, verse. 11. And how was that,
but by fire?

So that you see the judgment of fire came as it were to avenge the quarrel of
other abused judgments, when Famine and Pestilence had done no good upon them,
then God used Fire, which as being the worst, was reserved to the last. Most of
the judgments denounced by Amos go under the notion of Fire, Chap. ^, and 2.
and incorrigibleness you see is one main reason rendered of Gods inflicting
those judgment.

Now England hold up thy hand at the Bar, and answer, Art thou guilty or not
guilty of the great sin of incorrigibleness? and you dispersed inhabitants of
that once famous City, which now lies in the dust (little did I ever think to
have called you by that name) speak out and say, were you guilty or not guilty
of much incorrigibleness under other judgments, before such time as God began
to contend with you by that Fire which has now almost consumed you? Plead your
innocence if you can: Either prove you were never warned, or sufficiently
warned by preceding judgments, or make it appear that you took warning, and
mended upon it. That war by Sea, which has been as a bloody issue upon the
Nation for several years past, and is not yet stanched, was that no warning
piece? That impoverishing decay of trade which has made so many murmur, was it
no warning to us to repent and reform? If it were a great judgment, did it not
call upon us to reform, and if but a small one, why did we so much repine at
it? That devouring pestilence which in one years time swept away above a
hundred thousand in and about London, was it not a sufficient warning to us
from heaven? Yet after all this, how few did smite upon their thighs, and said,
what have I done? I doubt few have been the better for all these, and many the
worse, who since God has so smitten us, have revolted more and more, which is
such a thing, as if Jonah should have presumed to provoke God more than ever,
even then when he was in the great deep, and in the Whales belly; or Daniel
whilst he was in the Lions Den, or the three Children in the midst of the fiery
Furnace: I wish some of our greatest sins had not been committed in the time of
our greatest dangers, as is spoken to the shame of the Israelites, that they
provoked God at the Sea, even at the red Sea. God having threatened that if
great judgments do not reform a people, he will send yet greater; it is no
wonder that it is with London as it is, but rather, that the execution of this
punishment was deferred so long. Concerning Gods heating his Furnace seven times
hotter for a people, when a more gentle Fire has not consumed their dross, we
read Levit. 26.24. If ye will not be reformed by these things, I will punish
you yet seven times for your sins. Also ver. 18.21, 24, 28. I will bring seven
times more Plagues upon you, according to your sins. How justly may God
complain of us, as he did of the Jews in old time. Jer. 5.3. Thou have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made
their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return. God has made us
as a boiling Pot, but our s^^^ is not gone forth of us, ( Ezekiel. 24.10.) As some
Children, though their Parents are severe enough, are so bad, that one would
think they were never corrected, but suffered to do what they list; so has it
been with England. Such as is the way of a Ship in the Sea, which leaves no
footsteps behind it, whereby it may be seen which way it went, when it is out
of sight: So has it been with the Plague, and Sword, and other judgments in
England; they have left little or no impression behind them, whereby it might
be discerned that God has attempted to reform us by such terrible judgments.
We have cause to admire that God has not in wrath ceased to punish us at the
present, intending to reserve us to the day of judgment, and of the perdition
of ungodly men to be punished. It is one of the greatest punishments, for God
in wrath to give over punishing, and to say as concerning Ephraim, He is joined
to Idols, let him alone, or why should they be smitten any more, they will
revolt more and more. It would kill the heart of an understanding patient; when
very ill, to hear his Physician say, let him have what he will, and do what he
will, for then would he conclude, he takes his condition to be desperate, and
has no hope of his recovery.

O Lord, since thou art pleased to condescend so far, as yet to chosten us (For
what is man that thou should magnify him? that thou should visit him every
morning, and try him every moment? Job 7.18.) intimating thereby, that thou
have not utterly cast us off, but art in a way of reclaiming us; be pleased to
bless and sanctify those thy chastisements, and do us good by them, as we
would do by our Children, if we knew how, or if it were in our power. Thou
can make less correction if thou so please to work a greater reformation in
us. One twig of thy rod, and one lash of that twig, being sanctified, will do
us more good than a Scorpion that is not. Suffer us no longer by our
incorrigibleness under judgments, to add contempt and contumacy to all our
other sins, which is able to swell a small crime into a heinous offense. When
Christ who is compared to a refiners fire, Mal. 3.2. Shall sit as a refiner and
purifier of Silver, let him purify thy people, and purge them as Gold and
Silver that they may offer to the Lord in righteousness. Then shall their
Offerings be pleasant to the Lord, v. 3, and 4. Do not thou always correct us
for our being incorrigible, but vouchsafe to correct and cure our
incorrigibleness its self, so shall thou receive more glory, and we shall
henceforth need less correction.

MEDITATION XIII. Of the Aggravations of the sins of London.
O London, how were thy sins out of measure sinful? Consider thy sins without
their aggravations, and I doubt not but there were many places in England
(proportionably to their bigness) more wicked than London was; particularly,
many Sea-towns, and some Inland, most consisting of Innes and Alehouses. But
how few of those places that equallized or possibly exceeded London in
wickedness, did ever come near it as in reference to means of grace, and other
mercies? I have heard of a Papist, who in a storm did vow in case he were
delivered, that he would give to the Virgin Mary a 'Taper no less than the
Mainmast of the Ship he was in; but when the storm was over, persideously
said, that he would make a Farthingcandle serve her turn. Were not the means
thou did enjoy like the Taper he promised, whilst those which other places
enjoyed, were but like the Candle which he performed? Some wicked Towns have
been like Egypt for darkness, whilst London was like Goshen for light.

Capernaum it self was not more truly lifted up to Heaven in the abundance of
means, than London had been. For gifts and knowledge, thou were another Church
of Corinth. Had the mighty things which have been done in thee, been done in
other places, who knows how they might have proved? To be sure thou have had
line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little, and there a little. In
thee an excellent Sermon might have been heard every day of the week, and often
times more than one in a day. The men that inhabited thee any long time, for
their time might have been all of them teachers, though all did not profit
accordingly. They could not but know their masters will if they cared to know
it; and therefore if they did it not, were worthy of many stripes. I am loath
to say what course fare the souls of men had in other places, and what short
commons, whilst thou were fed to the full. Thou had Quails, whilst they had
scarcely Mannah. Thy Ministers spoke like the Oracles of God, whilst some of
theirs could hardly speak sense. Paul and Apollos, and Cephas were yours,
whilst amongst them the blind lead the blind, and no wonder if both fall into
the ditch. O London, it is impossible thou should sin so cheap as other
places might do, considering those words of Christ, John 15.22. If I had not
spoken to them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin.
Had thy sins been but motes, there was that sunshine would have made them all
to appear; but alas, how many of them were beams? I know not those sins that
were found elsewhere, that were not to be found in the midst of thee. Though
thou had the Prophets of God crying to thee early and late, O do not this
abominable thing which my soul hates.

Some body spoke long since by way of admiration or aggravation rather; what!
go to hell out of London; England is presumed to have more knowledge in the
things of God, than any other part of the world, and London than most part of
England.

Neither did thy means of grace (O London) more exceed those of other parts,
than thy other mercies did. Had thou not the best of every thing? the best
houses, the best trades, the best commodities, the best provisions, the best
Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Artists, and Artificers in every kind?
the best accommodations of all sorts. Whilst the poor Countries were put off
with any thing; the very cream of all things was brought to thy hands. Had
Farmers wont to live like you Citizens? they drudged, and toiled, lived meanly,
fared hardly, habited themselves in poor and despicable apparel, contented
themselves with any thing: whilst you dwelt at case and in pomp, fed high, went
gallantly, followed the fashions, vied with the Court it self. So were you
provided for, as if all England, yea, as if all the remote parts of the world,
as far as both the Indies, had been made for no other end, than to serve and
supply London; and their sheaf, like that of Joseph's brethren, to bow to your
sheaf. What did either London serve the Country with, or the Country serve
its self with, but as I may say, the very leavings and refuse of the City? As
the spleen and mesentery, and other more ignoble parts are fed with the
coursest kind of blood, which nature will not offer to the heart and liver; so
was the Country with those mean things which the City did little less than
disdain. Yea had not London, amongst other privileges, greater variety of good
company than other places had good Christians, ingenious men in all
professions, insomuch that some could no more frame themselves to live out of
London, than Fish can, to live out of the water.

These things considered, London proportionably to its privileges, should have
been the best place in the whole world. But was it so? It is hard, comparing
the sins of one place with another, but sure I am, the sins of London were
many, and great; all its privileges notwithstanding. Wonder not then (O
London) that God has set thee on fire, whilst other places are yet spared:
Were thou as good as other places? (possibly so) but thou should have been
betthan they, for the means and mercies thou have enjoyed far above them. Yea
were thou better than some other places? (that may be too) but were thou so
much better, as thou were happier than they? did thy goodness toward God
exceed theirs, as much as his goodness toward thee, exceeded his goodness
toward them? Who knows not that to whom much is given, from them much is
expected? If they made four talents of two, was it not more than if thou did
make seven talents of five? O Lord, thou have severely chastened this great
City, cause all that are concerned to know, there is a just reason for what
thou have done. That place have thou known above all other places and have not
dealt so with any people almost, as thou have dealt with the inhabitants
thereof, therefore have thou punished them for their iniquity. Thou speak of
tribulation upon the Jew first (as being those that had the greatest
privileges) and afterward upon the Gentiles: so thou have begun with London
first, it being but equal they should first drink of the cup of misery, who
have drunk deep^st of the cup of abused mercy. Should Londons punishments be
always so much greater than those of other places, as her mis-improved
privileges have been, would not she that was first, become last? she that was
the head become the tail, she that was the happiest, become of all Cities and
places, most miserable? May the Repentance of that once great City be such, and
such thy favor and good will toward it, that it may sit once more as a Queen,
and wear that Crown of honor and dignity, which till all earthly things shall
be dissolved, may never fall more from its head.

FINIS
PHYSICAL Contemplations; OF THE Nature, and Natural-Causes OF FIRE, Morally
Applied.

BY SAMVEL ROLLS, Minister of the Word, and sometime Fellow of Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Nathaniel Ranew, and Jonathan Robinson. 1667.

To his Highly Honored Friends Dr. GEORGE BATE HIS MAJESTY'S Learned
Proto-medicus, And to Doctor JOHN MICKLETHVVAITE, To Doctor EDMOND TRENCH, To
Doctor THOMAS COXE One of his Majesty's Physicians, And to Doctor THOMAS
WHARTON SAMUEL ROLLS Dedicateth the ensuing Contemplations, with profession of
his great respects, and in thankful acknowledgment of all the undeserved
favors he has received from them.

Physical Contemplations of the Nature, and Natural Causes of FIRE.
CONTEMPLATION I. Concerning the Nature of Fire, and the use that may be made
of that Contemplation.
IT much increases my wonder at the great things done by Fire, when I
seriously consider what Fire is, I had almost said what a petty thing it is. I
could scarce believe it at the first, but am now convinced, past all doubt,
that Fire is nothing but a mighty swarm, and corrent of sulphurious particles,
or motes of brimstone, violently agitated or moved, and forcibly breaking out
from those respective bodies, to which they did formerly belong.

That Fire is a mere stream of small particles, motes, or atoms, methinks the
strange vanishing of so much of every thing, as did turn to Fire, as it were
into air or smoke, (or we know not what our selves) does prove sufficiently.
Though there be some remainder of all or most things that are burnt, (as namely
ashes, etc.) yet a great part of each body so destroyed is missing, flies away
imperceptibly, (that is, we see nothing of what it was before) and we can but
guess (at most) what is become of it. Bodies of bulk and weight, and yet not
very much neither, though they may ascend for the present upon the wings of
others, as bars of Iron blown up with Gunpowder, yet down they come again, and
having got rid of that mantle, either of smoke or fire, in which they mounted
up, come under our view again; so do the salt and Earthy parts of most bodies,
which we call by the name of ashes. What small things are ashes! and yet too
heavy always to keep aloft, and pressed down to the Earth with that little
weight they have, which is next to none: (take them singlely and one by one)
Surely then those flaming bodies which keep their station above, and never
return to us again, (as we can discern) which fly up to the Element of Fire,
(if such a notion may be admitted) and there abide, (as Rivers run into the
Sea) they must be exceeding light, and weightless, and consequently as exile,
and small, as can be imagined. For matter (as Fire doubtless is) cannot but be
ponderous, if there be any quantity of it together. Were several motes, such as
we see in the air joined together, they could not flote and swim as they do,
in that thin vehicle, but would quickly sink to the ground, much less were they
able to fly up to heaven, (as if they had Eagles wings) as we observe fire to
do.

Since then it is clear to us, that Fire is nothing else but a mighty stream of
atoms (which we shall prove anon to be sulphurious) O my soul, apply this ere
thou proceed any further. Surely this notion has its use. I see the great God
can terrify the World, yea and destroy it too, with any thing, yea with that
which is next to nothing. 2 Pet. 3.7. But the Heavens and the Earth which are
now, are kept in store, reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, verse.
10. The Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works
that are therein, shall be burnt up. I cease to wonder at God his making
Locusts, yea flies, yea lice, so great a Plague to Pharaoh, and to the
Egyptians, that Pharaoh himself began to relent, whilst those Plagues were upon
him. Those Creatures were Giants (if I may so speak) in comparison of those
motes of brimstone, which the great God employed to destroy our City, and shall
be his only Executioners at last in the destruction of the whole World, as I
proved but now. How many parts do belong to each fly, or flea? (For even all
their parts were down in Gods Book) head, eyes, ears, legs, intrails, and now
each of these parts (and for ought I know, count bones, and all, they may be
some scores of them) are I presume as big or bigger than any one of those
sulphurious Atoms, or Motes of which Fire consists. A man would scarce believe
till he had well considered it, that swar^nes of Locasts, Canker-wormes,
Cater-pillars, and Palmet-wormes, commissioned by God to introduce a Famine,
should be all that God intends by those amazing expressions, which he is
pleased to use in Joel. 2. from verse 1, to the 11. Let all the Inhabitants of
the Land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, etc. verse. 1, and verse. 2. A
great people and a strong, there has not been ever the like, nor shall be any
more after it, to many Generations, verse. 3. The Land is as the Garden of Eden
before them, and behind them a desolate Wilderness; yea, and nothing shall
escape them. The appearance of them it as horses, and as hors-men, so they
shall run. Read to the end of the eleventh verse. Dreadful expressions, yet
were all verified in an Army of Locusts, and such like despicable insects, by
which God did such execution upon them, as did demonstrate those expressions,
not to have been so strange as true, yea to have been no hyperbolies. Joel 1.4.

Now, how easy is it for us to believe this might be so, who have seen the
great God working wonderful desolations by far weaker instruments, viz. by an
army of little motes of brimstone, all in an uproare, and joint conspiracy, to
take their flight from those bodies, in, and with which they lately dwelt in a
profitable peace, and Amity. Goliath in proportion did not more exceed David in
strength and stature, and dimensions every way, than Locusts, and such like
insects do exceed those little Atoms, whereof Fire consists. Besides those
Insects, are living creatures (which is a great matter) but the sulphurious
particles I am speaking of (otherwise called fire) are (as we all know) things
without life, and yet so nimble when God sets them on, as if they had vigorous
souls to actuate them; or rather, as if they themselves were all soul, and
spirit, which are indeed some of the contemptiblest shreds, or rather silings
of mere matter. I see then that the great God can make a formidable Army of any
thing, (even of the dust of the earth, for why not of that, as well as of
these?) I have therefore done wondering that such things should be spoken of
Locusts, and such like insects as are in Joel 2.11. The Lord shall utter his
voice before his Army, for his Camp is very great. The words that follow in the
same verse, are a sufficient Comment, For he is strong that executes his word.
surely they do their work in his strength, whose glory it is to make weak
things confound the mighty, and things that are not, bring to naught things
that are.

I further learn from hence, the great danger of an enraged multitude, though
every one of that number fingly, and by himself considered, be very mean and
despicable: yet all put together, may be terrible as an Army with Banners. The
Psalmist seems to speak of the tumult of the people, as if it were so hard to
still and pacify, as the very raging of the Sea. Psalm. 65.7. Which stilleth
the noise of the seas, and the tumults of the people. Multitudes of people are
compared to great Waters, or Inundations, and they as well as Fire it self
(though each single person is but as one poor drop) will bear down all before
them. It is God-like to still the Tumults of the people; but to raise tempests
and commotions amongst them, as Jonas did upon the Sea, is neither the part of
a Christian, nor of a wise man? Who would conjure up those spirits which
possibly he shall never be able to lay again? Oh the strength of weak things
united and combined by whole millions together! oh the greatness of little
things met in such infinite swarms; what vast things are the Sands of the
Seashore, take them together? What huge mountains do they make? and how do
they give Law to the Sea its self, and say to it under God, hitherto shall thou
go and no further? Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord, which have placed
the sands for the bounds of the Sea, that it cannot pass it, and though the
waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet
can they not pass over. Yea, what smaller and more despicable thing, than each
of those by its self considered? They have more passion than policy that stick
not to inrage the body of a Nation, without a just and enforcing cause, though
to humor them in every thing (any more than children) is not commendable, or
convenient. What goodly ships have stuck fast in those heaps of dust, called
sands? so as they could never get off again, yea been swallowed up by them? as
Jonas was by the Whale, or Corah and his accomplices by the earth, when it opened
its mouth upon them? so that no discreet pilot ventures to come near them, or
offers to say what hurt can so strong and stately a vessel, receive from those
sands, which are but a heap of dust, thousands of which run thorough a little
pin-hole in an hourglass in the space of one hour? If an Ocean of Atoms did
(as we know to our cost) bring greater and speedier ruin, on our famous City
than an host of men could have done (for that they much exceeded any army in
number, though their power singly were next to nothing.) If so, I say, it
appears, that vast and innumerable multitudes (at leastwise of people) though
of the weaker and more despicable sort, ought not to be bad in contempt, or to
be needlessly put into a combustion. Alas, were it not that God had put a divine
stamp upon Magistrates (as he has been pleased to call them Gods) surely they
could no more rule the people, when in the calmest temper that ever they are in
(some being always too rough) then they could rule the Sea. What wisdom can it
then be to put so unruly a body into agroundless commotion? If this Sea once
become troubled, work, and rage, and foam, and swell, how much is it to be
feared it may overflow all its banks, and invade us with a ruining inundation?
It was not cowardice, but prudence in Herod, to decline putting of John to
death, for fear of the people, because they accounted him a Prophet, Matthew.
14.15. Likewise in the chief Priests and Elders of the people, not to reply
unto Christ, that the Baptism of John was of men, because of the people, who
all held him as a Prophet, Matthew. 21.26. For my own part, I dread, the
Insurrection of people, no less than the consequences of Fire it self, the
beginnings whereof have appeared very contemptible, so that it has been said,
(as is reported) that such a fire as that was at the first, might be pissed
out; but the conclusion fatal, beyond all imagination.

Now do I long to be at the end of this Meditation, but having promised to show
what the matter of those particles is whereof Fire consists, and considering
with my self that some good moral may be gathered and inferred from thence, as
I have already hinted, that sulphurious or oily particles are those whereof
Fire does altogether or mostly consist: so I shall now undertake to prove that
so it is, and consider how we may improve it. It is manifest that all mixed
bodies here below are compounded of five Elements, or principles, viz. Spirit,
(otherwise called Mercury) Water, (or Phlegm) Sulphur, (or an Oily kind of
substance) Salt and Earth. For each natural body, be it of vegitables Animals,
or Minerals, is by chemical art reduced or resolved into these five. From any
such body may be drawn a spirit, or generous subtle liquor; an Oil, a Water,
a Salt, and a kind of Earth; saving that the two last are rather said to stay
behind, than to be drawn. now if each body that is burning, be as it is, both
its own fire and its own fuel, both that which burns and that which is burnt,
then one or more of the forementioned principles so modified, must be the
matter and form of fire. As for the Watery and Phlegmatic part of each body,
no man will so confound two Elements so contrary each to other, as to say that
is the Fire which consumes. Then as for that Salt and Earth which belongs to
bodies, they are not the Fire that burns them up, for that which burns so far
forth consumes and flies away, but Salt and Earth they remain after the
greatest burnings, under the form of Ashes. True it is, that spirit or
spiritous Liquor which is in Bodies, is capable of taking Fire; as we see
spirit of Wine will burn, and Fevers arise in the bodies of men by virtue of
their spirits being inflamed; but then we must consider, that there is but
little of that which is called Spirit, or Spirits, in Timber, and such like
materials of houses, as are destroyed by Fire; neither is the Fire of any great
duration which has only Spirits for its fuel; as we see in the bodies of men,
that those Fevers which only fire the Spirits, never last above three or four
days, and many times not above one day; and are therefore called Ephemeral.

Having therefore quitted Water, Salt, and Earth, from being the causes of
Fire; and also proved that the Spirits of such kind of bodies which have but
little of Spirits in them, cannot contribute much to the maintenance of a
desolating Fire; Sulphur, or the oily part of each body will appear to be the
great Incendiary, and to be more the matter, fuel, and fomenter of Fire than
any thing else. And that it is so, does yet further appear, in that such bodies
of all others, are most apt to take Fire, and to burn fiercely when they have
so done, in which there is most of a sulphurious or oily substance, as Oil it
self, Pitch, Tar, etc. Moreover, we see that when any body is thoroughly
burnt, the sulphurious parts are all or most of them gone (as if conscious of
what they bad done, they had fled for it) and which is most of all
demonstrative, when those parts are once gone, all or most of them, what
remains will burn no longer; as you see, we cannot make a fire with Ashes, for
that they consist only of Salt and Earth, with little or no commixture of
Sulphur.

Since then Sulphur or Brimstone (though in an acceptance somewhat different
from that which in commonly called by that name) is the great matter of Fire,
and the Agitation, Commotion and Flight of it, is the very Form of Fire. I
shall the less wonder hereafter to find the Scripture still joining Brimstone
and Fire together. So Genesis 19, 24. The Lord rained upon Sodom Brimstone and
Fire. Psalm. 11.6. On the wicked he shall rain Fire and Brimstone. And Isa.
30.33. The Pile whereof is Fire and much Wood. The breath of the Lord like
astream of Brimstone kindles it, viz. Tophet. Fire most usually kindles Fire.
A stream of Brimstone in violent motion is Fire, and here you see the breath of
the Lord, is said, like a mighty stream of Brimstone, to kindle Tophet; which
kind of expression is more genuine and philosophical than most men know it to
be, and may hint unto us, that thorough our ignorance it comes to pass that
many expressions in Scripture seem to us no more proper and significant than
they do, it faring with us in the reading of holy Writ, as with those that
ignorantly walk or ride over precions Mines, little do they think what a world
of Treasure they tread upon; nor if they did, could they be content till they
had gotten within the bowels of that ground which now they flightly trample
upon. But I have been too long in this Philosophical contemplation (because it
was such) and must endeavor to compensate my prolixity in this with greater
Brevity in the rest, at leastwise of that sort, if any such shall occur.

CONTEMPLATION II. Touching the Nature of Sulphur, which is the principal
matter and cause of Fire, and how it comes to be so mischievous in the World.
BEing credibly informed that the Element called Sulphur, has had the greatest
hand under God in the late dismal Fire (as it has had in all other, whereby
Towns and Cities have been laid waste) it is but fit we should take him under
serious examination, and strictly enquire what he is, and by what ways and
means he brings such great desolations to pass. Sulphur, that is, Brimstone so
called by Chemists, because it has some assinity with that which we commonly
call Brimstone, though it be not the very same (for our common Brimstone is a
compounded body, so is not that we treat of) is one of those Elements or
principles with which all terrestrial bodies are made up, and whereof they
consist.

It has pleased the God of nature, who is called Natura naturans, that amongst
all things here below, even those which go by the name of Elements, as Air, and
Water, and Earth, there should be no one pure and unmixed, and which is more
strange, that the principles of which each body is compounded, should be of
different and contrary natures, viz. hot and cold, moist and dry, heavy and
light, active and unactive, weak and strong. Yea, that contrariety which is
betwixt those Elements of Fire and Water, Earth and Air, which are the
Ingredients of each Sublunary, makes for the good of each, and for the benefit
of the whole, so long as they quietly draw together in that yoke of mixture in
which God has placed them. So that as the Apostle speaks in another case, 1
Cor. 12.21. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the
head to the feet, I have no need of you. Fire cannot say to Water, or Water to
Fire, or either of them to Earth, I have no need of you. Though some of them do
curb and limit the Activity of others; yea, the more ignoble put some restraint
upon those that are more noble than themselves; yet in all this they do but
what is necessary for the well-being, if not also for the very being of the
compositum. Mercury and Sulphur would be too volatile and apt to vanish, if
Earth and water did not hold them in: Water and Earth would be too dull and
sluggish, if Sulphur and Mercury did not put life into them. Elements are said
to abide in mixtion refractly, that is, brokenly, not one of them being able so
fully to execute its own pleasure, and inclination, as it might, if it were all
alone; and it is best it should be so, for if one of them get an absolute
unlimited power, and make vassals of all the rest, presently all goes to wrack.
So in acute Fevers, when either the spirits are too high, or the sulphurious
part of the blood; and so in chronical Fevers or Agues, when salt is become
too predominant in the blood, and has sowred it (like Ale in Summer) you see
what work it makes, how it threatens no less than death and dissolution. Yet
give me leave to say, though no one Element have unlimited power where there is
a due mixtion, yet neither is Anarchy or Ataxy to be found in mixed bodies, no
not in vegetables, which have the lowest degree of life; nor yet in minerals,
which have none. For some one Element is still predominant over all the rest
hence amongst men, some are connted fanguine, others phlegmatic, etc. there
being no where found in bodies that which is called, I empe^^mentum ad pondus,
that is, just so much fire as water, and air as earth, weight for weight, (as
if Nature were a Levelker) but temperamentum ad justitiam; as in a Medicine, in
which are scruples of gentle purgers, to a few grains of those that are
stronger, and in each a basis which is supreme over all things in the medicine;
yet not put without its correctives, lest it should work too violently. You
will see anon whether all this tends, I said before, that sulphur is one
Element or Ingredient of all terrestrial bodies, and now I shall add, that it
is one of the most active, noble, and useful amongst them all. If that which is
called the Spirit or mercurial part, do excel the sulphur, as it is said to
do, yet does sulphur as much excel the other three Principles, viz. Salt,
Water, and Earth; so long as it remains in a convenient mixture and dwells
peaceably with all the rest. It were casie to expatiate in the commendation of
Sulphur, so placed and qualified as God has originally placed and qualified it
in and with other Elements. Sulphur (say Chemists, and truly) is as it were the
warm bosom in which the spirituous parts of all bodies do lodge, the bond of
union, or copula betwixt spirits, and more gross substances (as Cartilages or
gristles are betwixt hard bones and more tender parts.) It is that to which
most bodies do chiefly owe their acceptable color, taste, sent, and amiable
texture. From thence most vegetables do derive their maturity, sweetness, and
most other perfective qualities. It does such service in bodies as nothing does
more: namely, it curbs the sharpness of that salt which is in them, it blunts
the acrimony of the spirits, by its supple oily quality, it cements and sodres
other elements, which otherwise would never hold together; being somewhat
glutinous, it contributes to the consistence of bodies, which would be
otherwise over flaid and volutile; in a word, it has a faculty of resisting
patrefaction more than any thing else, in so much that by means thereof Ale may
be kept from sowring in the midst of Summer, and Juices of Plants from
corrupting. All this and much more may be truly affirmed of Sulphur whilst it
keeps its proper place and station.

But when this noble and useful Element once becomes impatient of the Yoke of
mixtion with other Elements, and will no longer endure that water should allay
it. Salt should fix it, Earth should clog and retard it, nor yet that the
spirits though more excellent than its self, should govern it, then does it
play the maddest pranks imaginable; it breaks away from those other Elements
that were joined with it, like an unruly servant from his Master, that flings
open the doors, that who will may come out or go in, leaves all exposed to
rapine and spoil, and not content with that, musters together all the
debauched youth, (such as himself) that he can come near, draws them away from
their respective Masters, and engages them in the same Rebellion with himself,
and by this means it not only ruins all that society, whereof it was before a
profitable member, and those which it has drawn into the same conspiracy, but
its self also. For it can no more subsist without those Elements which it has
cast off, than they can subsist without it, and so it quickly vanishes and
comes to nothing. I say not only the Elements which are left behind do moulder
and crumble to dust and ashes, but by that means its sel^ is quickly almost
annihilated, which is far worse.

Now methinks there should be some morality if not Divinity also, to be learned
from this discourse of sulphur, which if I had despaired of, I would never have
dived so far into it. How naturally then do the following considerations offer
themselves from what has been discoursed as touching sulphur, viz. In the
first place, how useful many men of sulphurious tempers that is active, subtle
and vigorous; might be, could they but skill of it to be contented and
peaceable? but on the other hand, how dangerous all such persens are, even
above others, when once transported with pride or passion, affectation of undue
liberty, or unlimitted dominion? Then do they verify that saying, Corruption
optimi est pessima. The best things when depraved, become the worst of all. An
Apostate Archangel is most likely to make a Beelzebub or Prince of Devils. No
Element more perfective of bodies, than sulp^ur duly bounded, but otherwise
none so destructive.

Moreover, how great an emblem is sulphur of those men and of their misery,
who have not the wisdom to know when they are well? who want for nothing, and
yet cannot be content. Such men whilst they grasp at more, usually lose what
they had, like our first parents, who affecting to be as God, knowing good and
evil, (when they knew enough already) became like the bruites that perish, or
as Luciser, (if that be meant of the Devil) who saying he would ascend, and be
like the most high, aut Deus aut nullus, as he said, aut Caesar aut nullus, was
cast down to hell.

Sulphur is in point of power and dignity the second Element in each body, yet
often times that satisfies it not, but it would have the Throne, which belongs
to the things called spirits, and then Icarus-like, by soaring so high, it
melts its waxen wings, and falls down into almost nothing.

I further observe how sulphur, whilst it destroys other things, destroys its
self, so many men, whilst Sampson-like they go about to destroy the
Philistines, (as they count them) pluck the house (as he did) upon their own
heads. Such as are ever biting and devouring others, are like by others to be
bitten and devoured. ( Gal. 5.15.) The sad experience we have had in that kind,
may save me the labor of reflecting yet further, from the nature of Sulphur,
upon the danger of an intestine War, when one part of the same body fights with
another, or with all the rest. Sulphur is a part of those bodies which it
preyes upon; and what does it get by it? it ruins the fabric it did belong
to, and its self to boot, yea some parts of the body, after it has done its
worst, do still remain, when its self is utterly extinct, and no more to be
seen.

Moreover I observe that sulphur goes about to destroy that order, which God
has placed in the World, viz. That Elements of a different nature, should
cohabit and dwell together in peace and concord, (which may be done) for so it
fares in most things in the World. Sulphur would make a schism and a rent, as
not enduring to have its excesses corrected, (as it is needful they should be)
therefore it fancieth to dwell alone; sues out a divorce, and puts asunder the
things which God had joined together, and what comes thereof? Does it not
perish in the doing of it? I am deceived if men of so proud a temper, that they
can brook no allay of their excesses (which are things incident to most men,
both in opinion and practice) by a commixture of such Elements, as they might
safely cohabit with, (yea and be happy, though not perfectly humoured in a
conjunction with them) do not at length gain as little by it, as enraged
Sulphur does when it flies from the reft of those Elements, to which it was
formerly united, and soon after dies, like a woman that will needs live from
her husband, and so starves for want of Alimony. Men of that principle and
practice, go about to dissolve the world, at leastwise take that course that
would do it, if followed in all things. For when the great God shall assign to
each Element its proper and distinct place, by it self, (in case he annihilate
them not) which no instrument is more fit to effect than Fire,) then will the
whole world be at an end.

CONTEMPLATION III. Concerning the true cause of Combustibility, or what it is
that does make Bodies obnoxious to Fire: together with the improvement of that
consideration.
IT is the Fire that is within each Terrestrial body, which alone exposes it
to that Fire which is without. It is a most true saying, that Fire is
potentially in almost all bodies, but actually in very few; the meaning is,
there is that in most bodies which can easily become fire, yea which is
actually fire, quoad actum primum, and differs no more from true fire, than the
same man when he is quiet, differs from himself when he is in a rage or
passion, which he may be easily put into. Were it not for that fire that is
within its self, nothing could be burnt: for fire does all its execution upon
other things, by means of that confederacy and conspiracy which it has with
those bodies which are inkindled by it, opening as it were the prison-doors for
them, knocking off their fetters, rescuing them from their keepers, I mean
those contrary Elements whereby they were restrained before, and kept asunder,
and then giving them opportunity to unite together, and with joint force
violently to break away, and to destroy those bodies which before they did help
to preserve.

How great cause have we then to wonder that almost the whole creation is not
in a flame, since most creatures carry fire as it were in their bosoms
continually, at leastwise are as tinder, which a few sparks falling upon, are
able to turn into fire? It is no marvel to see those things destroyed which do
always bear about them the instruments and principles of their own
destruction, as one that did always go up and down with his pockets full of
loose Gunpowder. In a like sense as St. John says, All that is in the world,
is the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eye; meaning as fuel ready for
those lusts to kindle upon, and propagate its self by, may it be said that all
or most things of the World are Fire, as to some part of them, that is, as
fuel for fire to work upon, and to convert into its own nature.

May not this notion of creatures, being consumed by their own internal fire,
put us in mind how that man's destruction also is of himself, and that our
greatest enemies as Christ says, are those of our own house. The fire of
temptation from without us could do us no great hurt, were it not for the fire
of sin within us consenting and conspiring therewith. For every man is then
only tempted, that is overcome by temptation, when he is enticed and drawn away
of his own lusts. It is said of Christ that the Devil came and found nothing
in him. Thereupon it was that the fiery darts which he threw at Christ, were
presently quenched and took no effect, neither could they upon us, if there
were nothing in us to comply with them. Woe unto us that we are traitors to our
selves, and do naturally combine with our greatest enemies to accomplish our
own ruin.

But as those bodies are least incident to fire, in which there is most of
water, salt, or earth, to rebate the petulancy of sulphur, so are those souls
lest obnoxious to the injuries of temptation that have the most grace, which in
scripture is compared sometimes to water, and other times to salt, let your
words be seasoned with salt, that is, with grace.

Seeing then in this life more or less of sin will always cleave to us, as so
much sulphur ready to set us on fire; labor we to weaken the power of it, by
the predominancy of grace, so shall the remainder of our very sins in some
sense, contribute to our good (as sulphur to the good of those bodies it is
mixed with) as tending to keep us from pride, security, self-confidence, trust
in our own righteousness, and such like evils, to weaken in us the salt sharp
humor of censuring others to make our spirits more serious and consistent by
the shame and grief which they occasion in us: so shall we improve them as
vipers in treacle, which so mixed, make it the better antidote, and that which
was as downright fire in the commission of it, shall become as profitable
sulphur in our reflection upon it, and accommodating of it to the forementioned
uses and purposes.

CONTEMPLATION IV. Of Fire kindled by Fire.
THe most usual way of kindling sire, as we all know, is by fire, one fire
begets another. That which is actually fire, makes actual fire of that which
before was but potentially, or rather habitually such. The reason is plainly
this, things of the same kind do naturally resort one to another, and consort
each with other, as we say proverbially, that Bards of a feather flock
together, and fire has a name above all other things for congregating, or
calling together things that are homogeneous, or of the same nature, as also
for segregating or separating things that are heterogeneous or of a different
kind (in so much that that was made the very definition of fire by them that
knew no better) Now actual Fire, when it bath once separated the fulphurious
particles of other bodies, from those more quiet Elements, which did restrain
them, whilst mixed therewith; and when it has brought those wild Atoms
together, which before were conveniently dispersed and dis-joyned each from
other, the product is this; that each of these being habitually fire, (as
flints are, out of which fire may be struck) what with the irritation they
receive from actual fire, and what with that greater strength they have
acquired, by being united in such great multitudes, presently they begin to
kindle and show themselves in actual fire, and as it were, to brandish their
glittering swords, which before they kept as it were in scabbards, as by way of
triumph, that they had now cast off the yoke of mixtion, with discenting and
restraining Elements, and possessed themselves of that liberty which they were
always desirous of, but could not sooner attain.

Here me thinks, I see a lively emblem of ungodly youth, some are actually so,
others are so but habitually, as being under restraint from Parents, Masters,
and other Governors, who do all that in them lies to keep those fiery
mettalsome youths from consorting each with other, lest by that means they
should inflame each other: (as beams of the Sun concentered in a burning
glass, are able to kindle fire, which scattered and dispersed they could never
do.) Now when some or more of these young men or maids, actually wicked and
debaucht, as having already cast off the yoke of all government, and run away
from those that did and should restrain them; either openly or secretly, lights
into the company of those that are habitually such as themselves, and have
great propensions to the same things: first he tempts and inticeth them away
from under the jurisdiction and society of those that have hitherto restrained
them (as to their lusts,) then he joins them to as great a number as he can,
of such young ranters as themselves, who mutually encourage one another in an
evil way, and strengthen the hand each of other, to do that in herds and
troops, which they would dread to do singly, and one by one, and when it is
come to that, then does the wickedness which heretofore they smothered, flame
out; they are presently all on a light fire, and so continue (if God extinguish
it not) till having utterly consumed themselves by sin, they come to just
nothing, or what is worse than nothing; as that which we call Fire, domineers a
while, and carries all before it, but by and by it vanishes, and we know no
more of it (save that it oft-times leaves an ugly stink behind it.) To give
this fair warning to young men and women, ready to be debauched by the next ill
company, is all the use I shall make of that most known way of kindling fire,
which is by fire its self, where the allegory you see holds in every thing, and
improves a truth to our hands, which might seem not worth our taking notice of,
because every fool knows it. To which I shall add but thus much, though
fools can apprchend it, yet can they not apply it, at leastwise to their own
good, and he that can do so is no fool.

CONTEMPLATION V. Of Fire kindled by Putrefaction.
THey say that fire is sometimes kindled by means of Putrefaction, and it seems
evident from experiments, both without and within our selves, that so it is.
What are Fevers, but as it were so many fires kindled in the bodies of men?
Else how do they make the blood to boil in our veins, and so exceedingly
rarisie, it that the vesels are painfully distended by it, and are scarce able
to contain it? or how come they to make such a heap of ashes in the body, as
appears to be made by that deep sediment that is in the urine when the
disease begins to decline, or (as it is vulgarly called) to break away? These
hints may sufficiently prove that Fevers are Internal fires; and whence are
most of those sires (at leastwise that are of any long continuance) but from
Putrefaction, and thence called Putrid Fevers? Now as for Corruption or
Putrefaction, it is thus defined, viz. that it is the separation of those parts
and principles which were before mutually combined (the band of their union
being dissolved) or that it is the dissolution of, or resolution of a
compounded body, into all or most of those principles or elements of which it
was compounded, some taking their flight one way, and some another. Now this
separation or divorce of the principles of bodies one from another,
contributeth to the inkindling fire by this means, viz. because when the
sulphurous particles get loose from the rest, then do they combine together,
and break away with great heat and violence from those less active Elements, to
which they were joined before, and thence comes Fire. Thus in putrid Fevers,
the due mixture and composition of the blood is very much destroyed, the
thicker and thinner parts affecting as it were to be each by themselves (like
the whey and curds in milk, that is sowred or turned) which were before
perfectly united. Then the sulphurious or oily part of the blood, thus set at
liberty, flies thorough the body with great violence and sets all into a
combustion. And this is the great instance, as from within our selves, of Fire
arising from Putrefaction. As for an experiment from without, one may suffice,
viz. that of Dung, which lying together in heaps, and so putrefying more and
more, does sometimes wax so hot, that it sets fire on the straw that is mingled
with it: which is long of its sulphurious parts by putrefaction, set at
liberty, and flying away in great troops, and with much violence.

And is there nothing to be made of all this besides matter of Speculation? You
know what corruption and putrefaction does signify in a moral sense; and sure
I am that kind of corruption is the cause of all the mischievous fires that are
in the world. Did God drown the old world, because all flesh had corrupted its
self? and did he not burn Sodom and Gomorrah for the same cause? So likewise
Jerusalem, Jer. 9. v. 13. The Scripture calls sinful communication (...), that
is, rotten or putrified, Ephesians. 4.20. and says of it, that it does (...), that
is, corrupt or putrify good manners. Many fires are kindled by such
communication, viz. fires of lust, and fires of anger, and of revenge, besides
those fires of judgment and vengeance which God sends upon the world for the
same. James 3.6. The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, and sets on fire
the course of nature, and is set on fire of Hell.

Moreover, if we take the word putrefaction strictly for a secession or
separation of principles or elements formerly united, in that acception it is
capable of a good moral, and may serve to teach us how great the danger of
perfect separation and disunion is, even amongst those whose principles do so
far forth disagree that they cannot be together, but refractly, as fire and
water in mixtion: Yet these in natural bodies, as contrary as they seem, do
much better in a convenient mixture and composition, than they ever can singly
and apart: yea when they fall in pieces, though one bear a greater sway for the
present than before, and that the worthiest of all the rest (as it might be the
spirits in Ephemeral Fevers) yet as well that part which rules more absolutely
than ever for the time being, as those parts which are more than ever subjected
to it, is quickly destroyed and brought to nothing.

Natural bodies cannot be mistaken about their own party (which are really
such) but by a kind of infallible instinct, do draw those parts out of other
bodies, which are for kind the same with themselves, as the kindled fulphur
that is in one body, kindles and draws forth that sulphur which is in another,
and yet it proves unhappy and fatal to those bodies (as to sulphur in
particular) that they divide from all others, and will unite only amongst
themselves, though they are all perfectly of the same species, and no more than
just numerically differenced. How it should be more safe for men to do the same
thing, viz. to abstract and divorce themselves from all, but those that are of
their persuasion, whilst mean time diverse may be such, only in pretense, and
for their own ends for ought they know, and others whom they reject may
heartily symbolize with them in more things; I say, how that can be prudent or
safe, I am yet to learn.

Those that affect that simplicity which is poculiar to God, and his alone
prerogative, let them conceive a displeasure against the composition of their
own bodies, and try conclusions to make them consist but of one Element, and
that the noblest of all. Let them quarrel four of those five principles which
are the ingredients of our bodies, and resolve to turn sulphur, salt, Earth and
Water out of doors, and that they will consist of mere spirits, and to that end
let them exalt those spirituous liquors that are in them, to the greatest
height that may be, that so they may be able to turn those four inferior
principles out of possession, and live alone in and throughout the whole body,
all the veins and arteries being henceforth filled with spirits only in stead
of blood: Try how this experiment will succeed. If it do well, attempt the like
thing upon the Church and State, bring them to the same pass. But if you find
this likely to set on fire the whole course of nature, to set you in a violent
fever that will soon burn you to death, be so just as not to wish that should
be done to others that you would by no means have done to your selves; and
suspect that may be bad for public bodies, which would be so destructive to
your own private. Let one principle bear rule over all the rest, (as in good
Wines the spirituous parts are predominant) and let the noblest Element sway
the Scepter, else things will degenerate: (as Wines do into Vinegar, when the
spirits are kept under, and the saline or saltish particles exalted:) but let
the less noble Elements not be excluded, but fairly comprehended in a due
mixtion and subordination, otherwise if it fare with men (as it does with fire)
that which aspires to be all in all, will soon vanish, and be as it were
annihilated.

CONTEMPLATION VI. Of Fire kindled by the collision of two hard bodies.
AS obvious almost as any of the former, is the way of kindling fire by the
collision or smiting together of two hard bodies, as when slint and steel are
struck one against the other: the reason why fire issues from thence, is,
because by the blow given, the sulphurious particles of the steel and flint are
put in motion. Now inward they cannot move, because these bodies being hard and
of close parts, do suffer nothing to get within them, for as much as there can
be no penetrating of dimensions. Therefore our they must come, and if they
could come out leisurely and by degrees, they would produce no fire, or scarce
so much as heat, but sallying forth in great haste, and all at once, as if they
were affrighted with the blow they had received, by virtue of their number,
union, and violent motion, they engender sparks, and produce that fire which we
discern to come from them.

Just thus it is betwixt persons of stout and sturdy spirits, when they happen
to clash one against another, retreat and retire into themselves they cannot,
to deliberate, and consider what they had best to do; so full are they of
themselves, that is, of their pride and passion, but out they come, being once
put into a commotion, and with all the spirits they can make and muster
together, assail each other, and with their drawn glittering swords, do as it
were fire at one another, and with greatest eagerness pursue a bloody duel.

Now oh the folly of men, Do they not know that the contests and incounters of
two great spirits, is as like to produce such a bloody issue as the smiting of
slint and steel together, is to bring out Fire, and yet they will give way to
it upon every slight occasion, as if they had less consideration than the devil
himself, who said, skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life: but they will give or throw away their lives upon every trifling
provocation, as if they were nothing worth. I wonder who it is that does so
highly honor the memory of men dying upon those terms, that persons of
quality should be ambitious of it?

I wender in whose Kallender it is, that such kind of persons are put down for
Martyrs, Saints and Worthy-men! I wonder what heathen God it is, whom men think
to please with such kind of sacrifices (for the true God does most certainly
abhor them) I wonder that men who stand so much upon the nobleness of their
blood (as if each drop of theirs were more worth than all that runs in the
veins of ordinary men) should trivially pour it out, or hazard it to be poured
out, like water upon the ground, and at the same time everlastingly tain it, by
sheding the blood of others, either actually or intentionally. Surely Cain and
Lamech, and these men deserve to be canonized all in one day, at leastwise it
is very sit that all their names should be written in red characters, that is,
in letters of blood.

But what shall we say to those persons, who make it their business to knock
those slints and steels against each other, and then to find tinder to receive
the sparks, and matches to procure the flame, (that tinder of its self could
not) that is, to set persons of great and sturdy spirits together by the ears
to foment their differences, and to make them thirsty after one another blood.
If that rule in Law be true, Plus peccat Author quam Actor. If any such two
shall happen to kill one another in a duel, or so, they will be murderers, but
you will be greater murderers than they.

I can scarcely think of two hard bodies by their mutual attrition fetching
fire out of each other, and not meditate that thus it is when two Nations fall
at odds, they are always firing one at another, and the reason is, because
they are hard bodies, and neither can yield, (one cannot yield in point of
right, nor the other in point of honor) and so those sparks are continually
struck from each, which fomented by that tinder, that ill-willers to both do
cherish it with, and propagated by dangerous matches, and confederacies, breaks
out into that flame which possibly may never come to be extinguished. Oh how do
I long for the accomplishment of that promise! Isa. 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, etc. And verse. 9.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain. And Isa. 65.2. How
should I rejoice to see some of that Prophesy fulfilled in our days. Isa. 2.4.
They shall beat their swords into Plowshares, and their spears into
pruning hooks, Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more. I further consider, if two things be struck together,
though one behard, if the other be soft, (as a feather against a flint) not one
spark will ensue. Thus it is, when persons of rough and rugged tempers are
marched and mated with those that are of a quite contrary disposition ( viz.
full of the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit) though that which is hard may
dash against that which is soft, yet no fire of contention is thereby
inkindled, because that which is soft soon yields, and so prevents the quarrel.
We say, the second person makes the fray, and Solomon gives us a better
proverb, Prove. 15.1. A soft answer turns away wrath, and Prove. 25.15. A soft
tongue breaks the bones. So will a flint break upon a cushion better than
upon that which is hard. May I never be one of those hard things which help to
kindle fire, either national, domestical, or otherwise, but always possessed of
that christian softness, that may prevent the kindling of those things, which
upon a little undue collision would be all in sparks, if not in flames.

CONTEMPLATION VII. Of Fire kindled for want of vent, as in Hay, etc.
THere is one way more whereby Fires are sometimes kindled, the consideration
whereof is capable enough of a practical improvement, and therefore I shall not
pass it by, and that is, by denying convenient vent to bodies, that are full of
sulphur. Thence it is, that Hay that is laid up too wet, and lies too close
together, is frequently set on fire, because by that means those sulphurious
particles, which would otherwise have exhaled by degrees, are pent in, and
being so, do associate one with another, provoke and excite each other, and
when they have gotten a sufficient number of them together, with united force
do as it were break Prison (for want of leave to go out quietly, now and then
some of them, or some by some) and fly away like lightning. And thence is that
fire which sometimes is kindled in Hay, and other times in dung, upon the same
account. Those active particles which affected more liberty than they could
singly obtain, and such as might have been given them without any danger (for
dry hay the sulphurious particles whereof do exhale freely by some and some,
does not kindle of its self) combine together to set themselves free, as if
they were of Caesar's mind, who said, Omnia dat, qui justa negat, when he was
denied some privilege, which he might justly challenge. But those are not
words fit to be taken into a subjects mouth.

Yet as unlawful as it is for those that are under authority to act or speak at
any such rate, as that of Caesar. I cannot but think withal, that it is no
point of prudence in Parents, Masters. and other Governors, to deny to those
that are under them that desirable liberty which they may safety give, any more
than to give them that liberty which a due care of safety bids them to deny.
That profound Philosopher and Statesman the Lord Verulam in his Essays, page
86. speaks thus. To give moderate liberty for griefs and discontentments to
evaporate, (so it be without too great insolency or bravery) is a safe way. For
he that turns the humors back, and makes the wound bleed inwards, indangereth
malign Ulcers and pernicious imposthumations.

When I consider what Fires have formerly been kindled both at honte and
abroad, both in Church and State, and all for want of a little vent, otherwise
called liberty; I say a little, (for too much may be as dangerous on the other
hand;) pardon me, if I wish that in all places where it is vehemently desired,
there might be as much of it as might consist with the real welfare and
prosperity both of Church and State. And now, O Lord, thou who art only wise,
cause Rulers every where to know what liberty may, and what may not be given,
what liberty would truly make for them, and what against them; what would tend
to kindle greater Fires than yet have been in the midst of us, and what might
help to extinguish those fire, of contention which are amongst us already and
to prevent others for the future. Such things as quietly would breathe
themselves, and do themselves good, and the world no hurt, by their insensible
exhalations, suffer them to evaporate, and let them not be so pent in, and shut
up, as thereby to become needlessly exasperated, unavoidably united both in
miserings and discontents, and will they ^^l they, to fall on fire like a move
of ^^lay laid too moistly and close together, which otherwise had never fired
in and of its self; but now is forced to flame (though its self must be both
the fire and fuel) and all for want of vent And now, O Lord, thou who have made
me the father of many children, grant I beseech thee to me and other parents,
that wise behavior to wards them, that we may neither like old Eli spoil and
undo them with too much lenity, nor like Saul enraged against his son Jonathan,
endanger them by overmuch severity, but may so carry toward them, and have so
much comfort in them, that we may be able to say concerning our children, as
good old Jacob (that father of the Patriarks) did concerning his, These are the
children which God has graciously given us: and to think of them as the
Psalmist represents them, Psalm. 127.3. Lo! children are an heritage of the
Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward.

CONTEMPLATION VIII. Of Fire kindled by pouring on Water, as in Lime.
IT is famously known that Fire is sometimes kindled, otherwhiles increased,
even by the pouring on of water. By that means Lime is made to burn; which
though it flame not our, yet both by its hissing, and smoking, as also by its
ability to burn other things, does appear it self to be set on fire. And we may
daily observe, that Smiths do sprinkle water upon their forges, thereby causing
the Fire therein to burn so much the more eagerly. The reason of the former,
viz. of Lime its burning when it meets with Water, seems to be this: Some
particles of Fire do remain in Lime, after it has been burnt in the Furnace
(though cooled again) but closely united with certain particles of Salt, and by
them moderated and kept quiet. But when water is poured upon it, then is the
association that was betwixt the particles of Fire, and of Salt dissolved, and
the earthy parts separated, which before lay betwixt the fiery particles,
keeping them from joining each with other, which being done, they all flock
together and rendezvous by themselves, and so violently sally out together, and
forcibly take their flight in a considerable body or party, and thence comes
that Fire which is kindled in Lime, which is true Fire, though it flame not by
reason of those watery parts which are commixed therewith, which cause smoke
instead of flame.

Now when I think of Fire kindled by water, (its known opposite) in Lime as
aforesaid, me thinks the corrupt nature of man is just like Lime; for when it
meets with the holy Law of God, which is as contrary to it as water to Fire, (I
mean, to the lusts and corruptions that are in it) how is it inkindled and
enflamed thereby? Hence that complaint of Paul, Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion
by the commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For without the
Law sin was dead, and v. 13. But sin, that it might appear sin, working death
in me by that which was good, that sin by the Commandment might become
exceeding sinful.

Moreover, whereas those particles of Fire which are in Lime, are as it were,
so many forraigners, or foreign guests that get into it, when the Lime-stones
were burning within the Furnace (for in Lime it self there is little Sulphur,
as appears by the difficulty of burning all or most of it away) and these
foreign particles are they that do expose it unto being set onfire whenwater
is put to it, I cannot but thence think of the danger of Kingdoms and Countries
which are over-stocked with forraigners (especially if of a foreign Religion
as well as Nation) especially if men of fiery principles and spirits: for
though such persons may lie still and make no noise for a time, so long as
there are other parties to balance and tie their hands (as the particles of
Salt does that of Fire) and whilst they are not suffered to imbody and flock
together; yet let an enemy come (like water upon lime) presently they hiss, and
smoke, and reak, and heard together, and are ready to burn up all that comes
near them. May the Popish party never verify what I have now hinted from the
nature of Lime.

Neither is it unapt to be significantly applied, that Smiths do intend the
heat of their fires by ever and anon sprinkling on them small quantities of
water. Did they throw on much water it would extinguish it, but that little
they use now and then, makes it to burn more fiercely. What better resemblance
can there be of the over-mild rebukes of parents toward obstinate and
dissolute children. As good or better not chide, or not correct them at all, as
do it over-gently, and Eli like, who only said, It is not a good report I hear
of you my sons, etc. 1 Samuel 2.24. Were such deeds as theirs to be corrected
only with words; especially with such soft words as those, v. 25. Why do you
such things? Nay my sons, for it is no good report that I hear. Did they lie
with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle, and is this all he
has to say to them? He had even as good have held his peace. This was but
water sprinkled upon the forge; this was but like an over-gentle purge, that
stirs and troubles humors; but brings them not away. Thus to whip as it were
with a fan of Feathers, is but to make an offenders remedy (which is
correction) contemptible, and himself thereby more incorrigible. When the water
of rebuke or correction must be used, take enough to quench the Fire, though
not to drown or sink the offender.

Lastly, Lime that kindles at the approach of water (which one would think
should rather quench it if kindled before) is methinks a good emblem of
Christian zeal, and a good pattern for us in that behalf. Should not our zeal
be heightened by opposition, like floods that swell when they come at banks that
hinder them. So did the zeal of David, when Michal derided him for dancing
before the Ark. 2 Samuel 3.22. I will yet be more vile than thus (said he) viz.
if that were to be vile, to rejoice before the Ark of God. So Paul, when some
persuaded him not to go to Jerusalem for fear of being bound there, made this
answer, Acts 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but to die at Jerusalem
for the name of Christ. Thus were their disswasions like water thrown upon
Lime, which did merely kindle it. Thus you see the way of kindling Lime shows
us both what our Corruptions are, and what our Graces should be, and woe unto
us that our Corruptions have that vigor which our Graces want.

Henceforth then, by the help of God, I will endeavor that my lusts may be
like green wood, which though it lie upon the fire, will hardly burn, as being
choked with its own moisture; and that the Graces of Gods Spirit may be in me
as so much Lime, the fiery particles whereof meeting with their old enemy
water, presently break off their association with other Elements, firmly unite
among themselves, and of potential fire become actual, and send up those watery
particles in smoke, which went about to extinguish them. If I cannot flame (as
Lime cannot) yet I will endeavor to be as smoking Lime or Flax, which Christ
will not quench; and when I can do no more at present against those lusts which
fight against my soul: I will as it were hiss at them, as lime does at the
approach of water, that is, testify my displeasure and indignation against them.

FINIS.
Sixty One MEDITATIONS, AND REFLECTIONS UPON The most Remarkable Passages and
Circumstances of the late DREADFUL FIRE.

PART III.

BY SAMVEL ROLL, Minister of the Word, and sometime Fellow of Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, Nathaniel Ranew, and Jonathan Robinson.
1667.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JOHN LANGHAM, Knight and Baronet.

Sir THOMAS PLAYER, Knight, And Chamberlain of the City of London. AND TO
RICHARD HAMPDEN of Hampden in the County of Bucks, Esquire.

AND To all his dear Friends, (and sometime Pastoral-charge,) the Inhabitants
of Thistleworth in the County of Middlesex.

S. R. Dedicateth this part of his Meditations, and wishes the Blessings of
the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

MEDITATIONS Upon all the Remarkable Passages and Circumstances of the late
dreadful Fire.
MEDITATION I. Of the Weight of Gods Hand in the late destruction of London by
Fire.
REmarkable are those expressions of Job, cap. 6. ver. 2. and 3. O that my
grief were thoroughly weighed and my calamity laid in the Balances together;
for now it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up, and ver. 4. For the Arrows of the Almighty are within me, and the
poison thereof drinks up my spirit: the Terrors of God do set themselves in
array against me. How fitly may the people of England, but especially the late
Inhabitants of London, take up the same expressions? How justly may they wish
that their Calumities were weighed by others, as well as felt by themselves?
But as it is is impossible to find Balances able to contain the sands of the
Sea, so is i^ next to impossible to find any, in which the Calamity of London
may be weighed, or any thing able to weigh against them (such is the heaviness
thereof) besides the sands of the Sea: Yea, i^ Jo^s particular grief and misery
were heavier than those sands, may not the like be said of what has now
befallen thousands, all whose losses and crosses put together (though not any
of them singly) are certainly heavier than his either was, or could be. I think
it is so far from being a sin to put the judgments of God, as it were, into a
scale, that we may learn how heavy they are (so far as we can attain) that I
question not but it is a duty, and am sure it was the practice of that
sensible Prophet holy Jeremiah, Lam. 4.6. The punishment of the Iniquity of the
Daughter of my People, is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom,
etc. There we see he lays the punishment of Sodom in one scale, and that of
Jerusalem in another, and weighing them against each other, concludes the
latter to have been the heavier of the two: Yea, indeed the whole Book of
Lamentations is, as it were, a pair of Balances hung up, into which the
Prophet is casting in the several miseries of Jerusalem parcel by parcel (as
he could take them up) till he had thrown in all; that he and others might
understand to what weight the whole sum did amount. Though there are some that
are ready to faint under the chastisements of the Lord, yet more are apt to
despise them, especially after some time, and when the surprise is over, and in
case they themselves are not so immediately, or so deeply concerned in them as
others are. Then are they ready to say to others in reference to their losses,
as the chief Priests and Elders did to Judas, in reference to the trouble of
his mind, Mat. 27.4. What is that to us? look thou to that: Or to show
themselves Gallio like of whom we read, that when the Greeks took Softhenes the
chief Ruler of the Synagogue and beat him before the Judgment Seat, Gallio
cared for none of those things. Though he saw a Person of Quality and of
Integrity unjustly beaten in a public way, he regarded it not. Let the
Gallio's of this Age read what I am now to write us touching the miseries of
poor London, and be perfectly unconcerned if they can, or exempt themselves, if
it be possible, from having any share in that Calamity which they seem to
slight, as if it were nothing to them, or as if the late fire had not so much
as singed one hair of their heads, neither would, at the long run. I dare
warrant them, that gray hairs of misery are upon them also (and upon that
account,) though they know it not.

When I enter upon the Meditation of Londons destruction, I had need to
fortify my self with those words of Solomon, viz. that It is better to go to
the House of mourning, than to the House of feasting, Eccles. 7.2. For such a
discourse can be no other, than as it were a House of mourning, yea, As the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, Zach. 12.11. And now
methinks the Book of Jeremy called Lamentations does so wonderfully suit the
present case of London, as if it had been calculated for the Meridian of that
City, rather than of Jerusalem, or as if God had stretched out upon London the
same line of confusion, as he did upon Jerusalem, or as if those divine thunder
bolts, which were shot against both those famous Cities, had been made in one
and the same mold, or as God speaks, Amos 4.11. I have overthrown some of you,
as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. So, as God overthrew Jerusalem in like
manner, and with many the same circumstances has he destroyed London. Our sins
were much what the same with theirs (as I have showed, when I ennumerated the
procuring causes of fire) and it is but just, that our plagues and punishments
should be the same likewise. Now where shall I begin my discourse of Londons
calamity? Or how can I do it without premising those words of the Prophet,
Jerem. 9.11. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
etc. If my eyes be not a fountain my heart must needs be a Rock, and Lord smite
thou that Rock, that waters may gush out, whilst I mention those things that
should be bewailed, even with tears of blood.

That which first presents its self is the consideration of what London was,
nor can it be better expressed than in those words, Lam. 1.1 The City that was
Great amongst the Nations, and Princess amongst the Provinces. Sure I am
London was the glory of England, yea the glory of Great Britain, yea the glory
of these three Nations, if not in some sense the glory of the whole World. But
as the Prophet speaks of Jerusalem, ver. 9. She came down wonderfully, the same
may be said of London. But alas! What is London now, but another Sodom lying
in ashes? What is it but a heap of dust and rubbish? The greatest part of it
seems to be convered into so many Churchyards, as consisting of nothing, but
the Relics of Churches, with waste ground round about them, full of open
Vaults or Cellers, like so many uncovered Graves, and fragments of houses like
so many dead men's bones scattered on every side of them: I had almost called it
another Smithfield (^alluding to the use that place was put to in the Marian
days) for that every house was a kind of Martyr sacrificed to the flames: and
that (as is vehemently suspected) by men of the same Religion, with those that
burnt the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days: Witness that Frenchman that was
convicted and executed upon his own acknowledgement of having begun the Fire in
London, whose confession tells us that he was instigated by Papists (one or
more) and the choice of his Confessor, that he was one himself. We can now no
longer say of London Here it stands, but Hie jacet (as we say of one that is
dead and buried) Here it lies; not that here it is, but that here it was.

May we not go on with those words of Jeremy Lam. 1.1. How does the City sit
solitary, that was full of people? How is she become as a Widow? Where are
those multitudes that inhabited London a few months since? How are they
dispersed and scatte^ed into corners, some crowded into the Suburbs, others
gone into the Country, disabled in all likely hood, from ever returning again,
to settle as before; Who complains not that they scarce know where to find any
body, even those that they had wont to converse and trade with, for that their
former places know them no more, yea they hardly know the places again, where
they dwelt formerly, or can find where those houses stood, which they inhabited
many years together. To see a populous City so woefully depopulated in a few
days time, and the late Inhabitants driven away as stubble before the wind;
Whose heart would it not cause to bleed? How often have I heard men say since the
Fire we have occasion to use such and such tradesmen, that use to work to us
but know not were to find them, we should speak with such and such Friends, but
know not what is become of them, or whether they are gone. How many thousand
houses (that were lately such) do not now contain one Inhabitant, nor are sit
to do it. This also should be for a lamentation. Did the Egyptians mourn, when
but one was missing in every house, and shall not we when multitudes of whole
households and houses are swept away all at once?

Why should I doubt to say, that a great part of the strength and defense of
all England, yea, of all the three Kingdoms, is lost and taken away, in and by
the destruction of London? Was not that great City able to have raised a mighty
force in a short time, wherewith to have opposed an invading Forreigner? Was it
not a Mine of Treasure, able to supply vast sums of money for the use of King
and Kingdom, at a short warning: and found as willing as able to do it? If a
vast and stately Ship, as most that swim in the Ocean had been lost, how soon
could, and did that famous City build such another? Surely, London was the
sinews and the very right hand of all great and public undertakings; and that
they knew full well, that said in their hearts, Raze it, Raze it to the very
ground. Are we not now like Sampson when his hair was cut, and should we go out
to shake our selves as he did, Judge. 16.20. should we not presently find it?
Yea, are we not become like the men of Sechem, when they were fore, presently
after their being circumcised, whom Simeon and Levi flew, Genesis ^4.25. Who can
be a friend to England, or have any true English blood running in his veins,
and not lament, to see so much of the strength of the Nation taken away at
once? As Jerem^, speaking of what God had done to Jerusalem, (as in his own
person) says, He has made my strength to fall, Lament. 1.14. and then adds,
He has delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up: That
is not our case as yet, but how soon may it be, our present weakness and
obnoxiousness considered?

Is it not worth taking notice of, that the beauty and splendour of England is
defaced and lost by the destruction of London? How deformed is a body without a
head? and was not London the head of England, in that sense that Damascus is
said to have been the head of Syria, and the head of Ephraim to have been
Samaria, Isa. 7.8. That is the head City, for we acknowledge a head Superior
to that, yea, Supreme under God, viz. our Sovereign, as it is, ver. 9. the head
of Ephraim is Remaliahs Son. As the face is to the body, so was London to
England, viz. the beautifullest part of it, and look how men reckon it a great
prejudice to their bodies when their faces are marred by any great deformity,
so is it to the whole Land (which is to be considered as one body, and all the
parts of it as members of each other) when scarce any thing of that is left
which was the very face of it. They that saw only the other parts of England
saw (as I may allude with reverence) but it is back parts. Was not London as it
were the Throne of the Kings of England successively, and other places in
comparison of it, but as it were their Footstool? (you know to what I allude.)
Now London is gone may we not write Icabod upon the Nation, for that the honor
of it is departed? Now who can be a true Englishman and unconcerned for the
honor of his Nation, and not troubled to see it lie in the dust? How is the
honor of a Nation insisted on? How many wars are commenced and continued in
the world to vindicate the honor of particular Nations? How hard is it for
Nations to recede from the very punctillio's of their honor? Now if God has
disgraced us and weakened our reputation (as certainly he has done) by taking
away the great City, surely it should be for a Lamentation? If our Father has
spit in our face, as Moses said to Mariam, ought we not to be ashamed seven
days, yea, seven years we had need for such a spitting of fire in our face, as
has befallen us? Jeremy puts it amongst his Lamentations, Lam. 1.6. From the
Daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed. We proceed.

Whose heart would it not grieve, to think what precious fuel went to feed that
pernicious fire? Goodly Houses, noble Halls, belonging to several Companies,
ancient and worthy Hospitals, affording relief to multitudes of poor and
distressed people, magnificent Churches built (and some of them but lately
repaired) at a very great charge, places of Judicature, and for the honorable
reception of Magistrates, as Guild Hall, and others, Common places (as I may
call them) of Trade and Tradesmen, such as Blackwell-hall, and the Royal
Exchange, (the only sanctuary that I hear of, to it is own Founder,) useful and
eminent Schools, as Paul's, and others, one famous receptacle of Divines, by the
name of Zion College, another for Civilians, one Cathedral, for largeness and
stateliness of building, exceeding all that I have before mentioned. All these
are well known to have been fuel to that fire; yea, all these were but a part
of it is fuel. There were other things, which though they did not as to bulk
equalize those I have mentioned, yet in worth and value did far exceed them. In
some places you might have seen rich wines, it may be Sack and Hippocras,
burning for no bodies use, elsewhere costly Oils swimming about the streets, and
afterward converted into flames. Was not the fire fed in some places with rich
housholdstuffe, and dear furniture, in others with shop-goods and wares of
great value, as fine clothes, and such like, which their owners wanted
opportunity to send away? How many precious druggs, and odoriferous spices went
up in those flames, as so much incense? How many wholesome Medicines, and
powerful Antidotes, and great Cordials, such as Mithridate, Treacle,
Spirituous Liquors, Bezoardick Powders, Confection of Alchermies, Chemical
Oils, and Spirits, were in great quantities consumed by that fire, as if they
had been good for nothing, or as if nothing had been too good for it. And above
all other losses, What Scholar, (that is so indeed,) can with dry eyes
mention the inestimable loss of books that was sustained by that merciless
fire, to the undoing of many Booksellers, in one sense, and of many more
Scholars in another. How many learned and useful Authors in several
Languages, Arts, and Sciences, Divines, both Pol^mical, and Practical, Fathers,
Schoolmen, Phylicians, Philosophers, Lawyers, Historians, Antiquaries,
Mathematicians, and others, besides many precious manuscripts (till then
preserved, like so many leaves of the Sybils) were then burnt to ashes, as if
our enemies the Papists, had been then disarming us of some of our best
weapons, wherewith we should defend our selves against them? Yea, the very
Sword of the Spirit, which ^s the word of God, the Bible it is self, as to many
hundred Copies of it, was then taken from us and burnt (as if it had been a
piece of heresy, or had fallen into Popish hands, who brook it not in our
genuine translations.) And this were more to be lamented than all the rest, if
that sacred book, that book of books, might not more easily be reprinted, than
many others that are of greater volume, and of which there are but few Copies
extant. But as for our Biblia Polyglotta, midwived into the world at a vast
charge, and by the unspeakable industry of many learned and famous men, to the
great renown of themselves and of this Nation, how many of them were consumed,
as if they had been so much waste paper, and who is able to repair the loss?
These things, as I said before, were the fuel that fed the flames of London,
Quis talia fando Temperet a lachrymis? Who can think of such things as these,
and not draw waters and pour out before the Lord, as the Israelites did at
Mizpah? To have made, or fed as many bonefires, as are usual upon great
solemnities, with mere Musk and Ambergrease, (if so much could have been had)
had not been so great a charge and loss, as were all those materials which
went to foment the dismal fire of London. Those flames were higher fed (all
things considered) than Cleopatra was, when, as it is storied of her, she drank
dissolved Pearls. How angry was the Almighty with us, when he would rather
fling all this treasure into the fire than suffer us to enjoy it? How unworthy
did he proclaim us, when, in fact, he said, better the fire should have it than
we?

But where did all this loss light? Was it upon LONDON only? Were few or none
sufferers but the Inhabitants of that City? Yea, doubtless, it was a terrible
blow to the whole Nation or to the greatest part of it. Who had any
considerable interest in England, and none in London more or less? As all
Rivers run into the Sea, and all the lines of a Circumference meet in one
Center, so did the interest of most considerable Englishmen, in London. Who had
not some share in that great ship, as I may call it, which is now blown up?
They that had no immediate and personal interest in London, Had they not
Relations Brothers or Sisters, yea it may be Sons or Daughters, or if not so,
Kindred more remote, that were great sufferers by this fire, and whose losses
they should lay to heart. Nero is said to have wished that Rome had had but one
Neck, that he might cut it off at a blow. In reference to England, London was
next to that one Neck, and has not this fire cut it off at one blow? His
Majesty has told us that his loss in the City was greater than any other
man's, and what good Subject would not bewail that? But surely Reader it is thy
loss, if thou art an English Protestant, as truly, though not as much as his.
The loss was Catholic (that is universal) in the consequences, as well as
Roman Catholic in the Causes of it. But is this all that can be said of the
loss of London? Surely no, Read but the Book of Lamentations and you will find
many more expressions applicable to the Case of London, besides those which I
have taken notice of already, Lam. 1.4. There says the Prophet, The ways of
Sion mourn, because none come to the Solemn feasts, her gates are desolate. All
these their calamities are come upon us at once. Our Gates are laid waste, our
selemn Assemblies both Religious and Civil in most places of that which was
called London, are unavoidably at an end, and if our ways do not mourn, that
is, if they have not a sad and a ghastly appearance let all that pass by them
Judge. Surely London is now the saddest spectacle that is this day in England.

Does the circumstance of time in which this fire befell us, add nothing to our
affliction? Had we at the same time had many friends, and enemies but few or
none, our misery had been less: For then should we have been much pitied, which
had been some mitigation of our loss: but did it not befall us at a time when we
had few friends, but many foreign enemies round about us. This Jeremy lamented
in reference to Jerusalem, Lam. 1.2. Amongst all her lovers she has none to
comfort her, all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become
her enemies. Is it no aggravation of our misery (surely it cannot be otherwise)
to think how wretchedly our many enemies will triumph and insult, because of
it, and cry, Ah, ah, so would they have it, Lam. 1.21. All mine enemies have
heard of my trouble, they are glad that thou have done it. And Lam. 2.25. All
that pass by clap their hands, they hiss, and wag their head, for the daughter
of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City that men call the perfection of beauty,
the joy of the whole earth, verse. 16. All thine enemies say, This is the day
that we looked for, we have found, we have seen it, verse. 17. The Lord has
caused thine enemies to rejoice over thee, he has set up the horn of thine
adversaries. Also in Lam. 3.14, 45. You may see how much stress the prophet
Jeremy did lay upon the insultings of enemies, and how humbling a consideration
he took it for. When enemies congratulate our miseries in stead of condoling
them, it adds much. Surely France, but for shame, had rung bells, and made
bonfires when the tidings of our fire did arrive there. God would that a people
should lay it to heart, when he exposes them to contempt. Jerusalem has
grievously sinned, therefore she is removed (so is London) all that honored
her, despise her, because they have seen her nakedness. He loves not his
country that cares not how it is slighted, or who insults over it.

What if it can be made out that there is no parallel at this day for London's
calamity, should not that be for a lamentation, that God should so punish us,
as if he would make us an example to all the world, or as if we had been the
worst people in the world? Jeremy took that circumstance to heart in
Jerusalem's case, Lam. 2.13. What thing shall I liken to thee Oh daughter of
Jerusalem? What shall I equal to thee that thou may be comforted? So Daniel
9.12. For under the whole heaven has not been done so great evil, as has been
done upon Jerusalem. If the like may be said of London, (and indeed I have
heard no man pretend the contrary at this day) its misery must needs be great.
If it be an unparalled stroke it must needs carry a great face of Divine
wrath and displeasure with it, and that does add much, Lam. 2.1. How has the
Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his Anger? and remembered not
his footstool in the day of his Anger. Ver. 3. He has cut off in his fierce
Anger all the horns of Israel.

Many things in this judgment seemed to carry with them a great face of Divine
Anger, as namely, for that the Lord seemed to destroy London, so far as he went
without any pity. Such a thing as this is bewailed, Lam. 2.2. The Lord has
swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob and has not pitied, And verse 17.
The Lord has thrown down and has not pitied. If God had taken away the houses
of rich men that could have born their loss, and mean time spared the houses of
such as were poor, there had been pity in that, but he was pleased to take all
before him, and with the same besome of destruction to sweep away the habitious
of the poorest, as well as of the most rich. And did not God's turning a deaf
ear to all the prayers and intercessions that were made, as for the greatest
part of London whilst the fire was, and going on to destroy notwithstanding
though they cried unto him day and night that he would stay his hand and spare
the remainder, I say did not that speak God exceeding angry. This was one of
Ieremies complaints, L^m. 3.8. Also when I cry and shout he shuts out my
prayer, and verse 44. Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayers
should not p^ss thorough. God did in effect say that, Though Noch, Daniel and
Ioh stood before him, yet would he not be entreated for the City. When prayers
can prevail no longer in such a case as that was, it is a sign God is exceeding
angry. Moreover the fierceness of the judgment, and the mighty force it came
with, and the quick dispatch it made, intimates, as if God for that time had
abandoned all pity toward London: For may not these words of Jeremy be applied
to us, Lam. 3.10. He was unto me as a Bear or as a Lion he has pulled me in
pieces, he has made me desolate.

If any man that reads these things be yet insensible of the heaviness of Gods
hand in this stroke let him beside; all that has been said, consider how
unexpected, and how Incredible a thing it was that London should be almost
totally consumed by fire, ere this year were at an end? Now what, but the
greatness of this judgment made it so incredible till it came? That some few
houses might have been fired in a short time, we could easily have believed,
but not that so many as the Prophet speaks, Lam. 4.12. The kings of the earth,
and the inhabitants of the world would not have believed that the enemy should
have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. To think a judgment too great to be
inflicted, and yet when it is inflicted to make light of it, are very
inconsistant things, and mighty self-contradictions. He that should have come
to a man worth eight or ten thousand pound, a week before the fire, and told
him that within ten days he should not be worth so many hundreds, would he not
have laughed at him, and said in his heart, How can that be? Had all his estate
been in houses, some in one street, some in another, he would never have
dreamed that they should be all sired together, or within a few days of one
another: And yet it is well known to have been the case of many to have been
worth a good estate one day, and the next day, by the fire to have been reduced
almost to nothing. How are the words of Jeremy upon this occasion revived, Lam.
4, 5. They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, they that were
brought up in scarlet embrace dunghils. Great and sudden downfalls cannot but
move compassion in any man that has bowels. As Jeremy speaks of the Nazarites,
Lam. 4.6, 7. That they who were purer then snow, whiter then milk, their visage
was become blacker then any coal, so to think how they that lived in great port
and fashion, are many of them, as in the turning of a hand brought exceeding
low, they and theirs, should much affect us. The desolation of so many houses
is a sad sight, but the ruin of so many families as this fire has ruined, is
yet a sadder consideration. Surely it has fallen heavy, both upon rich and
poor, rich men in the loss of their estates, poor men in the loss of their
friends. The rich man has lost his talent, and the poor man has lost his
steward that improved it for him in a way of relief and charity.

Is it not worth our adding, and throwing into the balance, that this loss by
fire trod upon the heels of two other greater losses, viz. By war and
pestilence, the latter of which, not only diminished our estates, but (which
was worse) deprived us of near and dear relations: yea, moreover that this
judgment came before the other two were gone, or either of them, for is not
the sword yet drawn, and does not the pestilence still devour? so that these
three judgments have appeared together like three terrible Comets or
Blazing-stars threatening utter destruction, and God has come out against us
riding as it were upon three several dreadful horses, black, red and pale, to
allude to what is spoken in the Revelations: And as for what concerns men's
estates, it is well known that the sword and pestilence in several years has
not so much exhausted them, as this fire did within a few days.

Merely to avoid tediousness I shall here add but two things touching London's
loss (though otherwise much more might be added) one is, that it is Invaluable,
and the other that in the eye of reason it is Irreparable. It is in the first
place Inestimable, namely, how great the loss is for the present, but more
especially what sad products and consequences it may draw after it, for the
future, whither the tail of the Comet (as I may call it) may reach. It is a
common, and I believe a true saying, amongst the sufferers by this fire, that
they have lost so much that they themselves cannot tell what they have lost.
Only he that can tell the number of the Stars, and call them all by their
names, does know what the sum total of this loss is, and what are all the
particulars of it, and what influence this Judgment may have upon the times to
come; for certain it is the children which are yet unborn will in time fare the
worse for it. Who can estimate how great a damage and confusion will arise
first and last from one branch of this loss viz. the burning of Bills, Bonds,
Leases, Conveiances, Books of Debts, and Accounts, and other Writings of great
consequence, which was all that many men had to show for the greatest part of
their Estates; what contention and confusion this one loss may produce no heart
can conceive? who knows not that paper and parchment, such as the contents
thereof may be, may be of greater value than Pearls and Diamonds? How many had
rather, yea had better have lost thousands of pounds, than some few sheets of
paper, that went to feed those flames? O fire inestimably dear! O loss
unvaluable, Could this loss be repaired the matter were not so great, but it
either is or seems to be irrepairable ^t leastwise in the memory of any man now
living. So that we may here take up the same complaint which the prophet did,
Lam. 2.13. Thy reach is great like the Sea, Who can heal thee? Or as he Jer.
30.15. Why criest thou for thine affliction, thy sorr^w is incurable? I
question not the Omnipotency of God, but, according to what is usual with God
to do in the world, we can none of us expect to see that breach made up in many
years, which was made upon London in a few days. Now put all these things
together, and then tell me if his heart be not harder then the nether Millstone,
that can see what London has suffered, and not mourn with a very great
mourning. If so a mazeing a Judgment will not awaken men, they are like to
sleep in their security, till they come to wake in Hell, where none can sleep;
for the smoke of their torment ascends continually, and they have no rest day
nor night.

But are there any that call themselves Englishmen, that do not only not mourn
over, but rejoice and triumph in the destruction of London? Let them believe
themselves to be legitimate if they can; at leastwise let them not think, that
others will ever believe that there is one drop of true English Blood running
in their veins: Or let the parents of their Bodies be who they will, I am sure
that in another sense they are of their Father the Devil, and his works they
do. If there could have bin mirth in Hell there would have been rejoicing there
at the firing of London, as there is in heaven at the Conversion of a sinner.
How worthy were they to have danced in those flames, who (if any such be) have
sung and danced at the remembrance of them?

But what if some not only rejoice in this being done, but had the heart to do
it? How long was it ere I could believe there was any such Monster in the
World? till I heard of one convicted for the same, and that by his own sensible
and persevering Confession. Lord, What mischief have they done? Is there any
sacrifice for their sin? One would think, if there were no Hell, God would
prepare one on purpose, for such miscreants, to burn them in, who have burned
up the Estates and Livelihoods of so many thousands. But, Lord, thou know it
is not my desire they should, nor is it my opinion, that the blood of Christ,
laid hold on by faith, is not able to save their souls. And oh! Though their
bodies should be given as meat to the fowls of the air, or fuel to temporal
flames, yet that their souls might be delivered from the wrath to come! Let
them rely upon no pardon from that triple crowned blasphemer of Rome, who
cannot so much as pardon his own sins, and it is well the (light of such men
considered, and how they hold the truth in unrighteousness) if they be not
unpardouable. He that cheats men into sin, let him not cheat them into Hell, by
causing them to rest upon his mock indulgences, who is easy enough to pardon
such peccadilloes in his account, as are the burning of Protestant Cities, yea,
can be willing to enroll them amongst his Saints. I confess a red letter would
do well before their names, but only in token of blood and cruelty. But, Lord,
I desire to look higher, than those instruments of our late sire, even unto
thee. Thou have set us on fire round about, and oh that we could lay it to
heart as becomes us. We would hold our peace, because thou, Lord, have done
it. If thou had so pleased London might have been like the Bush, which did
burn, but was not consumed, but thou did give it up to the flames: Lord, at
what a rate has London, yea England sinne^ that thou have thus punished it?
Thou do man^ times punish men less than their sins deserve, but never more.
Which of us have not contributed by our iniquities, to this as well as to other
judgments? Which of us have not cause to say, Lord forgive us, that by our
sins we have infected London and England with a devouring Plague, that we have
helped to embroil it in a consuming War, yea, that we have had our hands as by
way of demerit in kindling the late Fire, which burnt London to the ground.

MEDITATION II. Upon sight of the Weekly Bill for London since the Fire.
With how sad a heart have I read that Bill, finding but sixteen Parishes
within the walls now pretended to, and considering with my self by how great a
Synecdoche some of those Parishes do at this day go by their former names? It
is that figure, which puts a part for the whole (yea a small part too) the
compounding Figure as I may call it, that takes as it were, five shillings or
half a Crown for a pound) which alone warranteth us to call London, London
still, and several parishes (said to be now standing) by the names which they
did bear formerly. The unjust Steward, Luke 16.7. used substraction; only
where a hundred was owing he bid them set down fifty, but we (as if that were
to be more just) proceed by way of multiplication setting down a a hundred for
ten or twenty. We view our City as it were through a microscope, which
represents the leg of a Flea so big, as if it were the leg of some creature far
bigger than its whole Body. So might we call a sometimes great and samous Inn,
the Crown or Miter, as it was formerly called, though burnt down to the
proportion of a Cottage, because the sign and sign post are still to be seen,
and there is yet some small part of the old Building. Is it not rather the
Epitom^ of London, which we now have than London it self, as if the abridgement
of a Book in Folio (be it Aquinas his Sums or any other such) should go by
the name of Aquinas his Sums (or what other name it bore in Folio) when
contracted into a small Manual or Pocketbook. It is London in short hand, such
as might contain the Decalogue within the compass of a single penny, rather
than so at length if yet we may call it London.

Is it not rather Londons Remains and Ruins, its ^^rn and Ashes than London it
self? So a Burgess or two in Parliament stands for a whole Town, a Knight or
two for a whole Shire, so Lords Spi^ual and Temporal write themselves, London,
York, Lincoln, Canterbury, as if they were whole Cities or Towns, being indeed
but single and individual persons. Methinks it is as if Judah and Benjamin were
called Israel, being indeed but two Tribes of Twelve: Nor am I less affected
with that doleful parenthesis in two short words ( viz. Now standing) How am I
pusht with the two horns of that parenthesis, putting me upon this dilemma,
that I know not whether more to be thankful, that all London is not fallen, or
more to lament that so small a part of it is yet standing. The late Plague gave
us to see and expect London without many Inhabitants (at leastwise for a time
but to see London with but a few habitations was that we never looked for. We
have lately known a Plague, that laid thousands of Citizens under ground, but
who dreamt of a Fire that would lay the City it self upon the ground? Hear O
Heavens, and be astonished O earth. I find as many sorts of diseases in the
Bill now as ever. They find men out go whither they will they crowd into
Families, that have scarce room enough to turn themselves in. Death will not
spa^e, (as if it pitied those whom the fire has not spared): Men's tabernacles
must go to wrack as well as their houses. But to confine my self to the
business of the sire.

Methinks London at this day is a lively Emblem of a Professor fallen from his
first Love, or rather a backsliding Professor is just in such a condition as
London is at this day. He goes by the same name as formerly, but How far is he
from being the same person he was? How like is he to those Churches the
outsides whereof are yet standing; their walls and steeples make such a fair
show, that they, who should view them at a distance, would think, they were
just as before; but alas! Their insides are gone, they are fit for no use, yea
their very outsides are so frail and brittle, that in a windy day men are loath
to pass by them for fear of being knocked on the head. What havoc has sin made
in all the faculties of such men (which, if the Soul may be compared to a City,
may be called the several streets of that City) How has error destroyed their
understandings, ill habits their wills and inclinations to good, the World
consumed their spiritual affections, all these things conspired to desolate and
lay waste their Consciences; and now those men though called Christians still
(and glorying in that name) lie just like London in dust, and rubbish, and
ashes. O Lord, Give England to meet thee in the way of thy judgments, by a
timely repentance, yea give these three Kingdoms so to do, lest it come to
pass that hereafter England should be called England; and Great Britain, Great
Britain, and the three Kingdoms so; by as great a Synecdoche, as the poor
Remains of London are now called London, and the Relics of some streets (said
to be now standing) by the name those streets had, when in their beauty and
glory.

MEDITATION III. Upon the Discourses occasioned by the late Fire, both th^n and
since.
SOme came to London in the time of the Fire, having heard of it (but not seen
it) and probably their first question was, Is the Fire out? Alas! no, would
they say that answered them, It is so far from being out, that it rages more
and more. They that heard it was not out would be asking how far it was gotten,
whereabouts it was: Then would men begin to reckon up the Streets and Churches
that were burnt down already, Thames street is gone, and Fish street is gone,
and Gracious Street is down, and now it is at such a place, and such a place,
and so they would proceed. Is the Fire abated would others say? Is there any
hope of extinguishing it? We see little sign of it would some reply, It is
seared it will consume the whole City and Suburbs too. Why do they not play
their Engines would some cry? Alas they are broken and out of Kelter, we little
expecting such a sad time as this. Some it may be would say, Why do so many
people stand gazing on, and not run to help? The Fire has now got such head
and is so fierce would they say that there is no coming near it: But why do
they not pull down houses at a distance? that is long work would some reply,
and seeing they cannot carry away the timber, when they have done, it will do
but little good. Do not the Magistrates, would some say, bestir themselves to
put a stop to it? It is like they do what they can, but they are even at their
wits ends, or like men astonished. They that stood and looked on would cry out,
See how it burns East and West at the same time, not only with the wind, but
against it. Hear how it crackles like a Fire in thorns: Hear what a rattling
noise there is with the crackling and falling of timber. Look you there says
another just now the Fire has taken this or that Church, which alas is full of
goods, now it is just come to the Royal Exchange; by and by would they say,
See how presently such a stately house was gone, it was but even now, that it
began to fire, and it is consumed already: Oh what a wind is here, See how it
is as bellows to the Fire, or as the breath of the Almighty blowing it up. You
would wonder to see how far the sparks and coals do sly. It is strange they do
not fire all the houses on the other side of the water, where abundance of them
do light. I can think of nothing, says one, but of Sodom and Gomorral, when I
see this sight. Alas, Alas! cries one, now do I see such a good friends house
to take fire, and, by and by, now do I see the house of another good friend of
mine on fire; in that house, that you see now burning dwelt a Brother or S^ster
of mine, or some other near Relation. Others would come dropping in and say,
They had staid so long as to see their own houses on fire and then they came
away and left them, Such a^ dwell near to London and to the Road would cry as
they lay in their beds, we hear the Carts rumbling and posting by continually.
Those that were within the City, at that time, would ever and anon say to one
another, Did you hear that noise. There was a house blown up, and by and by
there was another house blown up. Others would cry, The fire is now come near
the Tower, and if the powder be not removed, God knows, what mischief will be
done with that: One while the people would take an Alarm of Treachery, and cry
out that the French were coming to cut their throats.

Such whose houses the Fire had not yet seized, but was hast^ing toward them,
you must suppose to have made this their discourse, What shall we do for Carts
to carry away our goods, we have offered three, four pounds a load for Carts to
carry them but two or three miles off, and cannot have them. One while they cry
there is an order to prevent the coming in of more Carts, it being thought that
whilst we mind the saving of our goods, we neglect the putting out the fire,
and now will our houses and goods burn together, and so we shall loose all.
Such as had the opportunity to convey their goods, as far as the fields and no
farther. How did they discourse of the hardship they must undergo, if they
should leave their goods, they would be stolen, if they should look to them
themselves (as many had no body else to do it for them) they must have but
little sleep, and a cold open lodging, and what if it should rain? And some we
may imagine were discoursing, what they and theirs should do, their houses and
goods being burnt, where they should put their heads as having neither money
nor friends, at leastwise so near that they knew how to get to them. These were
but some of those dreadful stories that men and women talked of: I could tell
you how women with child would say, They had but a month or a week to reckon,
and this had frighted them almost out of their wits, so that they found it
would go very hard with them. Others again would say, They were but so many
weeks gone, but were so disturbed, that they did never look to go out their
full time: Others, it is like, would say, They were so ill with the fright they
had taken, that they thought verily it would kill them, or that they should
never come to themselves whilst they lived. Would not others again report of
some here and there, who by venturing too much in the Fire, or staying too long
to bring away their goods, had lost their lives and perished in the flames?

Neither were all sad discourses exstinguished with the fire: For since that
time it has been the manner of Friends, as they met to ask some account of the
losses each of other. Pray what lost you, says one, by the Fire? I lost the
house I lived in, says one, which was my own, or as good as my own by virtue
of a long Lease and a great Fine. I lost my houses and goods, says another. I
lost to the value of two thousand pounds, says one, I four: I, six, says
another. I have lost the one half of what I had says one: I have lost all
says another, I am burnt to my very shirt. I have lost more than all, says a
third, for I by this means am left in a great deal of debt, that I shall never
be able to pay, I had many things belonging to other men committed to me, which
are swept away. Says another I am not only undone my self, but so many of my
Children and near Relations, it may be all of them are undone by this Fire, as
well as my self. But I need to say the less of this, because every days
converse will or may tell us, what men talk since the dismal Fire of and
concerning it. O Lord, I see thou who can put a Song of deliverance into our
mouths when thou please, can also sill us with complaints and lamentations
when thou will, and make our own tongues, as it were to fall upon us, how thou
can make us out of the abundance of our hearts, to speak such things as will
terrify both ourselves and others, and cause both our own ears and theirs to
tingle, how easily thou can find us other discourse than to ask and tell what
news is stirring (for who regarded news whilst these things were in agitation)
who seemed to mind what became of affairs either by Sea or Land? I see how
easily thou can imbitter our Converse one with another, and make us speak so
as to break each others hearts, that use to delight and refresh each other by
their pleasing conferences and communications, so that solitude may become
less afflictive, than that good company, which was wont to be very acceptable.
Would not our tongues rise up in judgment against us, if we should ever forget
the sad stories we have told of thy most heavy hand upon us? Seeing thou have
thus seasoned our communication, as it were with salt, and salted it, as it
were with fire, shall that which is rotten and unsavory proceed out of our
mouths from henceforth? Let us remember, what we said to others, and what
others said to us, that we may never be unmindfull of what thou have done both
to us and them, we have spoken with sad countenances and with aching hearts. Oh
that by the sadness of our countenances our hearts might be made better.

MEDITATION IV. Upon the dishonest Carters, who exacted excessive Rates.
IS there a Conscience in men, or is there none? Or is there some such thing in
Pagans and Infidels, but no such thing in Christians? or is there a Conscience
in the Christians of other parts, but none in Englishmen? Or is there some in
other Englishmen, but none in plow-men, and Carters, at leastwise in the most
of them, who came to help the Londoners away with their goods in the time of
the Fire? Whatsoever there be in other men, there seems to have been no such
thing in them; witness their plowing, as they did, upon the backs of poor
Citizens, and making long furrows in the time of their utmost Calamity.
Londoners have been glad sometimes, if they could get but one in ten of their
broken Chapmen, but you, when you saw a fire that was like to break hundreds of
Citizens, would have ten for one; five pound for so little work, as ten
shillings, if not five, would have been taken for at another time. Let it not
be known in Gath: never let Papist, or Turk, or Jew, read this paper, whereby
to know, what you have done: They would think it were never possible, to go to
heaven in your Religion. Who can believe you to be so much, or so good as mere
men? For can there be a man without humanity? The Apostle says, He is not a
Jew that is a Jew outwardly, and may I not say, He is not a Man that is a Man
outwardly, but he that has the tender heart and bowels of a man. As there are,
Wolves in Sheeps clothing, (as our Savior speaks) so, Are there not evil
Angels appearing in the shape of Men? Did you do as you would be done by (which
is the Rule of Justice) when you seemed to vie with the fire it is self, which
should be most cruel, you or it? It gave most men space to carry away their
goods, you might have given them opportunity to have done it, and would not,
but upon most unreasonable terms, such as many were not able to come up to.
Should Landlords, knowing you cannot live without ground to work upon, make you
pay ten times so much Rent as it is worth, How would you curse them, and be
ready to call them Baptized Jews, Uncircumcised Turks, or other names, as bad
as those; and such as I dare not call you, (whatsoever you deserve) as
remembering, how the Archangel durst not bring a railing accusation against the
Devil himself, but only said, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude the 9th. Were any of
you dangerously sick, and in great extremity, and being so, should send for the
only Physician near at hand, and he should refuse to come, though it were to
save your life, unless you would give him ten Fees for one; would you not go
nigh to use that rude Proverb, concerning him, viz. That he would get the Devil
and all? and would you not think, that one good angel might be better to him,
than ten evil ones (and such are all that are ill gotten)? Were your Wives in
sore Travail, and but one Midwife to be had, that were able to deliver them;
and she, knowing their necessity to make use of her, should so far work upon
it, as to capitulate for as many pounds as she used to have shillings, or else,
give out, that, for her, mother and child should both perish together: How
would you make the Country ring of the savage cruelty of so extorting a
Midwife? If you had urgent occasion for money, and some biting Usurer, knowing
of it, should make you, directly or indirectly, to pay twenty or thirty pound
per Cent. how would you take on at him, and clamor upon him? Such was your
dealing with poor Londoners in the day of their distress.

As the raging Sea, when men are in danger of being cast away, will have a
great part of their lading cast into her lap, or not suffer them to ride safe;
or as Thieves, do make men buy their lives at a great rate, which they ought
nevertheless to save, and suffer them to enjoy free-cost; or, as the Devil
himself, when he osters his assistance to men in their great straights, exacts
that of them for his pains, which is more worth than the whole world, viz.
Their Souls; requiring to be paid manifold more than his work comes to: Such
was the equity you used toward distressed Citizens in the time of the fire,
(as if you had been Jews and they Samaritans.) There was a Samaritan himself,
who when he saw a stranger that had been robbed, and wounded, and half-dead,
had compassion on him, bound up his wounds, paid for his lodging, took care of
him, Luke 10 33. Surely you are no akin to that good Samaritan; you took from
them whom the fire had robbed before; you made their wounds bleed afresh with
your unkindness; you even killed those outright with your cruelty, whom fire,
and grief, and fear had made half dead before.

Did you ever read that Text Acts 28.2. where Paul says, The barbarous people
showed us no little kindness, for they kindled a fire, and received us every
one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold. This did Barbarians
to strangers, when exposed but to rain and cold, which is nothing like so
dangerous as fire: but what you Carters, called Christians, did to men of your
own Nation, and of your own Religion, the world knows too well; as if you,
indeed, had been the Barbarians; and they that Paul speaks of had been
Christians. Will not the Christian-like carriage of those Barbarians judge the
barbarous carriage of you Christians (if I may so call you)? Have you never
read those words, 1 Cor. 6.10. Extortioners shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? nor those in 1 These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond or defraud his brother in
any matter, because the Lord is the avenger of all such. Quit yourselves, if
you can, from having been Extortioners, and such as have defrauded and gone
beyond others. I doubt not in the least, but this was a real theft in the sight
of God: You think it was not, because they consented and contracted to give you
so much: But so may a man consent to deliver his purse to a highway man, that
threatens, if he do not so, he will have his life: Does that make it no theft
on his part that takes it? A man may consent to that which is a real injury to
himself, to avoid a greater than that; all that can be said, is, No man can be
forced, if he consent. Volenti non fit violentia, is true, but not Volenti non
fit injuria. If you have not wronged the poor Citizens, whether with or against
their consents (as it was partly both) never were men wronged. How many, think
you, did lose all, or the most of their goods, because they had not
wherewithal to give those unreasonable rates which you demanded, who yet could
and would have honestly paid you as much as you in reason and conscience could
have demanded for the removal of their goods. Will not the great God, think
you, place the loss of those goods, and the undoing of those poor families to
your account? Therefore, O Country men (honest Countrymen I must not call you
till you better deserve it) let my advice be acceptable to you: Blush for what
you have done, repent, restore, make satisfaction to the full. What you have
gotten in that way (unless it be such of you as ventured your own lives, or
the lives of your beasts, by going near the fire) will never thrive with you,
yea, may prove a moth and canker to all you have besides. Who were the large
contributers to all Briefs, when your Towns and Houses were at any time burnt,
but these very Citizens, whom you have used thus unkindly? If fire should
happen in your thatch, which may easily be, (and which you have provoked God to
send) how dearly would you miss that City which you have so inhumanely
oppressed? You that have not pitied Londoners, pity your own souls; and
remember that true saying, Unjust gain is not remitted, (that is, forgiven)
unless, intentionally by those that cannot, and actually by those that can,
restitution be made.

MEDITATION V. Upon those that stole what they could in the time of the Fire.
IT should seem it was not enough for Londoners to have their houses consumed
by fire, and their faces grownd by unconscionable Carters, demanding half as
much for carrying away their goods, as some of them were worth; (yea, ten times
so much as was their due) but, as a further aggravation of their misery, God
was pleased to give London, as he gave Jacob, to the spoil, and as he gave
Israel to the robbers. How many, under pretense of rescuing their neighbors
goods out of the fire, carried them away for altogether, (as if all things now
had been common, because the fire had broken down men's enclosures): Was this
your kindness to your friends? Was this the pity that should be showed to them
that are in misery? I have heard indeed of Janissaries, (that is, Turkish
Soldiers), that when fires have been in Constantinople, would sall to
plundering; but, are you Turks? Some living upon the Seacoast, may, perchance,
gain now and then by racks, bringing rich goods to their hands; but then, it is
presumed, the owners are cast away, or cannot be known. They say, some Nurses,
that use to attend on such as have the plague, are wont to make away all they
can lay their hands on: but then they stay, till the people whose goods they
take, be dead, and have no further need of them. But you, barbarous wretches,
stripped the poor Citizens, being yet alive, and likely to live, and to need all
they had, and more: Do you think much, to be chid for what you have done? Alas,
yours is a great crime, It is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges, yet, I
had rather you would judge your selves for it, satisfy for the wrong you have
done, and so avoid the punishment both of God and Men. You make me think of the
Eagle, that stole away a coal from the Altar, and fired his own nest with it.
Were they not firebrarnds snatched out of the fire that you stole away? If you
continue to keep them in your Nests, sure enough they will set them on fire; I
mean, they will bring a curse upon all the rest of your substance. You have
done that, which one would have thought, no man's heart could serve him to have
done. If other Thieves deserve hanging, you are worthy of a Gallows as high as
Haman's; for, the circumstance of time makes your sin out of measure sinful.
Would you offer to be stealing when God was burning? Would you take from those,
to whom you had more need to have given? Now you are told of your fault, be not
worse than Judas himself, who, when admonished but by his own conscience, came
and brought back that wages of unrighteousness, which he had received, viz. The
thirty pieces of Silver. I do not advise you, by any unnecessary confession, to
bring your selves into danger; so you do every man right, what matter is it,
whether they know who it was that wronged them? If ever God pardon you, see one
Condition that must be performed by you, Ezekiel. 33.15. If the wicked restore the
pledge, give again that he has robbed; he shall surely live, he shall not dye.

MEDITATION VI. Upon unconscionable Landlords, demanding excessiv^ Fines and
Rents, since the Fire.
IS it a good Rule, that men may take as much as ever they can get, for such
things as men cannot live without? Surely, that is the Rule you go by, in
asking and taking such vast Fines and Rents for the houses you let. By that
Rule, if some few men could be supposed to have all the Corn in England in
their hands, they might sell it for five pounds a bushel: for men would give
it, if they had wherewithal, rather than be without bread, which is the staff
of life: But how would you curse them that should serve you so? You seem to
have made a Covenant with fire, (as some are said to have done with death, Isa.
26.15.) and with slames (as others with hell) to be at an agreement, that if an
overflowing scourge should pass thorough, it might not hurt you, as who should
say, If your houses be burnt hereafter, yet they are paid for; such Fines may
be sufficient to build them again: Methinks, I hear the great God saying, Your
Covenant shall be disannulled, and your Agreement shall not stand; when the
overflouring scourge shall p^sse thorough, you shall he trodden down by it, as
it is, verse 18. Like the builders of B^b^^, you seem to have been raising a
Tower, to fortify your selves against heaven, but God will confound your
Languages. Would you anticipate the rebuilding of the City, by obliging men
always to remain in the Suburbs? I wish, it may not be said of you in a bad
sense (what the Psalmist says of others in a good) that You take pleasure in
the stones of London ( as they of Zion) and savor the dust thereof, Psalm
102.14. because its ruin has been your rise. I doubt not, but the Fines you
have taken, and the Rents you have agreed for, will be the undoing of many a
poor Family, that, but for those exactions, might have made a shift to live.
Possibly, all the gains of your Tenants, (trading being so dead as it is, and
is like to be) will scarce pay for the houses they live in, and if so,
wherewithal shall they and theirs subsist? Men must have meat to eat, and
clothes to wear, as well houses to dwell in; but your rack-Rents, and more than
rack Fines, do eat the very bread out of their mouths. When I think of the
Fire, the Carters, the Pilferers, and you extorting Landlords, I cannot but
recount, what is said, Joel 1.4. That which the palmer-worm has left, has the
locust eaten; and that which the locust has left, has the canker-worm eaten;
and that which the canker-worm has left, has the caterpiller eaten. How
contrary have you been to Jesus Christ, who impoverishell himself to make
others rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. whereas you have inricht your selves by making others
poor. You have handled the poor City, as the Sybils are said to have done their
Prophecies, when they had burnt the greatest part of them, asking as great a
price for the Remains, as they did at first for the whole Book: what ever
reason they had for that, I am sure you have none for this. Ruminate, I beseech
you, upon one Text I shall name to you, (with others of like nature) and then
if you think fit to keep all the Fines you have taken, and to take all the Rent
you have contracted for, give me leave to think, that your hearts do stand in
no awe of Gods Word: The place I mean, is, Zach. 2.9, 10, 11. Woe to him that
coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his ^^st on high,
that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to
thy self, thou have sinned against thy soul; For the stone shall cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. If you will not believe,
try at your peril, if that saying of Christ be not true, viz. that It will
profit a man nothing to gain the world and lose his own soul.

MEDITATION VII. Upon the burning down of many Churches.
When men are better informed, and less under the power of prejudice, they
will not be offended, at calling those places by the name of Churches, where
people meet together for the public worship and service of God, though the
living Temples of God, (or, the faithful meeting together for such ends and
purposes) are in greatest strictness and propriety of speech called, the
Church, or some part of the Church of Christ, which is his Body, each Believer
a member of it, and himself the Head. There is a Figure in Rhetoric (and such
as we can hardly speak without) which puts things containing, for the things
contained; and if the Holy Ghost himself do use that Figure, I am sure we ought
not to quarrel with it. I know not who can assure us, that the Scripture does
not speak by that Figure, when it says, 1 Cor. 11.22. Have ye not Houses to
eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God? But not to contend about
words, I look upon it as a great misery, that the places called by that name,
are so generally demolished. He that shall look upon them, but as great
ornaments to the places where they stood; or, as strong and stately buildings,
that might have been employed to many good uses; or at most, but as places,
where first and last, many fervent prayers have been offered to God, many
religious assemblies have met together, many excellent and converting Sermons
have been preached, if he be consistent with himself, cannot but bewail, that
they are now made a ruinous heap. Most sober men do think, there were some good
and useful lights, shining to the very last, in those Candlesticks; and for
their sakes, I wish, (if the will of God had been so) that those Candlesticks
might yet have stood; as also for the hope I had, that God in his good time,
might have thrust forth many more faithful laborers into those Vineyards (if I
may so call them.) Where now within the walls of that, sometimes famous City,
can hundreds and thousands meet together, to reap the benefit of one and the
same Sermon? I say, in how few places can it now be done (as formerly) with
convenience and safety? We read of three thousand souls added to the Church, by
one of Peter's Sermons, Acts 2.14. But, where now could a fifth part of that
number with freedom and allowance converse together in order to such a
purpose? How many idle persons are there like to be in fields and alehouses on
the Lords day, under pretense they have no Churches to go to? What a vast
charge and trouble will it be, to rebuild those Churches, or many of them,
which, if ever London come to be it is self again, and Religion in any request
(as God forbid it should be otherwise) must, and will be done. How forlo^n
would London have looked, if all its Churches had been burnt, though all private
houses had been yet standing? I dare not give those reasons, that some would
do, why those Churches were burnt; I dare not say, we may do as well without
them as with them. What reformed Church is there in the whole world, that has
not such places as those for public worship, and that is not careful to
maintain and uphold them? I wish every private house were a Church, (as P^ul
Salities the Church that was in their house, viz. in the house of Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16.5.) and yet I wish there were Churches every where besides
those in private houses. What if the blind zeal of Papists did build many of
those Churches, were they not converted to a better use? I think they could no
more infuse evil into those places, than others can real and intrinsical
holiness. The Censers of Korah and Dathan (howsoever they abused them) were not
cast out of the Sanctuary, but made into broad plates, as are vering for the
Altar, Numb. 16.38. The destruction of Churches is pleasing to few men, but
those who have outrun the sobriety of Religion, and, who have made such haste
out of Balylon, that, (as one says) they are run beyond Jerusalem. If some
Ministers, by the fire of their passion, or other provoking sins, have helped to
burn the Churches, they did, or should have preached in over their heads; and if
some, that were, or should have been hearers, have done the like, the Lord
forgive them, they know not what they have done. But may I, or mine (if God so
please) live to see London rebuilt, Churches re-edified, by the zeal and piety
of Protestants, every Congregation furnished with (...) faithful Pastor, every
Candlestick filled with a burning and shining light, all divine Ordinances
purely administered, all places for public worship greatly and cheerfully
frequented, all good Christians united in the service of God; then, though our
new structures should never be so great and magnificent, as our old ones were,
we shall easily acknowledge, that the glory of our second Temples, is far
greater than was that of our first.

MEDITATION VIII. Upon the burning multitudes of Books of all sorts.
What the Prophet speaks in another case, Habbak, 3.8. Was the Lord displeased
against the Rivers? Was thing anger against the Rivers? Was thy wrath against
the Sea? I may here allude to, and say, Was the Lord displeased against the
Books? Was his anger against the famous Libraries that were burnt? I doubt not,
but there were many Books amongst them, fit for nothing but the fire, viz.
wanton Poems, idle Romances, profane Comedies, lying Legends, heretical
Treatises, scandalous and pernicious Pamphlets, but were they all such? It had
then been a good riddance, and this fire had proved the best Index
Expurgatorius, that ever was. But alas! Who knows not, that better Books were
not extant in the whole World than were thousands of those, which this Fire
consumed, and amongst the rest an innumerable company of Bibles, the best of
Books. I can hardly forbear expostulating as Abraham did, Genesis 18.3. Lord, Wile
thou destroy the Righteous with the Wicked? Thou did do so in this case, and
yet were certainly righteous in what thou did. Good Books are made for us,
and for our sakes too, they were destroyed; they had not offended, but we: We
by our sins, make the whole Creation groan, and subject it to vanity.

Who can sufficiently lament the poor Booksellers more generally undone, by
this Fire, than any one sort of men? But Why? No man can tell, there being
amongst them many honest and industrious men. But, O Lord, thy Judgments are
unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out: The greatest visible crime,
wherewith I can charge them (and but some of them neither) was their printing,
and selling some Books not fit to see the light: One Jonas disquieted and
endangered ^all that were in the same ship, and one Achan trouble all Israel,
and one Leviathan might mischief an Ocean of Books, as we read of the Creature
so called, Job. 41.31. That he makes the Sea to b^il like a pot, he makes the
deep to boil like a pot of ^in^ment. Why did you set up Dagon by the Ark?
Scripture and Anti-scripturisme did do ill together in one and the same Shop:
Bibles at one end, and Atheistical books at another: Books of Divinity in one
corner of your Shops, and Books of Obscenity in another: What was this, but
from the same Fountain to send forth bitter and sweet? This was like gunpowder
put amongst other commodities, which hazards the blowing up of all the rest.
This might be the great provocation on your part, but, I doubt not, but the
loss came as much for their sakes, that were Buyers, as for yours that were
Sellers of Books: for the sakes of your Customers, (that either were, or should
have been) as much as for your own. Some wanted a heart to buy Books, though
they could and should have done it: others bought books enough, but wanted
industry to peruse them (and so anticipated others that would have read those
Books, if they had had them, or could have gotten them) Others both bought
Books and read them, but did not too many do it, only for ostentation sake, or
out of curiosity (as desirous to taste the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge both
of good and evil) with design merely to inform, not to reform and amend
themselves thereby, or for other such low, and sinister ends? In all this we
played the Wantons with our books, and Was it not just with God to take them
from us, as Parents use to take the meat from off their Childrens trenchers,
when they see, they eat out of mere wantonness? Put to no better uses, they
would but have risen up against us in the day, when the Books mentioned,
Revelat. 20.12. Shall be opened, and the dead judged out of the things therein
contained.

But, whatsoever the particular causes of this Judgment were, sure I am, the
loss of so many excellent books, was a great blow, both to Religion and
Learning. We lost a far greater treasure in their worth, than in their price,
though that also amounted to a very great sum, far surpassing the price of
those Books of curious Arts, spoken of, Act. 19.19. Which those that believed
are said to have burnt, though they reckoned them worth fifty thousand pieces
of silver. Alas! What was that to four times fifty thousand pieces of Gold,
which some have judged this loss to amount unto? Who sees not, by this
instance, that Books are of a perishing nature, as well as other things; he,
that, by means thereof, would raise to himself a lasting monument, may fail of
his end. He spoke like a vapouring Poet, that said, Jamque opus exegi qu^d non
Jovis ira nec ignes, nec poterunt flammae ^^c^ed^x ^bolere vetustas. I doubt
not but many of those Poems of his were at this time metamorphosed into flames;
and, by the same reason, all may be one time or other. Books worth a thousand
of that suffered in the same flames, and yet, I think, their sufferings not to
have been the same; as is usually said, Cum duo faciunt idem, non est idem; so,
Cum duo p^tiuntur idem, non est idem, is as true. Good books burnt like
Martyrs, Bad ones like Malefactors: the former ascended up to Heaven, like
sweet Incense: the latter like the smoke of the Bottomless pit. As some waters
run by each other, and yet mix not, so in a moral sense may we judge of these
flames, which consumed the good Books, and the bad ones.

Were it not in vain to wish for a resurrection of Books, How should I long to
see it? Oh! that at least our forty thousand Bibles might be recovered again,
though all the other books were irrecoverably lost; the next Age may be for
books, though this be all for News. But since, a privatione ad habitum non
datur regressis: (in this as in some other cases) since we can never look for
them again; let us remember the Italian proverb, which says, Deliver us from
that man that reads but one book (intimating, that he, that does so, is like to
be too hard for any man, in defending the principles of that one Author) and be
thence encouraged to read those few books that are left us over and over, so
shall we find dimidium plus to to to be verified in this case, a part, so
improved, will do us more good, than the whole had wont to do, as one dish,
well fed upon, refreshes us more than twenty, that do but glut us with the
sight and sent of them. Let us take occasion from this, to acquaint our selves
more then ever, with those four Books, which are of more consequence than all
the rest, viz. The Book of Creation, Providence, Scripture, and that of our own
Hearts and Consciences. The multitude of our other Books may have impeded us
from looking, so much as we ought, into these; and now they are diminished, let
us more then ever delight ourselves in these, and meditate therein day and
night. If thou did make an Idol of thy books (as some men did) and do now
mourn, for the loss of them, as Micha did for the taking away of his gods (
Judges 18.24.) Consider, that the best of knowledge (and that the Scripture is
sufficient to instruct thee in) is that, Saint John speaks of, John 17.3. This
is Life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent.

MEDITATION IX. Upon the burning of the Royal Exchange.
IT is but a few months ago, that one, who had never seen the Royal Exchange
before, would have beheld the glory of it with admiration; as one, or more of
the Disciples of Christ, did the Temple of Jerusalem, Matthew. 13.1. saying, See
what manner of stones and what manner of buildings are here: But, behold, that
which Christ spoke of the Temple, saying, See thou these great buildings!
There shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down,
is already almost fulfilled in, and upon that stately Pile, the destruction
whereof, we little dreamed to have been so near at hand. Some stones there are
yet standing one upon another, but so, as that they must be taken down, and had
they fallen, without breaking themselves, it had but saved a labor: What a
princely soundation was that Royal Exchange? and of how great use? Was not that
the Center in which those lines met, that were drawn from all parts of Europe?
rich Merchants, I mean, and other eminent Tradesmen and great Dealers, not
only English, but Spanish, French, Dutch, Portugueze, Danes, Swedes. Was not
the place a little Epitomie, or rather Representative of all ^urope (if not of
the greatest part of the trading World) renewed every day at such a time, and
for so many hours? As London was the glory of England, so was that Royal
Exchange one of the greatest Glories and Ornaments of London. There were the
Statues of the Kings and Queens of England set up, as in the most conspicuous
and honorable place (as well receiving luster from the place where they stood,
as giving luster to it.)

How full of Riches was that Royal Exchange? Rich men in the midst of it, rich
goods both above and beneath. There men walked upon the top of a Wealthy Mine;
considering, what Eastern Treasures, costly spices, and such like things were
laid up in the bowels (I mean the Cellars) of that Place. As for the upper part
of it, Was it not the great Storehouse, whence the Nobility and Gentry of
England were furnished with most of those costly things, wherewith they did
adorn either their Closets or themselves? Here, if any where, might a man have
seen the glory of the world in a moment, as the Devil showed it to Christ from
a high mountain; What artificial thing could entertain the senses and
fantasies of men, that was not there to be had? Such was the delight that many
Gallants took in that Magazine of all curious varieties, that they could almost
have dwelt there (going from Shop to Shop, like Bees from flower to flower) If
they had but had a Fountain of Money that could not have been drawn dry. I
doubt not but a Mohammedan (who never expects other than sensible delights)
would gladly have accepted of that place, and the treasures of it for his
heaven, and have thought there were none like it. About the space of ni^neteen
months was that Royal Exchange in building, viz. from June 7th. til November
in the year following: So that the Sun had finished his annual course once,
and almost a second time, ere that work was finished: but was it so many hours
in burning, as it was months in building?

How obnoxious are all earthly things to destruction? How easily are the works
of our hands brought to naught? How little a time will serve to ruin those
things, that did require a long time to raise them? I find this noble
Structure had stood about a hundred years before Destruction overtook it: for
it is said to have been erected in the year 1566, and the time of its
conflagration, we know too well, to have been 1666. One sixty six built it,
another sixty six burnt it; so one Philip founded the Macedonian Empire,
another Philip ruined it; one Constantine built Constantinople, and another of
that Name lost it; an Augustus was the first established Emperor of Rome, and
another Augustus the last. So many times the World goes round like a Circle,
where it begins, there it ends. Did that Structure come down in a day or less,
which had continued a hundred years, and might in all probability have lasted
one Century more? I see then there may be more in the womb of one day or night,
than was in the womb of a hundred years before, and the law of providence may,
in a few hours overruled the prescription of a whole Age. Though the
destruction of Places, and so of Persons set out late, yet, when it once sets
out, it may ride post, and come, as upon the wings of the wind. He that, being
often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,, Prove. 29.1.
The sins of that place had deserved this judgment sooner: but he that bore with
the old World, one hundred and twenty years, after warning given, bore with it
toward an hundred, though the provocations thereof were great. As nature has
placed the weightiest things below, and lighter things above them (as Air above
Earth); so the more solid persons and parlyes (as well as the more bulky
Commodities) had wont to be in the lower Rooms of that Exchange, where
Merchants met to discourse their affairs. The sins of that lower part, we may
suspect, to have been craft and covetousness, overreaching and going beyond
one another. Many did not so because of the fear of the Lord; (as Nehemiah said
of himself, Neh. 9.5. So did not I, because of the fear of God) but others did.
And were there not other kinds of sin, which did abound in the upper Region of
that Exchange, which, like so many Comets or blazing Stars, did portend or
threaten the destruction of it. Oh the pride and prodigality that was there to
be seen? How few could be charitable, that were so expensive as many were in
that place? And how much of that which was there expended, might well have been
put to charitable uses? How unlikely was it, that they should be humble, who
were so curious and fantastical, as the things that were there bought, showed
them to be? They that wrought to that place, had need of as good a fantasy
for Metamorphosis in Habits, as Ovid had in other Things, that they might
please customers so insatiable after novelties.

So fell that noble structure, undermined by craft and covetousness, and
over-laden with pride and prodigality above, and great was the fall thereof.
Though there was in that place an Inssurance-Office, which undertook for those
Ships and Goods that were hazarded at Sea, either by boisterous winds or
dangerous enemies: yet could it not secure it self, when sin, like Sampson,
took hold of the pillars of it, and went about to pull it down. What quick work
can sin and fire make? How did that strong Building vanish of a sudden, as if
it had been but an Apparition? How quickly was it taken down, as if it had been
but a slight Tent, the Cords whereof are presently loosened, and the Stakes
soon removed? Oh that some Jonas might have been sent, to tell us, that within
so many days that Exchange should be burnt down, if we repented not. Oh that
howsoever, a timely repentance might have prevented those ruins; that we had
commuted for our Exchange, by parting with our sin^. But since it lies in
ashes, and there is no prevention of it, oh that we may not so much lament the
burning of our Exchange, as the sins that burnt it. May the minds of men, by
this sad Providence, be disposed to use another Exchange, for only honest
Merchandise; and the minds, both of men and women, to use the upper part of it
no more as a Nursery of pride, but, in order to putting them and theirs, into a
decent equipage, befitting their respective qualities; and then may they live
to see another Structure in the same place, not inferior to the first, and
that Royal Burse, or Purse (which is now a mere Vacuum) as well filled as ever
it was before; and after that, if the Will of God be so, may it never perish
(at least wise by fire) more, till the Conslagration of all things.

MEDITATION X. Upon the burning of Hospitals, and Rents thereunto belonging.
RIghteous art thou O Lord, yet let me plead with thee concerning thy
Judgments. Why had the fire a Commission to burn down Hospitals? Why did thou
dry up those pools of Bethesdah? Why did thou wither the Goards of those poor
Jonas's, who had nothing else to defend them from the scorching of extreme
poverty? Was ever money given to better uses, or with a better intent, than
what went to the maintaining those houses of Charity? Or was it ever entrusted
in better and safer hands, than that which had so many persons of worth and
integrity to take care of it, (and be, as it were, Overseers of, the poor)? Or
what charity was ever disposed of more according to the will of the Doners,
than that has always been, which few or none would accept, but those that had
need of it (and for them it was intended)? I should have thought, the Doors of
those houses, above all others, would have been sprinkled, that the destroying
Angel might have passed over them, and that Judgment should not have entered,
where only Mercy did seem to dwell. Did not Christ say, The poor we have
always with us, and shall we have no Receptacles for the poor? The poor
increase daily, but the places of their relief are diminished; and where those
places are yet standing, yet is not much of their Revenue impaired? Shall the
Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air nests, but the poor not have where
to lay their heads? Came this for their sakes, whose charity did maintain these
places, or for those that were maintained in them and by them, or for the sake
of others; or for all the three? Whilst some contributed to those places out
of pure ends and principles, might not others do it out of superstition and
conceit of merit, others out of Ostentation? (though we may not impute those
things to any in particular): And as for those who were relieved in those
places, were there not sins amongst them also? Some, it may be, were not more
poor than wicked; so, that though their poverty made them the Objects of Mercy
from men, yet their wickedness exposed them to the Justice of God.

Doubtless, men by sin, may forfeit, not only their superfluities and
conveniences, but also their very necessaries, or such things as they cannot
live without: and had not too many of these so done? Though some, whose
miseries have brought them to such places, are affected with the hand of God,
and fear to sin whilst his rod is upon them; yet, were there not others, who
no whit appalled by all their sufferings (were it the loss of limbs or
whatsoever else) would swear, and drink, and rant, at such a rate, as if they
had had all the world before them, or thought scorn, that as to these things,
even the greatest personages should go beyond them. Had all been such as some
were, possibly the Great God had not forborne to set fire upon those Houses long
ago. But in relation to others, might not this come, First, to try their
sincerity, whether their hearts would serve them to give to good uses, though
by this it appears, they can have no assurance of raising any lasting monument
to their names thereby. Or, Secondly, to try their Faith, whether they would
cast their bread, as upon the water, so upon the fire, as it were, (or that
which may easily be burnt) in hope to find it after many days. But the
probablest reason of all is, that it came to prove and exercise their Charity,
and to call upon them (so many as are able) to make to themselves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when they fail, they may be received into
everlasting habitations. Why should the poor be always maintained by an old
stock of Charity? Why should not this Age be as charitable as former Ages were?
Though many be poor at this time, yet all are not, yea, there are many rich,
though not comparative to the number of such as are poor, nor have rich men
ever more to do, than when there are most poor. Poor men think it a blessed
thing to receive; but Christ has told them, It is yet a more blessed thing to
give. The Italians when they beg, use to say to them of whom they beg, Pray
be good to your selves.

As much as iniquity does abound, I will not believe, unless I see it, that
Charity is grown so cold, that amongst all the rich men that are in England,
Nobles, Gentlemen, and others, there will not be found enough to repair that
breach which the fire has made upon the poor Hospitals, and the revenues,
formerly belonging to them. You know, (or, if I thought you did not, I can tell
you) where and whence you may defaulk enough to rear up those Structures again
as large and fair as before, (though one of them was sometimes the Palace of a
Prince, even Bridewell it is self) and to indow them as liberally as ever, and
not to miss what you have parted with, when you have done. Think how much
extraordinary it uses to cost you every year upon your lusts, one or more. One
man's Drunkenness costs him an hundred pounds in a year extraordinary, another
man's Uncleanness twice so much, a third man's Gameing no less, and so it is
like to do from year to year: Yea possibly some men have spent, as much of
their time upon one lust, as would have built an Hospital. Now as God says,
that he would famish all the gods of the Heathen; so do you famish those lusts
which you have idolized, cut off those right hands, that they may grasp no more
of your money, for time to come, and let the poor receive it in their stead. Is
it not better lending to the Lord, than giving to the Devil? Why will you buy
repentance so dear, when you might put your money to so much better uses? Some
that have fallen into very heinous sins, have built Hospitals, for the relief
of their own Consciences.

God may please to leave you to the same sins, and so extort that out of you,
by the same means, if it will not come freely. Some, though free from notorious
vices, yet do manifestly exceed in diet, and in apparel. What if you should
lessen your Table by one or two dishes every day? What if you should spare
something of that superfluous cost, which you use to give yourselves in every
garment; and resolving so to do, should contribute all that, to the rebuilding
and reindowing the consumed Hospitals, which, you reckon, that good husbandry
would save you every year: What if Gentlemen should keep fewer hounds and
hawks, or none at all, in order to so good a work? Yea, What if you should put
two horses less into your Coaches, which had wont to be drawn with four or
six? You may think yourselves at liberty in this case, but pardon me, if I
think you are bound. It is not matter of choice, but duty, to minister to the
necessities of others, out of our superfluities, and to their extremities, out
of our very conveniences. He, that is unmercifull or uncharitable, is also
unjust, because he does not use the talent, wherewith his Lord has entrusted
him, for those ends for which it was put into his hands: He does not fulfill
the just will of the Donor: Let it never be said, that God gave you Estates to
do good with, but you spent them upon your lusts, that you can find so many
pounds, or hundreds of pounds, to consume in Taverns and Tippling-houses, so
much treasure wherewith to keep Mistresses (otherwise called whores) so much
gold and silver, wherewith to treasure up to yourselves wrath against the day
of wrath, but nothing, wherewithal to rebuild, or help forward the rebuilding
of ruinated Hospitals.

Break off your sins, by repentance, and your iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor, as Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar. All the good you do sincerely will
be your own another day: Therefore said Paul, Phil. 4.17. I desire fruit that
may abound to your account. The same Apostle, speaking of the Churches of
Macedonia, says, That their deep poverty had abounded to the riches of their
liberality, 2 Cor. 8.2. and, Shall not your riches amount to as much as did
their poverty? Christ became poor to make u^rich: and, Shall we think much to
be somewhat less rich, that we may relieve those that are extremely poor? Look
not to receive, that joyful Sentence from Christ, Come ye blessed, etc.
unless he may say of you, For you saw me hungry and fed me; naked, and clothed
me, meaning his Members, which are himself, mystically; (so the Church is
called Christ.) Let not the ashes of, sometimes greatly useful, Hospitals cry
to Heaven, against your want of bowels, He that has this worlds goods, and
shuts up his bowels against those that are in want, How dwells the love of
God in him? The worse uses, that any have formerly put their money to, the
greater obligation lies upon them to put it to good uses (as they are called)
for time to come. Not only the ill getting of money calls for extraordinary
charity (which made Zacch^us say, The one half of my Estate I give to the poor)
but also, our having ill spent it, in times past; for it is with money as with
time, by how much the worse we spent it formerly, by so much the better, we
should spend it for the future. Princes have laid these foundations, and will
it not be an honor, for Subjects to build upon them? your work may possibly
stand hundreds of years (as some of those houses, yet in being, have done)
whereas theirs is fallen to the ground. In a word, next unto the honor of
building a Temple for Gods house (as Solomon did, and David was ambitious to
have done) is that of building a house for Gods Temples, and such are all true
believers, how poor and mean soever.

MEDITATION XI. Upon the Burning of Public Halls.
If any think those Halls were built merely for feasting and entertainment (or
at the most but for pomp) they are much deceived. Certainly, they were both
intended and improved to higher and better uses. All great Bodies and Societies
of men must needs, for order sake, be divided and subdivided. So Armies are
divided into several Regiments; Regiments, into several Troops or Companies:
so Navies divide themselves into several Squadrons. Upon the same account, the
Citizens of London, being a great Body of Traders, and those of several
Professions; it was but necessary, they should be parcelled into several
Companies, having each of them their peculiar Officers, which made them as it
were an entire body by themselves, fitted with head and members of all sorts,
the respective Masters being, as it were, the head, the subordinate Officers,
the Essential parts, and the ordinary members the integral. Both decency and
convenience required, there should be a handsome place, for each of those
Societies to meet in; which was, as it were, a little Parliament House
belonging to them, in which the Representatives of each Company (I mean their
Officers) did meet together to consult and Parley, what might be for the good
of the whole. Here the grievances of each Society (falling within their
cognizance) where complained of and redressed. Here they advised and agreed
together what to do, and what to petition their Superiors for, that might be
for the benefit of their respective trades and Professions, how they might
prevent encroachments and abuses, how they might maintain their privileges,
how they might take all advantages, for the best improvement of their
respective Trades. In all of these a common stock was kept on foot, and
carefully looked after, for diverse needful purposes; as namely, for the relief
of such of their own Society, as should fall to decay, for helping young
beginners, who had little to set up with, and might there borrow upon good
security, for improving the Estates of Widows (as in the Booksellers Company)
and for many other good purposes; one of which, Scholars ought never to
forget, and that is for encouraging young Students, by liberal exhibitions
wherewith to increase their maintenance at the University. There were in
several Halls, though not in each of them, Stocks going for all these purposes
(and it is like for many more) which may sufficiently evidence, that they were
places of great use; which, I mention to show, what cause we have to bewail the
loss of them. To say, they were most of them noble Structures, even those that
did belong to the meaner Trades (as, who should say, they assumed some grandeur
to themselves, as they were a Society, whatsoever their condition might be
^ngly and apart) Or, to say, that the meeting together, of the members of those
Companies, in their several Halls, upon many great solemnities, was a probable
means to increase love and friendship amongst them, were to defcend to lower
considerations about them, then I have yet taken notice of (and yet those
things are not altogether contemptible) and therefore I scarce care to mention
them. But put all I have said, together (though possibly I know not half the
uses they were put to) it will appear a doleful thing, that they were burnt,
and that, in their destruction, we lost, not only great Splendour, but great
conveniences, helps, and advantages, and that in several kinds. If men did
there decree righteous things amongst themselves (as I hope they did) I know no
Crime those places were chargeable with, unless it were too much Feasting:
which, the sadness of Times, for many years past, might put an aggravation
upon: And, if that were all their Crime, I see, how necessary it is, to shun,
not only greater, but also lesser sins, which may expose Places; and, if
Places, Why not Persons also to ruin and destruction.

One Hall there was of something a different use from the rest, and of greater
spendor, Guild Hall I mean; in which, one Author tells me, no less than nine
several Courts had wont to be kept; whereof, one was called, The Court of
Conscience: If any of the rest did not deserve the same name, (which I cannot
charge:) those, or that which did not, should be looked upon as the Acan's,
which troubled that place, and brought a curse upon it. One sinner destroys
much good, says Solomon, Eccles. 9.18. What then may not an unrighteous Court
do, which consists of many sinners? When I consider the Largeness, the
Strength, and yet the Antiquity, the Majesty, and the daily-Usefulness of that
same Guild Hall, methinks it is not enough to weep over the Ruins of it: As
firm as it stood, it was founded no less than upward of 360 years ago; and, to
see it confounded, (as I may call it) in one day, Whose heart would it not
cause to bleed? Other Halls were like Parliament-Houses, to particular
Companies; but this, to the whole City: where the Assembling together of the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councill, had some resemblance of a King,
Lords, and Commons. There seemed to be an awfulness in the very place; methinks
it had a Majestic look with it; and such, as made the Magistrates there
convened (though very venerable in themselves) yet something more considerable
than they would have appeared elsewhere. It was surely that place, which did
more contribute to make London look like it self (that is, like the Head-City
of these three Kingdoms) than any one Structure thereunto belonging. London
had not been its self, if it had lost nothing but that one Hall: I wonder, That
all the Wise Heads, that were concerned in it, could not save that stately
Hall, (our English Capitol, as I may call it) from burning: Methinks it speaks
our Provocations-high, that we have sinned away so great an Ornament, so vast
an Accommodation as that Hall was; and, to think, that almost all the rest are
gone with it, might make our joints tremble, and our knees smite together, as
Belshazzar's did, when he saw the handwriting upon the wall. I see there is no
building certainly durable, but that, which Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 5.1. and,
Lord, let that be mine (as well as his,) That building of God, that house not
m^de with hands, eternal in the heavens.

MEDITATION XII. Of the Burning of Public Schools, as Paul's School, and others.
IS Learning taking it is leave of England? Is that Sun about to set in our
Horizon? that Scholars have received two such terrible blows? Young ones have
lost their Schools; and, both young and old have lost their Books:
Nevertheless, for ever Renowned be Reverend Doctor Colet, and the rest of the
Founders and Benefactors of all those noble Free-Schools that now lie in the
dust: I say, Let their Memory be ever precious, though their Gift has not
continued so long, as they and we did hope it might. Yet, the youngest of the
three Public Schools, that are now demolished ( viz. that which was founded by
the Merchant-Taylers) had lasted above a hundred years; and the eldest of the
three. ( viz. Paul's) half as long again, and many Centuries more they might
have stood, had not this fire brought them to an untimely end. I cannot but
muse to what a plunge Parents are now put, to get good Schools for their
Children, (especially those, who cannot endure their Children should live at a
distance from them) considering, that honest and able Schoolmasters are but
here and there to be found. A good Schoolmaster must, in the first place, be a
good man: It is to a wonder what notice Children will take of their Master's
Religion, and what a lasting impression that will make upon them; and how apt
they are to take after them, because of the veneration they have for them. If
their Masters be profane, they think they have leave to be so, and should not
take upon them to be more religious than they. A Master must consider, that his
Scholars have souls to save, as well as minds to inform; and he is not to be
trusted with Youth that will not consider it. Nextly, A good Master must be a
good Scholar, (at least wise for some kind of Learning) a good Grammarian, a
good Linguist; and one, that is not only so himself, but also able to make
others such, that is, one that knows how, in an easy and familiar way, to
communicate Knowledge to Children, to make hard things plain, etc. He must be
(...) (as the Apostle says, a Minister should be) that is, Apt to teach.

Again, A good Master must be a wise man, no antic, no mimmick (as too many
are, which has made the word Pedant and Pedantical to sound very ridiculously,
though the work of a good Schoolmaster be very honorable). Wise he ought to
be, that he may set his Scholars the Example of a wise behavior, and teach
Children to carry themselves like Men; whereas, some seem to learn of their
Scholars to carry themselves like Children, that is, Conceiptedly, Humorsomely,
Phantastically. It requires no small Wisdom, to judge of the different parts
and tempers of Children, where their excellency lies, whether in Memory, or
Invention, or otherwise, that they may put them upon those pieces of Learning,
in which they are like most of all to excel: and whilst they find them to
have an excellency in one kind, work upon that, and bear with their defects in
another kind. He may have a great Memory, that has but mean Fancy; he may be
long in retaining, who is slow in getting things into his memory; one can make
his exercise of a sudden, as well as if he had more time; another can do
nothing of a sudden, but, give him time enough, and he will perform it
excellently, and better than he that was quick at it.

How many Masters commit great errors, for want of being able to judge of these
things, like unskilful Riders, that either think a horse good for nothing
because he cannot amble well, though he have an excellent and an easy tro^; or
keep him wholly to his pace, though he do but shussle at it, and can never be
made to do otherwise: whereas he would trot as fast as could be desired, and as
well as any horse can do, if they would but give him leave. The Scholar's
Scholar-craft, (as I may call it) in humoring his humorsome Master: the
Parent's great bounty to the Master, and his great affection to such his
Scholars, upon those two accounts, makes too many partial and injudicious
Masters, Cry up the pregnancy of those Scholars that little deserve it, and so
vice vers^. And ought not Masters to be wise therefore also, that they may be
able to judge of the disposition of their Scholars, whether fair means or fowl
is like to do most good upon them, whether fear or shame will most prevail with
them, whether emulation or correction will most spur them on. A word or two
will do more with some Children, than many blows with others; where Balsomes
will serve the turn, it is folly to apply Causticks and Corrosives, which, it
is to be feared, some Masters do for want of judgment. Moreover, wise and sage
Admonitions are of great use to Children; and therefore, it is needful, their
Master should be a wise man, that he may be able to dispense them Let me add, A
Master had need be furnished with Wisdom, to govern and conceal his own weak
humors and passions (as there are many that abound with such) for that the
discovery thereof, is like Noah's uncovering his nakedness, in the sight of his
Children, which exposed him to their contempt, and made some of them to sin:
And Masters that give way to such humors, are like unsound Nurses that give
suck, who make the Children that draw their Breasts as unwholesome as
themselves; and fill them, as they say, with evil humors. I might add, That a
Master should be no conceited man, not one that thinks himself a good
Philosopher, because he is a good Philologer; or the wisest man in the Nation,
because he is the wisest person in the School: He that is a Man amongst
Children, may be but a Child amongst Men. I had not mentioned this, but that I
have observed some Schoolmasters, to have brought an ill report, both upon
themselves and their Profession, by seeming as wise in their own eyes, as they
could be in the eyes of their boys, who oftimes think, that no man knows so
much as does their Master, as if they were proud of that high opinion, which
their Scholars have of them, and did rest in the judgment of Children (who
scarce know the right hand from the left,) as if it were infallible.

Lastly, To say nothing of that diligence and laboriousness that ought to be in
Schoolmasters, I shall only add, that they ought not to be either too mild or
severe, neither like that Beam, which Jupiter (as it is in the Fable) gave to
the Frogs for their King: Which always lying still, when they were used to it
a while, they leapt and played upon it: Nor yet like that Stork, which was
afterward sent amongst them, when they desired a more active Prince, whose
cruelty made them wish for their Beam again. He, that is over-mild, is like to
do little good upon some children; but, he that is over-harsh, may do a great
deal of hurt. I read, Acts 19.9. of the School of one Tyrannus: I wish there
were no more Schools that did deserve the same name. We hear but of one
Tyrannical Emperor that became a Schoolmaster before he died; but, Are there
not many Schoolmasters that domineer, and exercise severity like Tyrannical
Emperors, or Imperial Tyrants? Now, if the character I have given of a good
Schoolmaster be a Digression; yet, it may prove a useful one, if Parents will
thereby be directed in the choice of Masters for their Children, or Masters
that are guilty of any of the forementioned faults, would thereby be prevailed
with to amend.

But possibly, what I have said about Schoolmasters, is no Digression,
considering, that if those Masters that were fired out of London, were men of
such a good Character, as I have given of a good Schoolmaster, it informs us
what cause we have to bewail the loss of them, and of those Schools which
might have invited and encouraged a succession of such worthy Masters as
themselves. This poor Lads little lay to heart (as being ignorant of what is
for their good); yea possibly, what through dread of their Masters,
disaffection to their Books, and love of their Play, they are even glad their
Schools are burnt; so incident it is to humane nature, to rejoice in any little
good to it is self: yea, to wish for it, though it be brought to pass by
unspeakably more hurt and prejudice to others; being glad, when their own eggs
are roasted, though it be by that fire, that consumes the houses of other men.
Yet I wonder not, at the evil that proceeds from degenerate men, much less
from Children: but, O Lord, I rather wonder at Thy self, Why thou did suffer
the Foxes to spoil those Vines (the Fire, I mean, which came like Sampson's
Foxes, with firebrarnds in their Tails, consuming those Noble Schools, as they
did the Philistim's Corn,) considering, that those Vines had tender Grapes,
Cant. 2.15. But I would answer my self with this: Schools had their sins as
well as other places, which were more and greater than a Master's rod could
punish. Yea, Masters themselves had deserved Correction, and who but Th^^ self
should give it them? But oh that these useful Structures might not always lie
in the dust, but that Piety and Charity might rebuild what Sin has pulled
down. Doubtless, this Age has many men in it, as able to build Free-Schools,
as Reverend Colet, and some other Founders were; and why should they not be as
willing. If Parents want good Schools for their Children, they will hardly come
to any thing whilst they live: (For, the errors of the first Concoction, as
Physicians observe, cannot be corrected by the second or third). Schools, like
Stomachs, make the first Digestion, which if naught, will spoil all the rest.
Let me conjure men of Estates, especially those that have no Children, or if
Children such as are unworthy, I say, let me conjure you, by the regard you
have to the honor of God, to the renown of the English Nation, to the increase
of Knowledge, to the happiness of Church and State, (the chief Officers and
Ministers whereof, use to receive their first rudiments and seasoning in
public Schools) liberally to contribute to the re-building of those noble
Schools, which the late sire has deprived us of; yea, do it yourselves, as
some have done before you, if you have wherewithal: And when that is done, set
up your Statues by those of the ancient Founders, and appear together like
Castor and Pollux at Sea, which is accounted an Omen of good. Take your choice
of four sorts of good works, which may best suit with your tempers. If you are
severe Cato's, help to re-build Pridewell, where naughty Persons may receive
Correction, and be made to work: If you are devoted to the Service of God, help
to re-edifie Churches: If to works of Mercy, contribute toward the raising up
of demolished Hospitals: But, if you are friends to Learning, and to all the
other three, do what in you lies, to restore Publick-schools to their former
glory; in which, Vice may be corrected, Mercy showed to poor men's Children, and
Religion promoted, by preparing Youth, to be, in time, serviceable to the
Church.

MEDITATION XIII. Upon the Burning of Tombs, and Graves, and dead Bodies that
were buried therein.
Where is rest to be had, either for the quick or dead, in this World? where
may men be quiet and secure, if they cannot be so in their very Graves? One
would have thought, nothing would have plucked them from the horns of that
Altar; But, the fire has done it: That fire, which robbed the Spittles, Has
it not also robbed the Worms, and taken the meat out of their mouths? We
expected, those Bodies would have turned Worms-meat and dust; but, in stead
thereof, they are burnt to ashes. So Job, speaking of the grave, Job. 3.17.
There the weary are at rest: So they are in one sense, but not always so in
another. The righteous man's grave is called his bed, Isa. 57.2. They shall roast
in their beds. How many dead bodies then were burnt in their beds? and, so
might many living ones have been, if God had not been more merciful. Now, the
fire has turned many dead bodies to ashes: could those ashes (as some others)
be made into glass, which, they say, is the last resolution that bodies can
undergo (Vitrificatio est ultima resolutio;) yet would the Resurrection find
them out, and not lose one grain belonging to them. We read, that Absalom had
reared up a Pillar, or stately Sepulcher for himself, to preserve his name,
because he had no children; but, it went by the name of A^salom's Place, or
empty-Monument ((...)) as Tremellius renders it in the Margint; because he
never (for ought we read) came to lie in it, but was buried in a pit in a wood,
with a heap of stones ^^st upon him, 2 Samuel 18.18. So, in that great City,
there were many that had provided noble burying-places for themselves, against
the time they should be gathered to their fathers; yea, and they were possessed
of them, (which A^salom never was of his:) but, How short a time had some of
their bodies lain in those costly Sepulchers, before the sire came and turned
them out of possession; or rather destroyed both their Carcasses and their
stately Monuments!

I see, how vain a thing it is, for men to have their Names, and Titles, and
Encomiums, graven upon Marble-Stones in Golden Letters, and set up in Churches:
How easily they may be deceived, that think, with Absalom, out of those stones,
to raise up to themselves (I cannot say children) but a Memorial in lien of
Children. Every body will not believe all the Epitaphs they find inscribed upon
those Monuments-Stones can lie and not blush: But, besides that, if men were
prone to believe all they read upon Tombs and Monuments, How soon may those
Characters be so defaced and obliterated, as that they cannot be read? And,
look how Absalom was buried under a heap of stones, in stead of being laid in
that stately Pillar, or Pyramid, which he had built for that purpose: So, are
not many at this day covered, but as it were with a heap of stones, who had
provided themselves of stately Sepulchers; those Sepulchers of theirs being by
the fire converted, but into a rude and formless heaps of stones: She erected a
more durable Monument for her self, who did but pour out a box of precious
^i^tment upon the head of Christ, Matt. 26.17. for, Christ has said,
Wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall this
be told for a memorial of her. How little does it signify, that our Names be
written upon the Earth, or upon any part of it? Is it not all in all, that our
Names are written in the Book of Life? I see, there is no reckoning upon those
things which men leave behind them when they die; therefore hear, and receive
it as a voice from heaven, that which the Spirit says, Rev. 14.1^. Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, and their works do follow them.

MEDITATION XIV. Upon the Burning of Writings; as Fills, Bonds, Evidences, etc.
HOw many had nothing to show for all the Money they had lent out; for all the
Debts that were owing them; upon any account: yea, for all their Interest in
Lands and Honses, to a great value; but only certain Papers, or Parchments,
called Bonds, Shop-Books, Deeds, Conveiances, Leases, etc. Writings are the
most compendious Treasure in, and of the whole World: Of so many single Sheets
of Parchment, may it not be said by some, This is my Money, (all I have in the
World;) that is my House; that is my Land; this is my Inheritance; that is my
Jointer; this is my Patent for such an Office, or for such a Dignity; this is
my D^scharge, for so much Money that I have disbursed for such and such; this
is my. Account, for so many thousands tha^ I have been entrusted with: Oh the
vast concernment of such Papers and Parchments as these! What had not many
rather have lost than these? How many were honest and just in all their
Accounts, who now want an opportunity to make it appear they were so? (and,
Does not that wound them sorely?) How many dealt falsely and fraudulently in
the trust that was committed to them, and that cannot be proved neither?
Doleful fire! that has made honest men mourn, and knaves rejoice. With what
cost and care were many of those Writings drawn up at first? How often were the
owners at Counsel about them? and, With how much circumspectness was every
Clause put in? but, Did the sire make any more of them then if they had been so
much waste paper? Deeds and Conveiances were no more to those flames than
chips, and straw, and stubble: How slight is that Tenure, by which men do hold
and enjoy all their Earthly Possessions? How soon may that, which should defend
their title, be stolen, or burnt, or otherwise lost? and then, How liable are
they to be claimed by those that have no right? Was there ever such a plucking
up of Inclosines as this, whereby the Estates of many are, as it were, laid
common, that is, obnoxious unto being invaded, and overrun by them that will.

It is well, a Christians evidences for heaven are not so uncertain: It is
true, that copy of them which is within his own breast, may be lost, or
missing, at leastwise for a time; but then there is a counter-part of them kept
in heaven, which can never be lost: for, The foundation of God stands sure, and
he knows who are his. It is happy for us that uncertain things are those of
less value; but, that those things which are most valuable, (though indeed only
they) may be ascertained and insured in heavenly things. Sad was the loss of
Writings, as they were Evidences of men's Estates; but, methinks more sad, as
they were the Vouchers of men's honesty: or, if by this means, either honest
men become suspected, or, those that have been otherwise cannot be detected and
discovered: But, methinks, where always heretofore found faithful, it is but
equal to admit no jealousy of them upon this occasion. No doubt, but he, that
was faithful till the fire, will be faithful after it, and not be worse for
that Purgatory (if I may so call it.) O Lord, Art not thou he that did find
out a way to acquit those chaste Women that were suspected of Adultery, Numb.
5.28? Art not thou he who did furnish Solomon with wisdom, to know which was
the true Mother of the living child, to which two Women laid an equal claim, 1
Kings 3? Art not thou he that did direct Queen Emma and others to pass the
hot plowshares barefoot and blindfold, without hurting her self; when, by
that ardent fire, proof was to be made of her unspotted chastity? Clear up. I
beseech thee, the integrity of thy innocent servants, whose Accounts and
Acquittances this fire has destroyed: but, as for others, search out their
wickedness till thou find none; or, as thou said, thou would search
Jerusalem with candles, Zeph. 1.12. What work has this burning of Writings
made for greedy Lawyers? What a barvest are they like to have by that means?
One sire, I doubt, will beget another, viz. that of endless contention, and
Lawsuits: Now the sire has gotten men's Vintage; I wish, unjust Claimers on
one hand, and Lawyers on the other, do not sweep awar their Gleanings: They are
newly leapt out of the fire, and, Most they presently come into the drying pan?
Can the wisdom of our Governors find out no way whereby to prevent vexations
Suits, that will otherwise arise upon this occasion, to preserve the rights of
honest men, now their Writings are gone; and, to prevent the unjust claims of
those that are dishonest? If ever Magistrates needed a Priest (one, or more) to
ask Counsel for them, after the Judgment of Urim, before the Lord, Num^. ^7.20.
(as Eleazar did for Joshu^,) now is the time. Howsoever, thou, O Lord, who
girdest up the wrath of men (or so much of it as will not turn to thy praise)
vouchsafe to put such a restraint upon the spirits of men, that those, who were
half-undone by the fire, may not be utterly so, either by merciless Lawyers, or
by unrighteous Adversaries, and unjust Claimers.

MEDITATION XV. Upon the Burning of Saint Paul's Church: the unconsumed Body of
Bishop Brabrook.
HOw long was this goodly Cathedral in building? How leasurely did it proceed?
Insomuch that it became a Proverb, when men did any thing slowly, That they
made Pauls-work of it: But so did not the fire, when it came to destroy it, but
consumed it presently, as if it had been but Jonas his gourd, which sprang up
in a night. Dying Persons are oft-times very restless, they shift from one side
of their beds to the other, and talk much of removing to other places. So, have
I observed, this noble Structure, not long before its fatal period, to have
shifted often. First it was a Church, then a Stable (as some were pleased to
make it) within these few years (but the argument was far fetched, if, they
think, that because Christ himself did sometimes lie in a Stable and in a
Manger, that therefore, one and the same place might well serve, both for
brutish and for sacred uses) Otherwhile (if not at the very same time) it was
made a Court of Guard (without any intention, as I believe, to make it an
Emblem of the Church Militant, or to exhibit any other religious mystery.) And
then of late, it wheeled about again to its Primitive use, to be a place
appropriated to Divine Worship. Few expected it would continue long a Stable,
or a Court of Guard (for great alienations, like strong sticks that are much
bent, do quickly start back again) but, when it became once more a Church, they
that considered it had stood above five hundred years, from its first Erection
(yea, and Conflagration) which latter was in 1087. after which it was soon
built again, and did observe it to bear its years well, (as if it were at most
but of a middle age) saw no cause to doubt, but it might last as much longer.
But alas! How were they deceived? and How was its destruction at the very door!
Surely Papists are deceived, in thinking Crucifixes to carry a safeguard and
protection with them, considering, that this Cathedral was built in the figure
of a Cross, and yet, when Fire did appreach, had no relief by it. It had been a
comfortable sight, to have beheld the first erection of that stately Church,
considering the Situation and Dedication of it, that whereas before, in the
same place, stood a Temple Dedicated to Diama (and as is supposed, a Wood and
Grove about it, devoted to her use) there was then another in the room of it;
the name whereof might speak the place alienated from heathenism to
Christianity, from the service of a false goddess, to the service of the true
God, and of his Son Jesus Christ. Twice has that famous Structure been fired
before (at leastwise part of it) both times by lightning, and thereunto exposed
by the transcendent height of its Steeple. One of those times it burnt a great
part of the City of London (if I mistake not;) and now, the City, by a kind of
unintended retaliation has helped to burn it. Great pity it is to see so noble
a building in the dust, and yet it is likely some will but little pity it, if
not rejoice in the ruins of it (especially its disaffected neighbors, whose
houses that had wont to lean to the sides of it (like Vines climbing upon a
wall) had at leastwise received sentence to be pulled down.) But should not men
regard the honor of their Nation, whatsoever became of private interests?

One strange and remarkable passage that did relate to this Cathedral, I cannot
but reflect upon, viz. The unheard of continuance of a certain dead Body, viz.
the Body of one Dr. B^aybro^k, sometimes Bishop of London, and Lord Chancellor
of England, which was there interred above two hundred years ago, and, as
several that have seen it do inform, was taken up since this fire, and found to
retain much of it is manly shape, and most of it is external parts, to the
amazement of such as beheld it, and did withal believe it to be indeed the
Body of the said Bishop. I shall not dispute, whether the dignity of his
Person, as he was sometimes a Bishop, or as he was sometimes Lord Chancellor,
or as he was both at once, were that which did consign over his Body to so long
an incorruption, (as if Corruption and Worms had been afraid to claim kindred
of him, as of others): but, I think, rather than either, that this came to
pass to show the power of God, as to preserving Bodies from Corruption in the
Grave, as well as those of the three Children, from being consumed in the fiery
Furnace; and that of Daniel, from being devoured by the Lions, when he was in
their Den.

But whilst this passage ministers great wonder to all that see and hear of
it, What is himself the better for it? For, had his Body been eaten by
Cannibals, those Cannibals by Fishes, those Fishes afterward by Men, those Men
by Worms, yet, should it have been brought forth as perfect, at the
Resurrection of the Dead, as now it is; yea, as it was then, when it was first
committed to the Grave.

Now, as for re-building of that Cathedral, when I consider, how many Sons that
Mother has had, who in all Ages have been as kind and bountiful to her, as
could be desired; I doubt not, but the same principles and affections which led
them to it in her prosperity, will prevail with them to be the same, now she
lies in the dust; commiseration toward her, and consideration of the honor
of England, stepping in as further incentives thereunto. May England (if the
will of God be so) enjoy so much peace and plenty, and all the living Temples
of God be so well provided for, that none may grudge that cost and charge,
which is necessary to re-building Churches; not only such, and so many, as may
serve for indispensable use, but neither that also, which may rear up others,
not only for use, but such as may be also, an outward honor and ornament both
to the Church and Nation.

MEDITATION XVI. Upon the Visiblewsse of Gods Hand in the Destruction of London.
IT is a great dispute, amongst many people, whether men (one or more) had any
hand, from first to last, in the burning of London. They that are for the
affirmative, think they have much reason on their side, because one was, by
Order of Law, executed upon that account; and the proof against him, no less
than his own Confession (both in public and private) in which he long
persisted, though he knew full well the danger of it. Now, who but a mad man,
would confess himself guilty, of so heinous and odious a crime which he had
never committed? And on the other hand, had he been mad, his Judge and Jury
wanted not wisdom and diligence sufficient, by one means or other, to discover
it: neither had they so little Justice and Conscience, as to have convicted and
condemned him, for ought he had said against himself, if it had been evident to
them, he had not been himself, or, as they call it, Mentis Compos. Moreover,
say they, This must needs have been done, either by Oversight, or by
Treachery, or by Miracle. We hear not of the least umbrage of any oversight,
or carelessnesse in any of the Family where the fire began, (which doubtless
has been narrowly looked into): so that if we reject the second, we must rest
in the third, viz. That it was done by a miraculous, that is, by an immediate
Hand of Heaven, which, since the time that miracles have generally ceased,
seems far less probable, than it is, that that should be true, which a man,
that, for ought could be made appear, was in his right wits, did confess
against his own life.

But grant it were so, that the first fireing of any part of London, were
wilfully done, by that miserable Wretch, who took it upon himself and was
executed for it, Will it follow from thence, that the Hand of God was not
visible upon it? Yea, all things considered, if Pharaoh's Magicians had been
then alive and present, they would have said, This was the Finger of God, as
they said in another case, when it was undeniable. For, first of all, Who but
the great God, withheld Rain for so many weeks before, and sent so great a
Drought, as did make the houses ready to take fire, like so much Tinder? Who
brought the wind out of his Treasures, and made it blow so fiercely for several
days together, as if it had been on purpose to augment and spread those flames
like mighty bellows? Who that had begun that sire, could foresee the wind would
continue so long to carry on his work, and not suffer those flames to be
extinguished as other fires have been? Who dried up the Springs, that when men
came to dig for water in several Streets, little could be had, where used to
be plenty at other times? By whose Providence came it to pass, that the
Engines, which used to be serviceable in such cases, were at that time, most of
them out of kelter, and unfit for use? Who took away spirit and courage from
men, that they were at that time (above all the rest) like silly Doves without
heart, and, contrary to their usual manner, did generally apply themselves,
not to extinguishing the fire, but unto removing their goods, (even such as
were competently remote) as if they had given all for lost at the first dash.
Who hid counsel from men's eyes, that so obvious and effectual a way, as that
of Blowing up of houses to stop the increase of fire, was not sooner thought
of? Or, if it were, that it was no sooner put in Execution? I say, Who but the
great God did all these things? Who caused the fire to burn fiercely, as well
against the wind as with it? Disown Providence in this, and you will disown it
every where. If there were something of the hand of man in it, doubtless,
there was more of the hand of God.

But yet, more do they entitle the Providence of God to this sire, who seem
consident, there was nothing of Treachery or Design in it. For, if they think
it came in an ordinary way (but unintendedly); things that so happen, are in
Scripture more especially put upon God's account. It is said of him that killed
a man accidentally, and without any purpose so to do, that God had delivered
him into his hands, Exodus 21.13. Moreover, when things that come by accident,
or, without humane contrivance, so fall out, as if all things had been laid and
prepared for such a purpose, in such cases the Divine Providence is most
visible and conspicuous. Now manifest it is, that if a Council of Jesuits had
laid their heads together, how they might burn London to the ground, they could
not have chosen, either a fitter time, or place. Not a fitter time, in respect
of the great Drought that had been, and wind that then was; nor yet a fitter
place, considering the vicinity of it, to the great magazine of Combustible
Materials, to wit, Pitch, Tar, Oils, Hemp, and Powder it is self: (viz.
Thames Street). Moreover, how near was it to the Water-houses, the burning down
of which places, was just like a subtle Enemy his seizing upon some
considerable Forts, which might otherwise stand in his way, and obstruct his
design. It makes me think of what is spoken, Psalm. 78.50. how that God did make
a way to his anger, as if he would have nothing to hinder the passage of it:
And, upon the whole, I cannot but recount those words of God, by his Prophet,
to the Jews, Jer. 18.11. Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device
against you: for methinks it appears like a Destruction wisely framed and
devised.

But, as for such, as think it came neither by Treachery, nor by Casualty, they
must needs ascribe it to mere Providence, and to nothing else; not only to
God, but to God alone, like the burning of Nadab and Abihu, or, of Sodom and
Gomorrah. So that, let men derive the pedigree of this fire whence they will
(as there are three conjectures about it) they cannot exclude the Providence of
God from having signally appeared in it. It is a sign the great God is not
ashamed of what he has done, and that he cares not who knows it: For, how
easy had it been for him, to have contrived the burning of London in such a
way, as that himself might scarce have been seen in it, that men would
generally have thought, it had been the hand of Man, and not of God, any more
than every thing else is: But now, methinks it is, as if the great God had
said, If any man ask, Who set London on fire? let the Circumstances tell them,
it was I, that did it.

Surely, something is the matter, that God should, as it were, glory, in making
known, that he it was that set London on fire: Was it not to show, that he had
a Controversy with us? Might it not be also, lest his governing of the World
should be called in question, if so great a thing should have happened, to all
appearance, by mere chance and fortune? Was it not also to make us stoop, and
submit to so great a loss, upon such an account, as David did, when he said, I
held my peace, because thou Lord did it: Or, Might it not be also, to tell
us, That he challenges to himself just Power and Authority, to burn up great
Cities at his pleasure; and, Who shall say unto him, what do thou? As
Lebanon is said, not to be sufficient for him to burn; so neither was London
more than sufficient: O London, Disdain not to fall by that hand by which thou
art fallen: It was not that poor Miscreant, that ended his days at Tyburn,
that did, or could, by his own power destroy thee (though possibly he may be
somewhere Canonized for the Saint that did it.) If God had not first dried
thee, he, and a hundred more, could never have burnt thee: If he kindled the
fire, it would have gone out again, if God had not blowed the coal: It was he
that says, Behold, I shake heaven and earth: It is he that can take hold of
the Pillars of the Universe, and tumble it down when he pleases: It is he,
that in process of time, will serve the whole World as he served thee: It was
he, I say, that bid thee come down and lie in the dust. Humble thy self under
his mighty hand; He can raise thee up again, and make thee a Princess among
the Nations, when Paris and Rome may chance to lie in Ashes.

MEDITATION XVII. Upon the burning of the Sessions House in the Old Bailey.
What a rebuke is it to the Censoriousnesse of men, who are ready to charge
London with greater sins than other places are guilty of, because this great
Judgment fell upon it. I say, what a rebuke is it to them, to behold the most
eminent seat of Justice in all those parts, consumed by the same fire? Who
dare, or who truly can, in this case, apply those words of Solemon, Eccles.
3.16. I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment that Wickedness was there, and
the place of Righteousness that Iniquity was there? For amidst all the
complaints of men about other matters, and particular distastes they have taken
at particular persons or passages, I do not know that man, that will deny, that
there is as much of Law and Conscience to be found amongst the Reverend Judges,
which are at this day, as amongst the Judges of any Time and Age whatsoever:
The consideration whereof, may be no small comfort to the poor Citizens, whose
difficult Cases, relating to the fire are like to lie in their breasts, and be
subjected to their wise determination (which, I hope, will be such, as may
abundantly confirm that honorable Character, which I think, but justice to
give concerning them).

Yet was that honorable and most eminent place of their Sessions, within the
City burnt amongst the rest. How commodious was that place for their work; for
that it was scituare near to the great Den of Thieves, and Receptacle of
Felons: ( Newgate I mean) it being requisite, that Justice and Sin should not
dwell far asunder, but, that the former should, as it were, tread upon the
heels of the latter. From thence had many Malefactors received sentence to be
deservedly executed, but now the place itself, which (for what cause we know
not) had received an unexpected sentence in heaven, had it executed
accordingly, and came to an untimely end, yet had it stood so long, as to
acquire the name of Old, being called the Old Bailey, and, as one Author thinks,
was a Court of Justice, for some purposes above three hundred years since, viz.
in the year 1356. And what more than Old or very Old can be attributed to any
Creature upon earth, in point of duration, none of which, in this world, shall
be perpetual (for that is more than the world it self shall be.) The Apostle
telling us, that all these things shall be dissolved. When places of Justice
are destroyed, perhaps Malefactors will rejoice, (though they have little
cause; for change of place will no whit mitigate their punishment) but all true
and honest men will be sorry. May there nere want a place, in which to try and
arraign Malefactors (in case there be any such) but much rather do I wish,
there might no more be any Malefactors deserving to be tried.

MEDITATION. XVIII. Upon the Gates and Prisons of London, that were burnt.
COncerning those, that use an after care, and provide too late, our Proverb
is, That when the Steed is stolen, they shut the Stable door: but the fire,
when it had stolen the Steed, I mean destroyed the City, slung open the Gates,
or rather demolished and ruinated several of them. (Gates without a City being
as insignificant, and to as little purpose, as a City without Gates is unsafe.)
Yet had those Gates been standing, which are not (I mean in strength and
perfection) it might have carried a good Omen and Presage with it, as if they
had been left to enclose and secure a City, which should afterward be built
(though there were scarcely any for them to secure at present;) but we trust
through divine goodness, the same thing will be done (but with more charge)
without that Omen. No man can tell where destruction will begin or where it
will make an end, for that sometimes it makes an end, where usually it begins.
Destruction usually assaults the Gates of a City first, and then the City it
self; the loss of the Gates does generally prove the losing of the City: but,
in this case, the losing of the City first, proved the loss of the Gates at
last: The fire went out of the City by the Gates, but it came not in that way.
There are famous Gates for Death and Misery to enter in by, which are all we
look at, generally; and, if they be but shut, we think our selves secure;
(alas! but too secure are we in one sense, for thinking so,) since Death and
Misery have so many secret in-lets which we know not of; and can make a way,
where they scarce find any. We thought, if London had been destroyed, (as now
it is,) it must have been by some powerful enemy, visibly entering in at its
Gates; but, little did we think of what one spoke in another case; That, there
was (...), some such invisible evils, or enemies within us, as were sufficient
to destroy it in this fashien: Alas! When can we conclude our selves safe in
this World?

Besides that great Ornament which those stately Gates, that were burnt, added
to the City, and the great Defense which they afforded thereunto, (as to
enemies from without,) Were they not also very serviceable, as they were the
fittest places, in reference to their impregnable strength, whereof to make
Goales and Prisons; (neither are there any Houses more necessary than they,) so
long as there are many lewd People, whom no other places but such can keep
within compass; for whom Prisons are as needful, as Chimneys are for fire:
which, set at liberty, would put all into a slame: But now came an unexpected
Jail-delivery, better to many poor Prisoners, than they looked for: but, to
Capital-Offenders not so good, as it is like, they did hope it would have
proved. When notorious Felons heard of this, probably they did hope, it would
break open the doors of their several Prisons, and set them free: but, all they
got by it, was, only a Newer Newgate, or to be removed from one Goal to
another: But, poor Men, that were in for Debt only, as in Lud-gate, etc.
possibly they were in a pannick-fear they should have been burnt in the Prisons
where they were, not knowing how to make an escape: But, if I mistake not, they
were released in the time of the fire, which had left but room enough for
Offenders of a higher nature: So was the Proverb verified, that, It is an
ill-Wind that blows no body any good: So was the Fire more merciful to them
than their Creditors: so were their fears converted into joy. Is it not worth
mentioning, How that Cannibal-fire did first roast, and then devour those
Quarters of human flesh, which upon those Gates were exposed to the Fowls of
the Air; robbing them of their prey, and burying them in the dust much sooner
than was expected: Now may it be said, That the Gates of London, as of old,
That the Gates of Sion did mourn. We little thought the time had been so near,
when the Security of London should not consist so much in its Gates and VValls,
(I say, its Security, as from a foreign Enemy: for, Nullus ad amissas ibit
opes,) as in its un-enviable Ruins and Pove^ty.

MEDITATION XIX. Upon the Constagration of the Universe.
IT is evident by Scripture, that the Heavens and the earth (which are now) are
reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 3.7. And, That in the
day of God (as it is called,) the heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved;
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, Verse. 12. Yea, the heavens shall
pass away with a great noise; the earth also, and the works that are thereof
shall be burnt up, Verse. 10. Some think, that fire shall only refine, and
purify, not consume and destroy: But, besides that the expressions of the
heavens their being dissolved, and passing away; and that of the earth, its
being burnt up, seem to import more, than a bare purifying of both, or either
of them: Why should we think the World it self should last, when all the
Inhabitants of it shall be removed into another World? Surely, the World will
be of no further use, when there shall be no one Man or Woman to Inhabit it,
and to adore God in, and for it: God made the World for Man's use, and therefore
will unmake it again, when Man has no further use for it; (as Men use to pull
down Tents, when they have no further occasion for them.) The World is but Gods
Nursery, (such a thing I mean as Gardiners use to call by that name,) from
whence he means to transplant all he there sets; and, when that is done, he
will pull down his senses, and let it run to ruin: Yea, he will lett-in fire as
a wild Bore, that shall destroy it. Whosoever believes that God made the World,
cannot but think he is able to destroy it; for that it seems much easier of the
two, to bring something to nothing, than to bring something out of nothing.
What a solemn time will that be, when the whole world shall be in flames? What
a petty, puny fire was that which burnt up London, to that which shall consume
the whole world? For what was London to England? What is England, in comparison
of all the Earth? Or what is the whole Earth, in comparison of the Globe of
Heaven, which consists of innumerable Stars, some one of which, is far bigger
than the surface of the whole Earth? Surely, the fiering of one City, was but a
blaze, to what the burning of the whole Fabric of Heaven and Earth will be. We
have seen great things, in reference to this Fire, such as our Fathers never
saw; but these are nothing, to what, both we, and they shall see at the Great
Day. Though I cannot conceive, what kind of fire it should be; that might be
able to dissolve the Heavens and melt the Elements; yet will I believe the
matter of things contained in Scripture, though I cannot reach the manner, how
such things should be. He that can withhold fire from consuming that which is
in it is self Combustible, can make those things Combustible, which, in their
own nature are not so, or rather, can enable fire to consume them. God, by
setting fire upon the whole World, will let us see, He can spare it. He is
Conscious to his own power, that he can make another World when he pleases,
yea, as many Worlds as now there are Stars. He was infinitely happy before he
made the World, (which, in comparison of Himself was but of yesterday, for what
is six thousand years to Eternity?) and He will Be still, when the world shall
be no more. He was Light to himself, when, as yet, there were no Sun, Moon, and
Stars; yea, he was Light it is self, so he is, and so he will be, when all those
lights shall be put out. We cannot better afford, to burn a Rush-candle till we
have burnt it out, (or, when that is done, miss it less) than he can, to burn
up the Sun it is self and to disfurnish all the Stars of their borrowed light.

God looks upon this world, as that which is too good for wicked men always to
enjoy, but not good enough for his Children always to continue in ( Of whom
the world is not worthy, Heb. 11.) and so being not fit, to be the eternal
Mansion, either of the one, or of the other, has resolved, that when it has
served to the end, for which it was made, it shall be burnt: His Friends shall
have better Mansions, his Enemies shall not have so good: How soon the
Conflagration of the World shall be, Who can tell? God prefixed the time in
which he would destroy the first World, viz. within a hundred and twenty years
after warning given, but has not done so by this. Of that day and hour knows
no man; no, not the Son of man ( viz. as man.) It may be nearer at hand, than
we are aware of: The ends of the world seem to be upon us: If Saint John, and
others contemporary with him, called the time wherein they lived, The l^st
time, 1 John 2.18. Heb. 1.2. 2 Pet. ^.^. What, may this be called? Well might
the Psalmist say, This their way is their folly, of them, whose inward thought
was, that their House and Lands should continue for ever, Psalm 49.11. whereas,
alas, the world it self shall not do so. Were they secure, that were told, The
world should be drowned, at the end of a hundred and twenty years, and would
not regard; and are not we, that know the world shall be burnt, and that, for
ought we know, within half that time, or less, and yet are not affected with
it? Ought not the very thoughts of that burning, to be as a fiery Chariot, to
convey our minds from earth to heaven? Ought it not to quench our affections to
the world, as one heat puts out another; so the heat of the Sun puts out the
Fire. I observe Saint Peter to say, that The earth and the works that are
thereof, shall be burnt, by which, I suppose, he means the works of Art
(because he speaks of none of the works of heaven, which are all natural) such
as are, strong Towers, stately Palaces, famous Cities, and such like. Now the
day in which that shall be done (says he) shall come upon the world as a thief
in the night, that is, suddenly, and unexpectedly. Nor know I, what better use
can be made of the doctrine of the Worlds intended Destruction by fire, than
that which we read, 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing then, that all these things shall be
dissolved, What manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and
godliness?

MEDITATION XX. Upon the Fire of Hell.
Who can think on the late dreadful fire without some serious reflections on
the more dreadful fire of hell? If that Tophet which is spoken of, Isa. 30.33.
be the same with Hell, methinks the description of it is such, as does not a
little agree with our late fire, The pile thereof (says the Prophet) is much
wood, the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it. Was
not the pile of our late fire much wood, of Churches, Houses, and other
Structures? and did not the wind (which may be called the breath of the Lord)
so kindle it, or rather, increase it, as if it had been a mighty stream of
Brimstone poured in upon it? Some are not more hard to believe there is a Hell
(a Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is, The second death) than
they would have been, to believe, that any such fire, should, or could have
fallen upon London, as that which lately did. If more dreadful things than we
could imagine, do happen unforetold, (as the late Judgment for one); Why
should we think those incredible, which the Scripture plainly speaks of, though
they far transcend our imagination, and what we should otherwise expect?
Nothing can make the burning of London, and the misery attending it, seem
small, but, to consider the fire of Hell, and the misery of the damned; and
that considered, this does even vanish and disappear before it. For, What is a
fire of four days continuance, to that which shall last more millions of
millions of Ages, than there are minutes in the space of four days and nights?
Or, What is a fire, preying upon Houses and Goods, to that, which shall prey
upon Bodies and Souls; as Christ has commanded us, to Fear him, who can cast
s^ul and body into hell. If one Soul be (as it is) more worth than many worlds,
how much less is one City worth than many thousand souls? Neither is Hell an
uncompounded torment, consisting of fire only; but there are other
ingredients, to make the misery of it more unsufferable: There is the worm that
shall never die, there it the darkness that shall never end. There is the heat
of fire to Torment, but not the light of fire to Refresh. Oh the demerit of
sin, that, fire, which of it is self is so intolerable a torment, should not be
thought sufficient to punish it! Shall I dread fire alone (such as that which
befell the City) and shall I not dread more scorching flames than those,
accompanied with a gnawing worm and a perpetual night? I can heartily say with
that good man, Hic ure, hic see^, Domine; sed in aeternum p^rce, Here, O Lord,
cut and burn, and do what thou will with me; only spare in Eternity. May the
consideration of Hellfire, not only deterr me from sin, but also kindle love
to Christ within me, who is therefore called Jesus, because he shall save his
people from the wrath to come.

MEDITATION XXI. Upon the coming of that most dreadful fire in so Idolized a
year, as 1666.
When will men give over groundless prophesying? When will they learn, not to
be wise above what is written? Did not Christ say to his Disciples, It is not
for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own
hands. One said, That an Itch of disputing was in his time, the scab of the
Church; and in our time, an Itch of prophesying has been the same thing.
According to the manifold prophesies, which have been concerning it, -66.
should have been a year of Jubilee, I had almost said a time of the Restitution
of all things, but, alas! Whilst men looked for light, behold darkness, whilst
they cried Peace, peace, greater destruction then ever, was coming upon them.
It is said, that God has set one over against the other to the end that man
should find nothing after him. Eccles. 7.14. If it be the glory of God to
conceal a matter (as the Scripture says, it is) why will men pretend to know
what God intends to do? Who can tell, what the womb of a day, much more of a
year will bring forth? If women that are with child know not what they go with,
whether male or female, wise or foolish, who can tell what is in the womb of
Providence? Such as pretend to foreknow future contingencies, are not more
admired for their wisdom before the time be expired, than they are usually
condemned for their folly and presumption, when the event proves otherwise. We
read in Jer. 23.28. There were prophets of the deceit of their own hearts.
Which cause the people to forget the name of God by the dreams, which they
tell every one to his neighbor. Therefore, says God, The prophet which has a
dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my word let him speak my word
saithfully What is the chaff to the wheat? We say proverbially, Old Birds
cannot be caught with chaff, yet a great many are with such chaff as the
prophet speaks of, meaning false Predictions: many of which should by right
have been written in Hebrew Characters, for that the event shows they were to
be read backwards, like the presages of Almanack-makers concerning weather, who
frequently tell us, it will be fair when it proves foul, and foul when it
proves very fair.

The Devil himself is more tender of his credit than many men have bin of
theirs: for it was always his manner to deliver Oracles in Ambiguous
expressions, that, whatsoever the event were, he might not be charged with
falsehood; whereas men (that know less) have ventured to speak as plainly and
positively as could be, touching things to come, which falling out quite
contrary have filled their faces with shame. If that had been the worst, it had
been no great matter: but, alas! men have not only wounded their own
reputations by their daring false prophesies, but by accustoming themselves and
others, to believe and disbelieve again, have greatly propagated Atheism in the
world, and made the abused credulity of many to end in insidelity. They that
have been often deceived, become always jealous, and use to say, Alas! whom or
what can we trust? Though there be no reason in the world that men should
suspect the Word of God because they have been frustrated by the dreams of men;
I cannot deny but that there are and have been strong impressions from God upon
the minds of some men concerning future things, but, as the Apostle says in
another case, Have thou faith, have it to thy self before God: so in this case
though they themselves cannot but believe the things which are so impressed
upon them, yet let them keep that faith to themselves, and not expect others
should believe the same things, unless by miracles they could prove themselves
to be Prophets sent of God; or till such time as the event shall show they were
not mistaken. A prophecy may indeed and in truth signify much to him that
utters it, which yet may signify nothing at all to them that hear it, because
he may have received it from God, whereas others have received it but from
himself. As to all the prophecies concerning great, good things, which should
befall England in Sixty six, be it to themselves upon what grounds they have
had such expectations; sure I am, nothing has yet appeared that looks like a
fulfilling of them, though the year be almost expired. He that foretold that
Caesar should die upon such a day, Caesar sending him word the day was come,
and he was yet alive, made answer that day was come, but it was not past and
gone, and die he did upon that day; So some it may be will tell us that Sixty
six is come, and far spent, but not quite past and gone. It Is very true, and so
long as one day or hour of that year lasts, let them lengthen out their hopes.
If it produce what they have foretold, I shall not envy them the honor of
proving true Prophets: but if it end as it has begun, and held on hitherto;
give me leave to say, that mere humane Predictions touching future
Contingencies ought never to be trusted more; and that the frustrations of
Sixty six, should abolish or prevent the credulity of all after-ages.

There is a Text or two, which I suppose, many do build upon, who have great
regard to humane prophesies. We read, say they, that the Secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, Psalm 25.14. But that must not be understood; as if
God did make them that fear him acquainted with all his Secrets: for it is said
of Christ himself, considered as man, that Of that day and hour, speaking of
the day of Judgment, knows not the son of man himself. Moreover, say they, in
Amos 3.7. it is written, Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his
secrets unto his servants the Prophets. Yea, but where are such Prophets to be
found in these days as were in those, viz. Approved of God amongst men by
miracles, signs, and wonders, as is said of Christ, Acts 2.22? Does not
Experience show, that the Gift of prophesying (as thereby is meant the
infallible predicting of things) is either wholly, or for the most part at an
end, as well as several other Gifts, which were intended but for the infancy of
the Church: If it be said, that it is written, In the last days, your young
men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams, your sons and
daughters shall prophecy, it is evident, from Acts 3.16. that that was
fulfilled in the Apostles time: for, says Peter, when the Holy Ghost was
poured out upon the Disciples, when they were filled with the Holy Ghost and
spoke with other Tongues, This is that which was spoken by Joel, I will pour
out my spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophecy, etc. But, it is further
said, that the predictions of some good men, have come to pass, they have hit
right (as they call it). That may be too, and yet such as they may be no
Prophets to us, that is, no such Prophets as we are bound to believe, till the
Event have declared, that they themselves were not deceived.: It may not be
always from Divine Revelation, that men prophecy rightly concerning things to
come: A man may draw a Bow at an adventure, and shoot at random, and yet happen
to hit the mark, though he that shall do so, will miss it much oftener. Now, as
one says, Men mind when predictions hit, not when they miss, and that is the
reason, they give so much heed to them: Whereas indeed, as in predicting of
weather, when it shall be fair, and when it shall be fowl; so in other things,
though menspeak but what comes next it is almost as hard to be always out, as
it is to be always right.

How fain would I prevail with men not to lean upon the broken Reed of
uncertain Prophecies? Whereon, if a man lean, it will go into his hand and
pierce him (as was said of Egypt) Isa. 36.6. Pierce you they will, more ways
than one; as namely, With shame, when you see your considence disappointed:
With forrow, when you see your hopes frustrated: With reproach, when others
shall deride you, and say, Is this the good time you looked for? Is this the
Deliverance you expected? What now is become of all your Prophecies, touching
what would be such and such a year? All this Reproach you might save, if you
would believe no more than what the Scripture warrants you to believe: Where
does that speak of the glorious things that shall be in the year 1666? or, give
you to expect more from that, than from any other year? Are not Divine-Promises
sufficient for your comfort, unless you eake them out with human Prophecies,
(as the Papists do the Counsels of Scripture, with the Traditions of men:) It
is well, if some do not derive more comfort from fallible Predictions, than
from the infallible Word. Is not the Name of the Lord a strong Tower? Why then
will you betake your selves to a refuge of lies? It is enough for poor deluded
Jews to be always comforting themselves with one vain Prophecy or other, (as
they are observed to be seldom without:) but, it is below Christians so to do,
who have a sure Word of Prophecy; which they should take heed to, as to a light
shining in a dark place. Be consident, Faith, and Credulity are very different
things: The first builds upon a Rock; the last upon Quicksands. Believe, but
be not Credulous; many credulous people make many false Prophets, (as they say
Receivers make Thieves:) There will never want people to make Prophesies, so
long as there are enough to entertain them, and to trust upon them. Jer. 5.31.
The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the People love to have it so. There are
too many, that say in their hearts, Si populus vult decipi decipietur: If
People will be deceived, they shall. Many small Prophets, in this, and other
ages, seem Merchant-adventurers for a little credit; They will be the Authors
of a Prediction right or wrong; it is fit it be pleasing, whether it be true or
no: If it come to pass, they shall have a great deal of credit by it; and, in
the mean time, it makes them to be somewhat more taken notice of; and, if it be
frustrated, they are not the first that were mistaken, there have been, and are
many false Prophets besides themselves: When shall I see men so modest, as to
tell their uncertain Predictions, as their Dreams, not as heavenly Dictates; in
their own names, and not in the Name of God, saying, Thus says the Lord: but
rather, My mind bodes me so and so; Thus says my imagination, and I cannot
withstand it. At leastwise when shall I see others so wise as to hearken to
them, only as such, and upon no other account till experience have proved them
to be more than to. It is time enough to believe a humane Prophecy when you
see it fulfilled; and you pay it a sufficient respect, if, in the mean time,
you suspend your judgment, and forbear to censure it. O Sixty-six! Thou center
of human Prophesies! Thou Ocean, into which all the Rivers of Conjectural
Predictions did run! If I live to see thee end, as thou have continued
hitherto; for thy sake, if for nothing else (yet, upon other considerations
too,) if men will find confidence to make a thousand Prophecies, no ways
countenanced by Scripture, I shall not find Faith to believe one of them.

MEDITATION XXII. Upon the fire, it is beginning on the Lord's Day in the Morning.
Was there nothing in the Circumstance of Time, in which that fire began, viz.
upon the Lord's Day? Does not Providence determine the times before-appointed,
as well as the bounds of our habitations? Acts 17.26. Might not Herod read his
sin in the time in which the Angel of God smote him, and the Worms received a
commission to eat him up? which was immediately after he had received that
Acclamation from the People, saying, It is the voice of God, and not of man,
Acts 12.23. Neither can I think it was without its signification, that London
began to burn upon the Lord's Day. Were not the Sabbath-Dayes-sins of London
greater, than its sins upon other days; it being a certain truth, that, if
men's actions be evil, the better day, the worse action; as, in case they be
good, The better day, we say, the better deed? Justly might such a fire have
happened, had it been only to punish the usual profanations of the Lords Day. How
many had been playing on that very day, if, by this sad providence, they had
not been set at work? How many had been then employed in servile, and (at that
time) unlawful Works, if such a work of Mercy, and Charity, as was delivering
themselves and their substance from the fire, had not been put upon them? How
many had then been exercising themselves in Gluttony and Drunkenness; in
Rioting and Chambering; in Filthiness and Uncleanness; if the care of
preserving themselves and their Goods had not diverted them? How many, that
followed their honest Labors all the Week, had wont to find their sinful
pleasures on the Lord's Day?

Alas! That the Day, which God at first blessed, as well as sanctified, should
then be cursed, (if I may so call it,) above any other days that went before
it: That Londoners should have the most restless Day that ever they had
generally had, both as to Body and Mind; of that, which was at first appointed
for a Day of Rest: On that Day, in which God began to Create the World, in the
first Day of the Week did he begin to destroy that great City: Yea, The Day of
Christ his Resurrection, was the first Day of London's Death and Burial. Did
not good Men hope to have been Praying, Hearing, Singing of Psalms; Eating and
Drinking, in remembrance of Christ, on that very day, in which they were forced
to be quenching of Houses, carrying out of Goods, conveying away their Wives
and Children? How sadly were Churches filled on that Day, not with Men and
Women, (as upon other such Days,) but with Wares and Household Stuff? And, How
much more sadly were they emptied, some of them, on that very Day; not by
exportation, but by conflagration? Poor Londoners carried their Goods to
several Churches, to sacrifice them to slames, (as it proved,) though with an
intention to have secured them; those places proving Sepulchers, which they
repaired to as Sanctuaries.

O fatal, and never to be forgotten Sabbath! No emblem, as other of those
days, of that rest, which glorious Saints enjoy in Heaven; but rather of the
day of Judgment, which is called, The great and terrible day of the Lord:
Black-Sunday, some will call it; (as formerly there was much discourse of a
Black-Monday:) That was expected, and came not this was not expected, and yet
it came, like a thief in the night. I doubt not but men went to their beds
overnight as securely as ever they had done in their lives: yea, those that
dwelt in the house where it first began, and slept as soundly, for the time, as
ever they used to do, not questioning but the insuing-Sabbath would be like all
the rest; but when the early morning began to fall-in-travel with that
un-lookt-for-evil, which it was big with; when it began to cry out with a very
loud and doleful outcry: How did it awaken them, with a witness, and make them
call all their Neighbors round about them; and, in a few hours give a dreadful
Alarm to the whole City. That Lord's Day was much more a representation of
Hell, than of Heaven; though both the Work, and Rest of the Sabbath, at other
times, be a representation of Heaven, not of Hell. I see then, how easily God
can turn our Blessings into Curses; and, the Songs of the Temple into Howlings:
Aines 8.3. Not only the Jews of old had need to Pray, but we also, That our
slight may not be upon the Lords Day: For, so it was at this time notwithout a
real aggravation of the Judgment, (as they esteemed it,) who did unfeignedly
desire to have been at that time waiting upon God in his Ordinances, and who
know what it is, in effect, to lose a Sabbath.

MEDITATION XXIII. Upon the Place where this dreadful fire began, viz. at a
Bakers- House in Pudding-lane.
MEthinks the Burning of London, by Means of that obscure Lane, was like the
killing of that great Giant Goliath, by a Pibble-Stone, slung from the Sling and
Arm of little- David; or, like the slaying of a thousand Philistims merely with
the Jaw Bone of an Ass, Judge. 15.15. Or, like the throwing down the walls of
Jericho with the sound of Ramshorns. It may be the great God did design nothing
but Glory to himself, in employing so mean and inconsiderable an Instrument in
the destruction of that great City; but, it looks like a Father's spitting in
his Daughters face, which would be a punishment carrying a show of contempt
with it. When that poor Lane was on Fire, I doubt not, but many thought, that
other places, of greater note and eminency, would do well enough, as did
appear, by removing their goods thither, and no further, (as to Aldermanbury,
etc.) But, it ought to be conside^ed, that Judgments do many times ascend; and,
though they begin at the lowest round of the Ladder, yet they do not make an
end till they have climbed up to the very top. Though this Fire began with a
Bakers-House, yet its ambition, (if I may so phrase it,) was not satisfied,
till it had consumed the Houses of the Chief-Magistrates, and the places of
greatest eminency. When God is Correcting Mean-Men, Great-Ones should tremble,
and seek to make their Peace, lest the Cup go round. I am deceived, if some
Persons of Quality did not die of the last years Plague, though it befell the
Poor more generally, who were not able to provide for their safety by slying:
But, when the Judgment is by Fire, great Houses go to rack as well as small;
for, one can no more sly than can the other: Houses have no wings but those
which Fire gives them, when they fly away for good and all, once for all: They
easily fly by fire, but can never fly from it.

But, Will it vield us nothing of a profitable Meditation, that this fire began
in a Bakers-House? Had the hazardousness of that Calling, as to matter of fire,
or carelessness of the People, been the cause of its beginning there; when the
Natural cause had been so plain, the Moral ground of it had been less worth our
inquiring: But, I find not any thing of that nature so much as suspected; yea,
some to this day will not believe, that it came to pass otherwise, then by an
immediate hand of Providence: Whose Incredulousness in one thing is not so
great, but their Credulity in another is greater, if they think it were fired
from Heaven immediately. That it came by any in the Family is not mistrusted;
that it was by His means that Confessed himself Guilty, or by the Treachery of
any other, they will not believe: And, if neither of these two ways, there is
but a third can be thought of, (and they must have a Faith of Miracles, that
believe it to have come that way;) and, that is, As Fire came upon Sodom, viz.
from heaven immediately: But, when I consider where it began, (not to dispute
how, or by whose means,) I cannot well overlook a passage or two in the
Prophet Hoseah; viz. Hos. 7.4. They are all Adulterers, as on Oven heated by
the Baker, who cease from raising after he has kneeded the dough, until it
be leavened: Those words contain a part of Gods controversy with Ephraim, that
is, with the Ten Tribes, viz. First, for their eagerness in sin, they were like
a Fiery-Oven, very hot upon their Whoredoms, whether Corpo^al, or Spiritual.
Secondly, For their Security in sin; They were like a Baker fastasleep, whilst
his Oven is heating, and his Dough taking Leaven. Verse. 6. Their Baker sleeps
all the night, in the morning it burns as a flaming fire. Thirdly, For their
sliness and subtilty, in carrying on their Wickedness; making, as if they
minded no such thing; like a Baker, that seems not to regard either his Bread,
or his Oven; whereas he has put Leaven into the one, and Fire into the other,
which is all that can be done for the present; and, by that time the Oven is
hot enough, and the Bread leavened enough, he will be sure to wake, and fall to
his Business: Moreover, Verse. 8. We read this passage, Ephraim is a Cake not
turned; Meaning, that as such a Cake is partly baked, and partly dough; so,
Ephraim did halt betwixt God and Beal, was of several Religious, espousing the
Religion of those diverse People they lived amongst, as the foregoing words
imply; Ephraim has mixed himself amongst the People. Seeing then the Holy
Ghost seems to set forth these Four things I have mentioned, by Similitudes
taken from a Baker, and the things he deals in; it can be no ways improper,
from the Circumstance of place, where the Fire began, viz. a Bakers-House; to
Meditate of those Expressions, and to consider, how far-forth they are
applicable to our selves. If we have been as a Cake but half-bak't, if burning
like a fiery-Oven with the heat of lust, and in the mean time sleeping in
security, etc. How just was it with God to send such a Fire as this upon us?
Came it not to awaken us? Though Bakers can sleep quietly when they have put
fire in the Oven; yet, if they know there be fire on the Hous-top, they can
take no rest; Advertise them of that, and they will start up presently, and
endeavor to quench it. I thought fit to touch upon both these Circumstances,
not as pretending to know the end of God in either of them; (though he, who
acts all things according to the Counsel of his Will, has a wise end; not
only in all his actings, but in all the circumstances of them;) but rather to
show, that Meditati^n is a Plant, that may spring out of every Soil; a Fruit,
that may grow upon every Tree; which may evidence, That it is not from the
barreuness of things (which are all big with matter of profitable meditation)
but from the naughtiness of our hearts that we are so much strangers to it.

MEDITATION XXII. Upon the great pity that ought to be extended to Londoners
since the fire.
PIty, is an affection that should scarcely be withheld from any that are in
great distress and misery; but yet is much more due to some, then to others.
Where no misery is, there is no room for pity, and where there is nothing but
misery to bespeak it (as in reference to that Prodigal, who by riotous courses
brought himself to husks) there is no cause for much. But where merit and
misery go hand in hand, the greatest yearnings of our most tender bowels are
called for. God will not take it ill that we pity those whom he thinks fit to
punish; because one of his great ends in punishing some, is that he might
excite pity and compassion in others toward them: I have read that Sir Thomas
Moor not long before his Execution was desired to cut his locks, for no other
end, as is believed, than lest his Venerable hoary Fleece should stir up too
much compassion in those that were to be spectators at his death. But so far is
the great God from that, that he had rather we should number the gray heirs of
misery which are upon the heads of men, in order to our pitying of them. To
tell, Why the late Inhabitants of London are objects of Royal pity, or to move
to it, were to discourse, why children under great sufferings should be
compassionated by their Parents (For Kings are Fathers, and Subjects their Sons
and Daughters). Whereas the Scripture says, Can a mother forget her child,
that she should not have compassion on the child of her womb? and though it
adds, yea, she may, yet it insinuates that they seldom do or can. What reason
Courtiers have to pity Citizens, were easy to allege; For, Have not Citizens,
sometimes had so much pity for them, as that they seemed to have none for
themselves? Why should not Citizens be a little in Courtiers books, if some
Courtiers have been and are, a great deal in theirs? It is but ingenuity to
afford them pity who have given them credit. As for those that lead a Country
life they know full well that Citizens had wont to be their best Chapmen, and
to give them a good price for those commodities, and provisions which they
thought too good for themselves, and withal to furnish them with the best
things which they stood in need of.

Had Londoners been the worst of people the depth of their present misery,
compared with the height of their former prosperity had challenged pity and
compassion from their very enemies: but if it may be made appear that they were
generally as Civil as Religious, as Charitable, and in many other respects as
commendable as most people in the world, none but ill natured persons can
refrain commiserating them, much more rejoice and triumph in their sufferings.
The worst enemies they have in the world must needs confess that no people were
generally more Civil and Moral then they. As for Religion, I know there are
several standards by which men measure, and judge of that (though indeed, and
in truth there is but One, whereby to judge of it, to wit, the Word of God) but
if conformity to the duties both of the first and second Table, if love to God
and to our neighbors (so far as men can discern) may denominate persons
Religious (as surely it is that must do it) pure Religion and undefiled did as
much abound in London, as in any place whatsoever. I meddle not with charity in
point of judging (Censuring is every where too common) but as for Charity in
giving and ministering to those that are in want, both of one persuasion, and of
another, if that be a virtue (as doubtless it is) London has been as eminent
for it in all times in which several parties have taken their turns in
suffering as any place I know. In the space of twenty years and upwards that
England has been dissetl'd by War, it may be thousands that by the unhappines
of the times have been brought to straits and exigences, they and theirs had
perished, but for the charity of London, more than of all other places, whilst
some have taken care of the Disciples of Paul, others of Apollos, others of
Cephas, others of Christ without respect to any of those distinctions (which
best became good Christians); and so all have been taken care of, more or less,
by those poor Citizens who are now many of them themselves become the objects
of Charity. London will not want for pity, if it be pitied by no more then all,
and only those, that first and last have been pitied and relieved by it, and
that now and hereafter will dearly miss it.

I would not it should grate upon the minds of honest Citizens, undone by the
fire, to think or suspect that a great many have no pity for them: All good
people have, and they that are otherwise, have no pity, so much as for their
own souls. I observe they use to have most pity from God, who have least from
men, being withal such as deserve it. When Penninah did sorely vex Hannah to
make her fret, because God had shut up her womb, Hannah throve the better for
it; for God looked upon her affliction, and opened her womb, when her Rival had
shut up her bowels toward her, 1 Samuel 1.5. When Shimei cursed David being at
that time under trouble from Absalom, David said, It may be the Lord will
requite me good for his cursing this day, 2 Samuel 16.13. Such as triumph in your
miseries may do you a greater kindness then they are aware of, according to
that in Prove. 24.18. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, lest the Lord see
it, and turn away his wrath from him. They that will not look upon you as the
objects of their pity, are indeed the objects of yours; For so are all they
that show themselves to be neither Christians nor Men: and it is a good
presage, you shall not always want pity for that you cannot have it from a
great many people whilst you want it. Pity is that virtue which Englishmen are
famous for, and therefore every Englishman that is void of it, wants the common
virtue and character of his Country; and he that has none to bestow upon this
occasion, seems to have none at all. I know not that man that would not be
loath the world should think that he had no commiseration for the present case
of London; and why is it, but, because it would thence follow, that he were of
a mavelous ill nature, and unworthy of any pity to be showed to himself, even
in the greatest extremity that could befall him. One says, the reason why,
they that have children are usually more affectionate, than those that have
none, is, because their bowels are often called upon. By that reason they that
have no pity, now when that Affection in men is so much called upon are never
like to have any. But a pity like that charity which S. James speaks of, J^m.
2.15. Is not worth half the words I have used. If a brother be naked and
destitute of daily food, and one say unto him, Depart in peace, be you warmed
and filled; Notwithstanding, he gives him nothing, etc. I say a pity like that
charity, which yet is more then some men have, is little worth. But would men
show themselves truly compassionate, toward that desolated City, and the late
miserable Inhabitants of it, if they have interest in heaven, let them pray for
the reflourishing both of it, and them; if they have interest on earth, let
them promote it; if they have parts let them advise and contrive how it may be
effected; if they have Purses, let them contribute toward it; if they have all
of these, let them further it all, and every of these ways. Call your selves
Papists, Frenchmen, Hectors, any thing, but true Englishmen, true Christians,
true Protestants, if you have no pity for the desolations of London. I doubt
not but there are some Turks and Jews that have, or would have had, if they had
known London in it is prosperity, and should now see it in it is ashes. O Lord,
If men will not pity the miseries of London, the matter is not great; possibly
if they did, it might not signify much: only let Thy bowels yearn toward,
and thy repentings be kindled within thee, and Thou (who have spoken concerning
it, to pluck up, and pull down) speak in thy due time, to build, and to plant
it.

MEDITATION XXV. Upon those that have lost all by the Fire.
What shall we say to them that have lost all? who tell us, that before the
fire, they were worth so many hundreds, or, so many thousands, but since then,
they are worth nothing, yea, worse than nothing. Surely they ought not to mourn
as men without hope. If they were sometimes as rich as Job was at first, they
cannot be poorer now than he was afterward. Hatred in God toward men, cannot
be known by such Events as those; for Job, who was in like case, was a Person
greatly beloved of God. Do they fear that they and theirs shall perish? Not so
neither, for rather than the Israelites should perish in the Wilderness, God
gave them bread from Heaven, and waters out of the Rock. Ravens shall feed
them, if they be such as put their trust in God, rather than they shall famish.
Some, have no Children; they, it is to be supposed, may make a good shift:
others, have bad Children, and what should they do with Estates to spend upon
their lusts? Others, have good Children, and let not them doubt but God will
provide for them. Has the only wise God no ways whereby to make up your
losses? Did he not give to Job, double for all that which he had taken away
from him? and can he not do so by you?

Is it your great trouble, that you have lost all at once? I have heard of one,
who having a great number of costly Glasses, did himself break them all at one
time, that he might not be disquieted time after time, by the accidental
breaking of them one by one. Had your Estates been taken from you by
piece-meals, now a part, and then a part, till all had been consumed, that
might have proved more grievous to you; and so it has fared with many men.
Will you say, All is lost, because your Estates are gone? Know, he that is a
Christian indeed, cannot lose his All, yea, the best part of what he has,
cannot be lost, as is said of Mary, that she had chosen that good part, which
could not be taken from her. I have heard of a good Woman, who, when her
Children died, had wont to comfort herself with this, to wit, that The Lord
lives; who, being more than ordinarily dejected for the death of one of her
Children, that she had a more particular affection for; a Child that had
observed what she had wont to say, and how full of heaviness she then was, came
to her and said, Mother, Is the Lord dead? How may the words of that Child,
upbraid the carriage of those Christians, who mourn over their losses, as if
they had not an Everliving God to rejoice in? Is it strange to you to be poor,
who have heretofore always enjoyed riches and plenty? know, that it is one
point of a Christians Excellency and heavenly Skill, to be able to act several
and different parts well, as Paul says, I have learned how to abound, and how
to want, how to be full, and how to be empty; how, in every Estate therewithal
to be content. They are unfound bodies, that can only bear the Summer, but not
also the Winter, Spring and Autumn. You say, you have nothing now, How many
are there, that never had any thing, to speak of? Is it no mercy or privilege,
to have enjoyed good things for a long time past, though we may not enjoy them
always? If men have had good sight, good hearing, good health, till they come
to be old, and then all of these begin to decay, or be quite lost, do they, or
ought they, to reckon it no mercy that they have enjoyed these things so long?
If you say, you cannot live upon nothing (that is, nothing certain) how many
hundreds, yea, thousands, are, thorough the goodness of God, provided for from
year to year, who have no certainty to live upon? Now you have lost the things
you had, possibly you will thereby be excited, to look after the things which
can never be lost, which otherwise, it may be, you had never done. Has the
sire consumed your money, or money-worth, as if it had all been but so much
dross, this, peradventure, may make you look after that gold, tried in the
fire, which no sire can consume, and then, your unspeakable loss will prove
inconceivable gain. What great difference, between the worlds leaving us, and
our leaving it? You must shortly have left it, if it had not first left you.

Trust God, and doubt not but he will bear your charges thorough the world, and
more of this world you need not care for. What a noise will this make in the
world, that you have lost all, and who, that has any thing to spare, if they
know your case, will not contribute to your relief? You have yet the Love of
relations and friends, the Charity of men, the Fruit of your own ingenuity, and
industry, the Bounty of heaven, the Result of Divine Promises, all these things
you have, besides several others, to help and succor you; therefore, say not,
You are undone, though all be lost for the present. How many have, from a fair
Estate, been brought to a morsel of Bread, not by Casualty, but by Crimes, such
as God might have left you to, as by that fire which, Job says, will consume
to destruction, and root out all a man's increase, Job 31.12. Now consider, how
much better your condition is than theirs. Are you as those that have nothing,
think of the Apostles words, a Cor. 6.10. As having nothing, yet possessing all
things. If, either you are true Believers, or shall hereafter be such, those
words of the same Apostle will be verified in you, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are
yours, ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

MEDITATION XXIV. Upon those that have lost but half their Estates by this
Fire, or some such proportion.
What a mercy is it, that you have lost but half, when so many others have
lost all? How much better is half a Loaf, as our Proverb speaks, than no Bread?
As David said to Mephibosheth, Thou and Zibah divide; so has God decided the
case, betwixt the fire and you. You are, at most, but like David's Servants,
the one half of whose Beards were shaven by Hanan, and their Garments cut in
the middle. How much better is it, to have one Arm, than none; to have but one
Eye, than to be stark blind? The man that was wounded, and left but half dead,
recovered again, by the help and favor of the good Samaritan; and so may you.
Possibly, that half or part which is left you, is more than many men's All: Your
Gleanings better than the Vintage of many others. The Ancients ran much upon
such a saying as this, Dimidium plus toto, that half was better then the whole,
meaning, the former with quietness and contentment, was much better then the
latter without it. God can give you twice so much contentment with half so much
Estate. If you say, and say truly, that you had scarce enough before, and now
have but half so much as you had then; there are that have more by half then
they needed, and how know thou but God may incline them to consider thee who
have scarce half enough?

But, Oh! the miserable world in which many whose cup overflows will let others
have nothing of theirs, if they have but something of their own, though that
something be next to nothing. If men that have ten children have but enough to
maintain one, are they no objects of pity and charity? If a man have doublet
and breeches such as may serve his turn, but neither hat to his head, nor shoos
to his feet, will you not commiserate him? Did the good Samaritane overlook the
man he met because he was but half dead? did he stay till he were ready to give
up the ghost before he would do any thing for him? This is the manner of but
too many men: but the comfort is, your heavenly Father he knows whereof you
stand in need. Whether the moiety of what thou sometimes had be, or be not
enough for thy occasions, Bless God for it. That will be the way to have it
multiplied as those loaves were with which Christ fed five thousand to the
full. Try, what double industry, double frugality will do toward ^eaking out
that allowance that seems to fall short; and above all conclusions, try, if
doubling thy faith and confidence in God will not double thy maintenance if
need require. Learn to think, that God did not grudge thee the whole, but has
therefore retrencht thee, as thou art retrencht, because he knew, that but half
was better for thee.

MEDITATION XXV. Upon those that lost nothing by the Fire.
HOw well came you off? not so much as a hair of your head sindged, not so much
as the smell of fire about you. I cannot call you brands snatched out of the
fire, for you were better than so; brands are partly burnt, so were not you.
Fall down and adore that distinguishing-mercy, which has so preserved you, and
made a hedge about you. Alas! if all had been great losers, how should one have
been able to help another, whereas now some are able to succor others, if they
be but as willing. God is trying you what good Stewards you will be of those
Talents, which he has continued to you full and whole, whilst others are
either totally deprived of theirs, or at leastwise much diminished. He expects
you should make yourselves poorer (for the present) by your Charity, though he
has not made you so by the Fire; and woe be to you, if you do it not. He could
have forced all your Estates from you, as he did from others; but, he thought
fit to prove you, as to what you would part with freely. He would see what
influence that Text has upon you, He that has this worlds goods, and sees
his brother in want, and shuts up his loads of compassion. How dwells the
love of God in him?

Think not, that all that is left you, is lest you for yourselves; for it is no
such matter: It is, that you should disperse and give to the poor, that your
righteousness may remain. You are but Feoffees in trust for others, as to some
good proportion of what is continued with you. I expect, God will cast fire
upon your houses next, if you cast not your bread upon the waters: Charity may
secure what you enjoy, and the want of it may hazard all. It might have been
your lot to have stood in need of receiving; and, now you are left able to give
(which is a more blessed thing) will you not do it? All that was saved from the
fire was given you again, and will you not lend God a part, who has given you
the whole? and what is that lending to God, but giving to the Poor? God has
been tender of your Tabernacles, and will not you be kind to his living
Temples? They that were sent to fetch the Ass that Christ was to ride upon,
were bid to say, The Lord had need of him. Now, if ever, has Christ need to
borrow of those that are able, as in reference to his poor members; and woe to
them that can, and will not lend to their Lord and Savior. He could supply
them otherwise, without being beholden to you; but it is your love he values
more than your liberality, and the latter but as an Expression of the former.
It is not so much A gift which he desires, as fruit that may abound to your
own account, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 4.17. You may pretend you are
thankful for the great Deliverance vouchsafed you, but neither God, nor Men,
will believe you are so, unless you be also Charitable to them that were not
Delivered.

MEDITATION XXVI. Upon those that were Gainers by the late Fire.
WE say, It is an evil wind, that blows no body any good. Some were honest
gainers, (and much good may it do them); others dishonest. Some could not let
their Tenements before the fire, who have since, let them for moderate Rents;
such are honest gainers: Others have let their houses at most excessive Rates
and such have loaded themselves with dishonest gain. But be their gains one way
or another, I think no man ought, for the present, to pocket the money which he
has clearly gotten by the fire, (if it be so they can spare it). David would
not drink of the waters of Bethlehem which were brought to him, because, as he
said, They were the price of Blood, meaning, his Soldiers had ventured their
lives for it: What men have gotten by this fire, is little less than the price
of Blood, considering how many were impoverished that a few might be enriched,
or rather, that the enriching of but a very few, is by the undoing of many
thousands.

Men may look upon their gains by this fire, as Deodates: Let as many as are
able be their own Almoners, and give it back to God. Is it not a Sabbatical
year (in a doleful sense) for that the poor City now injoyeth it is Sabbath? and
in a Sabbatical year that did bear a better interpretation, the rich were not
suffered to reap, but were to leave the Crop to the poor, as appears, by
comparing, Exodus 23.11. with Levit. 25.5. If men who have only saved what they
had before, ought to contribute to them that have lost; how much more ought
they, who have received an Addition by this very means? To Build upon the
Ruins of others, is one of the worst Foundations that can be. Let it never be
said, The fire has made you rich, whilst such multitudes continue poor,
miserably poor, whom merely the fire has made so. We use to say, Men have
gotten those things out of the fire, which they came hardly by. But what men
got by, or out of, the late fire, was easily come by; well may it go leightly,
for it leightly came, yet neither does that go leightly, which goes to the use
of Charity. When I consider, how this fire which has ruined many, has raised
some, it brings to mind what is said, Luke 1.52. He has put down the mighty
from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. He has filled the hungry
with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away. How strangely, and by
seeming contraries, does the providence of God bring things to pass, that when
a dismal fire happened, some men should be made by it! So a Prison made way for
Joseph's preferment; and Onesimus his running away from his Master, for his
returning to God and to himself, and a better Servant to his Master than ever.
And Estate cast upon men by the desolating Fire, sounds like such a Riddle as
that of Sampson, Out of the eater came meat, and out the strong came sweetness:
Is it not as a Honeycomb found in the Carcass of a Lion? You whom God by this
fire has unexpectedly enabled more than ever, to eat the Fat and drink the
Sweet (you know what I allude to) see that you send portion; to them for whom
nothing is provided.

MEDITATION XXVII. Upon the Inducements unto re-building of London, and some
ways of promoting it.
THat London should be rebuilt, is so much the concern of England, both in
point of Honor and of Trade, as hardly any thing can be more. Whilst that
lies in the dust, our Glory lies with it. Our Enemies rejoice to see it where
it is: but should we let it lie there long, Oh! how would they scorn us for it,
and conclude, it were because we had not wherewithal to build it up again.
They know, as well as we, that there is no part of England situate so
commodiously for Trade as London is; which name is said to signify in the
Language of the Britains (it is first Inhabitants) Shipton, or a Town of Ships;
in regard, that the famous River which runs by the side of it, is able to
entertain the greatest Ships that can ride upon the Sea, which thing has made
it so famous a Mart; those Ships bringing in all the rich commodities the world
can afford. Hence London for so many Ages past, has held it is Primacy over all
other parts of England, and none has been thought fit to succeed it in that
dignity, though the shifting of Trade from one City to another, and an
alternate Superlativeness has been frequent in other parts of the world, where
one place has been as commodious as another. But London never had rival that
did, or could pretend it is self as fit to make the great Emporium and
Metropolis of England as was it is self. The River of Thames made it so at
first; and that, under God, will and must make it so again. It perished by
fire, and must be saved by water; for, that, if any thing, will make it once
again what it was before, as Job says of a Tree, only the Root whereof is
left in the ground, that thorough the scent of water, it will sprout again. How
venerable is London, were it but for its Antiquity, of which Ammianus
Marcellinus reports, that it was called an ancient City in his time, which was
above twelve hundreds years ago; and Cornelius Tacitus seems to do the like,
three hundred years before him, telling us, that, for multitudes of Merchants
and Commerce, London was very renowned, fifteen hundred years ago: nor can we
suppose it to have presently arrived at that perfection. Who would not assist
the building of another City in that place, hoping it may continue as many Ages
as the other did, and longer too, if God be pleased to prevent the like
disaster. I confess, I love not to hear men boast at such a time as this what
they will do, or what shall be done, as to the building of London more glorious
than ever. The Inhabitants of Samaria are blamed for saying, The Bricks are
fallen down, but we will build with hewn Stones; the Sycamores are cut down,
but we will change them into Cedars. We are but putting on our harness, as to
re-building; let us not boast, as if we were putting of it off: This is not a
time in which to say much, though it becomes us to do all we can. If we may see
but such another City it will be a great mercy, but one more glorious than that
we may scarce expect till we see it. Alas! how many difficulties is that work
clogged with? How scarce and dear are all materials? How poor are many that
desire to build? How hard, and almost impossible will it be, to satisfy the
Interest of all proprietors? Amongst all the Models that are presented for that
purpose, How hard will it be to know how to pitch upon that which may be most
convenient? If we build every where, as before, it will be incommodious for
Passage, dangerous for Fire; if by a new Platform, it is hard not to be
injuxious to multitudes of People, whose Houses stood inconveniently, as to the
Public: Lord, Give our Senators double and treble wisdom, that they may be
satisfactory-Repairers of so great breaches.

But, How shall Moneys be Levied for the re-building of London, where the
Estates of persons concerned do fall short? Two Expedients for that I have
propounded already; One was, by the Mercy and Charity of those persons who have
lost little or nothing by the fire; and, who have something they could well
spare: The other is, By the Justice and due Repentance of all those persons,
Carters, Landlords, and others, who have raised uncoscionable gains to
themselves, by means of the late Fire; whose duty it is, to restore, not only
the principal of what they have unlawfully gotten by the fire, but some certain
overplus, as was provided under the Law, in cases of Restitution: When that is
done, I wish there were a certain Pole-fine, or Mulct, set upon the head of
every common sin, not made capital; which additional-Pole, levied upon all
persons that are able, when once convicted of Drunkenness, Swearing, Cousenage,
Cursing, yea Lying its self, might be for, and toward the re-building of
London: I speak of an Additional pecuniary Punishment for those Crimes, both
for that the former and present Mulcts have not been sufficient to restrain
Men; as also, for that great sums are still in arrear to Justice; because
those kind of Penalties have been but seldom inflicted, possibly not one time
in a hundred that they ought to have been. To do this, were not to build London
upon the sins of the People, (as some will object;) but upon the punishment of
Sin, and due execution of Justice, which would be a glorious foundation. If but
one shilling extraordinary were levied upon men toties quoties; that is, so
often as they are, or might be, convicted for any of the forementioned sins:
How noble a City might those Fines build, if men should continue so bad as now
they are? Whilst some particular persons, (and those able enough to pay for it)
stick not to swear hundreds of Oaths in one day, besides all the Execrations
and Lies they become guilty of in one day. But, if men had rather reform
themselves, than by their Crimes help to re-build the City, the former shall be
as welcome as the latter; and, the latter may, in one sense, be promoted by the
former. But, if that way of raising Money be so happily prevented, possibly so
soon as God shall please to turn our Swords into Plow-shares, and our Spears
into Pruning Hooks: The Wisdom of our Governors may think fit to make some
coercive-levy, for once, toward the relieving of friends, as they have
formerly done; for, and toward the humbling of Forraign-Enemies: and, as the
Ruin of London is a National-Calamity, so, Who knows whether our Rulers may not
please to make the re-building of it somewhat of a National-Charge? as it would
certainly be an honor, and an advantage to the whole Nation: But, remembering
what is said, Ps. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house, (and so the City,)
they labor in vain that build it; I cannot but further consider what words we
should take unto our selves, wherewith to plead with God, that London, (if it
so seem good to him,) may be built again: And, May we not plead thus? O Lord,
How many hundred Families are there, whose livelihoods seem to depend upon the
re-building of that City? What hard shift do they make in the mean-time,
dwelling many of them like the Israelites, in Tents or Bothes? Were not many of
these good and merciful men? And, Have thou not said, That with the Merciful
thou will show thy self Merciful? How many are there, whose bowels yearn, and
whose hearts bleed over the desolations of London? Shall Men pity them, and
will not God much more, who is of infinite compassions? What strong affections
have these poor hearts for the place where that City sometimes stood? How do
they cleave, as it were, to the Ruins of it? How loath are they to remove at any
distance from it, as if they could settle to no business any where else, no
more than Irish-Kine, which, as they say, cannot give down their Milk, unless
their Calves, or something in their likeness stand by their sides: How do their
Enemies, yea, and thine also, insult and triumph, whilst poor London lies in
ashes; saying, Aha, Aha, so would we have it? Shall London be always a Ruinous
Heap, whilst Rome, and Paris, continue flourishing Cities? Have thou not a
greater Controversy with them than with it? Do thou suffer them to stand?
(not that we beg the destruction of any place,) Wilt not thou permit London to
rise again? Shall England never be like its self again? or, How can it be so,
if London be no more? Was ever the Restoration of a City more prayed for, and
shall all those Prayers fall to the ground? Lord, What joy will there be, when
the re-building of London shall be once finished? How will the top-Stone be
laid with Acclamations of Grace, Grace, Psalm. 71.20. Thou, who have showed that
place and People great and sore troubles, vouchsafe to quicken them again, and
bring them up again from the depths of the Earth: Increase their greatness, and
comfort them on every side.

MEDITATION XXVIII. Upon the Wines and Oils that swam in the Streets, and did
augment the Flames.
I Have heard, that upon some great Solemnities, the Conduits have been made to
run with Claret: But, so much precious Wine and Oil, as ran down the Kennels
upon this sad occasion, was (...) known to do so before: Then was London a
burning Lamp, flaming with its own Oil; But, worse than the wasting of those
Wines and Oils themselves was their unhappy mixing with that water; which some,
not well considering, made use of, to throw upon the flames; and, thereby in
stead of extinguishing, did increase them.

Oh the hurtfulness even of costly Mixtures in some cases, Water alone had done
well; but, Wine and Oil added to it did a world of mischief: So in Baptism,
Water alone does as well as can be, (suiting the Institution;) but, to add
Cream, and Spittle, is both sinful, slovenly, and ridiculous: But, O nasty
beasts! Why do you use Spittle above all the rest? Would you imitate that
Miracle whereby the eyes of the blind-man were opened with Spittle for one
thing? Why then do you not use Clay too? But, you are better at making
Seers-blind, than blind-Folks see: Or, is it from the great commendation which
you have heard of Fasting-Spittle, (in many other cases,) that you use Spittle
in this? Away with your unwarranted-mixtures, (beastly ones especially,) you
make me digress from a serious Subject, to answer Fools according to their
folly; But, I Will return again.

Oh, How did all things at that time conspire to make poor London miserable?
Not only did the Streets and Kennels drink freely of their best Wines and Oils,
but also made the Fire to pledge them, till it became outrageous, like a
man-in-drink. Drunkards may read their sin in their punishment: God has
inflamed their City with Wine, wherewith they had wont to inflame themselves:
God threatened the Jews, Hos. 2. That he would take from them his Wine, and his
Oil, which they had prepared for Baal; and, Why not yours, which you had
prepared for Bacchus? What an Argument is it of your unworthiness, that God
should give these good creatures to the Flames, rather than to your Selves?

MEDITATION XXIX. Upon the water running down hill so fast that they could not
stop it for their use.
DId not the water make more haste than good speed; when it ran down-hill with
such a force that they could hardly make any dams to save it? Aristotle's
description of Water, is but slight who describes it by this, that it can
hardly be contained within it is own bounds, vix continetur in suis terminis,
facile in alienis, but this sad occasion may make us think of it; for it was
found very difficult to stop it in it is career: yet I think the main reason was
it is running down so great and steep precipices, rather then it is natural
extravagancy, and aptness to transgress it is bounds. But let the cause be what
it will, that which I would observe is, that by overdoing, it undid; it came
not at all or not considerably to their help and aid because it came too fast.
So, blood and spirits flowing too fast to any part of the body that is
mis-affected (as to the side in a pleurisy) give no relief but do hurt. How
good were it, if men knew when and where to stop? He was a wise man (though he
called himself a simple Cobbler) who advised that men would unload on this side
Munster, and take heed of overthrowing Charles his Wain: Nor was he a fool that
observed, that some men make so much haste out of Babylon that they run beyond
Jerusalem. There is no good Music to be made, unless men will keep their due
Stops.

MEDITATION XXX. Upon men's being unwilling there should be no fire, though fire
has done so much hurt.
AFter all the mischief that fire has done in the world, first and last, none
would be content there should be no such thing as fire. Though sometimes we are
the worse for it, yet it would be worse for us to be always without it. The use
of things that are greatly useful ought not to be taken away, because they have
been abused, or may be so. For by that reason the Scripture might be withheld
from the common people, or denied them in their mother tongue, because some
passages in the Epistles of Paul, have been wrested by ignorant people to their
own destruction. And by the same reason there should be no Universities,
because some, with the learning they have there received, have contended not
for, but against the truth: yea, no Preaching, because some have done more hurt
then good in their Pulpits; Yea, upon that account, men might declame against
Christ himself; For that Christ has been, and will be to some a
stumbling-stone, and a Rock of offense, and says of himself, that, in one
sense He came not to send peace upon the earth, but a sword.

They that would banish all good things out of the world have ever argued from
this very Topic that such and such things have at one time or other done hurt,
and may do so again; so has fire when they resolve to abandon it, and never
use it more: then, and not till then, shall I believe they are true to their
principles. When the use of things is greater than the abuse, but especially
when, and where the abuse of good things may be effectually provided against,
to suppress the use of them, is a thing that can never be answered.

MEDITATION XXXI. Upon the usefulness of fire in it is proper place, and the
danger of it elsewhere.
FIre on a safe Hearth, or in a good Furnace, or Oven, how useful is it? What
almost can be done without it? Yet what more pernicious than the same fire, if
it chance to burn where it should not. Some have expressed it thus, that Fire
is a good Servant but a bad Master. Solomon says, Light is good, and it is
pleasant to behold the Sun. The same is true of Fire, especially in the Winter
time which we use to commend by the name of a fine Sunny-bank. But if it happen
to get into a reek of hay, or into a stack, or field of Corn, or into the
Timber of a house: Oh! What work does it oft-times make? Men have their proper
places assigned them by God, as well as Fire. In case they be of nimble active
and fiery Spirits, let them but keep within their bounds, and they will do no
hurt. Yea, the liveliness of their spirits may enable them to do the more good.
But if servants once come to ride on Horseback, and make their Masters go on
foot; if inferiors will become the head, and make their Superiors the tail;
if young Phaetons will get into the Chariot of the Sun, nothing but mischief
and confusion can ensue. How good is the Apostle's advice Every man whereunto
he is called, therein let him abide with God.

MEDITATION XXXII. Upon the Blowing up of Houses.
MEthinks that saying concerning Babylon is very dismal: Happy is he that
shall take thy children and dash their brains against the stones. Next to the
dolefulness of that time, seems to be the misery of that sad season in which
men rose up and called them blessed, who would do that good office, as to blow
up their houses, lest they and many more should perish together. Did we ever
think that a time would come, when men would beg, and entreat that not only
their neighbors houses might be blown up, but their own also, and count
themselves beholden to them that would do it? God's ways in Judgments, as well
as Mercies, are above ours, as far as the heavens are above the earth. I cannot
but think, what a name that way of Blowing-up-houses has gotten; how much it
is applauded and how much men lament that it was either not considered or not
permitted sooner. We are thankful to men that do us good, though by harshest
remedies, and why should we not be so to God, when he is pleased to teach us
obedience to himself, though it be by briars and thorns (as Gideon taught the
men of Succoth); when he prevents or abates our pride, though it be by sending
a messenger of Satan to buffet us. But how quickly was a great and stately
House, first blown up, and then laid flat upon the ground? It was but as it
were a flash of lightning, then a clap of thunder, then one jumpt upwards (as
if it had been that it might take the greater Fall); then a great smoke, and
presently all was in the dust. Scarce could a strong hand have sooner shuck in
pieces the rotten branches of an old worm-eaten tree; yea, scarcely could it
have made the over-ripe fruit of a tender plant (as it might be the Vine) to
fall sooner to the ground then many goodly Fabrics by the irresistible force
of Gunpowder were shaken to pieces, and presently laid in the dust.

How easy is the dissolution of any earthly thing? The way of making things is
as it were up-hill; men puff and blow at it, and are out of breath, and must
take time. But destruction is a precipice. Things no sooner begin to tumble
from the top, but they are presently at the bottom of that hill. Gunpowder
it is self is the most easily ruined, and destroyed of any thing; Thousands of
Batrels if they lie together may be blown up by means of one spark, and yet no
earthly creature so able to destroy as is Gunpowder; so that it should seem
nothing, is more Passive, and yet nothing more active then that. So have I
observed amongst men that none are so apt to ruin others as those that are
most apt to ruin or be ruined themselves. As destructive a thing as Gunpowder
is, did we not owe the preservation of what was preserved to that under God,
and to them that had the courage to use it, more then to any thing else.
Sometimes there is no way to save the most but by destroying a part; so that
high Priest prophesied, that it was of necessity that one should die for the
people; though other-whiles if you destroy any, you can save none, as Paul told
them that were with him, Except these abide in the ship you cannot be saved.
Men skilful to destroy, if they knew when to use their faculty, and when to
forhear it, might be very serviceable; forasmuch, as destruction in part, is
sometimes the only way to deliverance; as there is no way to save the life of a
man that has a Gangered-Limb, unless you cut it off.

But, Why was this way of blowing up Houses no sooner thought of, (being so
effectual as it is)? nothing could be more obvious; but God is wont to blind
those whom he intends to ruin. Quos Jupiter perdere vult, dement^t; We read,
that The men of might have not s^^nd their hands, Psalm. 76.5. and, if not their
hands, what could they find? But, Was this way timely thought of? Was it
motioned, and would it not be hearkened to? That is more than I know: But, if it
were so, the cause was either vain Commiseration; thinking, What pity it was,
to Blow up here and there a House; not considering, How much better it was to
do so, than to let the whole City perish: Better one Jonas be thrown
overboard, than the whole Ship be cast away. Thus, some Physicians destroy
their Patients, by not admitting of more generous, though more venturous
Medicines; when the Disease is such, as will not be played, or dallied with.
Or, Timerousness might be the cause; They might fear to be called in question
for giving way to the Blowing up of Houses: But, Magistrates should overlook
private-Concerns, when they are satisfied what will be for publick-Good. Some
perhaps do judge, it proceeded from Covetousness, that r^ot of all evil: But,
Who is so covetous, as to let a Ship and all ^^s Fraught be lost, rather than
throw a part of its Lading into the Sea, whereby to secure the rest? More
attribute it to carelessness, security, and pre^^mption; as thinking those
slames much more easily extinguishable than indeed they were; and that they
might draw waters enough (...) their own Gisterns (to allude to Prove. 1.15.)
wherewith to put it out; which is a modester phrase then is said to have been
used in the case: It is a very weak Cordial, that some, it may be, do comfort
themselves (...); viz. That, if ever London be first Built, and then F^^d
again, in any part of it, they will not fail to Blow up Houses in good time:
Now the Steed is stolen, be fure to shut the Stable-door. But, I shall conclude
this Meditation with my best wishes; That, if the will of God be so, we may
never hear more the sound of the Trumpet, and the Alarm of War. nor yet (which
is to many more dreadful than the former) the doleful noise of Blowing up of
Houses.

MEDITATION XXXI. Upon proventing the beginning of Evils.
HOw good is it to take things in time, to meet a Disease, as the Poet phraseth
it; Venienti occurrere morbo: How many complain, at first, of nothing but a
Cold; that cold turns to a Fever; that fever from Benign to Malignant; and,
that Malignity ends in Death. Sometimes the scratch of a Pin, not seasonably
looked after, Festers and Gangrenes, and does cost men their Lives. Most Men
think, that, if so effectual means, as were used at Iast, had been known at
first, at leastwise considered; or rather, if not only known and considered
of, but also resolved upon, and prosecuted; that Fire, which, at last, carried
all before it, had been stisled, as it were, in its Cradle. But alas! for poor
Mankind, it is generally one aggravation of their miseries, that some way was
made for their escape, and they were not sensible of it till it was too late:
Not incountring a danger at the first, ordinarily springs from despising of it;
which to do, is a very evil and an impolitick thing: For usually, the greatest
things have but small beginnings; and that Cloud, which at first is no bigger
than a hand-breadth, may spread, till it cover all the face of heaven. How
great a flame does a little fire kindle, as the Holy Ghost speaks by St. James.
It is ill presuming, that things will constantly succeed so well as generally
they do; Fires have ordinarily been quenched without blowing up of Houses, but
it would not be so in this case.

Therefore it is good to suspect, and provide against the worst, as careful
Women do for a Quinsey, and give a remedy against it, when their Children have
but a fore-throat; though many sore-throats never end in a Quinsey. Abundans
cautela non weet: If we prepare for the worst, and it prove otherwise, the best
will help it self. I shall live in hope, that after so great a Warning given,
none will hereafter be Epimetheus, or offer to play an after-Game; but will
apply themselves to the remedying of Evils at their first coming. Solomon
speaking concerning Anger, says, The beginning of strife i^ as when one
lets out water; therefore leave off strife before it be meddled withal, Prove.
17.14. When Waters have begun to make a breath in those Banks which should have
kept them in; there is like to be such an inundation as will bea^ down all
before it; which Comparison is applicable to many more evils besides strife and
contention. Remedies too late applied, (like letting off blood in a Fever,
when the time for it is past,) do more hurt than good. For Citizens, to forbear
currying out their Goods, that they might attend upon quenching the Fire, when
it was past quenching, by any thing that they could do, (how well soever
intended,) was but to stay, and look on, whilst their Goods burnt, and, to
increase the ^lames, as well as their own gri^^ and loss by the burning of
them. I say again, Let men hence learn to take things in time; Remember Es^u,
of whom we read, Heb. 12.17. How that afterward, when he would have inherited
the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of repentance, (viz. in
his father, for having given it away from him,) though he sought it carefully
with tears. In the same words that Christ lamented Jerusalem, give me leave to
lament London, and say, O that thou had known, in this thy day, the things
that had concerned thy Peace: yea, let me add, Whenever another day of Grace,
and for prevention of evil, shall come, (as indeed the present time, though in
a more spiritual sense, is such a Day,) May we then know the things that
concern our peace, before they be hid from our eyes.

MEDITATION XXXII. Upon the City-Ministers, whose Churches were saved from the
Fire.
GIve a reason, if you can, Why your Churches were not burnt, as well as were
the most of your Brethrens? Why was an Ark provided for you, (whose number was
scarce twice eight,) when all the Ministers of London besides were (as such)
swept away by that Deluge of Fire, (if I may so call it,) which did then
overflow? Were you the only Noah's that were in the Old World? Were there no
Preachers of Righteousness but your selves? or, Did you help to build that Ark,
which saved you, as Noah did? I dare engage for you, You have more humility and
modesty than to think any such thing: You are convinced, God made a difference
where he found none. You hate in this case, to say, Ego me ipsum discrevi. You
know, no account is to be given of it; But that God will have mercy on whom he
will have mercy: God who acts all things according to the Counsel of His own
Will, has reasons for every thing he does, but we are not worthy to know them.
To be sure, those I did mention were none of them.

What a distinguishing mercy is it, that you have both sheep and folds, when
other Shepherds have neither folds nor sheep; their folds are burnt, their
sheep are scattered. Methinks it is time, All shops of meat are shut up, only
here, and there one, that has gotten a license, and what a thing is it, that
one of those licenses should fall to your share, there being so few of them as
are? When there were Ninty seven Churches standing in London, had you heard a
suspension was coming forth (for what reason you could not tell) against all
but twelve or sixteen of those Ninty seven Ministers, could you have imagined
that each of you should have been one of that privileged number, or as the
Disciples of Christ asked him one by one when he told them one should betray him
Master is it I? So would not you have asked, Am not I, one of those that are to
be suspended, and in case it had proved otherwise how thankful would you have
been? Such is your case now. Others have lost, and you have gained; Others have
no Congregations, and yours are greater then ever (and look like gathered
Churches made up of people collected out of several parts and Parishes) which
now come to hear you. You have received singular favor; does not God expect
you should do some singular thing? As Christ said to his Disciples, What
singular thing do you? Will you not think yours selves bound to shine with
double and treble so much light as formerly (if you can possibly) now that
there are so few public Lights left to shine in this part of the firmament.
Pray, that the spirit of Elias may be doubled upon you now that so many Elias's
(as you your selves accounted them) are taken away by that fiery Chariot I have
been speaking of. If you see such multitudes in your respective Churches as you
never saw there before, have compassion on them as Christ had, and labor to
send them away well fed, and satisfied. Your lips are now to preserve knowledge
for many more than they had wont to do; The fire has given you a kind of
Monopoly for preaching in these parts, and therefore you must needs have the
more Auditors; Forfeit not your Patent. I was a stranger to several of you, but
others of you I knew, whom I believe to be honest and ingenuous men, partly for
whose sake I am glad that those Candlesticks are still in being, which did and
do contain so serviceable Lights. As Noah being saved from the deluge, did
greatly help to increase the world; so, may you add daily to the Church such
as shall be saved; and then the worst I wish you, is, that a blessing from
heaven may attend your labors.

MEDITATION XXXIII. Upon those Ministers whose Churches were burnt.
THere was cause to fear some years since that Churches might be demolished,
not generally by fire (for of that there was no mistrust), but by those whom
the Scripture compares to water, viz. A rude multitude, I mean of deluded and
sick-brain people, who pretended that all Ministers, and their legal
Maintenance were Antichristian, Churches places of Spiritual whoredom; and
could as willingly have pulled them down, as if they had been so many
Brothel-houses. Was it any thing but a pretense? could they think as they
spoke? I should hardly believe men could be so mistaken, but that Christ
foretold some would think they should do God good service, even in killing his
Prophets: and Paul tells us, that when time was he verily thought he ought to
do many things against Jesus of Nazareth. They that thought it their duty to
oppose and vilify the places called Churches, would probably have taken it for
as great an honor to have demolished them themselves, as others might to have
burnt them; but he that sits in heaven would not gratify their ambition, but
put that work into the hand of the fire to do, which could no ways glory or
triumph in it when it was done. But that which I am now to discourse of, is
not, by whom but upon whom this Calamity came, viz. Concerning the Ministers
whose Churches were burnt. Now far be it from me and others to think that they
were greater sinners then other Ministers whose Churches stand to this day. I
cannot forget what Christ says, Luke 13.4. Suppose ye that those upon whom the
tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, were sinners above all men that dwelt at
Jerusalem; I tell you nay, but except you repent you shall all likewise perish.
Had these Ministers made Cock-pits of their Pulpits (as some elsewhere have
done); had they, like those toes of the cloven foot, which consisted partly of
Iron, and partly of clay, (to allude to Dan. 2.4.) come thither to trample upon
Magistracy and Ministry, in such railing Language as some that I have heard;
had they thence, like mad men, cast firebrands, arrows and death, Prove. 26.18.
truly, for that time, their Churches might have been spared; but such were the
labors of several of them, as will certainly be missed.

Neither can I choose, but reflect how dearly some of them (as is probable) will
miss their Livings, such I mean as have Wives and Children, and little or
nothing to live upon, but what came in that way; Few men make a worse shift in
the world than Scholars, especially Ministers when put out of their course;
They that have lived as it were out of the world, can worst of all skill how to
live in it. Swords may be beaten into Ploughshares, so cannot Books; Moreover
the liberalness, and ingenuousness of the Education of Scholars makes them
greater objects of pity than many others are, when poverty overtakes them. It
is pity, that they who desire to live, that they may study, should be put upon
studying little else, but how to live. One half years time, without the help of
a Living, may so pinch some honest Ministers, who have great Families, as that
they can scarcely bear it. They may have hope, the grass will grow again, but
they fear, lest mean time the Steed should starve. What shall be done for those
Ministers whom only the fire has sequestered? How shall they be provided for?
There is a saving of Christ in Luke 3.11. which, Analogically applied and
practiced, might go a great way, and it is this, He that has two coats, let
him impart to him that has none, and he that has meat let him do likewise.

But that which I have more hope of, is, that the Nobility and Gentry of
England, who either have or shortly may have good Livings to dispose of, will
lay to heart, how many worthy Laborers stand idle in the Marketplace since
the Fire, because there is none to set them on work; and will use their best
endeavors that they may be sent forth into Gods Vineyard. What God says of
Joshu^^h the High Priest, Zach. 3.2. Is not this a brand plucked out of the
Fire? is, methinks applicable to those Ministers whose Churches were burnt,
and themselves spared; (for what is a ^^and, but a stick partly burnt, and
partly unburnt); Now, as God was pleased to add concerning Joshu^, (...) away
the filthy garments from him, and I will clothe him with change of reiments.
Some such thing in a Moral sense, should the several Patrons in England,
resolve to do for those able Ministers, whose Churches were consumed, viz. To
invest them with Livings worthy of them, and suffer them no longer, as it were,
to were sackcloth, and to lie in ashes. The Statutes of some Colleges have
wisely provided, that when there is any competition for places of preferment,
caeteris (...), they that have most need of it, should be first chosen, they
that have least wealth should carry it, if they have as much worth. May Patrons
go by the same Rule, viz. To prefer the poorest first, which to do is as I may
call it Simony inversed, or the just opposite to base Simony: for where Simony
takes place, they that have most (and are most free to part with it) do always
carry it; but where Charity bears sway, the lot falls upon those that have
least. I see how you may exercise a threefold Charity in one, viz. Charity to
unimployed and impoverished Ministers, Charity to the places where and people
amongst whom you live, (For some Ministers do not more want good places, then
many places do want good Ministers): Yea, and Charity to your selves and
families, to whom honest and able Ministers would be no small blessings: Let me
therefore beg for such Ministers, as the Italians use to beg for themselves, by
saying to our Honorable Nobility, and Gentry, as they to those of whom they
ask, Pray remember to be good to your selves.

MEDITATION XXXIV. Upon the killing of several People by the falling of some
part of ruinous Churches.
MEn were never afraid, till of late, to pass by the outsides of Churches,
though there were not a few that did not much care to come within them: Alas,
that those places, in which many Souls have formerly been saved, by the
faithful Preaching of Gods Word, should now serve to no other end, but to
destroy men's Bodies. Seeing the greatest part of so many Churches were burnt,
How happy had it been for diverse persons if not one stone had been left upon
another, which had not been thrown down: Those tall Ruins, those high Trophies
of the Fire, have cost many lives already; and God only knows, how many more
they may cost first and last.

I was never the man that did, (as too many others,) wish the Churches down to
the very ground, till since the Fire; and, now I wish it with all my heart,
concerning as many of them as are burnt; for, Why should they stand to ruin
some, and to terrify all that pass by them, especially in a VVindy-season. I
know not to whom it belongs to take care, that ruinated-Buildings should be
quite pulled down; but, sure I am, they have had fair warning; and if they take
it not, by the same reason, That he who dug a sit, and ^^vered it not, in
case a beast fell into it, was to make satisfaction to the owner: and, that he,
whose Ox g^red another man's Ox to death, knowing that the Ox had wont to
push in time past, and the owner head not kept him in, wa^, by Moses his Law, to
pay Ox for Ox, and the dead was to be his own, Exodus 21.36. I say, by parity
of reason, ought they, who know the danger of Fragments of Churches, and other
Buildings, standing as they do, to satisfy for the lives of those Men and
Women, who shall happen hereafter to be killed by the fall of those places,
which it was their duty to have taken down: Great pity it is that so much
notice was not taken of the first person that perished by that means, as might
have prevented the destruction of all the rest; But, of that we speak too late.

Had those Churches been either persectly standing, or perfectly demolished,
they could have done no hurt; but, being between both, they were in a capacity
to do mischief; though, as for matter of service, they were in no capacity at
all. I am deceived if it be not just so with almost, but not altogether-ruin'd
Persons, as with Places of that sore; Though they can do, or receive little
good themselves, yet may they prove incomparably destructive to others,
(especially in such high-Winds as may blow;) and therefore prudence may
suggest, that such Persons, as are not judged worthy to be perfectly ruined,
and, as it were destroyed from off the face of the earth, had better be left
standing in some tolerable condition, than in such a tottering and ruinous way,
as, in case any violent tempest, or unexpected Herricaue should happen, might
endanger the ruin of many, upon whom they may chance to fall.

I cannot dismiss this Subject till I have considered how securely those
Persons, that were killed by the fall of ruinous-Buildings, may have been
supposed to have passed by them, till perchance their utter-destruction gave
them the first apprehensions of their dangers, or rather anticipated the
apprehensions of it. Alas! How unexpected a guest oft-times is Death? How often
does it draw the latch and come in upon men unawares, when they dream of
nothing less? How comes it like a thief in the night, when men are in a
profound sleep of security? It is like, those People thought, that seeing so
many persons had gone that way with safety the self-same-day; yea, it may be the
self-same-hour; so might they, as well as the rest: But, I see, there is no
Topic, from which men argue for security, (how probable soever,) but fails
them now and then; neither is there any safety in probable immunity, from
sudden death, but only in due preparation for it. As for those, who have often
passed to and fro the Ruins, and by the sides of tottering-Walls, but never
received any hurt: I wish they may consider, How infinitely they are bound to
God for the gracious watchfulness of his good Providence over them, and for
putting so vast a difference betwixt them and others, as not to let them lose
one hair of their heads by ruinated-Buildings, whereby others have lost their
lives: And, may such, as have occasion to pass-by such places from day to day,
duly consider, That God has created more dangers than were formerly; and
therefore ought they to walk with more circumspection than they had wont to do,
and to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long; and to be in readiness for
the worst that can befall them; as men that carry their lives in their hands,
and do walk in the midst of menacing-perils. There is a Promise, (if I may so
call it,) Job. 5.23. that it were good for a man to have interest in,
especially at such a time as this; Then shall be in league with the stones, as
well as the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.

MEDITATION XXXV. Of the Fire, its not exceeding the Liberties of the City.
When I consider the Compass this fire took, how far it went, and where it
stopped, I see cause to wonder at several things; First, That it did burn
much-what about the Proportion of the whole City, within the Walls; that is to
say, look how much was left standing within the Walls, (as if it had been by
way of exchange and compensation,) so much, or thereabouts it burnt without,
Secondly, That though it threw down the Gates, and got without the Walls, yet
it no where went beyond the Liberties of the City of London; as if the Bars had
been a greater fence against it, (which indeed were no sense at all) than the
Gates and Walls could be. Had the Citizens gone in Procession, or had the Lord
Mayor and his Brethren took a Survey of the Bounds and Limits of their
Jurisdiction, they could not have kept much more within compass than the Fire
did. Did not he who sets bounds to the Sea, and says to the proud waves
thereof, ^hitherto shall thou go and no further; I say, did not he say the same
thing to those proud stames? How admirable is the work of God, in causing
Creatures that are without Reason, yea, without Life, to act, as if they well
understood what they did? Does he not cause the dayspring to know its place,
Job 38.12. and the Sun to know its g^ing down, Psalm 104.19. The Storck in the
heavens, knows her appointed time, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
Swallme, observe the time of their coming, Jer. 8.7. When I consider, how the
fire took just such a proportion, as if it had been marked out, it brings to
mind that usual saying, That God does all things in weight and measure, and
makes me think of such passages of Scripture, as where God says, Isaiah 28.16.
that He would lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet. Also,
where God speaks of a people meted out ( viz. for destruction, Is^. 18.2. and
7.) and trvden under fo^t: Also, where it is said of God, that He weighed out a
path to his anger, Psalm 78.50. Which we translate, that He made a way to his
anger, the meaning is, He did proportion it, as if he had dispensed it by
weight.

How great a Mercy was it, that the Suburbs were spared, considering, how
great, how populous, and how poor they were? Being so great and capacious, they
can contain all the exiles of the City; but, it had been impossible for the
City, if it had stood, and they had been burnt, to have contained all the
outcasts of the more spacious Suburbs. Considering their populousness, if the
fire had fallen to their lot, possibly, five times so many persons as now are,
had been undone; and so many families had been reduced to utmost penury, as all
England had scarce been sufficient to relieve. Lastly, considering, their
Poverty they had much more generally been unable to bear their losses than
Citizens, or those within the Walls were. Neither was the sparing of the
Suburbs, a thing more desirable, than it was improbable, when the fire was in
its Meridian or Zenith, if I may so call it. For, as the Sun, which sets out in
the East, finisheth not its race, till it come about to the West: so did this
dreadful Fire threate^ not to stop, till it had run thorough the Suburbs as
well as the City its self. But God, who causes it to rain upon one City, and
not upon another, and, who kept that Storm of fire from falling upon Zoak,
which destroyed Sodom and three other Cities, of that which was called
Pentapolis, He thus divided the flames of fire, that most parts of the City
should have their share, but the Suburbs, though in great danger, should have
none. I think, if men had designed, to have burnt so far^ and no further, as
easy as it was to kindle, it was hard to extinguish such a fire, when, and
where they would: But if any malicious persons, did conduct it so far, and
there leave it, What they have done secretly, will one day be proclaimed upon
the Housetop.

MEDITATION XXXVI. Upon the Suburbs coming into more request then ever, since
the fire.
HOw much more considerable are the Suburbs now, than they lately were? Some
places of despicable termination, and as mean account, but a few months since,
such as Hounds-ditch, and Shorditch, do now contain not a few Citizens of very
good fashion. Philosophers say, that Corruptiounius est generctio alterius: so
was the marring of the City, the making of the Suburbs. What rich commodities
cannot the Suburbs now supply us with, which heretofore could be had only
within the walls. Time was that rich Citizens would almost have held their
Noses, if they had past by those places where now it may be they are
constrained to dwell: they would hardly have kept the dogs of their fl^ck (to
use Jobs words with some variation) where now they are forced to keep
themselves. Had London been standing; in the places where some of them do now
inhabit, Zijim and Ochin^ might have dwelt for them, and the Satyrs might have
danced there (to allude to Isa. 13.21) In how great request at this day, is
poor Piedmont as I may call it ( Southwark I mean) which lay submissively at
the feet of London, like an humble valley at the foot of a high mountain? What
multitudes of Citizens have flockt to it, as glad to be free amongst those that
were not free themselves, the fire having as it were broken down the
partition wall, betwixt those that were Freemen of London, and those that were
not.

If the Suburbs had been burnt, VVhither would the Inhabitants have sled? Trade
within the VValls they might not, as Citizens may without; which liberty they
having now taken, (as it is their due;) What are the Suburbs now becon^, but as
it were the inside of the late-Famous City, carried and placed without the
Walls? London its self (by a kind of (...)) the Soul of the City, being now
translated into the Body of the Suburbs: So that he, who would now look for
London, must look for most of it, not within, but without the Walls. How easy
is it with God to pull down one and set up another? To pluck the mighty from
their seat, and to exalt the poor and needy? We read, though in another sense,
that every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made
low. Who can but think of ^^ann^h's words, showing, how God turns the World
up-side-down like a Wheel, the uppermost Spoke whereof is quickly down, and
the lowest at the top, 1 Samuel 2.5. They that were full have hired out
themseives for bread, and they that were hungry have ceased: So that the barren
have ^orn seven, and she that has many children is waxen fe^ble: And Verse. 7.
The (...) makes p^or, and makes rich; he brings low, and lists up. It is
good counsel that an excellent man gives, viz. That we should despise no man's
present condition, seeing we do not know his Destiny. It should seem, the poor
despised Suburbs were destined to hold up their heads more than ever, when the
noble City should lie in dust and ashes, as now it does. Let L^ndoners not
think much of it, that the providence of God has cast them without the Gates
and VValls of London; but, rather consider of such expressions as those, Heb.
13.12, 13, 14. How that Christ suffered without the Gate; Let us go therefore
to him without the Camp, bearing his reproach. For here we have no continuing
City. I say, Let them think of those words, and prepare for another-guise
suffering without the Gate, than as now they do; and bearing another-guise-
reproach than now they bear, for this is next to none; it being more proper to
say, and think, That they have made the Suburbs honorable; than, That the
Suburbs have made them despicable.

MEDITATION XXXVII. Upon the Tongue being a Fire, etc. James 3.6.
When the Scripture would express how mischievous a Member an evil Tongue is,
it says, It is a Fire. Fire has done a world of mischief one time or other,
and so have evil Tongues; whereupon it is added, That the Tongue is a world of
iniquity. There is a fire that is called Ignis fatuus (quod efficit tales;)
because it makes fools of men, leading them out of their way: So Solomon,
speaking concerning a young man seduced by a Harlot, says, With her much fair
speech she caused him to yield, Prove. 7.21. Fire from small beglnnings spreads
it self very far, so do the evils of men's Tongues. So, Solomon speaking of a
Fool, faith, The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the
end of his talk is mischievous madness, Eccles. 10.13. They are high
expressions which St. James uses concerning the Tongue, telling us, that it
desileth the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and it is
set on fire of Hell.

By setting on fire the course of nature, we may understand those great
Combustions which the tongues of men have made in the World, of which there
are three famous Instances that come to mind, sufficient to demonstrate that,
so as men may use and employ their Tongues, by means thereof the whole World
may be put into a flame. How did the Princes of Succoth fire Gideon, by that
upbraiding Question mentioned Judge. 8.5. Are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunnah
now in thy hands, that we should give bread unto thine Army? To which he
replied, When the Lord shall give Zeba and Zalmunnah into mine hands, then
will I te^r your flesh with the briars of the wilderness, and with thorns: And
we know he was as good as his word. Did not Nabals churlish Tongue kindle such
a fire in David's breast, as might have consumed all his family, if the greater
prudence of Abigail his wife had not seasonably extinguished it, 1 Samuel 25.10.
It was gone so far, that David had sworn, He would not leave of them that did
pertain to Nabal by the morning-light any that pissed against a wall, Verse. 22.
And all this because of a provoking Answer he sent him, saying, Who is David?
Many servants nowadayes break away from their Masters, etc. Yea, the Tongue of
David himself, (at what time he came with a lie in his mouth to Abimelech)
proved no otherwise than a fire, which did consume at once four-score and five
of the Lords Priests, 1 Samuel 22.19. By the same reason, that so great
Combustions were raised by a few sparks falling from the Tongues of particular
men, may the whole World be destroyed by the fire of men's Tongues, such, and
so great as it may be, which may give us an account, of what the Text says
concerning the Tongue, its setting on fire the whole course of nature; Now,
whereas he adds that he Tongue it is self, is set on fire of hell, methinks he
speaks of a wicked Tongue, as if it were a sacrifice, a Holocaust to the Devil
(as the Apostle says in another case; The things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they s^crifice to Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10.20.) For whereas the
sacrifices which God did accept were kindled by sire from heaven, a depraved
Tongue, is said to be kindled by a fire, worse then that which is common, viz.
by fire from hell, as if it were in token of the Devils preparing, and
challenging of it for himself.

Yet as ill a construction as calling the tongue a fire, may bear in one sense;
yet in another acceptance of that Metaphor, the Tongue ought to be a Fire, and
it is its excellency so to be. The holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, in
the form of fiery cl^ven tongues, Act. 2.3. God did touch the mouth of his
prophet with a coal from his altar, in token that his iniquity was taken away,
and his sin purged Isa. 6.7. There are words that may be used to enemies which
would be like heaping coals of fire upon their heads, in that good sense that
S^l^mon wishes us so to do. May my tongue be such a sire as one of these, may
it be a flame breaking forth, to vent, and express a fire of God that burns
within: may it be a fire consuming the vices of others by faithful admonitions,
and reproofs, in kindling and increasing zeal in others, by warm and
affectionate counsels; a fire refreshing the hearts of others by a due and
seasonable application of divine and comfortable considerations. They whose
tongues are a fire in the worse sense, viz. inflaming the world with
contention, concupiscence, and other noisome lusts, shall have for their reward
sharp arrows of the Almighty with coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120.4. Yea, the time
is coming, when, in case they repent not, they shall cry out with Dives, Father
Abraham, send ^^z^arus that he may dip the tip of hi^ singer in water, and cool
my tongue, tormented in this flame, Luke 16. As fire is one of usefullest
things in the world, when well employed; so is the Tongue of man; (therefore
called his glory): but as that, when it exceeds it is bounds, is greatly
pernicious, so are the Tongues of men; and therefore, look what care is taken
to keep fire within our Chymnies, and other places proper for it, the like
should be taken to set a watch before the door of our lips, that we offend not
with our Tongues: no wonder S. James should say, that He who offends not in
words, is a perfect man, ^ble to bridle the whole body. For, he that can master
his tongue can master fire, which of all creatures is most untameable.

MEDITATION XXXVIII. Upon the Angels being called flames of fire, Heb. 1.
IS it for their Agility, or for their spirituality, or for their great power,
or for their likeness to God that Angels are called flames of five? or rather,
is it not for all of these? How quickly does a flash of lightnings shoot its
self from East to West? Nor are the Angels of God less nimble. Light and fire
(and slames comprehend both) are as spiritual bodies as any we know, the fitter
therefore to resemble those who are mere Spirits, and as the Text calls them
ministering Spirits. The power of fire, and particularly in destroving, we know
to our cost. And did that single Angel show himself less powerful, who in one
night destroyed a hundred fourscore and five thousand men belonging to the host
of Senacherib, Isa. 37.36. It is not for nothing, that Angels are called
Principalities and Powers. Neither have good Angels less power to save, than to
destroy, when they are appointed thereunto. God himself being called a fire, it
is probable enough, that Angels go by the same name, because of the resemblance
which they bear to God, who have more of Gods image than man himself though man
has more of it then all other creatures. The Chariots of fire which Elisha
saw, 2 King. 6.17. What were they, but so many Angels of God that were sent to
guard him which made him say, there were more with than against him. Yea, the
fiery chariot in which Elijah was said to have been taken up to heaven,
possibly was no other then a convoy of Angels, such as carried Lazarus into
Abraham's bosom. How happy are the Servants of God in having a guard of Angels?
How safe are they, being compassed about with such walls of fire? No wonder,
that the righteous are more bold than a Lion, as Solomon speaks; wild beasts
are afraid of fire, and if there be a sort of men as savage as they, yet can
those good Angels which God has ordered to protect his people, keep those
Salvages in awe. What a comfort is it that God has such nimble Messengers to
dispatch upon any expedition for our good? An host of Angels can be with us
presently, even as soon as lightning can glance thorough the air. It is well
for believers that Angels are so powerful that they excel in strength, seeing
they are theirs, appointed to minister for their good. In how much less danger
are Gods children many times, than they apprehend themselves, because their
guard is spiritual and invisible; which made Elisha's servant more afraid one
while than otherwise he would have been, and than afterward he was. If every
Angel be a flame of fire, what the Prophet told his man in another case, may be
applied in this, There are more (flames and fires I mean) with Gods people than
are against them.

MEDITATION XXXIX. Upon the word of God it is being compared to fire, Jer. 23.29.
HOw shall we understand that question, Jer. 22.29. It not my word like as a
fire says the Lord? Wherein consists the resemblance betwixt the word of God
and fire? Surely it is warnting the hearts of men in whom it takes place, is one
reason of it is being so called: For so said the Disciples of Christ Did not our
hearts even burn within us, whilst he opened the Scriptures to us? Luke 24.32.
Or else it may be so called from it is efficacy; in which sense it is also
called a Hammer which breaks the rocks in pieces: Fire is able to demolish
the strongest places, of which we many have sad instances at this day; and so the
Word is said to be mighty through God to pull down strong holds. We read of
Gold tried by fire, 1 Pet. 1.7. and is not the Word of God a trying thing? It
is said (I shall not here examine in what sense) that God sent forth his word
and tried Joseph. Psalm. 10.19. Who knows not the purifying nature of fire,
whereby metals are refined? and did not Christ ascribe the like virtue to his
Word, saying, Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken to you? What
more piercing then fire, and in that ^espect also, it is much an Emblem of the
Word of God, which is said, to be sharper than a two-edged sword piercing to
the dividing a-sunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, Heb.
4.12.

These are but some of the Parallels that might be made, betwixt the word of
God and Fire. He, whose word it is, would have it to be as Fire. And if it be
Fire, where it has once broken out, and got head, it will be hard to smother
or suppress it (as that Evangelical Fire, which was kindled by Luther in
Germany, could never be extinguished to this day). Saint Paul says, though he
suffered bonds, yet the word of God was not bound, 2 Timothy 2.4. And in Phil.
1.12. he says, that the troubles which befell him, had happened rather to the
furtherano^ ^f the Gospel; and many did wax confident by his bonds, to speak
the word without fear. If the word of God be Fire (as it is), I wonder not that
there are such combustions in the world by means of it; as Christ, telling us
what (through the corruption of men) would ensue upon his Gospel, says, He
came not to send peace upon earth, but a sword, Mat. 10.34. It is not Gods
word, but something else those men would have, who would have nothing preached
to them, that should be as fire to consume their Lusts, or to make their
consciences smart, at the remembrance of them. That which is not apt to search
and pierce, is nothing akin to fire, and therefore cannot be the word of God,
which is said to be quick and powerful as fire its self. The fires which God
kindles for the good of the world (whereof his word is one of the chief) woe
be to any that shall go about to quench. Quenching of prophesying is next unto
quenching of the Spirit, yea, and is one way of doing it, as Divines observe.

I see cause, to bless the God of heaven, who has created some fires as
profitable as others are mischievous, namely, his word for one, a fire that
never does hurt, otherwise than by accident (neither indeed would other fires,
kept within their due bounds) but so much good, as no tongue can express. O
Lord, that through thine insinite goodness, I might experiment in my self and
others, all those excellent properties of fire meeting in thy word, of which I
have now been speaking; that my heart and theirs might burn within us at the
hearing of it, as did the hearts of thy Disciples, that it may be mighty
through thee to pull down all the strongholds of Sin and Satan that are
within us, that it might try us as gold is tried in the fire, and at the same
time resined and purisied; that it might pierce, unto the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow; that the sin, which is, as it
were, bred in our bones, may be gotten out of the very flesh. May the fire of
thy word, have such influence as this upon us, we shall then be sure to escape
the fire of thy wrath, and to arrive to that happiness, which is called, The
inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12.

MEDITATION XL. Upon the spoiling of Conduits and other Aqueducts, by this Fire.
Methinks the several Conduits that were in London, stood like so many little
(but strong) Forts, to confront and give check, to that great enemy, Fire, if
any occasion should be. There, methinks the water was, as it were, entrenched
and ingarrisoned. The several Pipes and Vehicles of water, that were within
those Conduits, all of them charged with water, till, by the turning of the
Cocks, they were discharged again; were, as so many Soldiers within those
Forts, with their Muskets charged, and ready to be discharged upon the drawing
of their several Cocks, to keep and defend those places. And look how Enemies
are wont to deal with those Castles, which they take to be impregnable, and
despair of ever getting by storm, viz. to attempt the starving of them by a
close Siege, intercepting all provision of Victuals from coming at them; so
went the fire to work with those little Castles of stone, which were not easy
for it to burn down (witness their standing to this day); spoiled them or
almost spoiled them it has for present, by cutting off those supplies of
water, which had wont to slow to them, melting those leaden Channels, in which
the water had wont to be conveyed to them, and thereby, as it were, starving
those Garrisons, which they could not take by storm.

What the Scripture speaks of the Land of Jordan, that it was well watered
every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom, even as the Garden of the Lord,
like the Land of Egypt (made fruitful by the River Nilus); the same might have
been said of London before this fire, It was watered like Paradise its self:
yea, whereas Paradise had but one River, (though it parted into four heads,
Genesis 2.10.) London had two at least, deviding its self, or rather divided into
many branches, and dispersing its self several ways. For, besides the noble
River of Thames, gliding not only by the sides, but through the bowels of
London, there was another, called the New-River, brought from Hartfordshire
thither, by the industry and ingenuity of that worthy and never to be forgotten
Knight, Sir Hugh Middleton, the spring of whose deserved fame is such, as the
late Fire its self (though the dreadfullest of all that we have known) has
not, nor will not be able to dry up; but continue it will, a Fountain of praise
and honor, bubling up to all posterity.

As nature, by Veins and Arteries, some great, some small, placed up and down
all parts of the Body, ministers blood and nourishment to every member
thereof, and part of each member; so was that wholesome Water, which was as
necessary for the good of London, as blood is for the life and health of the
body, conveyed by Pipes, wooden or metalline, as by so many veins into all
parts of that famous City. If water were, as we may call it, the blood of
London, then were its several Conduits, as it were, the Liver and Spleen of
that City (which are reckoned as the Fountains of blood in humane bodies) for
that the great Trunks of veins conveying blood about the body, are seated
there, as great Roots fixed in the Earth, shooting out their branches diverse
and sundry ways. But alas! how were those Livers inflamed, and how unfit have
they been since to do their wonted Office? What pity it is, to see those
breasts of London (for so I may also call them) almost dried up: and the poor
Citizens mean time so loath as they are, to be weaned from their former place.
They were lovely streams indeed, which did refresh that noble City, one of
which was always at work, pouring out its self when the rest lay still.

As if the Fire had been angry with the poor old Tankard-bearers, both Men and
Women, for propagating that Element which was contrary to it; and carrying it
upon their shoulders as it were in State and Triumph; it has even destroyed
their Trade, and threatened to make them perish by fire, who had wont to live by
water. Seeing there are few or none to suck those Breasts at this day, the
matter is not so great; if they be almost empty and dry at present, may they
but sill again, and their Milk be renewed, so soon as the honest Citizens shall
come again to their former scituations. O Lord, that it might be thy good
pleasure to let London be first restored, and ever after preserved from Fire;
and when once restored, let it be as plentifully and commodiously supplied with
water as ever it was formerly: Make it once again as the Paradise of God; but
never suffer any destroying Serpent any more to come there.

MEDITATION XLI. Upon the Retorts and Reproaches of Papists, occasioned by this
fire.
Methinks I hear some Reman-Catholicks, (as they are pleased to call
themselves,) saying, Some of your Protestants did confidently foretell, That
within this present year 1666 Rome should down; Babylon should fall; Antichrist
should be destroyed: But, now your own City is destroyed in the selfsame-year;
which (according to you) does show, that London was the true- Babylon, and that
the true Antichrist is amongst your selves. Yet, upon due examination, it will
be found, that there is as little strength in the Argument which they have
brought, as there is sense in the name whereby they are called, viz.
Roman Catholics: which is as much as to say, Members of the particular
Universal-Church; or of that part of the Church which is the whole; or of Rome,
which is all the World. We read of Names of blasphemy which were upon the
heads of the Beast, Rev. 13.1. But, as if that were not sufficient they have
added a Name, which is perfect nonsense for the reason aforesaid; but, that by
the way. Their design is, to prove, that Antichrist is amongst us; and, that
London was that Mystical- Balylon so often spoken of, according to what was
lately found in a Seditious Libel; Do to South-Babel, etc. meaning to the
Southern-part of London yet standing, etc. But alas! How weak are the
Premises from which they have drawn these conclusions.

Their Argument put into a Syllogism, is this; If London were destroyed the
self-same-year in which some did Prophecy that Babylon and Antichrist should
be destroyed; then is London that which the Scripture calls Babylon and
Antichrist amongst the Protestants: But London was, etc. E^go. If the World
mistake not, some of you have proved the Minor so strongly, ( viz. the
destruction of London,) and in such a year, that no body can disprove it: But,
the consequence of the Major-Proposition has no force at all in it; For, what
if some did Prophecy the destruction of Babylon and Antichrist in 66, and
London only was destroyed that year, from what Principle of Scripture, or
Reason, can you thence infer, that London is Mystical- Babylon? For, first of
all, Who were they that did Prophecy such a thing? Were they not a few
inconsiderable Enthusiastical Men, to whom, not one Protestant of a thousand
gave credit? For, believe me, Enthusiasts and Protestants are no convertible
terms; forasmuch as not every hundredth or thousandth Protestant is any thing
of an Enthusiast. We do not use to charge upon your Church the Extravagant
Bablings of one or a few particular Papists, but the professed Doctrines and
Tenets of that which yourselves call the Church of Rome. Do us the same right,
and forbear to charge upon Protestants, as such, what the Protestant Church
does disavow.

Possibly they were some of your own Religion, some Romanists, putting on the
mask of Protestants (as has bin usual with them to do, for sinister ends) who
foreknowing, that London would be burnt this year (as nothing is more easy,
than for men to know what themselves intend to do) gave out, that Babylon and
Antichrist would be destroyed in sixty six, for that very end, that when they
had once effected the burying of London in ashes, they might have some pretense
to write this Epitaph, Here lies Babylon, here lies that which was the feat of
the true Antichrist; thereby rolling away the reproach of Babylon and
Antichrist from themselves to whom it belongs, upon the Protestants whom it
concerns not.

But take heed how you deny Antichrist to be amongst you, for by that means
you quit one Argument, Sir. Edw. Sand. Spec. Europ.
which some of your writers have used to prove Rome to be a true Church, for
that it is said, that Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4.
But, if upon further consideration, you would not be known to have Antichrist
amongst you, let me tell you, that the Beast spoken of in Scripture, is so
thoroughly marked, that it is easy to distinguish him from the Protestant
Church, and from Rome heathenish and whatsoever else he would turn over his
name to. Methinks that one Text, 2 These. 2.4. would plainly enough decipher
Antichrist, if there were none but that, Who opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God,
sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. The Emperors of
Rome-heathenish sat not in the Temple of God, they were not within the pales
of the professedly Christian Church, therefore they were not the man of sin,
and Antichrist there spoken of, but he is to be sought and found amongst those
that are called Christians. Now amongst Christians there are none that exalt
themselves above all that are called God, that is, above all Magistrates which
are called Gods, challenging a Primacy and Supremacy to themselves over all
Christians, both Subjects and Princes; I say there are none that do so, but the
Popes of Rome successively: whence it comes to pass that Papists are wont to
refuse the Oath of Supremacy to their Native Prince, as believing not their own
Prince to be Supreme under God over his own Subjects, but the Pope of Rome over
both him and them. Moreover, who is it that fitteth in the Temple of God,
showing himself to be God, that is, assumeth to himself those things which are
proper and particuliar to God only, as namely, To forgive sins? For none can
forgive sins but God only: I say, who, but the respective Popes of Rome do
take upon them by their own power, and in their own name to forgive sin: the
grossness of which practice did first provoke Luther, of a staff Monk, to
become a zealous Protestant. Yea, who amognst those that were called
Christians, did ever exalt himself above all that is worshipped (by which may
be meant the true God), saving the respective Popes of Rome? And they have done
it time after time in taking upon them to dispense with the Commission of sin,
as with the taking of unlawful Oaths, and such like. Now God himself though he
remit sin to such as truly believe, and repent; yet he never did, nor, by
reason of the holiness of his nature, ever could give men free leave, and
license to do that which is sinful. It is true that God gave the Israelites
Commission to borrow the Jewels and Earings of the Egyptians, and never to
return them again: but that was not a liberty to steal; for God, Whose all
those things were, and whose are all things, was pleased to alienate the
propriety; to take those things from the Egyptians, and give them to the
Israelites.

A fourth Character of Antichrist, is, that his Coming is, with lying wonders,
verse. 9. that is, with feigned miracles. Now who amongst all that are called
Christians, trade so much (if at all) in those things, as does the Church of
Rome? How do the Romanists (they and only they) abound with miracles; and all
fictitious, and no other then gross imposture? Tell those people that have no
Bibles to consult, but what are in an unknown language or else perverted by a
false translation, or a corrupt gloss, I say, tell them the Antichrist is
amongst the protestants, and that London was the Mystical Babylon of which the
Scripture speaks, Sic notus Ulysses? Is Antichrist no better known, think you,
to them that have seen his Picture and Description in holy Writ. Alas! such
coarse Wares as is the ridiculous asserting of London to be Babylon, will go
off no where, but in a dark shop, or by a false light. Your blinded Moses, that
live as it were under ground, may be made to believe that Rome is the new
Jerusalem spoken of Rev. 21.1. and London what ever you please to call it, or
any thing else wherewith you shall think fit to delude them by those artifices
which you call Pious-Frands (which is as proper an expression as Pious-Devils):
but our people converse with the Sun, I mean the light of Scripture. They have
read the book of the Revelations of Saint John, and though they do not pretend
to understand every thing therein contained, yet they doubt not what is meant
by the beast's having seven heads and ten horns, Rev. 13.1. because they find
Saint John himself expounding it, Rev. 17.9. The seven heads are seven
mountains. And there are seven Kings (that is, Forms of governments) Five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, etc. These passages agree
and quadrate to Rome exactly. It was built upon seven Hills yet to be seen,
though some of them be now without the walls of the City. It had seven forms of
Government, whereof five were fallen in Saints John's time, viz. Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvir's, Dictators: one is, says he, that is, Emperors
were then in being, the other was not yet come, viz. Popes. But do these
expressions, all or any of them, agree to London, as they agree to Rome? Does
that stand upon just seven hills? Has that had just seven forms of Government,
five whereof were fallen in Saint John's time, and one other in being? With
what face then can you affirm London to be Babylon? But I see, Those men have
impudence enough to assert any thing, who have taught their followers to
believe every thing they please to assert.

A faith of Legends (and only that) may be sufficient to assure men that London
was Mystical-Babylon; for that I take to be more than a faith of Miracles: the
latter being a says of Possibles, the other of Impossibilities and
contradictions. Therefore though some of the sillier sort of Papists may
believe, and others may boldly assert the same though they believe it not (as
they do in many other cases): yet Protestants can never be persuaded to it
whilst the world stands; nor any other persons, that are from under the power
of gross Ignorance, or Prejudice: As for the name Antichrist, Who knows not
that it imports one that sets himself in the stead or place of Christ, as well
as against Christ; the Praeposition (...), signifying both pro, and con, that
is, as well For, as Against. Now, Who amongst those that are called
Protestants, can be charged with setting himself in the place of Christ, as if
he would be taken for Christ himself? But that do the Popes of Rome
successively, whilst they affirm to themselves, those things which are peculiar
to Christ alone, as namely Forgiveness of sin, etc. I had forborne this
discourse, but that I have been advertised of the reproaches of some of the
Papists, who, after the Baptism of fire we have lately undergone, go about to
Baptize us, and our City, with their spittle, by the names of Babylon and
Antichrist, due only to Rome, and Romanists: and God forbid that whilst
Papists do unjustly asperse Protestants (whose Religion is that which the Laws
of England does establish) Protestants should not have leave, and take heart
enough to vindicate themselves. In a word, if London be Mystical Babylon (so
confident am I it is not), let it never rise again; if Rome be not, let it
never fall: and, on the other hand, let Rome so fall as it proves to be Babylon
the great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, Rev. 17.5: and
let London so rise and flourish again (and only so) as it shall be found to be
otherwise.

MEDITATION XLII. Upon the Pains which the Kings Majesty is said to have taken
in helping to extinguish the Fire.
I Was no eyewitness, but have been informed, that when the Fire came near to
Cripplega^t, His Majesty being then and there present, did, in His own Person,
take great Pains (no less, as was told, then if He had been a poor Labourer,)
to promote the extinction of it. Possibly some weak and inconsiderate persons,
that saw His Majesty at that time stooping so low, might in their hearts
despise Him for it, (as Michal did David, for leaping and dancing before the
Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16. and 20.) saying in derision, How glorious was the King of
England to day? as she, How glorious was the King of Israel? etc. But wise and
religious persons, that had seen David in that posture, would have spoken the
same words in good earnest, which she spoke in scorn, meaning, as they said,
How glorious indeed was the King of Israel, whilst, transported with holy zeal,
he leapt before the Ark, which is called, Dancing before the Lord? The like can
I say from mine heart of our Dread Sovereign: How glorious was He in truth, and
in reality, when He took upon Him the form, or rather the work of a mean-man;
and vouchsafed His helping Hand to stop that dismal Fire, when it was in its
full carreer? Had I seen Him with His Crown upon His Head, His Scepter in His
Hand, His Noble Senators all waiting upon Him in their Parliament-Robes, or in
all the State in which He could have been seen, ( Cant. 3.11.) either on the
day of His Coronation, or of His Espousals; I could not have reverenced Him
more than I should have done, if I had beheld Him with a Bucket in His Hand,
pouring water upon the Flames; or than I do, so often as I think of Him in some
such posture of most kind and obliging condescension. Methinks it was but
equal that Christ should be more loved, but not less honored, when he humbled
himself so far, as to take a Towel, and therewith to wash, and to wipe his
Disciples feet, John 13.4.

Kings never act more like themselves than when they are doing good to their
Subjects, and are snatching them, or their Concerns, as firebrarnds out of the
Fire: forasmuch as the Scripture says, That Magistrates are the Ministers of
God to those that are under them for good, Romans 13.4. The Roman Emperors had
wont to issue out their Commands to their Soldiers, not in the third, but in
the first Person: So Pertinax his Word and Motto was Militemus; not, March ye;
but, Let us March on; (including himself.) So Septimius Severus his word was
Laboremus, Let us be doing. In like manner, our Gracious Sovereign is said to
have stretched forth His own Royal Hands to assist the putting out of those
Aspiring Flames, which seemed to expect a Princely Extinguisher: That was such
a kind of Royal Aid, as all Subjects must needs be in love with; and, Why not
more free to that other, which goes by such a name in the remembrance of this?
One of the Ancients did wish, to have seen Christ in the Flesh, Paul in the
Pulpit, and Rome in its ancient Glory. Much rather, at lest-wise than the last
of these, would I have seen that sight I am now speaking of, viz. His most
Excellent Majesty bestirring Himself, to give check to those Flames which
threatened to lay both His great City and Suburbs all in ashes. Who had the
faces to stand still and look on, (as many did at other times,) whilst their
Sovereign Himself was so employed? Whilst Princes work, Subjects cannot have
the confidence to be idle. Oh the power and efficacy of Princely Examples!
Regis ad exemplum, etc. When Princes will help to extinguish fires themselves,
the work is like to succeed; and when that is done, the greatest thanks are due
to them, next unto the King of Kings.

I wish, there were not many other fires at this day within the Bowels of this
Nation, viz. of fears and jealousies, envy and emulation, wrath and revenge,
dissatisfaction and discontent, dissension and division: May he, who is the
Wonderful, Counselor, and God only wise, instruct His Majesty, how, and which
way to extinguish them: and mean-time to increase one other fire (and only
that) viz. of love and affection; first to God, nextly to Himself, and then
amongst all his Subjects one toward another. Solomon tells of a poor man, who
by his wisdom saved a little City, when a great king came against it, and
besieged it, Eccles. 9.14. By this means may His Majesty save, and preserve,
not only one City but three Kingdoms, which those fires threaten to destroy:
(for our Savior tells us, That a kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand:) And though no man remembered that poor man (because he was poor) yet
when a more glorious action shall be done by a Princely hand, surely no man
will or can forget it. Will it not be a considerable accession of honor even
to a great King, to be enrolled amongst the Peacemakers, whom Christ
pronounces blessed? As for His Majesty's inclination to all such
Achievements, as sweetness of temper may induce men to, let all His Subjects
be well persuaded of, by the tears he shed, when he beheld the Flames of
London, which I had not reported but from a very credible Author. How amiable a
sight is it to behold Kings weeping over the miseries of their Subjects, and
what assurance does it give, that they will not be backward to redress them so
far as is within their power? Had His head been a fountain of tears, (as the
Prophet Jeremy upon occasion wished his own,) I doubt not but he had poured it
forth when he came near to Cripplegate, with resolution to do all a King could
do to put out those flames: May we always see a blessed contention betwixt our
King and his People, Which shall most resent and bewail each others sufferings;
Which shall most promote and rejoice in each others happiness!

MEDITATION XLIII. Of mere Worldlings, who lost their All by this Fire.
THis it is for men to venture all they have and hope for, in one bottom; and
that unfound and apt to leak: Some lay up no treasures for themselves any where
but upon earth; and upon earth there is no safe place to lay up treasures in:
but some are more hazardous than others, (as namely, House, subject to the
common casualty of fire;) and yet, some, who have contented themselves with a
portion in this World only, have laid up all there. So just is it with God to
let them be foolish, even in relation to Time, that would not be wise for
Eternity: weak, even as to this World, that would not be wise for the next. The
Prodigal, that desired to make sure of his Patrimony, by having all in hand,
presently spent it, and was reduced to husks: When he saw his error, surely he
became sensible, that less in possession, and more in reversion would have done
better. Were there not some, who, when they would bless themselves, (under a
presence of blessing God,) had nothing else to say, neither cared for any thing
else, but this, Blessed be God! for I am rich: But, in how small a time are
they become poor as Job! (as our Proverb is.)

Had they not fair Warning? Did not the Scripture charge them Not to trust in
uncertain riches? Did it not tell them, That Riches h^d ^^ings, and would fly
away? Alas! What will such People do? Whither will they turn themselves?
Interest in Heaven they never had any; and, interest on Earth they have none
left: They are in such like case as Saul was, when he said, The Philistims were
come up against him, and God was departed: Heaven and earth frowns upon them
both at once. Had you been in that case, that Christ would have had the Young
man in the Gospel to have put himself into, when he counseled him, To sell all
that he had, and give it to She poor; telling him, that if he would do so, He
should have treasures in Heaven; you had not been the hundredth part so
miserable; Yea, happy had you been, as to the main. But now, all sorts of men
conclude you in a woeful case; Good men do so, because you neither had nor have
any thing but this Worlds goods: Bad men, yea the worst of men, because you
have now lost what you had. But, mistake me not, as if I were urging People in
that case to despair. God forbid; I am so far from that, that I question not
but even they may be happier than ever they were heretofore, if the fault be
not their own: for, whereas before they had interest in the World, but none in
God; hereafter, may they have interest in God, which is far better, though
perchance they may have little or none in the World. Christ told the Church of
Laodicea in a spiritual sense, That she was miserable, and poor, and maked; so
are these men in both senses, viz. Spiritual and Temporal: but, let them take
that Counsel which Christ there gives, and all will be well, viz. Buy of Christ
gold tried in the fire, raiment, etc. All your losses may be reckoned as dross
and dung in comparison of your gains, if you shall gain this by your losses,
viz. To win Christ, and to be found in him. Say now, whether you your selves
were not the fools, and they whom you counted fools the truly wise, whose care
it was to lay up for themselves Treasures in heaven, where moth eats not, rust
corrupts not, thieves steal not; and, let me add, where fire cannot break in
and consume.

MEDITATION XLIV. Upon that Vorl^^rance which it becomes Citizens to use one
toward another since the Fire.
NOw the Fire has arrested so many honest Citizens, and made such woeful
distress upon them, what pity is it, that overhasty Creditors should clap in
their Actions upon them thick and threefold; as if seeing them stoop, they were
resolved to break them; or, thinking them fallen for the present, they would
never suffer them to rise more. If you think them well able to pay you
presently, and know yourselves unable to be without your moneys any longer,
that is another matter; or if you have reason to think they will not be honest,
unless you make them so by a surprise, and take them at an advantage, such
things may plead for you: but such as have to do with men that are not able to
pay their debts when they will, but willing to pay them when they are able, and
who in case they were forborne a while, might be as well able as willing to
satisfy every man; I say, where that is the case, to break men's backs with
over-hastiness a such a time as this, to give them no respite, that they may
recover their wind after the late calamity has run them out of breath, is
unchristian and more than heathenish unmercifulness. Will you needlessly add
affliction to the afflicted? Will you come like waves one in the neck of
another upon those that are almost sunk already? those that dashed upon Scylla
but a little before, will you throw them upon Charybdis? whereas, if they had
opportunity to make their Voyage, and might come safe to harbor, such might be
their success, that you would be no losers by them. Men can part with several
Pints of blood successively and by degrees, whereas, if you should take so much
from them all at once, they would be ready to faint and dye away. If the fire
has really undone men, do not you undo them yet more; If that have taken away
all their Estates, do not you seize their Bodies; as if it were not misery
enough for men to have nothing to live upon, unless they also lie and languish
in a Prison. Do no hurt to others whereby you can do no good to yourselves. Go
not to work as if you would constrain them to be honest, that you believe will
be honest without constraint (otherwise called restraint in this case). As for
those debtors of yours that make conscience to do as they would be done by,
(and I shall plead for none but such), though at present they cannot, Have but
patience with them and they will pay you all: that is, all they owe; at
leastwise, all they can, or shall be able to pay, and that is all that you can
reasonably demand or expect.

MEDITATION XLV. Upon any that are said or supposed to have rejoiced at the
coming and consequences of this Fire.
Who are they that did or do rejoice at the burning of London? Some such
Monsters there are said to be, and none more likely to be in that number, than
they that have given it the name of Babel or Babylon, from whom we can expect
no other than acclamations of Joy, saying, Babylon is fallen. It may be, they
or some of them, can boast of one thing more (and pity it is but if they can
they should) viz. that they did help to bring down that which they call
Babylon. If so, speak out and be canonized for what you have done; but, whether
you will or no, time will either condemn or absolve you. As for some of that
Religion, I do in my thoughts acquit them presently, from either contributing
to the destruction of London, or rejoicing in it now it is done, as believing
the sweetness of their temper, and the morality of some of their principles to
be such, as would not suffer them to do either, and God forbid that they should
suffer so much as by the mistrusts and jealousies of people concerning any such
matter: But others of them again (the prodigious actings of men of the same
persuasion in former times, the greatness of their own malice, and the
desperateness of their principles considered) I darenot answer for, but shall
leave it to those honorable persons which examined all those matters, to clear
and vindicate them, if they have found cause so to do. Should I hear any speak
with joy of the burning of London, or otherwise express themselves to be glad
of it, if I should judge themselves to have had a hand in it (and if I should
judge amiss) they themselves would be greatly accessory to my uncharitableness.

Whosoever they be, that think the destruction of London to be a ground of Joy,
let them ring Bells and make Bonesires professedly upon that account, that the
world may know them to be such Monsters as indeed they are. I think at present
but of three persons, to whom I may fitly compare such men and women: the one
is, that infamous execrable Bonner; such a feaster upon cruelty, that History
tells us, He would not eat his dinner, till ridings were brought him that
certain Martyrs were burnt (as if that had been the only sauce that could make
him relish his meat): the other is, that incarnate Devil N^^^, who set Rome on
sire, who was reckoned the Enemy of all mankind; who wished, that whilst he
lived Heaven and Earth might be turned into a Chaos, and whom one fitly called
(...), A mixture of clay and blood: And lastly, to the Father of that
prodigious Nero, and of all such as he, whose name is in the Hebrew Tongue,
Abaddon, and in the Greek Apollyon, Rev. 9.11. that is in English, The
Destroyer. If the things you rejoice at be the laying wast so noble a place,
the impoverishing and undoing so many hundreds of honest families, the
demolishing of the strongest Fort that England had for the defense of true
Religion, and whatever else was and ought to have been dear to it; if any or
all of these were and are the ground of your Joy, surely the Comparisons I have
made are not too severe. Nay, let me tell you further, in the words of
Scripture, Psalm 37.13. The Lord shall laugh at you, for he sees your day is
coming: and, as it is in Prove. 1.26. God will laugh at your calamity, and mock
when your fear comes: When your fear comes as desolation, and your
destruction as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you. I love
not to imprecate, but may probably enough predict concerning you, as the
Prophet Jeremy, concerning the Enemies of the Jews, Lam. 1.21, 22. of whom he
thus speaks, All mine enemies have heard of my trouble, they are glad: Thou will bring the day that thou have called, and they shall be like unto me: He
adds, Let all their wickedness come before thee, and do unto them as thou have
done unto me.

I am not without hope that the malicious, and inhumane Insulters over London's
downfall may greatly contribute (though quite besides their intention and much
against their wills) toward the rebuilding and reflourishing of that
once-renowned City, neither have I built that hope upon any other than a
Scriptural foundation, namely, those words of Solomon, Prove. 24.18. Rejoice not
when thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad, when he stumbleth,
Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.

MEDITATION XLVI. Of the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, compared with the
burning of London.
AS for the burning of Sedom, and the cities round about it, all but Zoar, it
must be confessed that in several respects it did transcend that of London.
For, first of all we read in Genesis 19.24. That the Lord did rain upon Sodom and
upon Gomorrah, brimstone, and fire from the Lord out of heaven. Those places
were destroyed by a mere miracle (which was no small aggravation of the
judgment, as it is of mercy when men are saved by miracle) but so was not
London conceived to have been. Nextly, the fire upon Sodom (and the three other
Cities consumed with it) destroyed not only a major part of those Cities but
the whole. But the Beesom of destruction, which swept London, did not sweep so
clean but God has left some small remnant of City, that it might not be like
Sodom, and like Gomornish, Isai. 1.9. Thirdly, the fire upon Sedom and Gomorrah
did consume, not only places, but persons; not only four Cities, but the
greatest part of their inhabitants, Genesis 19.25. But to the praise of
distinguishing-mercy be it spoken, the inhabitants of London were generally
snatched as firebrarnds out of the fire, and so was part of their substance.
Fourthly, Sodom and Gomarah are said to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire,
Jude 7. Which expression, so far as it is referred to the places themselves,
does signify that they were irrecoverably destroyed by fire, so as that they
shall eternally lie wast. But concerning London, we hope and have reason to
hope better things, and that she may say to her insulting enemies, Rejoice not
over me; For though I fall, yet shall I rise again, etc. Fifthly,

As if one destruction had been too little (and that by sire too) Sodom,
Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, were destroyed by water also; that whole Country
being turned into a standing stinking Lake, which at this day is called the
Dead Sea, and in the Scripture the salt-sea, Genesis 14.3. Though formerly it was
even as the garden of God, or as the land of Egypt for fruitfulness, Genesis
14.10. The Salt-sea it is supposed to be called from the Sulphurous
combustions, first occasioning it: and the Dead-sea, because the Charnel-house
of so many dead Carcasses, then destroyed therein, or because it is quickened by
no visible motion, or because it kills all creatures that come into it. Several
marks of God's curse it retains to this day. Though it be a Sea, yet neither
can fishes live in it, nor ships sail in it, neither has it intercourse with
any other seas or communion with the Ocean, lest it should infect other waters
with its malignity, neither does any healthful thing grow thereon; God having
blasted it (as it were) as Christ did the barren fig tree. Solinus calls it a
Melancholy Bay, which the black-soil thereof, being also turned into ashes,
witnesses to have been blasted from heaven. I read of nothing that appears
good in and about Sodom since its destruction, but a certain Apple, and that
does but appear so neither; for though it appear fair to the eye, yet within
the rind of it, is nothing but an Ember-like Soot, which being lightly pressed
evaporates into smoke, and becomes dust. Lastly, I might add that God would
not permit Lot and his wife, to testify their respects and compassion toward
Sodom, when the smoke thereon went up like a furnace, by casting so much as one
look back upon it; which L^^'s wife presuming to do became a pillar of Salt,
Genesis 19.26. In all these respects was the destruction of Sodom greater, than
that of London; Yet, Who is able to say, Their sins were greater, all things
considered? London had wherewithal to make its sins more out of measure sinful
than were those of the Sodomites: It may be more tolerable for the Land of
Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of Judgment, than for some Londoners, (though the
Judgment upon London at the present be less intolerable of the two,) Mat.
10.15. For, if the mighty works which have been done in London, had been done
in Sodom, possibly it had remained to this day, Matt. 11.23.

If any should say, It is but just that the place where Sodom stood, should he
turned into a standing-Lake, in memorial of the great Idleness of the
Inhabitants: That it should be turned into a Dead-Sea^ so called, from its
killing all creatures that come near it, in remembrance, how the Sodomites did,
or would have corrupted all persons that came near them, even the Angels
themselves that were L^ts guests: That the place where those Cities stood,
should have no communion with any other place, should be an exception from that
rule, that, All Rivers run into the Sea, viz. by way of punishment for that
unlawful communion which they had wont to have one with another, changing the
natural use to that which is against nature; or that it should be a Dead-Sea,
because the Inhabitants living in pleasures, were dead whilst they live; as is
said of Widows that so live: or, that no good thing should grow there, because
so many good creatures of God had wont to be abused by them, one of whose sins
was fullness of bread meaning Luxury; That the fair Apple which grows there
having nothing within it but Soot and ashes, was an emblem and signification of
their being burnt to ashes for lusting after Beauty. I say, if any will so
discant upon the destruction of Sodom, how easy were it to assign as many and
as strong Reasons, why God might have dealt by London as he dealt with Sodom?
When Londoners are ready to say, No misery like theirs, let them think of
Sodom, and the Inhabitants thereof; betwixt whom and themselves, not their own
merits, but Gods great mercy, has made a very wide difference.

MEDITATION XLVII. Of the burning of Troy and the circumstances thereof,
compared with that of London.
TIme was, when that place which was since called London, went by the name of
new- Troy, and as it sometimes bore the same name, so they both came to the
same end, viz. by fire. Old Troy was fired not accidentally, but wilfully and
by Enemies; and so some think was New- Troy, otherwise called London. Admit the
story of Troy be partly fictitious (as things related by Poets are suspected to
be) yet give me leave to moralize it as follows: Is is reported, that Priamus
giving leave to his Son Paris, to ravish Helena, Wife to Menelaus King of
Sparta, was that which forced the Greeks, who burnt Troy, to renew their
ancient quarrel against it. I think, there have been sew Tragedies acted in the
world, but the lust of the flesh has born a share in, and been one great
occasion of them. I cannot say, it was that which did provoke men to burn
London, if it were done by wilful ^nstruments; but I doubt not, but that was
one of the sins which did provoke God to suffer that goodly City to be burnt.
Was not Paris his treacherous slaying of Achilles, who was in treaty of
Marriage with his sister Polyxena, another incentive to the Grecians to destroy
Troy? The unrighteous shedding of blood is a sin, that will as easily kindle a
fire as most that can be mentioned. The Greeks (as is said) had it revealed to
them, that unless they could do three things, Troy could never be destroyed:
One was, they must get the Palladium, or image of Pallas out of the City,
(which, Virgil says, they did by means of Ulysses). Pallas was counted the
Goddess of wisdom. Had not the Pall^d^um been taken away, for the time; or had
those that were concerned been so wise at first, as they were at last, London
had scarcely been burnt to the ground in spite of all the treachery that was
suspected, or could have been used. Another thing was, If they would destroy
Troy, they must provide a great Wodden-horse, which accordingly they did,
putting some of their choifest men into the belly of it, which pretending to
dedicate to M^^crva, they left before the City, having made it higher than the
gates, hoping, as it proved, that the Tro^^s would pull down part of the wall,
to take it in, whilst they had withdrawn themselves to the (...) Te^^dot. The
Tr^jans brake down the wall, took in the horse, placed it in the Castle: but in
the night Sinon who was one of those Gre^^^^, that were in the Horse's belly,
giving notice by sire, the Greeks came from Tenedos; who finding the Trojans
had drunk themselves fast asleep, sacked the City, and burnt it. Thus Troy
perished, partly by the Credulity, Security, Weakness, and Intemperance of it is
Inhabitants, in a little time after it had for ten years together, withstood
the fruitless attempts of its adversaries. Was there not some such thing went
to the destruction of London? Were there not a sort of men within that City (as
is vehemently suspected) who might not unsitly be compared to the Greeks that
were hid in the Belly of the forementioned Wodden-horse, people of a concealed
Religion, (and therefore I call them hid); and amongst the rest was there not
one Sinon, as I may call him, because he was the first that kindled the fire
(witness his own confession)? Had not the Gates of London been set too wide
open for such treacherous Greeks to enter in, possibly that famous City had
been standing to this very day. But what was a Proverb concerning Trojans, Sero
sapiunt Phryges, The Trojans use to be wise when it is too late, was too
applicable to our selves. We begin to wish the gates of London had been shut
against such dangerous Persons, when alas! in some places it has no Gates to
shut. It is likely, the Gentlemen that lay Couchant before, in the Belly of the
Woodden-horse, are now not without greater hopes than ever that they shall get
up and ride. But he that sits in heaven can make the second of September
produce them as little good, as did their infamous fifth of November. But why
was it that London was destroyed by the same means as was old Troy? Will any
say that the old Proverb, that such a one is a trusty Trojan, was as applicable
to the new Trojans, as to the old? I do not think that was the reason. For
though there might be some faithless men in London (as there are in all
places;) yet I doubt not, but Londoners (take one with another) might and may
safely be trusted, as far as any sort of men; and have as much Faith and
Conscience amongst them as is elsewhere to be sound. But, that God who found
sin enough in Job to justify all that he did against him, all the evil he
brought upon him, could not but have a sufficient controversy with London;
which, absolutely considered, was bad enough; though, if compared with other
places and People, it was certainly one of the best.

MEDITATION XLVIII. Upon the burning of Jerusalem, compared with the Burning of
London.
MAny Prodigies there were, as Josephus tells us, that went before the
destruction of Jerusalem by Fire, namely, that a great Gate of the Temple,
which twenty men could hardly pull open, opened of its own accord; and, that an
Ox brought forth a Lamb in the Temple; with several others, which I forbear to
mention: These were dark Texts for men to expound, yet, some did venture to
give the sense and meaning of them, as if each of them had been a token for
good, whereas the event did manifest the quite contrary. So was the destruction
of London ushered in with several Prodigies, Blazing-Stars, and others, which
did precede it at no such distance of time, but that it was probable enough
they might ve^er to the fire, as well as to the foregoing-Pestilence. Neither
may we doubt, but there we^e some who did put a good construction upon those
ill-Signes, as if they had been forerunners of the good things, which they
themselves expected in the year -66; though as to their enemies they might have
an ill-aspect, and ominous signification: Thus far some involved themselves in
the same practice with the Jews of old, and God has involved them in the same
kind of calamity. It is dangerous doing as Jews, lest we suffer as they.

But, besides Prodigies, there were also sundry Prophesies, which did precede
the destruction of Jerusalem. Christ foretold it at large, as is reported by
several Evangelists, Mat. 24. Mark. 13. Luke 21.5. Luke 19.44.
with the several antecedents and concomitants of it; how, That the Sun should
be darkened, and the Moon not give her light, Matt. 24.29. There were also
humane Prophesies concerning it, as particularly by that Man, who ran thorough
the Streets of Jerusalem, and cried Woe to it several days together; which,
considering what Christ himself had said, was at no hand to be slighted. We
find no Text in Scripture Prophesying the burning of London, and in such a
year; but I have heard that some did considently assert, before any thing of
the Fire did happen, that London would be burnt in the year -66: as others had
done, that it would be visited with a great Plague in -65: Which things coming
to pass accordingly, may reasonably incline us to believe, that God, (though by
what way and means we know not,) had imparted the fore-knowledg of that Event
to such as did peremptorily Prophecy concerning it: For, though it be too much
credulousness to believe a Human Prophecy before it be fulfilled; yet to
dis-believe, that it was a real Prophecy, when it is fulfilled, is on the
other hand too much moroseness and incredulity: It is not unusual with God to
reveal to one or other those great and strange things which he is about to do
in the World; though because there are many false pretenders to Revelations,
we ought to suspend our belief of such things delivered to us by others, till
the event do attest them.

The burning of Jerusalem, at leastwise of the Temple, is said to have been
begun by one of Vespatian's Soldiers, contrary to his known will and pleasure;
but, when it was once begun, there were many more that did help it forward,
with an eye to gain and plunder. So the burning of London seems to have taken
its first rise from one hand, viz. His that suffered for it; but is vehemently
presumed to have been earried on by many more of the same stamp: Before
Jerusalem was set on fire, it had endured a close Siege, and a terrible Fire,
of which thousands, yea millions of People died. No Siege or Famine, (blessed
be God!) but a very terrible Plague is well known to have pre^eded the burning
of London. One judgment going off without its deligned effect, does not exempt
men from, but transmit them to another; as, where one of Pharaoh's Plagues
ended, another began, he still refusing to let Israel go. Some part of
Jerusalem was left standing, viz. the West End of the Wall, and three Towers
for their strength and beauty, preserved by the command of Titus, to bear
testimony of the stateliness of the City to posterity. So, by the Providence of
God, was, and is a tenth part of London, or thereabouts, preserved to this day,
as it were, in memorial of what London was. It must needs be confessed, that
the destruction of Jerusalem was far greater than that of London, all things
considered; because millions of Jews were put to the sword, besides several
other cruelties that were inflicted upon others of them; one where of was, that
upon a mistrust that some of them had swallowed gold, two thousand of them were
ripped up by the Soldiers hoping to have robbed those Mines, which made them
Goldsinders, but not in such a sense as they expected to have been. These were
aggravations of misery, which Londoners were exempted from (thanks to His
infinite goodness, who in judgment was pleased to remember mercy). But it is
not so much the disparity as the parallel betwixt the destruction of Jerusalem
and of London, that I aim to speak of; whereof I shall add two instances: one
is this, Jerusalem, and London, were both fired in the same month, viz.
Septemter; which month history informs us to have been fatal to many other
Cities, and, as I take it, to Jerusalem, more then once. Lastly, Jerusalem was
set on fire, by Romans: and, as is strongly suspected, By Romanists too was
London burnt. If it were otherwise, may their Innocence appear, and may those
worthy Patriots, who had the matter under examination, acquit them before all
the world.

MEDITATION XLIX. Upon People's taking the first and greatest care to save
those things from the Fire, which they did most value.
Who knows not, that the method which men used in removing, was, first to send
away their Wife's and Children, (as being their greatest treasure); next to
them, their Writings of consequence, such as Books of account, Bills, Bonds,
and others of great moment; and after them, their first and greatest care was,
to secure their Jewels (such as had any), their Cash, their Plate, and such
like precious things. Next to them, their care was for their Shop-goods, and
first for those that were of greatest price. In a word, what things men did
most value, those they did labor in the first place to secure, deferring the
removal of their lumber to the very last, so that for want of time much of that
was consumed. So Jacob, prizing Rachel and her Children above the rest of his
family, took the greatest care to secure them, by putting them in the rear of
his Company, when he went out to meet his Brother Esau, coming against him in a
hostile way; but the handmaids and their Children he put in the front (and, as
it were, in the forlornhope) exposing them to most danger, for whom he had
least love and respect, Genesis 33.2. Alas! that men should use a worse method in
reserence to spiritual things, than they naturally fall into in relation to
temporals. For how ordinary is it with men, in matters of Religion, to commit
(...), which our English Proverb does phrase, Setting the Cart before the
Hearse, or, setting that first which should be last? How many take care to save
the lumber of Religion, as I may call it, whilst, mean time, that better part
of it which is like Plate and Jewels, is in danger to be ^ost? So did those
Scribes and Pharisees, who ^ook great care to pay tithe of mint, anise, and
cummin, and omitted the weightier matters of the Law, viz. Judgment, Mercy, and
Faith, Mat. 23.23. There are some Truths unspeakably greater, and of more
consequence, than others. Those should most of all be contended for.

There are some enemies to our Religion, which would not only build with hay
and stubble, but even lay another Foundation besides that which is laid, viz.
The Lord Jesus Christ, though other Foundation, that will bear, can no man lay,
1 Cor. 3.11. Such should most of all be contended against. For, others are but
disparately opposite to us, as Green to Yellow, and other intermediate colors
are to White; but such, are as quite contrary to us, as Black can be to White.
Some Duties there are, the performance whereof are, as it were, the very
Pillars of a Church, which it cannot stand without. Others again, are for their
nature more disputable, for their use more indifferent and less necessary. God
forbid, but the first of these should always take place of the last, and that
we may more regard those things of which Christ says, These things ought you
to have done; and then those other, of which he speaks more diminutively,
saying, And the other you should not have left undone.

There are certain sins, which, S^mpson-like, do take hold upon the Pillars of
the House, I mean, Church and State, and threaten to pull it down. How
preposterous would it be to punish peccadillo's with Scorpions, and let such
crimes of the first magnitude scarce be punished with Rods? What men did in
relation to the Fire, may ever teach them, to mind those things in the first
place, which are of greatest consequence. If men had Ironware and Gunpowder in
the same Shop, did they not strive to remove their Gunpowder before their
Iron, because that would do most hurt. It is the Apostle's rule, that all
things should be done decently and in order. To begin with those things which
are most necessary, and then proceed gradually to those which are of less
consequence, is one of the most necessary pieces of Order that can be observed.
It is a good rule, that we should first do those things that must be done, and
afterward those that may be done. Joseph was overseen in presenting Ephraim to
his Father's left hand, and Manasseh to his right; and Jacob observing it, laid
his right hand upon Ephraim, and his left upon Manasseh, Genesis 48.14. In like
manner, there is frequent cause for us to cross our hands, and place our right
where we are moved to place our left; nothing being more incident to us, than
to mind those things in the last, which we ought to regard in the first place.
By as good reason as men secured their Wives and Children before their goods,
their Gold and Silver before their lumber, ought men, who know their souls to
be more worth than all other things, first of all to secure them from that worm
that never-dyes, from that fire that never will go out.

MEDITATION L. Upon some who, s^on after the Fire, could hardly tell
whereabouts their own houses did stand.
SO it was, that some who attempted to visit the Ruins and Relics of those
Houses in which they dwelt, (not above a week before,) though they found the
Street in which they stood, yet had much ado to be certain which was the ground
they stood upon. He that should have told them but one day before the Fire
began, that within five or six days, they being in London, and in the same
Street where their dwelling was, should not be able to find the way to their
own Houses, (where they had lived, it may be, twenty years and upwards,) would
have been looked upon as mad, or replied to in some such language as this; What
should aile us? Shall we be out of our wits within that time? or, Shall we be
struck with blindness as the Sodomites were, that sought for Lots door? or, if
so, we think we could find our own Houses blindfold, or in the darkest night,
at so small a distance: or, Shall London be changed as much as Sodom and
Gomorrah? which were fair Cities, but are now a filthy Lake: Or how, and by
what means should it be so much altered? He did not more express his admiration
and disbelief of what was foretold in another case, who said, If God would make
Windows in Heaven, how could this be? than most men would have expressed theirs
as to this: Yet do we see the thing, which could enter into no man's heart to
conceive, till he saw it is come to pass. Methinks it is sad to hear men, that
knew London well enough before, as they walk along the Ruins, asking at every
turn, Which is the way to such a place? and, What street is this? and, What
Street is that? But yet more sad, to think of men, that have sought their own
Houses, not far from the place where they had wont to stand, and could not
easily find them. There is a phrase in Scripture, of Men's places knowing them
no more: but, in this case that phrase was inversed, viz. Men, for the time,
knew their places no more. Oh stupendous Judgment! I see it is easy for God
to do such things as are hardly possible for men to believe, till they see them
done. So true is it, that the ways of God are above our ways, and his
thoughts above our thoughts, as much as the Heaveris are above the Harth. How
good is it then to be armed against all sorts of evil, not only such as are
likely and probable, but even those which are no more than possible? and, What
evil is there which he cannot inslict, to whom all things are possible? For
ought I see, no man is secured against any kind of Judgment, but he, that is
secured against all (in some sense,) by virtue of that promise, Prove. 12.21. Woe
evil shall happen to the just: with others of the same import. Nothing could be
more improbable, than that so many Calamities of different kinds should befall
Job, not successively, but at one and the same time, viz. The Sabae^ms, taking
away his Cattle, and killing his servants, Job 1.14. And, that whilst the
first Messenger was yet speaking, another should come, and tell him, that fire,
falling from Heaven, (...) up his sheep and his servants; and, that before the
words were out of his mouth, another should come and inform him, That the
Caldeans had ^^rried away his Camels, and slain others of his servants; and,
that before he had made an end of his story, another should come and tell him,
That a great Wind had killed his Sons and Daughters, by throwing down the house
upon them where they were eating and drinking together; and that only one
person should escape each of these dangers; being reserved, as it were, on
purpose to bring him the tidings of it: Such a conspiracy of Providence (as I
may call it) to strip a man of all his Comforts at once, could scarce have been
imagined, till the event did declare it: Unexpected and unimaginable miseries
are not much more rare than unexpected and unlookt-for Mercies. Upon this
occasion, I cannot but think of three other sorts of houses (as we may term
them) which men have or may seek for and not be able to find. First, our bodies
they are the Houses or Tabernacles in which our souls dwell, (as he said, Anima
Galbre male habitat, Galba's soul dwelt in an ill-body) when those houses shall
be crumbled away to dust, or devoured of worms, who will be able to find them
or to say, Which were they? The Graves of men they are the Houses or
Receptacles of their dead bodies, Job 17.13. If I wait, the grave is my house,
and the grave is called the house appointed for all living Job 30.23. How many
such houses as those could not be found, if they should never so carefully be
sought for? How ordinarily are the dead turned out of possession, and the
living come in their room? that is; Charnel-houses have been turned into
dwelling-houses, and many more such instances are like to be: so that it has
and will become impossible; not only to know the bodies of dead men again, but
their very graves. And the then Earth it is self, that is as it were the house
of all graves, the great Golgotha, or place of skulls: Now when that time shall
come which is spoken of, 2 Pet. 3.10. in which the earth and all the works that
are therein shall be burnt up, that great House of houses and graves, if it be
sought for, will be found no more.

MEDITATION LI. On the Statue of Sir Thomas Gresham left standing at the
Old-Exchange.
HOw great and particular a respect did the Fire show to the Essigies of that
worthy Knight, the honorable Founder of that which was the Royal Exchange, and
doner of Gresham-Colledge, (which, for present, succeeds in the room of it;) I
say, how great a respect, by the appointment of Divine Providence, (without
which not a hair falls from our heads) did that Fire show to his Effigies in
particular, which it left standing and undefaced, whilst mean time the Statues
of all the Kings and Queens of England since the Conquest, were demolished and
thrown down by it. No man could have answered it, to have put more honor upon
a fellow-Subject, than upon his lawful Prince, much less upon one Subject than
upon many that had swayed the Scepter within his native Soil (for certainly
there is an honor which Kings, as Kings, may challenge from their own people,
greater than is due to any of their Subjects): but God, who is the King of
Kings, may do what he please, He may pull down the mighty from their seats, and
exalt them of low degree, as it is, Luke 1.52. Men must have regard to
political claims and rights, in dispensing their respects, and give honor to
whom honor is due upon that account: but moral considerations are those which
the Great God takes notice of, who is otherwise no respecter of persons, yet
has promised to honor those that horour him, and is always observant, though
not of men's secular dignities, yet of their real worth and deserts. Now it must
needs be confessed, that no person upon earth had deserved so well of the
Royal Exchange, as that worshipful Knight had done, who both made and
maintained it. Indeed it was called the Burse or (...) of the Kings and Queen:
of England, and theirs it was by Sovereignty and superintendency, by
confirmation and countenance, but it was only his by cost and charge, by
creation and donation. They allowed it (...) an Exchange, and protected it as
such, but he only built and upheld it, for that use and purpose. They were, as
I may say, the Godfathers to that Noble Structure, which put their own names
upon it; but he the Father which gave Being to it. Now, which of those two have
most interest in a Child, is easy to judge; and that of the Poet may determine;
Et quae (...) fecimus ipsi, Hand ea nostro veco, Things are principally theirs
who made them. Yet this must be acknowledged, though he made it an Edifice, yet
they made it an Exchange, by their Royal Sanction and designation: but, to do
the former, Hic labor, hoc opus erat. And is all that cost and labor lost,
which that generous Knight did bestow upon that noble Foundation? Surely no;
For, besides the great service which that well-intended Structure did to the
Nation for a hundred years together, such, and so great was the fragrancy of
that precious ointment, which by him was poured out upon the head of London and
of it is Inhabitants, that the favor thereof will never be out of their
nostrils; nor shall they need the help of a standing Exchange, to remember so
worthy a Founder by. Three signal marks of honor did the late desolating fire
(or rather God, who is said to divide the flames of fire (which may be meant of
distributing them as he pleases) put upon that renowned Benefactor. One was
that I have been writing of, viz. the forbearance of his Effigies, and of his
alone (as if the relation of a Founder and nobile Benefactor, had put a
peculiar sacredness into it.) You might have seen him (his Statue I mean) after
the Fire safe and sound, as Noah was after the flood, the one having escaped a
Deluge of Fire (if I may so call it) as the other did a deluge of Water: Noah
was preserved by the visible and probable means of an Ark, in which himself and
his family were imbarqued; but, all the Ark, or means of preservation which
this worthy Knight had, was only the immediate Providence of God, which seemed
to intend a particular respect, for and toward so great a Benefactor;
reserving him, as we hope, (in Effigy I mean,) to see another Exchange, as
Noah was, (but he indeed in Person,) to see another World, after the
destruction of the first; whom for that reason the ancient Poets are supposed
to have meant by him, they call Janus, with two Faces, for that he had faced
two Worlds. Another badg of Honor put upon him was, the preservation of that
other Famous-Building, known by the name of Gresham-Colledge, which that Noble
Knight had long since given to a Publick-Use; intimating, that he wished no
better Successors than the Muses in that House, in which himself did sometimes
dwell. A third Honor which befell him at this time was, that his own
Dwelling House (that was) should, for the time being, and till the former can
be built again, be made the Royal Exchange, as if no man could provide an
Exchange fit to receive our Merchants, but their old Founder Sir Thomas
Gresham: which thing is no small accession of dignity, to that place, which as
a College furnished with able Professors, and good Lectures, well endowed, was
very Honorable before. Thus was the worthy Knight thrice dubbed (if I may so
call it) after the first time, and that by the fire. Where then is the man that
has an estate commensurate with so great an undertakine, that when he
considers these things would not be ambitious, to do as Sir Thomas Gresham had
done before him; I mean to build an Exchange in Lieu of that which now lies in
ashes? What better way could he think of, whereby to perpetuate his name to all
Posterity? or wherein could he better serve his Native-Countrey? Is there never
a rich Bachelor devoted to a single life? Nor yet any Childless (and almost
kindred-less) Widower that has Gold and Silver enough to compass such a
glorious work as that? thereby he may acquire to himself a name, and a memorial
in the world better then that of sons and daughters. How often do great estates
(even sufficient for so great an enterprise as I am speaking of) fall into the
hands of men that neither know how to use them whilst they live, nor yet how to
dispose them when they die, either for their own honor, or for a public good.
Is it not easier to find ten men with such estates, as Sir Thomas Gresham had,
than one man with so Noble and generous a Spirit? I wish some men do not
bequeath their money to not much better purposes, than if they had purchased
Coals with it to send to New Castle, or thrown it into the Sea, rather then
employ it to so good, and charitable a Use, as is rebuilding of the Royal
Exchange. Brave ambition to leave a name justly renowned amongst men, if it be
any thing of a vice, is, in appearance, so generous, and so like a virtue that
some low-spirited men were never capable of it, nor can ever be made to feel
the sharpest Spurrs of Honor, so as thereby to be stimulated and quickened to
Heroical Enterprises. I am amazed to think that some, but ordinary men, have
parted with their very lives, only to tell the world they were no Cowards, or
to leave a Name for valor behind them (which would be but nine days wonder)
when others of better birth, and quality will not part so much as with their
estates to good uses (no not when they come to die) whereby to inform the world
for ever, that they were lovers of their Country, as was said of that
Centurion; He has loved our nation, and built in a Synagogue.

MEDITATION LII. Upon the Pillar (...), and intended to be set up it
remembrance of the burning of London.
IF London its self be not the doleful Monument of its own destruction, by
always lying in Ashes (which God forbid it should) it is provided for by Act of
Parliament, that after its restoration a Pillar either of Brass or Stone,
should be erected in perpetual memory of its late most dismal conslagration.
Herein (for ought I know) has the pious care of this age exceeded all former;
For though History tells us, that London has several times been burnt, yet
that any such Memorial was set up, whereby to inform and warn all after ages, I
cannot call to mind that I ever read. May we uniformly transcend the piety of
former ages, as well in all other things as we have done in this, then shall we
not need to doubt, but as our greater sins have of late years procured us
greater judgments, (one in the neck of another) than have formerly been known
in so quick a succession ( viz. of Sword, Pestilence, and Fire;) so our
transcendant Reformation will end in greater blessings than former ages have
been acquainted with.

It is not without several Patterns and Presidents in Scripture, that Memorials
should be erected, as well of Judgments, as of Mercies; For, not only did
Jacob set up a Pillar of Stone in the place where God talked with him, and
fastened the name of Bethel upon it, Genesis 35.14. in remembrance of the great
Favor there vouchsafed him; but, God himself, to commemorate his great
displeasure against Let Us Wife, for looking back toward Sedom (which she ought
not to have done verse 17.) turned her into a Pillar of Salt, (which may
signify a lasting Pillar, or a hard stiff Body of perpetual duration: (in
which sense, the Covenant of God is called, a Covenant of Salt, that is, of
perpetuity,) to season after-Ages with the remembrance of his judgment upon
her: We read of the brazen-Censers of Kerah and his Company, those sinners
against their own souls (as they are called); that they were made into
broad-Plates for a covering of the Altar, to be a memorial to the children of
Israel, that no stranger, that is, not of the seed of Aaron come near to offer
incense before the Lord, that he be not as Korah and his company, Numb.
1.16.39. We read also of a great Stone called Abel, which word lignifieth
Grief; and that name seems to have been given it because of the Lamentation
which the People made over those Bethshemites, that were slain for looking into
the Ark. 1 Samuel 6.18. The Philistims themselves, when smitten by God with
Emereds, and plagued with Mice, are said to have presented the Lord with
certain Monuments of those judgments that were upon them, viz. with so many
Golden Emerods (or figures of Emerods,) and so many Golden Mice, as a
Trepass Offering, 1 Samuel 6.4, 5. Wherefore ye shall make Images of their
Emerods, and of your Mace, whichs mar the Land; and shall give glory to the God
of Israel^: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you^ from off your
gods, and from off your Land: which plainly shows, that even those blind
Heathen did look upon the due Commemoration of Judgments, as a thing
well-pleasing unto God; and we are assured it is so, by the complaint which God
makes of the Israelites, their forgetting the great things which God had done
in Egypt, and terrible things by the Red Sea, (meaning the drowning of Pharaoh
and all his Host there, Psalm. 106.21.) And the Apostle writing of what had
befallen the murmuring Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.6. says, These things are our
examples, that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted;
Therefore, remember them we must, or else we can take no warning by them.

He that questioneth the needfulness of erecting a Pillar, or some other
Monument, to commemorate the late dreadful Fire, may see his Error, if he do
but consider, that London (though not such a London then, as this was,) has
formerly been burnt several times, (and did once continue in ashes fourscore
and five years together;) and yet the generality of men now living in these
parts, were so far from considering and awing their hearts with the remembrance
of it, that but here and there a man does so much as know that any such thing
was ever done.

How vain a thing is it for Papists to bear us in hand, De (...) Hist. C^l.
114.8.131.161.213.263.
That Orall-Tradition is sufficient to transmit Religion to the World; and is
the great thing we are to vely upon; when, but for the Writings of Historians,
we had all been ignorant of so remarkable a thing, as was the burning of London
five several times, viz. Anno Domini 798, and Anno 801; and again Anno 982, and
again, Anno Domini 1087. and after that in the year 1133, which was little more
than five hundred years ago: Had our Parliament had any such considence in
Orall-Tradition, they had never designed a Pillar for the memorial of a Fire so
hard to be forgotten.

How weakly do Papists Argue, that the Authority of the Scriptures is built
upon the Church, and the Church its self Infallible; because it is called, The
Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Whereas Pillars are many times erected for other
uses, than to uphold and under-prop buildings; as the several Instances which I
have brought from Scripture, of Pillars, set up only as Monuments and
Memorials; and, the use to which the Pillar I am now treating of, is to be
applied, do plainly prove: Such a Pillar is the Church, viz. to transmit the
memory of Religion, or rather that Inscription, (the Scriptures I mean,) which
are the great memorial thereof from one Age to another.

But, Will the intended matter of that Pillar, which is appointed to be either
Brass or Stone, afford us nothing of a profitable Meditation? Methinks it
should. What Metal is there that more resembles Fire than does
burnished-Brass? therefore in Ezekiel. 1.7. we read, that the feet of the living
Creatures there spoken of, did sparkle like the color of burnished-Brass. It
is but fit that the Memorials of things should bear as lively a resemblance as
may be, of those things of which they are intended Memorials: So the Philistims
made choice of Artificial Mice and Emerods, in remembrance of those that were
true and natural: More over, if London were consumed by Treachery, no metal
can be more fit to receive the Characters of their most Impudent Villainy, who
(as to that) had sinned with a Brow of Brass, and with a Whores Forehead. Or,
if Stone be chosen rather of the two, to make that Pillar of, be it a lasting
Emblem of the Hardness of their hearts, (harder than the neither Millstone,)
that could burn such a City, and ruin so many thousand Families, both for the
present, and for many years, if not Ages to come.

Where the Fire began, there, or as near as may be to that place, must the
Pillar be erected, (if ever there be any such.) If we commemorate the places
where our Miseries began, surely the causes whence they sprang, (the
meritorious causes, or sins, are those I now intend,) should be thought of much
more. If such a Lane burnt London, Sin first burnt that Lane: Causa causa est
causa (...); Affliction springs not out of the dust; not but that it may spring
thence immeditely, (as if the dust of the Earth should be turned into Lice,)
but primarily and originally it springs up elsewhere.

As for the Inscription that ought to be upon that Pillar, (whether of Brass or
Stone,) I must leave it to their Piety and Prudence, to whom the Wisdom of the
Parliament has left it: Only three things I both wish and hope concerning it;
The first is, That it may be very humble, giving God the glory of his righteous
Judgments, and taking to our selves the shame of our great demerits. Secondly,
That the Confession which shall be there Engraven, may be as impartial, as the
judgment its self was; not charging the guilt for which that fire came upon a
few only, but acknowledging that all have sinned, as all have been punished.
Far be it from any man to say, that his sins did not help to burn London that
cannot also say (and who that is know not) that neither he nor any of his
either is, or are ever like to be, any thing the worse for that dreadful fire.
Lastly, whereas some of the same Religion with those that did hatch the
Powder Plot, are, and have been vehemently suspected to have been the
Incendiaries, by whose means London was burned, I earnestly desire that if
time, and further discovery, be able to acquit them from any such guilt that
Pillar may record their Innocence and may make themselves, as an Iron Pillar or
Brazen Wall, (as I may allude to Jer. 1.18.) against all the accusations of
those that suspect them, but if indeed, and in truth that Fire either came, or
was carried on and continued by their treachery that the Inscription of the
Pillar may consigne over their names to perpetual hatred and infamy.

Though I have thought too long already upon this subject; yet, methinks, I
cannot but muse yet a little further, How men will or ought to be affected with
seeing that Pillar, and reading such an Inscription, as, I presume will be made
upon it. Will they not reflect and say, Alas! Is the greatest part of a famous
City come to this? (or rather was it brought to this?) What nothing but a
brazen Pillar in lieu of the major part of a renowned City? Doleful exchange;
As the Angel we read of Matthew. 28.6. told the Women that came to Christ's
Sepulcher, He is not here, for he is risen. So this Pillar stands but to tell
men, that a glorious City, that sometimes stood hereabouts, is not here now;
for it (or most of it) is burnt and gone.

How uncomfortable is this in comparison of the two Pillars we read of, viz. a
Pillar of Cloud, and a Pillar of Fire, Numb. 14.14. Those were Pillars for
direction, but this was in token of destruction. In those God went before his
people, by day and by night, but in the Fire, which occasioned this Pillar, he
came against us. Then was God to his people as a Shadow from the heat of the
rage of their enemies, as a Wall of fire for their protection, but this Pillar
calls that time to remembrance, in which God covered himself, as with a cloud,
that the prayers of Londoners should not pass unto him, and came forth, not as
a conserving, but a consuming fire, not for, but against poor London. Surely
the place, where that Pillar shall stand, will be made a Bochim, for who will
be able to pass by it, and not shed some tears? Yet as woeful tidings as that
Pillar is to be charged with, How do I long to see it once erected (which if I
never do, God grant that others may) for surely, that will never be done, till
men can say of London, as the Prodigals Father of his converted Son. It (as he)
was dead, and is alive again, ^as lost and is sound.

MEDITATION LIII. Upon the Anniversary Fast appointed to be kept in remembrance
of the Fire.
HOw do we play an after-game? Yet better late than never: What Epimeth^usses
are we? Now the City is burnt, we design to keep a perpetual yearly Fast,
whereas there is little doubt, but the burning of it might have been prevented,
if, before that judgment came, we had set ourselves to keep such a fast, as is
spoken of, Isa. 58.6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and that ye break every Yoke, etc. The Ninivites were wiser then we, for
when Jonah preached to them, that within forty days Nineveh should be
overthrown: They took that short warning, proclaimed a Fast, yea and turned
from their evil way, and God repented of the evil, that he had said he would do
unto them, Jonah 3.10. We have now and then fasted after a sort, but was it not
so? that God might justly expostulate with us, as with the Jews of old, Is it
such a Fast as I have chosen? a day for a man (...) ^fflict his Soul: Will thou
call this a F^st, and an acceptable day to the Lord? But have we turned from
our evil ways? as the Ninevites are said to have done.

Preventing Fasts like preventing Physic are much the best, but when they have
been omitted (or not observed (as they ought to be) which surely has been our
case) then curing or restoring Fasts (as I may call them) are exceeding
necessary, as therapeutical or healing Physic is, where prophylactical or
preventing remedies have not taken place.

A Fast both Anniversary and Perpetual is not without its president in
scripture. The Jews had such a Fast by Gods appointment, Lev. 16.24. This
shall be a statute for ever to you, that in the seventh m^nth ye shall afflict
your s^uls, ver. 34. This shall be an everlasting Statute to you, to make an
atonement for the Children of Israel for all their sins once a year. So it is,
that the Jews their Anniversary Fast, or day of Atonements, I say theirs and
ours were and are both in the seventh month of the Year (reckoning March the
first, as it is upon a civil account) and this, we know, came to pass not by
humane designation, but by the determination of divine Providence, which
brought the Fire in September; and it was but meet, that the Fast, in relation
to it, should be in the same month, and on the same day the Fire was: Yea,
possibly the zeal of Esther (if such a thing had happened in her time) would have
continued the Fast as many days together, as the Fire it self did continue;
for we read that She fasted three days and three nights together, Esther 4.16.
and it is probable would have held out one day longer, if so solemn an occasion
had called her to it.

How suitable it is that a Fast should be proclaimed upon such an occasion as
this were easy to make appear. Fasts are a kind of Sabbaths, for Moses
speaking of the Jews their Anniversary Fast, Lev. 16.31. says It shall be a
sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls by a Statue for
ever. Now the City rests and injoyeth her Sabbaths in that doleful (if not
ironicall) sense, in which that phrase is used, Lev. 26.34. ( viz. for a place
that lies desolate) reason good that Citizens should keep a Sabbath too, at
leastwise every year, as that does every day. When London lies in ashes, why
should not Londoners do so to? at leastwise for a season: When God has humbled
the City to the very dust, should not Citizens, in like manner, humble their
selves under his mighty hand:

Neither is it without reas^n and scripture that a perpetual Fast should be
kept upon account of a transient judgment (if I may call this transient) or
that the Ages to come should confess and lament the sins and miseries of
former times, or of the Ages that were before them. Neh. 9.2. They confessed
their sins and the iniquities of their Fathers: and Dan. 9.16. For our sins,
and for the iniquities of our fathers, thy people are become a reproach. There
being Scripture for such a practice, doubtless there is reason enough for it;
yet I question not, but a man may lawfully ask, What the reason is, or what
cause can be assigned for our so doing? The most obvious Reasons seem to result
from the Love we owe to God, the Relation in which we stand to our Ancestors
and Forefathers, the Reverence which is due to the Judgments of God, and the
bad influence which the sins of our Ancestors and Predecessors may have upon
ourselves in case we lay them not to heart. We are sorry that those whom we
dearly love have been injured by others (and not then only when we have injured
them ourselves); yea, if we hear of any great wrong that was done them many
years ago, we are troubled at it, and affected with it (though possibly not so
much as if it were but yesterday). And will not true love to God cause us in
like manner to resent the known injuries that have been done to him? (and such
are all the great violations of his Law) yea, though by others, and many years
since. If those that have wronged the persons we love, were such as were nearly
related to ourselves (as when Saul, that was Jonathan's Father, was very unkind
to David, whom himself had a great affection for) it troubles us so much the
more. So would love to God cause us to do, when those from whose Loins we
sprang (or who are otherwise near to us), have greatly provoked him, to w^om
all by past things (though even worn out of the memory of men) are always as
present. By this Rule, though successors ought to mourn over the sins of their
predecessors, yet Children more especially over the sins of their Parents, or
Proparents, and other Relations one of another. We reverence not the Judgments
of God as we ought, if hearing what God has done to others for the same sins
whereof ourselves are guilty (more or less) we do not both mourn, and tremble,
and humble ourselves before the Lord, lest he should do as much to us, as God
says to the Israelites, Jer. 7.12, 14. Go and see what I did to Shiloh, I will
do unto this house as I did to Siloh.

If such considerations as these affect us not with the Sins and Judgments,
which have gone over the heads of our Ancestors in former times, then do we
ourselves become partakers of their sins, and their sins help to fill up the
measure of ours: at we read of the sins of the Amorites not being yet full
(implying, that the sins of the time present and time past, were thrown as it
were into one measure); and as Christ spoke to the persecuting Jews, Mat.
23.35. saying, That upon them might come all the righteous blood, from the
blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias. We read of God's visiting the
iniquities of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth
generation; and that he does when they make them theirs, as by other means, so
particularly by not mourning over them.

But if after-ages will not weep over the miseries of this (which History will
not suffer them to be ignorant of), let them weep over their own losses by this
Fire: for I doubt not, but some may smart under the consequences of it hundreds
of years hence: forasmuch as some Estates were consumed by it, which might
otherwise have been transmitted from Generation to Generation throughout
several Ages to come. For ought I know, the fourth and fifth Generation from
hence (to speak within bounds) may have just cause, even from the influence
this Judgment may have upon themselves, to observe the second of September as a
solemn Fast.

As for the good ends we may propound to ourselves in observing that day as a
Religious Fast, they are so plain and visible as that nothing can be more.
Solemnly to humble ourselves time after time, under this mighty hand of God,
that may be one. To beg that God would build up the waste places in his good
time, that may be another: as also, that he would make a gracious provision for
his impoverished Servants: And lastly, To deprecate the like Judgment for time
to come; several of which ends, if I mistake not, are hinted to us in the Act
of Parliament.

But when I further consider it, how ghastly are the thoughts of another Fast?
and that for Anniversary perpetuity? Alas! how do Fasts multiply upon us? and
the causes of them much more? -- Sixty five gave us just occasion for one
perpetual Fast, with reference to the dreadful Plague that was in that year,
and -- sixty six by a no less dreadful Fire, has given us another. Thus sin
upon sin, has made work for Fast after Fast. And the truth is, so many and so
great are our sins at this day, that if God should punish each of them with a
particular and proportionable Judgment, and every such Judgment should be
commemorated with an Anniversary Fast, the whole year might consist of little
else but Fasting-dayes: at leastwise all our Festivals be justled out, and all
those Letters be clothed with Mourning, that were wont to be clad, (as it
were) in Scarlet. Admit that London should be built again, and swell to as
great a bigness as it did before (the latter of which no person now living is
like to see) yet even then there will be found just cause of Fasting, Mourning,
and Lamentation, for the burning of London in 1666. the prints and footsteps
whereof will even then be visible, though not by an outward desolation, yet by
an inward and less perceptible decay. Though London may in process of time,
come to look as well in the face as ever it did; yet it is inwards and vital
parts will go nigh to remain greatly wasted and consumed.

But after I have insisted so long upon the Sutableness, Congruity, and
Reasonableness of a yearly Fast in Relation to the Fire: It is sit I declare my
self as to the nature and manner of the Fast I wish for, and which only will
stead us, viz. Such (...) Fast as is spoken of, Isa. 58.6, 7. then may we hope
to see such a promise fulfilled as that, (of which we read) ver. 12. And they
that shall be of thee, shall build the old waste places: thou shall raise up
the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be called, The repairer of
the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in.

MEDITATION LIVE. Upon the burning down of Zion- College.
LOndon was an Epitome of England (if not also of the whole World.) In it was
something of almost every thing; and amongst the rest, Colleges erected or
designed for most kinds and parts of good Learning: only two of which I shall
now instance in, viz. Gresham and Zion-Colledges. The former, which was to be
for Divinity and other Sciences, yet standing; the latter, which was intended
only for Divines, and for Theology, now lying in the dust. Doubtless, Learning
is a great advantage and stay to Religion, as the Apostle himself intimates,
when he speaks of some who being ignorant and unlearned, do wrest the
Scriptures to their own destruction; and if men (as much as in them is) would
root Religion out of the world, they could use no means more effectual than
that which Julian applied himself to, viz. the extinguishing of all good
literature. This came to mind, when I remembered that College to be yet
standing, where Divinity and other Sciences dwell together, though I am far
from assigning that as the reason, why that College rather than the other did
escape the Fire.

But, my work is, to treat of those places that did not escape, and now
particularly of Zion-Colledge. The place where that College stood, from the
first time that I can receive any account of it, was always a seat of Charity;
first in the Oar (as I may call it) and afterward refined. By Charity in the
Ore, I mean, that which was popish and superstitions: For the first Foundation
that I read of in that place was a Nunnery: After that, it was converted to an
Hospital, in the year, 1332. for the relief of one hundred blind men, and was
called the Priory or Hospital of Saint Mary the Virgin, founded by William
Elsing, the which William became the first Prior there. In the same place
where that Priory was situated, was since erected the College I am speaking
of, for the Clergy of London and Liberties thereof, and for the sustentation of
twenty poor people, ten men and ten women.

An exemplary and well-contrived piece of Bounty and Charity was the founding
of that College, and the Almshouses thereunto belonging: Which I must needs
speak in praise of those it is worthy Founders, whose Names should always live,
though their Works be now demolished.

Of the Charity that built that College, and the Library belonging to it, I
can say no less, than that i^ was, a Liberal, a Living, an Extensive, an
Humble, and a Handsome respectful Charity, and in all those respects greatly
Exemplary. That it was Liberal, appears by the quality of those two Divines,
that were the Founders of it, one of the College its self, viz. Doctor Thomas
White, the other of the Library, viz. Master John Sim^son. All the prefe^^ent
that I can find either of these Gentlemen had in and from the Church, was, that
the former was Vicar of Saint Dunstans in the West, and on^ of the Canons
residentiary of Saint Paul's Church London; and the other, viz. Mr. John
Sim^s^^ was only Re^^or of Saint Olaves Hart-street, London. Some men do a
great deal of good with a little (the Church does little for them, and yet they
do much for it); others do but a little good with a great deal: Many, whose
Titles and Ecclesiastical Revenues, have swelled ten times higher than either
of theirs did, never were half so much Benefactors to the Church and world as
was the least of them; but have hoorded up their money, as if they meant, when
they left the world, to take it with them.

And, as their Charity was liberal, (which I may call intensive;) so was it no
less extensive. Charity like seed, should not all be sown in one surrow, but
scattered, some here some there; as the Scripture speaking of a good man,
says, He has dispersed he has given to the poor, and his righteousness
remains: I say, their Charity was extensive, because first, it did reach and
extend to soul and body both yea, I might have said in the Apostles phrase,
Soul, Body, and Spirit: There was provision made for the bodies of so many
poor; there were helps (...) Learning, whereby to accommodate the mind^ and
souls of such as were lovers of it; and lastly, there was Religion, or rather
helps to Religion, (by the promoting of Divinity,) for the spirits of men; by
which I mean the sublimet faculties of men, which are more especially the (...)
and subjects of Religion. There was Charity showed to both Sexes, so much to
one as to another whereas some Sensuallists have no charity, but for that Sex
which is not their own, ( Pharaoh-like, who took care to save the females,
though he gave charge to drown the males, as if they had been so many Mice:)
And, certain Humorists on the other hand pretend to set their whole love upon
their own Sex, professing themselves to be Misogynists, or haters of Women;
which, whether in pretense or in reality, is another sinful extreme. Again,
That College was kind and Charitable, both to the Learned and Unlearned; as
Paul says, that he was a Doctor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians;
both to the wise and to the foolish: Whereas some, mere Scholars themselves,
have no love for any but Learned men: and, others again have a kind of
Antipathy to Scholars, as such. Lastly, The extensiveness of the Charity that
gave that College appears, in that it was a benefit both to Rich and Poor,
(for, as to some things, those that are Rich may need help, as truly as those
that are poor:) Thither might Persons of Quality, whose Libraries and usual
Divellings were in the Country, repair, and be furnished with those Books they
could not meet with elsewhere.

An extensive Charity ought much to be imi^ated, because the Scripture says,
Do good to all men: And, one great fault of this Age, is, That the Charity of
men, (like their respects,) is consined in some, only to Paul's in others, to
Cephas; in others, to Apollos, (as I may allude:) but, the World will never be
right, till men have learnt to love all good People as such.

On Mr. Simpsons part, who founded the Library, it was, as some call it, a
Living-Charity; for, he built it in his lifetime, at his own proper cost and
charges: whereas some others have, in effect, said, That their Money should go
to good uses, when they had nothing else to do with it: then,) and not till
then;) yea, possibly repented of that too, ere they died. I have moreover
called it an hurable-Charity, (a Charity that did not vaunt it self;) because
the aforesaid Founder of the Library did not scorn to build upon another man's
Foundation, or to spend himself in adding to another man's Work; (who it was to
be expected) would bear the name of the Principal Founder. Happy is he that can
seek the good of others, and not seek his own honor at the same time; that, so
others be benefited, does not much care though himself be over -- looked.

Lastly, I said, It was a handsome, and a respectful piece of Charity, and so
it was: For, How noble a Treatment did the Founder provide quarterly for those
Ministers successively, for whose sake chiefly, or for whose use, he built that
Noble College. Forasmuch as he was pleased to give forty Pounds yearly for
four Dinners for the Clergy, who were to Dine together in that College, after
they had broke their Fast with a good Latin Sermon.

A scornful Charity is (as our Proverb phraseth it) but a bit and a knock;
such, as all ingenuous persons, that can spare it, had as lief go without: but
Charity, conferred with respect, is like a Diamond well-set, or a Picture placed
in such a light, as shows it to the best advantage: It is good milk, well
sweetened; whereas others, like our Proverb of the red-Cow, Give good milk, and
kick down part of it again. All these things put together, methinks the
Founders of that College and Library, were noble Patterns of Charity; and
therefore pity it is, that their College and their Names should lie in ashes
together: that the latter should not remain as famous as ever, though the
former be taken away. The respect which Scholars owe to the memory of
Sion-Colledge, for the kindness intended to them in it, as also for the good
which many have received from it, (where some I presume, got more Learning out
of those public Books, than others did out of those that were properly and
peculiarly their own; Some throve upon the Common, better than others did upon
their own rich Enclosures; some got more Learning for nothing, than others did
out of costly Libraries of their own purchasing: would not permit me to say
less of it than I have said; neither will I say much more concerning it.

Only one thing I must not fail to Observe, viz. That the Providence of God was
pleased to watch over the greatest part of the Library belonging to that
College, and to save it from the Fire. At first, there was a College without
a Library, and afterward a Library-House for some time without Books; Now,
(thanks be to God,) there are Books good store, but neither College nor
Library to place them in: But, Shall it be always so? Are there no more
VVhites and Simpsons to build another Sion-Colledge, with a Library to it, in
the room of that which is burnt down? Methinks the very name of Sion should
invite some good man, one, or more, to such a Work as that, having wherewithal
to accomplish it; or, if it were but in part, to contribute toward it: Does
the present Age afford no man equal in Estate and Charity to the two former
Founders of that College? whereof one was but a Parson, the other but a Vicar.
One would think there were a great many Persons that have double and treble,
yea ten-fold that preferment and Revenue, that ever they had: But, if no body
will do it, (as far be it from me, to think, the World is grown so bad, as bad
as it is,) I shall be prone to think, that the generation that now is has
abandoned all care of Learning, Religion, and Charity, or of any thing else but
what men should not care for.

MEDITATION LVI. Upon Citizens dwelling in Brothes, or B^^th like Houses since
the Fire, as in Moor-Fields, etc.
What Wooden-Houses are those that many Citizens of good fashion are now
forced, yea glad, to dwell in? May we call than Houses? or are they any thing
but Sheds, and Hovels, or Boothes, at most? Such as had wont to be set up
against Bartholomew-Fair, and took down again, when the Fair was ended: But now
it is, as if some such Fair as that, were continued all the year long. How are
the Citizens in Moore-Fields like an Army encamped, and lodging only within
tents? How does it bring to mind that feast of Tabernacles, Booths, or Bowers,
which the Israelits were commanded to keep Lev. 23.34. and that in the seventh
month; it being also the seventh month (according to our account, beginning the
year in March) which brought Londoners to this. The reason of observing the
Feast of Tabernacles is set down, Lev. 23.43. viz. That your generations may
know that I made the Children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them
out of the Land of Egypt. I suppose, it was in thankful acknowledgement, that,
now they dwelt in houses, they were much better accommodated than either
themselves or their Ancestors were, when they dwelt in Booths.

Far beit from us to despair that Londoners in Gods good time may keep a Feast
of Tabernacles in thankful remembrance that God, who sometimes (as at this day)
made them to dwell in Booths has brought them to Houses again; mean time, I
wish they may be well contented with that small convenience they enjoy and may
consider with themselves, how much better it is to dwell in Tents (as it were)
as now they do, than to lie in the open fields with only the Canopy of Heaven
over their Heads (sub Dio, sub save frigid^) as in the time of the fire many of
them were constrained to do. Jacobs lodging was not so warm and so easy as is
yours within those tents, when he took stones for his pillows and slept upon
them in the open air, and yet no night ever pleased him better, (as to the
Dreams and Visions of it); nor yet so much as that. From thence he said of the
place where he lay, That it is the gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.17. Of the Stones
that were his Pillows, he made a Pillar of Thankfulness, and poured Oil upon
the top of it (I suppose by way of Thank-offering); and vowed a Vow, that if he
came again in peace, that Pillar should be God's House, ver. 22. meaning, that
he would build a House for God in that place. How much better and more
comfortable are such Booths, than those mountains, Dens, and Caves of the
Earth, where the primitive Christians were forced to hide themselves? Yea, was
not Christ himself worse accommodated, when he lay but in a Manger? nay, does
not another Text say, that The son of man (sometime) had not where to lay his
head? It was a long time, that God himself dwelt amongst the Israelites but in
a Tent or Tabernacle, the Ark I mean, which was the visible Symbol of Gods
presence amongst the Jews, (and is somewhere called by the name of God): For,
till Solomon's time, there was no House or Temple for God to dwell in. Shall
men think much to dwell a few months or years in such a way as God himself
dwelt amongst men for many ages together? Is the servant greater than his Lord?

Bless God that you have weathered out a sharp Winter, in which your cold
lodging in those thin paper-houses (not much better Fences against wind and
weather, than Moses his Ark of Bull rushes was against the water), and now a
warm Summer is before you, in which those slender Tabern^cles may prove, not
only tolerable, but pleasan^ and serve, as it were, for Country houses.

If men had had materials, as at other (...) wherewith to have built strong and
(...) tations, where their booths now stand, (...) scarce have done it, because
they wait for a remove, and expect the good time when they may have
opportunity, to dwell in or near the places where they dwelt before. Is there
nothing to be learnt from thence? Why should not all the provision we make for
this World, be only such, and so slender, as may argue us mindful, that We have
here (...) City, but look for one to come, a City that has Foundations, whose
maker and builder is God?

MEDITATION LVII. Upon certain slight Timber-houses that did escape the Fire,
though better Houses were burned on each side of them.
IT is plain, this Fire had a Commission from above, what to take and what to
leave, else it had never come to pass, that those houses should escape that
were in most danger, viz. Slight, Old Timber-houses, that were like so much
tinder, (and some such did escape) whilst so many goodly Buildings and stately
Fabrics, of Brick and Stone, (that seemed able to have made their own Defense)
were cousumed by the Fire. It makes me think of Gods words to the Prophet
Jeremy, 1.18. Behold, I have made thee a defenced City, and an iron pill^r and
brazen walls against the whole (...). They shall sight against thee, but they
shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, ver. 19. Alas! What was one
poor Prophet against so many Kings of Ju^oh, Princes, Priests, and People (as
is there expressed)? yet God said, He would make him as a brazen Wall against
them all: they should not be able to prevail against him. So stood these poor
Old-houses, at a very small distance from that Fire, which destroyed others at
their right hand and at their left: they stood, I say, so securely, under the
wing of Divine Providence, as if they had been so many Iron Pillars or Walls of
Brass.

It calls to mind that passage, where the Prophet speaking of God, says, That
he gives power to the faint; and to them that have no might, he increases
strength, Isa. 40.29. To be sure, those houses had no might or strength of
their own against such a Fire; had it seized them, it would have made but a
blaze of them, it would have swallowed them up quick, unless the great God had
interposed, as he did on behalf of the three Children in the fiery Furnace. The
preservation of those houses, I reflect upon, not as if it were a Miracle, but
as a very great wonder and demonstration of Divine Providence. Mira and
Miracula, that is, Wonders and Miracles, are usually distinguished. Miracles
put Nature out of its course; as when the Sun was made to stand still, the
Red Sea dried up, etc. but I cannot say, that in this case any such thing was
done. Possibly, the wind say still, or blew another way, at what time the Fire
came near those houses: but, Who was it that called the wind into his treasury
again, at that very time, or else appointed it to blow from another Coast? Was
it not that Great God, who is said, to ride upon the wings of the wind, and to
make the Clouds his Chariots? and for that end (as may be meet for us to
conceive) that he might convince the world, that all Safety and Danger is as he
pleases to make it, that he can expose those things which seem to be most
secure, and secure those things which are most exposed: Of this we have many
Instances. In the time of the last great Plague, how many persons were there
infected with it, yea, and died of it, who, to all appearance, were out of
harms way? whereas others again, who lived as it were in the mouth of danger,
and jaws of death (as namely in infected families, yea, some in Pest-houses)
were preserved, and are alive to this very day.

When the Arrows of God slew about, some stood (not knowing how to help it) as
it were at the very mark, and yet it was the pleasure of him that had the bow
in his hand not to shoot them; others stood either wide of the Butt, or far
beyond it, and yet a Dart struck through their Liver: an invenomed Arrow took
hold of them, and drunk up their Spirits. So it falls out in Spiritual things.
How great was Lot's danger in Sodom? (the very air of which place seemed to be
infectious, as to matter of filthiness) yet there he continued chaste, how safe
would one have thought him upon the Mountains (as for any such matter); yet God
leaving him there, he became incestuous with his own Daughters. The Almighty
seems to take pleasure, yea, and to glory in doing unlikely things. The
Prophet, Isa. 64.3. ascribes to God terrible things, such as men looked not
for. Having the issues of life and death in his hands, he so orders it many
times for his own glory, that persons notoriously weak and crazy should hold
out a long siege of distempers, yea, and overcome them at last (after several
years of drooping) whereas others of Sampson-like strength (in comparison of
them) fall sick, and die within a few days; So, weak Christians (both as to
grace and gifts) are many times kept unspotted of the present world, and
enabled to quench all the fiery darts of Satan, whilst some that excel them,
both in gifts and graces, are sometime left of God (in order to their greater
humbling) to take shameful falls, and for a time to be overcome of the evil
one: witness David and others. So the soft Scabbard (much more in danger as one
would think) oft-times receives no hurt by lightning, whilst the same
lightning, passing thorough it, does melt the Stee within. Paul observed by
himself, that when he was weak, then he was strong, meaning stronger or more
strengthened by God, than at other times: which words imply, that when he was
strongest to his own thinking, then was he really weaker than at other times,
because then he had less of the presence of God with him. All these Instances
are such like things in effect, as was the preservation of old timber-houses,
whilst newer Buildings of Brick or Stone that stood near to them, were
presently demolished.

It refreshes me so much the more, to think, that all this came to pass,
without any thing of a Miracle; because the working of Miracles we ought not to
expect in these days; nor can we, without presumption, and tempting of God,
pray to him, to supersede, overruled, or invert the course of Nature for our
sakes; but, to seek a wonder of God when need requires, is no presumption or
sin at all: and the instance before us does make evident, that Wonders may
sometime stead us as much as Miracles, even as the Houses I am speaking of, (as
near to danger as they were,) were as effectually secured by God's either
stilling or diverting the Wind, (in the very nick of time,) as they could have
been by the working of the greatest Miracle. We think, God must over-turn the
course of Nature, if he would do this, and that, for us (as he spoke of Gods
making windows in heaven): Whereas himself, who is only wise, knows how to
accomplish what we desire without using such violent, extraordinary means. Be
consident, the Lord knows how, together with every danger and temp^^tion, to
make a way for escape, and rely upon what is spoken, Psalm. 91.1. He that
dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty: and let the Children of men put their trust under the shadow of
his wings.

MEDITATION LVIII. Upon the Warning which other Places may, and ought to take
by the Burning of London.
LOndons downfall may Alarm all the World. As many bad People as were in it,
let him, that can, point out that City in which there are more (so far as men
can judge) that are truly good. If ten righteous persons, yea, if fifty, yea, if
ten times fifty, (to speak within compass,) could have saved it, London had not
been destroyed: There were more than a few Names within that Sardis, of such as
had not defiled their garments like others; Yet, it should seem, not enough to
weigh against the sins of the rest. Comparing London with other places, we may
call it a Green-Tree; and, If this were done to the green Tree, What shall be
done to the dry? If Judgment begin at the House of God, where shall the wicked
and ungodly appear?

I doubt not but there were sins enough in London to deserve the Judgment that
did befall it, yea, and a greater than that; but, by the same reason, there is
guilt enough in all other places to expose them to as great a desolation. Job
had sins enough of his own to acquit God, in stripping him of all his earthly
Comforts, and setting him upon a Dunghill to scrape his sores with postheards;
yet Job had not, at that time, his fellow in all the East-Countrey, for a man
searing God, and eschewing evil: so that God might as justly have done the same
thing to any man of that age, as to him. Sins, comparatively small, have
sometimes been branded with great Punishments; witness, David's numbering the
People, and the Bethshemites looking into the Ark; possibly to show, that
little sins are commensurate with great Judgments, in point of evil, as a
grain of some Poisons may be as hurtful as a dram of others; so lesser sinners
do sometimes fall under heavy Judgments, to show, that even they deserve such
Scorpions as those, and others, greater punishments; but that the patience of
God extends to the reprieving of them for the present; as Solomon said to
Abiathar, Thou art worthy to dye; but I will not p^t thee to death at this
time, 1 King. 2.26.

Such as charge those sins upon London, which it was never guilty of, might
have had more color for so doing, if the Judgment had not fallen upon all
sorts of men, as well those whom they think free from any such guilt, as
others, who were really free though they do not think them so.

To speak of London, as worse than indeed it was, (that is, as worse than other
places;) is no other, than to bespeak security in other places, and to prevent
that warning which they ought to take, and which is indeed given them by the
destruction of London. Who has not reason to think, that other places shall
likewise perish, if they repent not? All my doubt concerning London, is,
whether it were better than most other places proportionably to the mercies and
means of grace, which it enjoyed above them; or whether, those things
considered, its sins did not preponderate: but whether absolutely considered,
it did not more abound with people, of good and unblamable lives, then most
other places do, I do not much question, nor can I tell who does.

Could I be heard beyond the Seas, I would say, Let Rome, Vienna, Venice,
Madrid, and Paris, take warning by the destruction of London, and repent
betimes, as in dust and ashes, and (to keep within our own bounds), Let Dublin,
and Edenborough, do so likewise; or (to come nearer home), Let York, Bristol,
Norwich, and all other Cities of England (nwo in being), meet the Lord in the
way of his judgments, and seek to turn away his wrath, lest they drink of the
same Cup of trembling, whereof London has drunk so deep, lest God do unto
them, as he has done unto it (as he threatened of old to do to Jerusalem as
unto Shiloh Jer. 7.14.) lest he rain fire and an horrible tempest upon them, as
he has done upon that famous City; yea, lest when London (having humbled its
self under the mighty hand of God) shall be restored and lifted up again (which
we pray, and hope for) their doom should be to succeed it in the same Calamity,
under which it groaneth at this day: Which thing we should all wish may be
prevented as to each of them, by a Sincere and seasonable Repentance.

FINIS.
Twenty Seven MEDITATIONS Consisting of COUNSEL and COMFORT TO DIRECT and
SUPPORT CHRISTIANS Under outward troubles: But especially calculated for the
use of those, that were and are great Sufferers by the Fire.

Part IV.

By Samuel Roll Minister of the Word, and sometime Fellow of Trinity College
in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, Nathaniel Ranew, and Jonathan Robinson,
1667.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir THOMAS ADAMS Knight and Baronet. TO Sir FRANCIS
BICKLEY Knight and Baronet And to the rest of the wothy Citizens of the now
desolate (though not despairing) City OF LONDON Especially such of them, as
either reside at Hackney, or are Governors of Saint Thomas's Hospital in
Southwark.

S. R. A Native of London, and true Mourner for the Calamity thereof, in
gratitude to several of them, and in true respect to all, dedicateth this most
Consolatory part of his Meditations, wishing the reparation of all their losses
in Gods due time; and their complete Assurance of an interest in those better
things that cannot be lost.

Mixed Meditations and Discourses of Counsel and Comfort to such as were great
sufferers by the firing of London.
DISCOURSE I. Of Deliverance under losses and troubles, as well as out of them.
TO say there is a Deliverance under L^sses and Troubles, as well as another
out of them, must needs be good sense, because it is good Divinity. The holy
Ghost in the Scripture speaks of such a thing, to whom it is impossible to
speak either untruly or improperly. It were blasphemy and nonsense to charge
him either with falsehood or folly, who is Truth and Wisdom its self, and the
fountain of all that Truth and Wisdom which is dispersed amongst all
intelligent creatures. He himself tells us how Christ was heard in the prayers
which he made for Delive cance, unto him that was able to save from death. Heb.
5.8. Yet was he not saved from the Cross, intimating thereby, that there is a
Deliverance (properly enough so called) under the cross, as well as from under
it, else how was Christ heard and delivered as to the cup which he begged might
pass from him? Luke 22.42. Which nevertheless he was made to drink, unless his
being strengthened to undergo it, as the next verse tells us, that then there
appeared an Angel, from heaven strengthening him: as also his being enabled to
triumph over principallities upon the Cross? (as is said Cor. 2.15.) might be
interpreted an eminent Deliverance vouchsafed him in and upon the Cross. I am
mistaken if the Apostle Paul in Romans 7.25. does not give thanks to God thorough
Jesus Christ for delivering him as to the body of Death, which yet he carried
about with him, and therefore was not delivered from but under it, as the
foregoing words do show, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of Death? And in 1 Cor. 10.13. the Apostle says, God is faithful who
will with the temptation also make a way to escape (or to be delivered) that ye
may be able to beat it; seeming thereby to insinuate that Deliverance and
Temptation may stand together, and do so, when a man is not tempted above what
he is able, but together with the temptation, has assistance to bear it. Were
not the Israelites delivered in the red Sea, Jonas in the great deep and Whales
belly? Daniel in the Lions den? the three children in the fiery furnace, I say
were they not first truly delivered in each of these, as afterward from and
out of them? To be kept under water from drowning and in the midst of fire,
from being burnt, is Deliverance with a witness. Had the bush that did burn and
was not consumed been presently quenched, or snatched out of the fire, it had not
been so eminently delivered as it was. Deliverances under great troubles though
least observed by many, are of all others most oblervable and Emphaticall: what
more admirable promise than that Isa. 43.2. When thou passest thorough the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk thorough the fire, thou
halt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. No place can be
more pertinent than that is, to prove there is such a thing as Deliverance
under trouble: the notion is worth our pursuing, because it is full of Comfort;
it opens as it were a new spring of consolation to those that are under trouble
which many did overlook before, as Hagar did those wells of water which were
nearest to her. Many people have no more joy and comfort than they have hopes
of having their losses repaired in kind, and their temporal troubles removed,
and God knows whether that may ever be, when they themselves despair of it,
their hearts fail within them, he that thinks himself utterly undone, and that
it will not be worth while for him to live, if London be not suddenly rebuilt,
trading speedily restored, when these things appear unlikely, will be at his
wits ends, but he that knows and believes that God (who is only wise) can make
him and his happy, though London should still lie in ashes, and trade not
revive in many years to come; that God can work a Deliverance for him in and
under all public calamities, and in despite of all and every of them, he I
say will in patience possess his soul. St. Paul's words, 1 Cor. 1.4. are much
to be heeded, where he says, Blessed be God who comfort us in all our
Tribulations; he does not say who delivers us out of all, but who comfort
us in all our Tribulations, and what is that but a Deliverance under trouble,
when God does comfort us in it? If there be such a thing as Deliverance under
trouble, many may and will rejoice in the hopes of that, who are past all hope
(though I think that should not be neither) of ever seeing an end of their
present troubles. They look upon Deliverance out of the present calamities to
be at so great a distance, that they think the steed will starve whilst the
grass grows, and their carcasses will fall in the wilderness, ere the time come
for entering into Canaan. But now by virtue of the notion I am speaking of,
though I should grant men of misgiving minds, there are as great unlikelyhoods
as they can suppose, that they should ever re-enjoy, such houses trades,
estates, conveniences, as formerly, or any thing comparable thereunto, yet may
they live in a daily expectation of a comfortable Deliverance, with and under
those calamities, which are like to continue upon them; that God together with
their temptations, will make a way for their escape, men so persuaded will be
able to say with Habakkuk, though the fig tree blossom not, and the labor of
the Olive fail, yet will (or may they) rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God
of their Salvation. When Paul praved that the Messenger of Satan, which
buffetted him might depart, God gave him no assurance of that, at leastwise
for the present, but yet told him that which satisfied him, though that evil
messenger were likely to continue, namely, that his Grace should be sufficient
for him. The Israelites knew that their captivity in Babylon would certainly
last seventy years. Therefore it was not thehopes of a speedy Deliverance from
thence, that did bear up the hearts of believers amongst them, but the hopes
they had, that God would be good to them, in and under their captivity, and
show them mercy in a strange land. If the Israelites knew, as it is like they
did, that they must wander no less than sorry years in the wilderness, ere
they came to Canaan, it was the Mercy and Deliverance which they did expect in
the wilderness, not out of it, during all that time, that did support them; as
hoping that in that howling desert, God would be no wilderness or Land of
Darkness to them. If God spread a table for his people in the wilderness, if he
give them water out of the Rock, and Manna from heaven, are not those things to
be reckoned Deliverances (namely from the evils that in such a place, they
might expect) though Quails should be withheld? Though the famine were not
removed, yet seeing Elijah was sed the mean time, though but by Ravens, it must
be acknowledged, that he was delivered in and under famine. If to the righteous
there arise light in darkness, as is promise there shall, is not that
Deliverance? Though Paul and Silas were in prison, and their feet in the
stocks, yet if they were so cheerful there, as to sing praises to God at
midnight, Acts 16.25. was not that a great Deliverance? Surely Paul and others
of whom he speaks, were greatly delivered, even under chastisement, sorrow,
poverty, and a kind of Death, yea Deaths often, or else he could ever say as he
does, 2 Cor. 6.9.10. As dying and behold we live, as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing, as poor, yet making many rich, as having nothing, yet possessing all
things; as if he had but the shadows of evil, but the reallity and substance
of good things. He is delivered from death, as to whom the sting of death is
taken away, and he from the noisome pestilence who is secured, that the evil
of it shall not come nigh him (which is all that seems intended by that promise
Psalm 91.3. verse, compared with the tenth) David somewhere prays that God
would bring his Soul out of trouble, and his Soul out of prison. The Soul of a
man is the man, if that be brought out of trouble, in whole, or in part, though
his body, his name, estate, relations are yet introuble, the man himself is
delivered. A man may be sick and well at the same time (as Baul was poor, and
yet rich at the same time) according to that of the Prophet, the inhabitants
shall not say they are sick, for their sins shall be forgiven them; a man can
be but well in Prosperity, and it may be as well with us, yea and better with
us in adversity, all things considered (as David says, it was good for him
that he was afflicted) and in that case is not a man truly delivered even under
affliction? It may be God will be more with us in the water and in the fire,
than ^ver he was out of it. As prospective-glasses do represent the object near
at band, though it be some miles distant, so may this notion represent
Deliverance at the very door, or as that which may come the next mornine, when
sorrow came but the evening before ( viz. Deliverance in and under trouble,
which may be sufficient for us) though Deliverance out of trouble, may seem as
far from us as the East is from the West, thus may we hope in one kind whilst
we despair in another, and with Abraham in hope, believe even against hope. If
outward calamity and misery might not confist with more real happiness and
comfort, than plenty and prosperity had wont to afford, how could that promise
of Christ be sulfilled, that they who forsake all for him; shall have a
hundredfold in this life, and yet with persecution, or in despite thereof?
Lord if my heart ceceive me not, I had rather partake of those Deliverances
which many of thy servants have had, with and under great and sore trouble,
than of those Deliverances out of trouble into greates^ earthly prosperity,
which thou have sometimes vouchsafed to wicked men. Thou who gave to Paul and
Silas, imprisoned and in the stocks, songs in the night, but did make
Belteshazzer tremble, and his knees smite together in the midst of his full cups
and jovial company, thou caust imbitter the best of earthly conditions, and
sweeten the worst. Lord give me rather a bitter cup of thy sweetning, than a
sweet cup of thy imbittering. As for all the troubles which at this day are
upon my self, or any of thy people; if thou will never deliver us out of them,
thy will be done; but oh fail not in such manner as has been spoken (and how
else thou please) to save and deliver us under them, that experience
henceforth, may tender it no paradox to me and others, that there is real
Deliverance under trouble, as well as our of it, that the snare of evil may not
be visibly broken and yet thy people may be delivered.

DISCOURSE II. Of this, that the life of man consists not in the abundance of
what he possesses.
SUrely it is from a vain conceit, that the life of man consists in his
abundance, that those who have not an abundance of earthly comforts, do so much
covet after it; and those that have, do so much bless themselves in it, as
some are brought in saying, Zach. 11.5. Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; and
those who have lost of their ab^ndance do mourn so inordinately, for the want
of it. But whatsoever men think, Christ assures us it is not so, Luke 12.15.
For there says he, the life of a man consists not in the abundance of the
things which he possesses. I think at present of six or or seven instances
wherein that saying of Christ is verified. First, The length or prolongation of
man's life, does not consist in the abundance of what he possesses. The oil of
riches cannot feed the lamp of life, Psalm. 49. from the 6. to the 11. verse.
They that boast themselves of their riches, none of them can redeem his
brother, or give to God a ransom for him, that he should still live for ever,
and not see corruption, for he sees that wise men dye, and leave their wealth
to others. Look abroad and you will see more poor men that have lived to a
great age than rich, (yea in proportion to the humber, there is of one and of
the other;) Some diseases which poor people generally escape out of, and make
but light of them, how often do they prove fatal and deadly to them that are
rich? as if corruption were ambitious to claim kindred of them, more than of
others, and the hungry worms to feed upon their well fed flesh, rather than
that of others: to allude to Job 17.14. I have said to corruption, thou art my
father, to the worm, thou art my mother, and my sister: poor men lengthen
their lives by labor, and rich men too too often shorten theirs by Luxury.
Neither does the end of man's life consist in possessing an abundance; man was
not sent into the world, to load himself with thick clay, or to add house to
house, and land to land, as if he meant to dwell alone upon the earth, to
possess himself of so many hundreds, or thousands by the year, and so leave
it to his posterity. That these are trifles to the great end which man was sent
into the world for, appears by Acts 17.27. where Paul tells us, that God has
set man upon the face of the earth, to seek after God (there is the end of
life) if nappily he might find him out. Nor in the third place, does the Credit
of a man's life consist in the mere abundance of the things which he
possesses; they that have nothing to commend them but their riches, though
they are flattered by many, are truly bonoured but by a few, most men will bow
down to those idols of Silver and of God, as I may call them (because it is the
fashion so to do) but when their backs are turned upon them, they are ready to
say of them, as the Apostle concerning idols in the general, 1 Cor. 8.4. we
know that an Idol is nothing in the world, we know such a one for all his brave
outsides, and the caps and knees that are given him to be a worthless person;
and to signify just nothing. He is like a rich tomb without, which is so ill
furnished within, that it is not worth opening. Fourthly, Neither does the
usefulness of man's life, consist in the abundance of what he possesses.
Solomon tells of a poor man that by his wisdom delivered a City, Eccles. 9.15.
That a rich man void of wisdom, could not have done with all his wealth; some
do more good in the world with a little, than others do that have great
estates. There are little figures in the world, and great Ciphers, great ones
that spend all they can rap and rend together, upon their lusts, and no body is
the better for it; and others of mean condition, that are content to spend,
and to be spent for public good. Some great trees do but shade and prevent the
growth of other plants, and mean time bear no fruit themselves. Fifthly,
Neither does the successefulnesse of man's life, and of the undertakings,
thereof depend wholly upon the abundance of what he possesses. Now many elder
brothers that have had great estates left them by their Parents, great portions
with their Wives, and have in a few years, by Drunkenness, Gaming, Whoreing,
one or all of these, reduced themselves and their families to a morsel of
Bread, selling their birth right as it were, for a Mess of Pottage. And on the
other hand, how many younger brothers that have been bound to honest trades,
and had no more from their parents, than a competent stock to set up with, have
with the blessing of God, upon their industry, arrived at great estates? How
many have set up with small stocks, (it may be with nothing else but a stock of
Credit) and in a few years, become very rich? and on the other hand, how many
have had great stocks to begin with, and have soon brought them to nothing?
Sixthly, Neither does the life of men in, and as to their children (in whom
parents are said to live) consist in, or depend upon the abundance of what they
possess, or of what they have to give them; how many fathers have given great
portions with their children, thinking to match them highly, and in a few years
(yea months sometimes) have seen both their money and their children cast away?
Others again have had little wherewith to prefer their children in marriage,
and yet have seen them as well disposed of, as if they could have given them
thousands. Neither are good and comfortable yokefellows, the only things that
men are not sure always to purchase, for their children by giing great estates
with them, but many other things there are that parents wish to see in their
children, as namely, Health, Strength, Freedom from Deformity, Wisdom, Grace,
which things if they be wanting, cannot be bought for them with all the Gold
that is in both the Indies, neither can parents comfortably live or enjoy
themselves in their children, if all or most of those things be wanting.
Lastly, the happiness and comfort of man's life, (which I take to be that which
Christ here chiefly intends by the life of man) does certainly not consist in
the abundance of what he possesses; it is one thing to possess, and another
thing to enjoy, he may enjoy more that possesses less. Hear David, Psalm.
37.16. A little that a righteous man has is better than the riches of many
wicked. Some men have more comfort in a dish of green herbs, than others can
find in a stalled Ox, Zoph^ speaking of a wicked man, Job 20.22. says, that
in the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits, and why may not
good men in the midst of their straits, have a kind of sufficiency? the
Scripture telling us, that a good man is satisfied from himself. I doubt not
but some, and those the very same persons, have had more contentment in, or
enjoyment of God, and of themselves in a lower and poorer, than ever they had
in a higher and more plentiful condition, which has reconciled them to the
literal interpretation of these words, James 1.10. Let the rich (which may be
understood of him that was rich) rejoice in that he is made low. Most men count
it easier, when they are once down, to sit low, than to sit high. The body may
be too full of blood to consist with health, as well as too empty, though that
blood be all good. There is a Plethora or Redundancy of good blood, as well as
a Cacochymia or Superfluity of bad humors, which makes men less cheerful,
than they would otherwise be; so that breathing a vein may give some relief
against Melancholy. Wise Mariners having cast away some of their lading in a
tempest, do with more hearts-case and security enjoy the rest; so fares it
with some men, after considerable losses, they are better satisfied with a
part, than they were before with the whole. I see then experience does
abundantly confirm what Christ has spoken, touching the life of man nor
consisting in the abundance of that he possesses. I must then take leave to
think, those men are sick-brained that think, no man can be happy unless he
have so many hundreds, yea thousands by the year. Let a man make me believe if
he can, that no man can make a pleasant meal under twenty or thirty dishes,
when I know a man may feed as delightfully upon two or three, yea it may be
upon one. Persuade us who can that no man can travel a few miles to his full
content without a Coach and six Horses: or that a man cannot sleep sweetly any
where but upon a bed of down, hung with velvet curtains, when we all know the
contrary. I like our proverb well, Enough is as good as a feast; (yea
ordinarily it is better) I doubt not but Discontent is as often clad in Silks
and Sattins as in leather doublets and canvais breeches; many times easier feet
go in plainer shoes; give me rather high shoes such as Plow-men wear, with
sound toes in them, than high great gouty toes, in velvet slippers; let me
rather tread in the dirt, where I can stand fast, than walk upon smooth ice,
where I shall always be in fear of falling; if then abundance of earthly
things can neither prolong my days, nor give me the true end of life, nor help
me to that good name which is indeed a precious ointment, nor assure me of
success, nor make me to be more useful, nor make my children more happy than
with the blessing of God they may be without it, nor finally afford me more
comfort and contentment in my life, than others have, who have no abundance, if
God has diminished my abundance, I have no reason to mourn as one without
hope, or as Micah did, when his idol Gods were taken from him, as if he had
been quite undone. If God so please, I may in this impaired condition, be as
happy, yea more than ever I was. In thy favor O Lord is life, yea thy favor
is better than life its self, Psalm. 30.5. Ps. 63.3. Lift thou u^ upon me the
light of thy countenance, and it shall make my heart more glad, than they whose
Corn and Oil increase. Let me be so far from thinking I shall never see good
day more, because I have lost a part, yea it may be the greatest part of what
I sometimes had, as nevertheless to hope, that my last days though much the
poorest, may be my very best.

DISCOURSE III. Of the Lessons of an afflicted estate well learnt, their making
way for prosperity to ensue.
THe best way to gain, or regaine prosperity, is to learn apace in the
school of Adversity. Affliction is a teaching thing, for we read of Christ
himself that he did learn obedience by the things he suffered, Heb. 5.8. As
the Law is said to be a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, so is misery a
Schoolmaster to bring us to happiness, in case we give our selves to be taught
by it. As parents will keep their children at school no longer when once they
are fit for the Universitie, but send them thither; so will God translate his
people to the Academy of a more pleasing condition, when they are duly ripened
and prepared for it by the school of adversity; witness these words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 94.12.13. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law, that thou may give him rest from the days of
Adversity. Affliction is Gods plow, with which he breaks up the fallow ground
of men's hearts, and when that is done, he is most ready to sow the seeds of
peace and comfort, as it is written, light is sown for the righteous, and joy
for the upright in heart. Now sowing presupposes plowing, nor would the
husbandman do the former viz. to plow, but that he intends the latter, viz. to
cast in his seed, and would thereby prepare for it. Now there are several
Lessons which God does or would teach men by his speaking rod in affliction, if
men do o^ would hear the voice of that rod, and him that has appointed it.
First, God by affliction would teach men to pray. Is any man afflicted, let
him pray, Ja. 5. Affliction quickens men unto prayer. As Absalom fetched Joab
to him by setting his corn on fire: in their affliction they will seek me
early, says God; yea and it also quickens men in prayer, Christ in his Agony
prayed yet more ferventlie. Christ offered up prayers with strong crying and
tears to him that was able to save him from death: intimating that the approach
of death did help to quicken him, Heb. 5.7. It is a Proverb, he that cannot
pray, send him to Sea, affliction is a dangerous Sea, and God sends many men
thither, that they may learn how to pray. A^^^ Paul was struck down to the
earth, and terrifyed with a voice from heaven we quickly hear of him* Behold
he prays! Acts 16.11. so he had wont to do in former times, for that he was
a Pharisee, but now he so prayed and to so good purpose as he never did before.
And is not prayer (such as it may be) a good means to get on of affliction? is
it not said, call upon me in the day of affliction, and I will deliver thee?
Psalm. 50.15. and in Psalm. 107.17.19. We read, Fools because of their
Transgressions are afflicted, then they cry to the Lord in their trouble, he
saves them out of their Distresses, also verse 13. If our affliction do not
cause us to restrain prayer from the Almighty (like him that said, this evil
is of the Lord, why should I wait on him any longer?) our prayers will prevail
with God, to restrain affliction in his due time and manner. Secondly, Another
Lesson which affliction teaches us (or rather God by it) is to walk humbly,
and to be humble, I am sure is the ready way to be exalted, In Deuteronomy. 8.2. We
read how God lead the Israelites 40. years in the wilderness to humble them,
implying that a wilderness condition, tends to humble men. Earthly good things
are the fuel of prides and the refore pride of life is spoken of as if it were
a third part of all the things that are in the world, 1 John 2.16. All that is
in the world is, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, that is fuel to these; now when the fuel is abated, it may be expected
that the fire will slake. And will not humility make way for our Deliverance?
Surely it will, witness that promise, Lev. 26.41, 42. If then their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, then will I remember my covenant with Jacob,
and I will remember the land. If God humble us, he will do us good in our
latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.2. See the promise James 4.10. humble your selves in the
fight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Does not God by his Prophet tell
us, Isa. 57.15. That he dwells with the humble, and contrite, to revive them?
Thus you see affliction does as it were, prepare Antidotes to expel its self;
as some of our best Antidotes, for expulsion of poison, are taken from the
bodies of poisonous creatures; as Serpents, Vipers. And affliction sanctified,
works humility, and humility exercised, works out affliction. Thirdly, A third
Lesson, which God by affliction, teaches man is to be patient, and to submit
to his div^^^ will. And this also will be found an excellent means to remove
affliction, and recover prosperity in due time. We read Romans 5.3. How that
Tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience that hope
which makes not ashamed. Now that which produces an unslattering hope, does
surely contribute to deliverance, both as it is a kind of cause, in which hope
foreseeth such an issue as deliverance is, as also, for that hope is as it were
deliverance anticipated, for we are saved by hope, says the text, Romans 8.24.
But more plainly, James 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, says he,
and have seen the end of the Lord. Job was patient, and God afterward gave him
double in lieu of what he had taken from him, it is good that a man should
quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, Jam. 3.26. and verse 25. The Lord
is good to them that wait for him. God sometimes has all his end in
afflicting, when he has but made us humbly to stoop and submit, Levit. 26.41.
If then they shall accept the punishment of their iniquity, that is, if they
did patiently bear the indignation of the Lord, as having sinned against him,
and submit to the rod, then God promises that he would remember their land,
etc. it is Gods manner to withdraw afflictions, when he has once accomplished
the end for which he sent them. Esa. 10.12. God says, that when he had
performed his whole work upon Mount Zion and Jerusalem, then would he punish
the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, who was their oppressor.
If then the design of God in afflicting, be only to make us submit to his will
(as sometimes it is) when we have learnt to do that (like Abraham that was
become willing to sacrifice his Isaac, which was all God intended to put him
to) then is deliverance in one kind or other not far off. God does not intend
to make some men always poor, and despicable, though they are so for the
present, but yet the copy of his countenance toward them, is as if he meant
they should always be in adversity, whereas all he stands upon, is to make them
contented so to be, if such be his will concerning them; and when they have
quietly laid themselves down at Gods feet, bound their Isaac to the altar with
a true intent to sacrifice him to the good pleasure of God, and stretch forth
their hand to do it, then comes as it were a voice from heaven saying, let it
alone, it is enough that thou have done already; Behold I will accept a Ram for
a burnt offering, instead of thy son, as God dealt with Abraham, Genesis 22.13.
God does many things but to try us and make us believe he will take all from us
(when he means only to wean us from all) that he may say of us, as of Abraham,
Genesis 22.12. Now I know thou fear God, for thou have not withheld thy Son,
thy only Son from me. To be content always, to be in trouble, if God will have
it so, is the way to come out, is one good way to escape. Fourthly, Affliction
teaches us to live under an awful sense of God. It is a School of fear as to
God, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments, (says David to God.) If God appear as a consuming fire, one maine
use we are to make of it is, to serve him with Godly fear; Heb. 12. Now it is
evident, that a due fear of God does make way for Deliverance out of trouble:
When God saw that Abraham was so fearful to offend him, that he durst not
withhold his son Isaac whom God had commanded him to sacrifice with his own
hands, he gave him Isaac again, and accepted a Ram in his stead, Genesis 22.12.
When God had brought Manasseh to know that the Lord was God, that is, to fear
and reverence God as became him, and to humble himself before him, then says
the text, the Lord heard his supplication and brought him again to Jerusalem,
into his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 33.13. Fifthly, Affliction is a School of
obedience and circumspect walking, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that ye walk
circumspectly, because the days are evil. Those that walk in the dark take
more than ordinary care lest they stumble, and fall, new days of evil or
affliction, are called days of darkness. Prosperity has hardly more
Temptations on one hand; than great affliction has on the other hand: hence
Agur deprecates poverty, Prove. 30.9. Lest I be poor and Steal, and take the
name of the Lord in vain. The Apostle was afraid lest the incestuous
Corinthian, if not timely comforted, might be swallowed up of two much sorrow,
2. Cor. 2.7. and lest Satan should get an advantage against him, verse 11.
affliction is a tempest, and therefore we must do like Pilots, who steer with
greatest circumspection in a storm, the hard frost of adversity, though it be
apt to kill certain weeds, as pride, security, and such like? yet if care be
not taken, it may also nip many hopeful blossoms (as unseasonable frosts use
to do.) If such eminent worthyes as Elijah, Job, Jonas, Jeremy, were between
whiles worse for those afflictions, which should have made them better, (as we
know they were) we had need look to our selves, and walk circumspectly at such
a time. Now that our so doing will make way for our deliverance. David tells us,
Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the
Salvation of God. And the Prophet, Isa. 59.20. The Redeemer shall come to Zion,
and unto them that turn from transgressions in Jacob. Sixthly, Another Lesson
which affliction teaches men, is to redeem time, Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the time
because the days are evil. Young Scholars are not more ordinarily whipped for
any thing, than for losing their time, and in order to making them spend their
time better. We have never less time to lose than when the rod of the Almighty
is upon our backs. Affliction makes work wheresoever it comes (as Sickness in
a Family uses to do) and time is then most precious, when we have most work
upon our hands, when we have most to do; yea it also indisposeth for work, and
when the iron is blunt, we had need put to the more streng. Travelers make the
best of their time in the depth of winter, and will hardly draw bit till night,
because the shortness of the days, and badnesse both of the ways and weather
are great hindrances. When we look for the greatest impediments, we had need
take the most time before us, neither is the Redeeming of time more a duty in
Affliction, than a direct means to get out of it. Take one instance for all in
Paul and Silas, who being in prison, were redeeming their midnight time from
rest and sleep, for singing and praising of God, Acts 16. And the next news we
have of them is, they were both miraculously set at liberty. Lastly, Affliction
is a School of Faith and Affiance in God. David, says Psalm. 63.3. At what
time he was afraid he would put his trust in God, and when he was overwhelmed,
he would fly to the rock that was higher than he, meaning to God; and upon the
wing of faith. And it is said that she who is a widow indeed trusts in God,
and why she that is a widow, rather than she who is a wife, but because the
condition of a widow, is ordinarily more afflicted and disconsolate: Moreover
Afflictions are called the trial of our Faith. All which passages prove that
affliction is a School of Faith as well as of patience. Now withal it is
famously known, that the exercise of Faith, and dependence upon God, is a
notable expedient for the removal of Affliction. What miracles of Deliverance
are attributed to Faith, Heb. 11.33. By Faith they stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, turned to flight
the armies of the aliens: and passed the^ed Sea, as upon dry land; which the
Egyptians essaying to do were drowned, ver. 29. And if you will have it from
the mouths of two witnesses, let that of the Psalmist be added Psalm. 22.4. Our
fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them, they trusted in thee and
were not confounded. Thus have I mentioned seven doors belonging to the valley
of Acor (which signifies trouble) or so many ways of escape out of Affliction,
which are also duties in and under it. I see then in this case there are two
gaps may be stopped with one hedge (a man may una fidelia duos dealbare parietes)
there are two intentions may be answered with one and the same medicine; two
questions may be equally satisfied with one and the same answer; namely these
two, how ought I to carry my self under Affliction? and what course should I
take to get out of Affliction? He that studieth the latter only, shall be able
to do neither, he that minds the former well, shall do both under one. He that
considers only how to get out of Affliction, troubles himself with Gods work,
and neglects his own, and neither can he himself do what he aims at, nor
justly expect that God should do it for him. But he that makes it his only
business to carry himself under Affliction, as he ought; does what he can,
and interesseth God to do that which himself cannot do, let us do out part,
and God will not fail to do his, and so both will be done.

We need not trouble our selves, about getting into another form, let us but
out-learn others that are in the same form ( viz. of Affliction) with us, or at
leastwise keep pace with the best of them, and our master which is in heaven,
will take care of our translation into another form, that is more to be
desired, when we shall be fit for it. I find God very angry with those Jews
that would think of nothing but coming out of captivity, so soon almost as
they were gone into it, and would hearken to any lying Prophets that would
sooth them up with such pleasing stories; whereas their duty was to bring their
spirits to be content with a captivity of seventy years long, to learn the law
of such a condition as that, and to comply with it, see Jer. 27.8. And it shall
come to pass that the Nation and Kingdom, which will not put their neck under
the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, that Nation will I punish with the Sword, and
Famine, and Pestilence, till I have consumed them by his hand. And verse 17.
Hearken not to them (namely who said, that the vessel^ of the Lords house
should shortly be brought again from Rabylon. verse 16. for they prophecy a
lie to you) serve the King of Babylon and live, as if he had said, Buckle your
selves to the duty of your captive estate, patiently bear the yoke which God
has put about your necks, and it shall be better for you both at the present,
and for the future. Apprentices that cast off the yoke before they have served
out their time, do many of them never come to be freemen, whilst they live.
Hananiah his diverting the Jews, from the duties incumbent upon them as
designed for a long captivity, by telling them that within two years, God would
bring again the captives of Judah, Jer. 28.4. I say his so doing cost him his
life, verse 16. Thus says the Lord, this year thou shall dye, etc. I cannot
but observe how God commanded the Jews to provide for a lasting captivity. Jer.
28.4. Thus says the Lord, to those whom I have caused to be carried away from
Jerusalem to Babylon, build ye houses and dwell in them, and plant Gardens and
eat the fruit of them: Take ye wives and beget sons and daughters. And seek the
peace of the City whether I have caused you to be carried captives, and pray to
the Lord for it, etc. As if he had said, expect not to come out from thence
suddenly, but make the best of that condition I have allotted for you, and
carry your selves under it as becomes you, be satisfied and content with it,
and quietly wait till my time shall come, even the set time for your
Deliverance. I can do no less than turn the advice, I have given to my self
and others, into such petitions as follow; Lord thou have greatly Afflicted us,
teach us thereby so to call upon thee, in this day of our trouble, that thou
may in due time deliver us. Humble us under thy mighty hand, that thou may
lift us up, give us so to submit to thee, and accept our punishment, that thou
may remember our land. Give us such patience as thou gave to thy servant
Job, that thou may make such an issue for us, as thou did for him. Cause us
to fear thy great name, that when we pour out our cries to thee, who can
deliver from death, as Christ did in the days of his flesh; we may be heard as
he was, in that he feared. Cause us to order our conversations aright, that
thou may show us thy Salvation. Give us to redeem time in an evil day, as
Paul and Silas did, that thou by thine outstretched arm, may rescue us as
thou did them, knocking off the chains and fetters of our present troubles:
And above all things cause us to abound in faith, as our fathers trusted in
thee, and were delivered; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. We
desire to say with the three children, The God whom we serve is able to deliver
us, even out of a fiery furnace which has been prepared for us; but whither he
will or no, we will trust in him; Whilst thou chastenest us, O teach us out of
thy Law, and we shall not need to doubt but thou at length wilt give us rest
from the days of adversity.

DISCOURSE IV. Of being content with Food and Raiment.
HOw many would be well satisfied with what the Fire has left them, if they
could but take that excellent counsel which the Apostle gives them, 1 Timothy 6.8.
Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. Stately Houses, noble
shops, full Trades, vast Incomes, some have not now as formerlie, who yet have
food and raiment for them and theirs. Did Jacob indent with God for any more?
Genesis 28.20. If God will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then shall
the Lord be my God. Did Agur ask any more of God, (as for the things of this
world,) when he said, Feed me with food convenient? Yea, did he not deprecare
that which was much more, when he said Give me not riches, lest, etc. Dare we
absolutely pray for more than daily bread, (and other things as necessary for
life, whereof ravment is one?) and shall we peremptorily desire more than we
dare to pray for? Can those desires be regular; which we fear to make the
matter of our prayers? Or, if God vouchsafe us as much as we think lawful and
fit to pray for, why should we not be content? Turn your desires of greater
things than these, into the form of a prayer, and hear how it will sound: Lord
give me riches, though Agur were so unwise as to pray against them. Lord give
me with Dives to be clothed with Purple and fine Linen, and to fare
sumptuously every day; or to have wherewithal so to do. Lord give me so many
hundreds by the Year, more than I need to spend. Lord give me one thousand
pound at least; but rather two or three for every child; I cannot be content
with less as a portion for each of them. Offer if you dare to put such Incense
as this into Christ his Golden Cenfor; Appear if you dare with such requests as
these at the Throne of grace; Expect if you can that as to such requests Jesus
Christ should intercede for you. So absurd prayers cannot be good desires; nor
can it be otherwise than absurd to be discontented for the want of those things
which were absurd to pray for. How many of our betters have barelie food and
raiment, and yet are very thankful for what they have? The Israelites in the
Wilderness had but bread and water, when for their murmuring they were
destroyed of the destroyer, 1 Cor. 10. Beware of grumbling at Manna, and
lusting after Quails, lest for so doing your carcasses fall in the Wilderness,
as theirs did. If the end of life were to eat and drink, it were another
matter; but if the end of eating and drinking be, that we may live, such food
as will keep us alive and in health, ought to be accepted with thankfulness:
what a feast would a belly-full of bread be counted in a time of famine. How
precious was an Asses head, yea a cab of Doves dung in the famine of Samaria, 2
Kings 6.28. Are we better than Lazarus who would have been glad of Dives his
crumbs?

If that were a parable, then Lazarus is there put not for one person, but for
every one, that is, such as he is described to have been: namely defigned for
Abraham's bosom, and yet glad of crumbs in this World. Let me here diet with
Lazarus, (if the will of God be so) may I but be sure henceforth to lodge with
him in the bosom of Abraham. Do we make light of food and raiment for us and
ours? alas, what more can this World afford us, though we have ever so much of
it? Solomon complaining how the hearts of men are taken up with thoughts and
cares of worldly things (which is conceived to be the meaning of that
difflicult expression, Eccles. 3.11. He has set the World in their hearts,)
shows what the benefit of the World, and of the things therein is. I know
(says he) that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice, and to do
good in his life: And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the
good of all his labors, v. 12, 13. I find the rich man spoken of Luke 16.19.
distinguished from the beggar only by this, that he are better meat, and wore
better clothes. For the Text says, That he was clothed in Punple, and fared
sumptuously every day.

Now what great matter is it, that our vile bodies should have every thing of
the best? What are our bodies, especially if too much pampered: but as so many
reeking dunghils, annoying our souls with ill steames and vapors? or like
dead carcasses joined to living men, (a torture invented by Mezintius) which
are an unsufferable offense to them. As it is said of Eve, that she was first
in the transgression; and as she drew in her husband, so our bodies many times,
like so much tinder do receive the first sparks of temptation: or like the
thatch of an house, are first kindled, and as that might set the whole house,
so do they the whole soul on fire. Many sins begin at the body, are occasioned
or fomented, or both, by the over-sanguine, or melancholy, or choleric temper
or distemper thereof: which shows we are no debtors to the flesh, to fulfill
the desires thereof. Moreover if we consider whence our bodies came, and
whither they are going, it will appear there is no such cause to be greatly
concerned for them; that they should wear the finest wool, and eat the sinest
of the wheat. Dust they were, and to dust they shall teturn. Why must they
needs be sed so daintily which themselves must shortly become food for worms?
when we feed our bodies too high, what do we but feed our lusts, yea, feed
diseases in our very bodies? so that it is become a proverb, that the English
man digs his grave with his teeth. Few kill their bodies by mortifying them:
but many by indulging them. Christmat kills many more than Lent. As the Ape is
said to hug her young ones to death: so many kill their bodies with too much
kindness to them. As over-pamper'd Horses often times throw their riders, and
give them their deaths wound: so are men too commonly thrown both in osickness,
sin, and death it self, by indulging their bodies over much. The body (as one
says well) ought to be kept, as not infra, so neither supra negotium; sed per
negotio; not too high for its work, but equal to it. Paul says, that he did
keep under his body, and brought it into subjection. So far was he from
cockring of it till it became his master, as too many do. There is no small
danger in over-exalting our blood and natural spirits.

Job was never more afraid of his children, than when they went a feasting from
house to house. Then did he offer a Sacrifice for each of them, least they
should blaspheme God, or had done it. A cheap and simple diet may preserve
health and strength as well as the best dainties and costliest varieties.
Daniel, and the three children who lived of pulse and water, were fairer and
fatter than all those which did cat the portion of the Kings meat. Dan. 1.15.
They are sometimes the leanest cattle which devour the fat. As for any service
of God or men, he shall be much more fit, who having no pallatable diet, eats
but for necessity, and to satisfy his hunger; than one that by the
deliciousness of his fare, is tempted to devour more than he can well digest.
As for delight in meats and drinks: he that brings but hunger and thirst enough
to a course meal, shall have more of that (and those are sauces which the poor
have usuallie most of) than he that with balfe an appetite sits down to a great
Feast. Why then, having a comperencie of wholesome food, though but mean and
ordinary, should we not be therewithal content? Are we better then John the
Baptist, of whom it is said, that his diet was Locusts and wild Honey? Some
have found more sweetness in a draught of cold water (such as their thirst has
been) than in all the Wines and Spirits which they have drank at other times?
Why then may not a mean diet content us, yea prove delicious to us, as Solomon
says, To the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. Poverty brings such
sauce with it, as will make a dish of Tripe more savorie than a Venison Pastie
is to a rich man.

Then, as for Raiment: if we have but that which may serve the turn to keep us
warm and decent, though it be course and plain: why should we not be content
therewith? We read in Mark 1.6. John was clothed in Camels-hair, and with a
girdle of a skin about his lo^ns (which was as mean as could be;) and do we not
read of some of the primitive Christians, that they wandered about in
sheepe-skins, and Goat Skins. Heb. 11.37. Are we better than they? would such
habits become us worse than them? Time was, that God bid the Israelites to put
off their ornaments, that he might know what to do with them. Exodus 33.5. Did
God ever speak, as if he knew not what to do with a people for want of
ornaments? Did he ever seem displeased that a people were not fine enough? Why
should that habit displease us, that God may best like us in, and know what to
do with us? Whilst we are clad with costly attire, it is hard for us at the
same time to be clothed with humility: yea, not to have pride compass us as a
chain.

Why should not mean houses satisfy us, if God in such will appoint the bounds
of our habitation? If the primitive Christians were content with mountains,
dens, and caves of the earth, as we read, Heb. 11.37. why should we repine at
mean dwellings, which yet may answer the main ends for which houses are built;
viz. warmth, privacie, defense, and such like? were dens and caves better than
such houses? or is it because we think our selves better than those that dwelt
in deus and caves? Surely neither. It is but a little while that we and ours
shall have need of any such things, as houses, food, and raiment; and may not
that which is but mean and ordinary content us for a while? Did not Citizens
make shift with any thing whilst the City was burning? Glad they were to crowd
their goods, their children, yea themselves into any hole where they could get,
and thankful to those that would receive them, and well content with it, as
thinking with themselves it was but for a while. Well, after a little while
thou that came naked into the world shall go naked out of it, and never use
such clothing more: and whereas meats are for the belly, God shall destroy both
them and it.

For the present then, be content with such things as you have: as travelers
use to make shift with any thing upon a journey: and soldiers upon a march;
seeing such things are but for a season, and they hope for better afterward.
Lord I am sensible that this counsel, viz. to be content with food and raiment,
is very good. Oh give to me and others a heart to take it. If we need many
things, and are not satisfied without the best of every thing we need, (of such
fort as food and raiment) it is our weakness. So people that are sick would
taste of every bodies beer, and none is good enough for them: some is too new,
some too stale, some too bitter, some too sower, some too strong, some too
small, some fault there seems to be in all; whereas it may be there is no
fault in any, but all the fault is in their distempered pallates. One sort of
drink serves him that is in health (let that one be what it will, so it be but
tolerable) Lord give me that health within my soul that I may not long for any
thing that is not simply needful; nor be displeased with any thing that is
truly good, though not the best, (as being humbly persuaded that every such
thing is better than I deserve) let me not seek great things for my self, at
any time, but least of all at such a time as this, in which thou have broken
down what thou did once build up, and plucked up what thou did once plant,
and seem to be bringing evil upon all flesh: as thou did threaten the
Jews of old, Jer. 45.5. May I be able to say with David, Psalm. 131.2. I do not
exercise my self in things that be too high for me: I have quieted my self as a
child that is weaned of his Mother: my soul is as a weaned child. Oh give me
contentedly to feed on any thing, when thou will have me feed no longer on the
milk of those more luscious comforts which I have formerly enjoyed. Let the
food of my body be what thou will; so thou will but feed my soul with that
bread of life which came down from heaven: and let my bodily raiment be ever so
mean, so thou will but enable me to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and give me
to be clothed in the garment of that elder brother, the robe of whose
righteousness is that white raiment spoken of, Rev. 3.18. which suffers not
the shame of our sinful nakedness to appear. If I have but food and raiment for
my self: the worst is, I can contribute little, if any thing, to others: but
this I know, that where there is a willing mind, thou acceptest according to
what a man has, and not according to what he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. With God
the will without the deed is more than the deed without the will. 2 Cor. 8.10.
He is rich in good works, who is ready (that is wholly inclined) to distribute;
if he had but wherewithal, 1 Timothy 6.18. Lord, if thou will make me thy
Steward, intrusting me with an eslate wherewith I may do good to others: I
shall count it a blessed thing to be both able and willing to give; rather than
to be on the receiving hand. But if thou will allot me only food and raiment
for me and mine, and that none of the best neither: thy will be done; that I
know will bear our charges through this world. Mannah and old clothes (for the
Israelites had no new ones for 40. years together) will serve us in the
Wilderness: only sweeten our passage, by assuring us we shall at last arrive at
thy heavenly Canaan; and then shall we say, The lines are fallen to us in a
pleasant place, verily we have a goodly heritage.

DISCOURSE V. Of the way to be assured of Food and Raiment.
Methinks I hear one or other saying, we should be well contented with Food
and Raiment, if we were but sure of that; but so great is our charge, so vast
have our losses been; times are so hard, trading so dead, and charity it self
so cold, and poverty so common and almost universal; that we do much fear we
shall not have bread for our selves and Family, or if bread to eat, scarcely
raiment to put on.

It is not hard to guess, if Christ were corporally upon Earth, and should
over-hear such language; how and in what words he would upbraid you. Surely, as
he did them to whom he speaks, Mat. 6.30. O ye of little faith. The occasion of
which words appears by the context to have been a sinful mistrust they had,
that God would not so much as feed and cloathe them. How many at this day are
sick of the same disease? and therefore had need to be put in mind of that
course which Christ took to cure those, to whom he spoke: which remedies may
prove as effectual upon themselves. No advice at first might seem more strange
than that which Christ gives, Mat. 6.25. Take no thought for your life, what
you shall eat, or what you shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall
put on. One would wonder where-with-all Christ should make good that saying of
his, and yet we find him giving a plain reason of what he had said, verse. 26.
Behold the fowls of the air, they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better than
they, verse. 28. And why take ye thought for raiment? consider the Lillies of
the Field, how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin, yet Solomon in
all his glory was not arrayed like one of these, verse. 30. Wherefore if God so
cloathe the grass, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, shall
he not much more cloathe you? I am far from thinking that Christ by those words
of his, intended to encourage idleness, or to give men to think, that though
they could work and would not, yet God would provide food and raiment for them;
as he does for the birds, that neither sow nor reap, and for the Lillies that
neither toil nor spin; but I rather think that those words were spoken to
encourage those that would work and cannot, as namely those that are
bed-ridden, such as have lost the use of their limbs, or of one or more of
their senses, as sight, hearing, and that such, though unable either to sow or
reap, (like the fowls of the air) either to toil or spin, like the lillies,
yet ought not to doubt, but that he who feeds the one, and clothes the other,
will do as much for them. Why may not those that have the use of their limbs
and senses (together with a heart to make any good use of them) be fortified
against the fear of want by those arguments, which may relieve, even those that
want them? Were I lame or blind, or paralytick, or bed-ridden: to think of Gods
feeding the Birds and clothing the Grass, might be a support to me: but if I
have all my limbs and senses; not only may faith swim in the forementioned
consideration of that which God does for bruites and plants, but there is also
a shallower water, in which reason and sense may a little wade. He that can
work, and is willing so to do, may rationally hope he shall not starve.

The instance I have mentioned was an encouragement from providence, which is
no ways to be slighted. But there are also promises to support our faith in the
case. viz. that God will certainly feed and cloathe us; at leastwise upon such
reasonable terms and conditions, as he has engaged himself to do it. Is not
that a promise plain enough? Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good, and
verily thou shall be fed. God has repeated this promise over and over, to let
us see he is mindful of what he has spoken. Psalm. 34.9, 10. O fear ye the Lord
ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. The young Lions do
lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good
thing. If we desire a cloud of witnesses, or co-witnessing promises to shield
us from the fear of want (as the Israelites had a Pillar of Cloud to shelter
them in the Wilderness) it will not be difficult to add many more. He in whom
all the promises are yea and Amen, assures us from his own mouth, that if we
first seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, all these things shall be
added to us, (Mat. 6.33.) viz. meat, drink and clothing: for those were the
things he had been speaking of, verse. 31. The Scripture says, that Godliness
has the promise of the life that now is. Now a security for food and raiment,
one would think were as little as any thing so called, can amount to. Moreover
in Psalm. 84.11. It is said, that God will withold no good thing from them
that walk uprightly. So that if food and raiment may be reckoned good things
(as things of so absolute necessity must needs be reckoned ordinarily) then
come they within the compass of that general promise. Examine we one witness
more, Prove. 10.3. The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish
(that is the righteous person himself) I may not omit so confiderable
testimonies, as those which follow, Psalm. 33.18, 19. The eye of the Lord is
upon them that fear him, and that hope in his mercy, to keep them alive in
Famine. Psalm. 37.19. speaking of the upright, he says, In the days of Famine
they shall be satisfied. Prove. 5.20. In Famine he shall redeem thee from death.
It is far more difficult to feed men in a time of famine, than of plenty: as it
was not so easy to spread a table in the wilderness, as in a fruitful
Country: (I mean for any but God, to whom all things are not only possible,
but easy.) Methinks the promises of supplies even in famine, should be great
support in a time of common plenty, though things be scarce with us.

But let me take in all those conditions, on which God has suspended the
promises of food and raiment, (as I have already mentioned some of them) lest
we should think God to fail of his promise, when it is only we that fail in
those conditions to which it is made.

One condition is, that we use diligence, Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor that
deals with a slack hand: but the hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove.
19.15. An idle soul shall suffer hunger, which plainly implies, that a diligent
soul shall not. It will be a new lesson to some, both old and young to become
pains-takers. They have not known what it meant, to eat their bread in the
sweat of their brows. But they that be afraid of work, such as they are able
to perform, are worse scared than hurt, (as we say proverbially) and will find
that the bread of diligence is far more sweet, than ever was that of idleness.
Those that are given to hunt, account the exercise as good as the Venison, and
better too. God puts no hard terms upon us, if henceforth he will make us
earne our bread before we eat it, though he have formerly so much indulged us,
as to let us cat the bread we never earned. Idle persons have often times meat
without stomachs: but pains-takers have both stomachs and meat. That house
stands upon able pillars, and is like to last, in which every body is addicted
to honest labor, which is one of the most imitable things. I have heard of the
Dutch, that from the time their Children are of any growth or understanding,
they set them to work. They seem to have taken warning by those words of
Solomon, Eccles. 10.18. By much sloathfulness the building decays, and
thorough idleness, the house droppeth thorough, which words made me to say,
that house stands upon able pillars, where every body is well implo^ed. If that
were the worst fruit of the late fire, that idle persons of what quality
soever, were forced to take pains, the matter were not great: yea many would be
made better by it.

Moreover to our Diligence we must add frugality: if we would promise our
selves never to want food and raiment. Frugality is that pruning-hook, which
lops off all the unnecessary branches of superfluous expenses? God has no
where engaged himself to maintain any man's pride and prodigality: though he
has to supply his necessity. It is usual with God to let prodigals come to
husks: yea and want them too, before they die, or return. Prove. 23.21. The
drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty. It is a fault in those that
gain by it, to let their customers have as much wine as they will call for,
when they have had enough already: A greater fault in Parents, to let them have
money at will, knowing they will spend it upon their lusts. It is not then to
be expected, that God who hates to see men make provision for the flesh, should
bind himself to give them wherewithal to do it. As therefore we would be sure
of food and raiment, let us wisely consider what must be spent, and what may be
spared. Frustra fit per plura. He that requires superfluities, is like to want
necessaries; but he may build upon a supply of necessaries, who has learnt to
pare off all superfluities. They are desires of Gods own creating, (and in such
a measure) which do call but for necessaries, as food and raiment: and
therefore he that made these desires, we may expect will satisfy them. But
when we crave supersluities, it is sin that opens its mouth wide, yea which
inlargeth it like hell, and what reason is there that God should fill it?

And as we must be frugal, in case we would be sure of food and raiment; so one
good way is to be merciful, and ready to distribute to the necessities of
others, so long as we have wherewith. Frugality and charity may well stand
together. It is no ill husbandry to lend what we can spare upon infallible
security, and for great advantage. He that gives to the poor, lends to the
Lord. And if the principal be but a cup of cold water, he shall have
consideration for it. Matthew, 10.43. He shall in no wise lose his reward. See
Pro. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet increases. Can a man reap,
unless he first sow? or reap liberally if he sow but sparingly? Who so shall
read Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. will find that one of the best ways never to want our
selves, is not to let others want if we can help it. He that considers the
poor, God will consider him; though he have neither strength, nor certainty of
friends, or money to help him, or hardly one that he can promise himself will
make his bed for him. Where the three last mentioned qualifications do meet in
Diligence, Frugalitie, and merciful disposition, it is seldom, if ever seen,
that God does suffer such persons to want necessaries: though saving grace, and
the true fear of God be not found in them.

But if any desire yet further security, as for matter of food and raiment;
let them consider what is spoken. Psalm. 104.27. These wait all upon thee, that
thou may give them their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand, they are
filled with good, viz. Those innumerable creeping things, both great and small,
which are in the Sea, spoken of v. 25. also The young Lions which roar after
their prey, and seek their meat from God, spoken of v. 21. also, Psalm. 145.15.
The eyes of all wait on thee, thou give them their meat in due season. Thou
openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Here we
shall do well to remember, what the Apostle says, Does God take care for Oxen?
that is, does he not take more care for Mankind, than for Oxen? If then he feed
them (and creatures of less use than they) may we not conclude, he will much
more feed us! may not these words of David, Psalm. 23.1. afford us some relief,
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. Is not God a shepherd to other of
his people, as well as he was to David? Yea are we not in some sense his sheep,
as we are meerlie his creatures. Psalm. 100.3, It is he that made us, and not we
our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

Should not the extraordinary ways which God has taken to supply men with
food and raiment, when ordinary means have failed, be some stay to us? When
the Israelites wanted bread in the Wilderness, did not God rain down Manna from
heaven? and when they wanted water, did he not give it them out of the rock?
and whereas there was no clothing to be had there, did he not keep their
garments from waxing old, and make them serve them forty years? Did not God say
to Elijah, 1 King. 17.4. I have commanded the Ravens to feed thee; and
accordingly they brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and likewise in
the evening. v. 6. The widow of Zarephath had but a handful of meal in a
barrel, and a little oil in a cruse for her self and her son, when there was
yet three years famine to come: so that she reckoned but upon one good meal,
and so she and her son to lie down and die; and out of that the Prophet did
demand a cake for himself, v. 13. (...) yet did he assure her, that the barrel
of meal should not waste, nor the cruse of oil fail, till the Lord sent rain
upon the earth; and accordingly it came to pass, v 16. Who knows not the story
of Christ his seeding five thousand with five loaves and two fishes? Mat.
14.19. and yet there was enough, and to spare. I have somewhere read of a good
man, who in the time of the siege and famine at Rochel was kept alive by a Hen
that came every day and laid one egg, one or more in the place where he
ledged. Nor do I doubt but there are many true stories of as remarkable
supplies vouchsafed to such as were destitute of ordinary means. Is not God
the great householder of the world, from whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named? and do you think he will starve those that are of his family?
howbeit he has told us, that he who provides not for his own household is worse
than an Infidel? Is not the earth the Lords, and the fullness thereof? Are not
all the beasts of the forest his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills? Psalm.
50.10. And will he starve us (think you) either by the want of food or raiment;
whilst he has such an overplus of all needful things wherewith to supply us?
What father would see his child want, whilst he had more than enough to give
him? If we then that are evil will not let our children want whilst we abound,
shall we think so hardly of God? what if God has put the world into other men's
hands, and not into ours? has he not the hearts of those men in his own hands,
and can he not enlarge them toward us, when and as far as he pleases? He can
make enemies not only to (...) peace with us: but to be kind to us. Psalm.
^^.46. He made them also to be pitied of all them that carried them captives.
The barbarous people showed us no little kindness, says Paul, Acts 28 2. How
easily can God persuade even Egyptians to part with their Jewels and Earings,
to his people; how much more Israelites to one another? He that can make
enemies to become our friends, how much more friends to be friendly? Though men
be very hard, he can as well make them succor us, as fetch water out of a
rock? It is ordinary with God to make them show his people most kindness in
their extremity, from whom they did little or least expect it. Those whose
hearts were shut toward us in the time of our plenty, shall (it may be) be
wide opened in and under our necessity. A friend is said to be made for
Adversity: and God makes those friends for his people at such a time, though at
other times they were not such. Elijah could lest expect to be sed by a Raven,
of all creatures (from whose aptness to take, rather than give, comes our word
ravenous) neither did the Ravens do any thing for him till the famine came: but
then they were his good purveyors (as God would have it) that brought him all
his provision. We shall never know what friends God will raise us up till we
stand in need of them. God will be seen in the mount: that is, just in the time
of extremity; for then is his opportunity.

David tells us that he had never seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread. Psalm. 37.25. yet he says, he was an old man when he made that
observation. If his experience satisfy us not, let us consult our own. Have we
seen that which David never saw in this kind? Take but the seed of the
righteous for their righteous seed, and give instance if you can of any of them
that have wanted bread, or made a trade of begging it? As for vain prodigals:
it is fi^ they should be brought to husks, and not have a belly full of them
neither; nor is there any likelier way to bring them home. But it is not Gods
manner to deal so with others, especially at a time when there is bread
stirring in the world; (I mean when there is no public famine, or when the
earth yields its increase as at other times.)

If God bring famine upon a Nation: if he turn a fruitful Land into barrenness;
I cannot say, but in that case some truly righteous persons may die by famine
(as well as others by pestilence) but there are several things to relieve us
against that kind of fear.

First, the case of famine is rare and extraordinary. Few rich men torment
themselves with fear of want; though if a famine come, such as was in Samaria,
they must want bread as well as others; because it will not be to be had for
love or money. But think they God seldom visits a people with cleanness of
teeth, or comes riding to them upon his pale horse, to kill with hunger, as it
is Rev. 6.8. and why should we torment our selves with fear that he will do so?

Again, if good men perish in and by a common famine, it is because they fail
in some, or other condition to which the promises of being kept alive in
famine, are made; as namely, they want faith to trust God for bread in a time
of famine, and so it comes to pass that they want bread: but if that and other
conditions on which the promises of supplies are suspended were performed by
them; God would sooner rain down bread from heaven, than suffer them to starve.
So that you see good men have a conditional security for bread, even in a time
of famine. But in case, through their failing in some part of that condition,
any of them should come short of the promise; here is this to comfort them,
that if God do bring them to husks, yea to want a belly-full of husks who yet
are no prodigals; that is no unrighteous or ungodly persons (as to the main) it
is for no worse an intent than to fetch them home, so much the sooner to their
Fathers house, where is fullness of bread; that is, to heaven where is fullness
of joy. But methinks the extremity of Men's fear as to want, might be taken off,
by considering that if they be but diligent, frugal, mercifully inclined, but
especially if the true fear of God be before their eyes, they need not doubt of
bread, according to the experience of Gods dealing with others, save only in
time of Famine: nor shall they want it then, if they have but hearts to trust
God for it. If there be bread in the Land, you shall have part of it. If you
can show no instances to the contrary, why should you not believe it? If there
be no bread in the Land, but an universal Famine; rich men must want as well as
you, who yet fear no want, because they perplex not themselves with the
supposal of a Famine, which they hope never to see.

A little more to shame our mistrust of Gods giving us food and raiment. Let me
quote one other Text, and it is Romans 8.32. He that spured not his only Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall be not with him also freely give us all
things? Had we not a World of unbelief to deal withal, many things I have
said in this Chapter, might have been spread: but as the case stands with many,
all I doubt is little enough to shore up, and to under-prop their tottering
faith; which knows not how to trust God, no not for food and raiment. We little
think how we reproach and undervalue God, whilst we suspect that he will not so
much as feed and cloth us. Does not the Scripture say, that our Maker (...)
our husband? If a Woman marry a rich Ma^able to maintain her liberally, and yet
vex her self with a conceit, that he will not find her things necessary, and
think he can never give her promises and assurances enough, that she shall
never want clothes and victuals whilst he lives, what a woeful disparagement
would he take it for? you think me very cruel, unnatural and sordid, (would he
say) and though that thought be without ground, I know not how to persuade you
otherwise. It is not usual with Parents to promise their children over and over
that they will not starve them, the children that have honest and able Parents
use to take that for granted. (...) only our unbelief that has extorted from
God so many promises of that nature, whereby though we greatly dishonor him,
yet is he pleased to condescend to our weakness. Where shall we find faith to
believe those words, Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom: if in the mean time we cannot trust God for so much as food and
raiment? possibly we shall have it but from hand to mouth: to day shall take no
care of to morrow; but then to morrow shall take care of it self. Sufficient
for the day shall be the supply; as well as the trouble thereof.

Lord since then I have promises, providence, experience of thy dealing with
others, consideration of divine attributes and relations, with several other
things to secure me against the fear of absolute want: let me never dishonor
thee, or perplex my self with the thoughts of any such thing. Let my only care
be to live in my Fathers house, and to carry my self always as in his sight,
and I shall never want a belliful of husks, nor yet have mere husks, (for thou
feedest not thy children like swine) wherewith to fill my belly. Every thing
that is good is not good for me: neither is the best of earthly things always
best for me, (no more than the best liquors are for him that is in a fever.)
Give me to walk in integrity before thee, and then I know thou will give me
every thing that is good for me: for thy promise is, to give grace and glory,
and that no good thing will thou withold from them that walk uprightly. Can I
expect to eat bread in the Kingdom of God, as the phrase is, Luke 14.15. and
think that God will not give me bread to eat in this World? can I believe I
shall be one day clothed upon with an house which it from heaven, as it is
called, 2 Cor. 5.2. and yet think that God will deny me such clothing, as my
body stands in need of? he has given life, it not that more than meat; a body,
is not that more than raiment, Mat. 6.25. he that has given the greater, will
he not give that which is less? Our Heavenly Father knows we have need of food
and raiment, whilst we are in this World, and cannot live without it, verse. 32.
Lord give me but to trust in thee, and to do good: and as thou have said, so I
believe, verily I shall be fed.

DISCOURSE VI. Of a good conscience being a continual feast.
HOwever it comes to pass, the vulgar (and seemingly mistaken) quotation of the
close of that verse, Prove. 15.15. viz. in these words, A good conscience is a
continual feast, sounds much more spiritually, and like a saying of the Holy
Ghost, than does that translation which is usually given us, viz. in these
expressions, He that is of a merry heart, has a continual feast; which they
that know no mirth but that which Solomon calls madness, will be apt to wrest
to a very bad sense. The word translated merry, is in the Hebrew Tob, which
signifies good, which is a better word in common acceptance than is the word
merry: (for that is but too liable to an ill construction) and may I take
liberty to alter but that one word, and render the Hebrew Text verbatim word
for word: A good heart, a continual feast; when we have compared it with the
context, it will easily enough appear that the true sense and meaning is, that
which is generally understood by such a saying as this, in that a good
conscience is a continual feast. For (if I mistake not) that Proverb is seldom
used; but by a good conscience is intended, a conscience not accusing, but
excusing; not testifying against us, but with us, and for us, a conscience
speaking peace, and such as is a comfort and a rejoicing to us. That Solomon by
a good heart does intend such a conscience as that; the opposition in the
foregoing words seems to imply; All the days of the afflicted are evil: but
a good heart, etc. intimating thereby, as if good were here opposed to grieved,
wounded, afflicted: which interpretation is also countenanced by what
follows, ver. 16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great
treasure and trouble therewith, probably meaning trouble of mind and conscience
for the ill geting of it; for other kind of trouble there may be where there is
but a little, and that both gotten and enjoyed in the fear of God. And now we
know what it is that Solomon here styles a continual feast, we may be able to
speak to those who having with Dives fared deliciously every day (which now
they are not able to do as formerly) think it cold comfort to be told of mere
food and raiment, and would be fain feasting again, if they had wherewithal.
Feast we may, and that not only now and then, but every day in the year, and
every hour of the day, (and upon greater delicacies than any feast commonly so
called consists of) if we can but get that good conscience Solomon speaks of to
feast withal. Indeed there is no contentment but a good conscience, our bodies
admit not of a continual feast: but our souls do. A full stomach loathes the
honey comb. But there is no satiety in those dainties, which conscience feeds
upon: much less can we surfeit with them. As those that have but almost dined,
feel no troublesome sense of hunger, and yet could eat more: so a good
conscience, though it have that already, which may suffice, yet is always left
with a wholesome appetite.

What can be desired, or what is ever enjoyed in a feast, but good cheer, good
company, good discourse, mirth, music (now and then) as an help to mirth, and
above all hearty welcome? I am deceived if a good conscience do not afford all
and every of these. Good meats and good drinks are that we count good cheer,
and if our meats and drinks be both for health and delight, then do we account
them good. A good conscience affords both meats and drinks, (as they may
properly enough be called) as wholesome and as delightful as can be wished.
Meats and drinks, such as our bodies feed upon, there are none in Heaven. Yet
something so called there is, else why is there mention of eating bread in the
kingdom of God? Luke 14.15. or why does Christ speak of drinking of the fruit
of the Vine new in the kingdom of his father? Mat. 26.29. The bread of
comfort, the Wine of joy, is that which Saints and Angels feast upon in Heaven;
and the same for kind, though not for degree is that of a good conscience. It
spreads a Table with first, second and third course. Its presenting us with a
wellgrounded persuasion of our being delivered from the wrath to come, as the
Apostle says, we are not appointed to wrath, that is as it were the first
course: it is witnessing that we are not only not children of wrath, (which
alone would be a great comfort to be assured of) but also that we are the
children of God, (as the spirit of God is said to witness with the spirits of
Gods children) that is the second; and then its telling us that it is our
fathers pleasure to give us, even us, a kingdom, and causing us to rejoice in
hope of the glory of God, that is the third.

Nor is a good conscience better cheer than it is good company. As a bad
conscience is the worst companion in the World: so a good conscience is the
very best, unless it be God himself. He that has it, is many times never less
solitary than when he is most alone, that is the best company that is both
profitable and pleasant: and so is a good conscience; it has that property of
a good companion, amongst others, it will find good and pleasant discourse.
What Solomon speaks concerning the Law of God, taught by parents to their
children, Prove. 6.22. When thou goesh it shall lead thee, when thou awakest it
shall talk with thee. So will a good conscience. An evil conscience finds such
discourse as men have not patience to hear, like Micaiah, it never prophesies
good: but a good conscience commends without flattery, and tells those stories
than would not be grievous to a man to listen to from morning to night. It
speaks like God in his sentence of Absolution, well done good and faithful
Servant. No man can frame a discourse so delightful, as are the whispers of a
good conscience, speaking peace and pardon to us in the name of God. Where such
company and such discourse is, there can want no mirth, taking mirth in the
soberest sense, for comfort and refreshment; yea it will make the heart more
glad than they whose wine and oil increase.

And as for music; all the voices and instruments in the World cannot make
such melody as a good conscience. If a man had all those Men-singers, and
Women-singers that Solomon had, Eccles. 2.8. their best notes were not
comparable to this.

Nor is it hard to make out how a good conscience can and does give a man
hearty welcome. For as Christ in several senses is both Priest, Altar, and
Sacrifice: so is that, both our feast, and our Host, our entertainer, and our
entertainment. Conscience does as it were grudge a wicked man, both his meat
and his mirth, but to a good man it says, eat thy bread with joy, and drink
thy wine with a merry heart, for the Lord accepts thy person. Conscience bids
much good may do him with all he has, and tells him in the name of God, he is
as welcome to it as his heart can wish, and has it with as good a will. We
count those men best able to feast, that have as we say every thing about them
and within themselves, Corn, Cattle, Poultry, all of their own, Dove-houses,
Warrens, Parks all within their own grounds, Ponds affording several sorts of
fish, Trees yielding all sorts of fruits, etc. Such is he that has a good
conscience, he has all materials for feasting within himself, and therefore
may afford to do it, Prove. 14.14. A good Man shall be satisfied from himself.
Viz. from the consciousness of his own integrity. As Paul says, this is our
rejoicing, viz. the testimony of our conscience, etc. He that has this, has
meat to eat that the World knows not of, and such meat as he would not exchange
for all the rarities and varieties that are at Emperors Tables. He blesses
himself, or rather God, when he thinks how much happeir he is than the World
takes him for, and how much better he fares than the World knows of: whereas
they do or may blush, and inwardly bleed to think how much happier they are
thought to be than indeed they are. I might add, he that feasts upon a good
conscience, has that kind of meat which is also sauce for every thing,
whereas others have the same sauce that spoils all their sweet meat.

But possibly I cannot say more of the happiness of a good conscience, than
many can easily believe, from the experience of a bad one, and the misery they
have felt by means of it. A good conscience think they were an excellent feast
indeed if we had it. There is none like that, but as Saul said, the Philistims
were come up against him, and God was departed; so they, The Fire is come up
against them, and has taken away what they feasted on before; and as for a
good conscience they wish they had it, but they have it not. Such a sound
spirit would bear their infirmities, but for want of it, they are not able to
bear them. Were I sure such men were in good earnest, to look after that good
conscience which they confess and complain they want; I would tell them for
their encouragement, that there is a way for a bad, yea a very bad conscience,
to be made good; as well as a good one to be made better. Who can think that
Paul had always a good conscience? the Scripture telling us that he was
sometimes a persecutor, an injurious person, and a blasphemer; yea, that he did
compel others to blaspheme. Acts 26.12. considering that he had his hand in
the death of many of Gods Saints. Acts 26.12. Many of the Saints did I shut up
in prison, and when they were put to death I gave my voice against them. But
manifest it is, that he had a good conscience afterward; therefore I say there
is a way for a very bad conscience to be made very good, and blessed be God
there is so.

It is against Scripture to say, that a conscience once deflowred can never
recover its virginity. He who himself was born of a virgin, can reduce that
conscience to a virgin state, which has been the mother of many heinous sins.
Hab. 9.14. If the blood of bulls and goats, and the sprinkling the ashes of an
heifer sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood
of Christ sanctify your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?
It is sin alone that defiles the conscience, and makes it evil: Now sin is
either immediately against God, or immediately against our neighbor, that is,
against men: and that also is against God ultimately, though not firstly and
only. Therefore David confessing his sin in the matter of Vriah, says to God,
Against thee have I sinned. He that would have a good (that is, a pure and
peaceable conscience) must, if he be able, satisfy men for the wrongs and
injuries done to them: as Zacheus resolved to do; or if he be not able, he must
be sincerely willing and desirous so to do, and fully purpose it in his heart,
if God shall ever make him able. For nisi^restitutur oblatum is an old and a
true rule (that is, either actually or intentionally) non remittitur peccatum.
But as for the injury done to God by sin, either immediately or mediately, that
no mere man is able to satisfy for, though he could give thousands of rams,
and ten thousand rivers of oil, or would give the fruit of his body for the
sin of his soul: Therefore as to that there is no way to get our sins carried
into the land of forgetfulness, but by laying them by faith upon the head of
Christ, who was tipified by the Scapegoat under the Law; no satisfaction to be
tendered for them, but that which Christ our surety has made and intended for
the use and benefit of them; and them only who do or shall believe in him, and
by repentance turn from dead works to serve the living Go^ Col. 1.14. In whom
we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

When these things are once done, namely, when care has been taken to satisfy
men, so far as we are able, for the wrongs done to them: when we have looked
upon him whom we have pierced by sin, and truly mourned, when we have confessed
our sins, and forsaken them, both actually for the present, and in sincere
resolution for ever after: and when we have lifted up all eye of faith to
Christ, as to the antitype of that brazen serpent, which was lifted up in the
wilderness, as he that is able to take out the sting of sin out of the fiery
serpent; and by faith laid hold upon his grace, as upon the horns of an altar:
I say, when this is done, then is that conscience which was bad, become purely
good; and when we can reflect upon what we have done, then do they become not
only pure but peaceable, and consequently good upon all accounts. Now I see not
what notion can be more comfortable to those that have brought a bad conscience
into a bad condition than this, that a conscience extremely bad may be made
good: that which is impure may become very pure; and that which is unquiet, may
become calm and peaceable, yea full of joy and triumph.

This premised, I think it no hard matter to tell many a man how he may be much
more happy in a mean and impoverished condition, than he had wont to be in
midst of all his plenty and prosperity. Get but a good conscience instead of a
bad one: Get but peace within, ( viz. that peace which passes all
understanding:) get but the pardon of thy sins, and the well-grounded
persuasion of that pardon: get but a vision of thy sins as drowned in the red
sea of Christ his blood: get but to look upon God as thy friend and father, and
upon death as none of thine enemy (and where it is no enemy, it is and will be
a great friend;) get but the Spirit of God to witness with thy spirit that thou
art the child of God: get but this for thy rejoicing, which Paul had, viz. the
testimony of thy conscience, etc. and let me be miserable for thee, if thou who
have wanted these things in times past, when thou had the world at will, when
once possessed hereof, do not become more happy in the enjoyment of mere food
and raiment, than ever thou were formerly, when waters of a full cup were wrung
out unto thee. Some have said, Bread and the Gospel are good cheer: It is as
true, that brown bread and a good conscience are so. He that has those two,
will find no cause he has to complain. And as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 33.24.
The inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity: so neither will men repine that they are poor and
despicable, and otherwise afflicted, if they come but once to know for certain
that they are pardoned.

The true reason why many men do want so many outward good things, as namely so
much wine, so much company, so much recreation, etc. is because they want
better consciences: had they more of a good conscience, to cheer and to
refresh them, they would need less of other things. If Saul had not been
possessed with an evil spirit, be had not wanted David to have played to him
upon the Harp, 1 Samuel 16.16. One says, that the life of a wicked man is a
continual Dversion. If men were not wicked, they would not need the one half of
those diversions which they betake themselves to, as reliefs against the sting
of an evil conscience. Notable is that counsel of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.18. Be
not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be ye filled with the spirit. v.
19. making melody in your hearts to the Lord. When men want the comforts of
Gods Spirit, and melody in their own hearts, they would supply that defect, if
they knew how, with more than ordinary refreshments, from those good comforts
of God which do gratify and entertain their senses; and thence probably it is
that St. Jude joines those two together, Jude 19. Sensuel, having not the
Spirit. They that frequently use Cordials, are supposed to be apt to faintings:
for others had rather let them alone. Wine is observed to be a narcorick or
stupifying thing, (witness the proneness of men to fall asleep when they have
drunk freely of it) and it is to be feated, that many do use it but as opium to
conscience. Now as Physicians say, the body is much endangered by the
over-frequent use of opiates, natural opiates; so is the soul much more by
those things which cast it for the present into a dead sleep; for they do but
keep that worm from gnawing at the present, which will afterward gnaw so much
the more, and never die; stupifying things remove not a disease, but fix it so
much the more.

I see then, O Lord, what men must do if they would not only think themselves
happy, but be so indeed, if they would not be like hungry men that dream they
eat, but find themselves empty when they awake, or thirsty men that dream of
drink, but awake and find themselves deceived. Isa. 29.8. If they would feast
in good earnest, it must be by means of a good and quiet conscience. That men
may want though they have houses full of Gold and Silver: that men may have,
though Gold and Silver they have none. Riches cannot give it: poverty cannot
hinder it. I am or would be at a point, whether my body feast at all, more or
less; but for my soul. I desire not only a good meal now and then, but that
continual feast of a conscience both pure and peaceable. I prefer that to all
the far fetched and dear bought varieties of fish, flesh, and foul, which are
at Princes tables. I see then men need not bid adieu to feasting, or reckon
upon a bare commons after all the spoil this fire has made. They need only
change their diet for that which is much better than they had wont to live
upon, and they may feast hereafter ten times for once they did heretofore, and
be said in a nobler sense than ever Dives was, to fare sumptuously every day.
Peace of conscience is a feast of fat things, full of marrow, and of wines on
the lees well refined, as I may allude to Isa. 25.16.

DISCOURSE VII. Of getting, and living upon a stock of spiritual comforts.
AS it fares with children whose nurses have milk enough in both breasts, but
one is much hardet to be drawn than the other; they would willingly lie
altogether or mostlie at that breast which may be drawn with most ease: so with
many Christians who have an interest both in Spiritual and temporal things,
wherewith to solace themselves, they are too too prone to live upon the breast
of their worldly comforts, which may be sucked (as it were) by sense; rather
than upon that of their Spiritual privileges and advantages; which breast
(though much the sweetest and fullest) can no otherwise be drawn than by the
exercise of faith. Now sad experience convinces us, that it is much more hard
to exercise our faith, than to use our senses; even as to draw water out of a
deep well with a heavy bucket, is nothing like so easy, as to fetch it out of
a cistern, where it is but turning the cock and the work is done.

The objects of faith are things remote, and the eye of faith is in its kind
more weak than that of sense: and to a weak eye it is much more difficult to
view things that are at a great distance, than those that are near at hand. The
advantage of a high place, a clear day, and (it may be) of a prospective-glass
to boot, may be all little enough to make us discern those things which are
afar off: but without any such helps, we can easily epsy those things which
are close by us; as are the objects of sense compared with those of says. Why
did that good man cry out, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief? Mark 9.24.
but that he found difficulty in the exercise of faith? How come it to pass that
Christ upbraided his eleven Disciples all at once for their unbelief? Mark.
16.14. but for the same reason? They did not believe those that said they had
seen Christ, after he was risen (though he had told them he would rise again
the third day) but had they seen him themselves they would not have doubted of
it.

The exercise of our faith is opposed by sin and satan; so is not the use of
our senses. Now men finding it no easy thing to set faith on work, and to keep
that hand in ure, and in action, without which they cannot fetch in the comfort
of their spiritual privileges (for the Scripture speaking of Christ says, In
whom believing, we rejoice; intimating, that without faith there can be no true
rejoicing in Christ) and speaking of faith, Heb. 11.1.
says, that Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen; implying, that such things are no otherwise reallized and
evidenced to us than by faith, and consequently no otherwise the matter of our
joy than as faith makes them so. I say, men finding it so hard a work to
believe, and to fetch in their comfort that way; too often content themselves
with that meaner and lower kind of comfort, which more easily flows in upon
them, and which does as it were follow them as the rock, meaning the waters out
of the rock are said to have followed the Israelites in the wilderness. Hence
it is that whilst the world smiles upon them, they are apt like the fool in the
Gospel, to sing requiems to their souls, because they have laid up in store for
many years, and their barns are full. And hence it is that when God does strip
such men of earthly enjoyments, and as it were dry up that breast; even many
good men are for the present at a very great loss: not that they want interest
in better things than are taken from them, but because they have disused
themselves from sucking at that harder, but sweeter breast, which God has
provided for them, and does always continue to them. They have not accustomed
themselves to live by faith, and now they are to seek how to do it. These men
of might for the present cannot find their hands. As we grow up we forget to
suck, because we have not used it of a long time, and so in this case.

How necessary is it then for Christians, even whilst earthly enjoyments last,
to inure themselves to live upon the hopes and expectations of heavenly good
things? As Popish Priests put off the Laity with but one element, giving them
the bread in the Sacrament, but denying them the Cup (which is as due to them,
and rather more refreshing:) so do many serve themselves; feeding upon the
bread of their temporal possessions, whilst they refrain the wine of those
blessed hopes and expectations (as to another world) which belong unto them.
But how much better were it for them to receive in both kinds? It is good (as
our Proverb says) for men to have two strings to their bow. What great heir
contents himself with thinking only of that small allowance which he enjoys,
being under age, and does not please himself with musing how much greater
things he is like to enjoy hereafter? who that has both Viol and Lute, and can
play excellently upon both, would let his Lute, which is the sweeter instrument
of the two, hang by the walls and use his Viol only, because that is easier to
be played upon of the two? Who would pluck only the sowrish grapes which are at
the bottom of his Vine, because they are next at hand, and mean time neglect
those ripe clusters, which are at the top, because he cannot reach them without
a ladder, and the pains of climbing? he enjoyes not the one half of what he
might, who lives only or mostly upon the worser half of his enjoyments; like a
man that should always live in one of his houses, every way less convenient
and pleasant, and suffer another that does far transcend it to stand always
empty.

To what end has the spirit of God made any of us to know the things that are
freely given us of God, if we solace not our selves with the remembrance and
consideration thereof? even then when God has filled our cup with worldly good
things, if not made it to run over. Should we draw waters from those upper
Springs whilst the nether flow plentifully? and are we not as much or more
concerned to do it, when the nether springs are dried up? when the Fig Tree
blossoms not, and there is no herd in the stall, woe unto us if we know not
then (at leastwise then) how to rejoice in the Lord; and joy in the God of our
salvation: have thou interest in better things, and will thou not live upon the
comfort of them: no not at a time when thou have nothing else in effect to live
upon? what had become of David at Ziglag, if he had not encouraged himself in
the Lord his God? So elsewhere, when David saw his house declining; (which made
him say, though may house be not so with God) did he not comfort himself with
this, that yet God had made with him an everlasting Covenant? who brings not
out his old gold and precious Jewels to help himself withal, when all he had
besides, is spent or taken away? shall all creatures be wiser than we? Dogs
know their remedies when surfeited, viz. that they call Doggrass: and Toades,
when poisoned, theirs ( viz. Plantane) and fall to them, if they be to be had.
Is not an interest in spiritual things, if we have that, the only relief we
have in the loss of all our temporal comforts? and shall we not make use of it?
if a man have white bread to eat, would he suffer himself to be starved,
because he has no brown? will he keep it up in his Cup-board when he has
nothing else to eat? if you have a sort of comforts to live upon, besides those
which are taken from you, live upon them: never lie down and die whilst you
have wherewithal to live, yea and to live nobly.

A stock of well-grounded spiritual comforts, or a well-bottomed hope of glory
will maintain a man at a great rate, though he have little else; yea like a
Prince, if it be well improved. Have you not known men live cheerfully and
joyfully upon the expectance of great things in reversion, though they have had
but little in possession? One would think the assurance (or what is next to it)
of a Crown and Kingdom, after a short time of suffering, should raise and
revive us more than the present fruition of a great Lordship, being all that
ever we look for. He that upon Scripture-grounds believes himself to be an heir
of heaven, let him but reflect upon what he believes, and that alone will be a
heaven to him upon earth.

But do I not hear some say, they want a stock of spiritual comforts, or
grounds of comfort; they have no upper Springs to fetch water from, none of
those Rivers which make glad the City of God, and therefore it is that their
hearts fail^ them in an evil day. Yea doubtless therefore it is that their
hearts do fail them, because they either have not an interest in God, or if
they have, they know it not. Now as that holy man said to his friend touching
assurance, verily assurance is to be had, and what have we been doing all this
while? so say I to you, verily an interest in God is to be had, and see that
you labor for it. It was a great fault and oversight not to look after it
whilst we had a confluence of other good things: but now other things are taken
away, it were utter madness to neglect it. From this time forward make it thy
business to get an interest in eternal mercies, the sure mercies of David, and
to know that thine interest; and then live upon the comfort of it: and then
thou that never had it before, though God have cast thee (as it were) from
the throne to the dunghill, even upon that dunghill shall thou live better than
ever thou did in all thy life before. Doubtless a man may live more happily
upon a great deal of assurance, having but a small pittance of other things,
than upon great abundance of worldly enjoyments, having little or no assurance.

O Lord my heart deceives me, if the consolations of God be small with me (or
in my account) if I could not live more contentedly upon bread and water, with
calling and election made sure, than they who have their portion in this life,
do when their Corn and Wine increase. Oh why do I press no harder after that
which I take my self to have so great a value for? That is the only thing that
makes me fear, least my heart should in this case deceive me. For it is not
that God has been wanting to encourage the endeavors of men in pursuit of
spiritual and eternal mercies, so that we should have cause to fear our labor
would be in vain; for has he not declared he is a rewarder of all them that
seek him diligently? and that to them who by patient continuance in well doing
seek glory, he will give eternal life, Romans ^. And what more could have been
said?

I see then there are three sorts of men. Some have matter and groundwork for
spiritual joy, but will not take pains to improve it; they have (as it were)
the breast in their mouths, but will not draw it, because the milk is hard to
come by, that is, they have good evidences for heaven, but will not trouble
themselves to clear them up; and to be ever and anon reviewing and reading them
over. Lord if I be one of them, give me to see how much I stand, and have stood
in my own light, how much I have lessened my comforts by grudging my pains,
how I might have doubled and trebled my joys, if the fault had not been my
own, others there are that content themselves with a portion in this life,
seeing and knowing themselves as yet to have no interest in better things. Lord
how desperately do they adventure? how great a hazard do they run? If death
should come and find them provided only for this present World, what would
become of them? And yet there is a sort of men more desperate than these, (if
more can be) and they are those who are destitute of this World's good things,
and yet neither have an interest in spiritual comforts, nor yet regard to have
any. God has taken the World from them, and possibly will never give it them
again, do what they can, and yet they look not after that better portion that
can never be taken away from them. To such I may say, not only what will they
do in their latter end, but what will they do at present, what shift can they
make so much as for the present? can men live of nothing: without either
heaven, or earth, God, or the creature, comforts for either soul or body? where
are they but in hell, who are neither in heaven nor yet upon the earth? (in the
World I mean) Surely such men care not what becomes of them. I cannot better
compare them to any thing than to a ship turned adrift in a mighty storm, whose
Pilot steeres her no longer, but exposes her to the mercy of winds and waves,
and rocks, and sands, and it is a thousand to one if ever she get safe to
harbor. Lord of all sorts of men, let me be none of this last. Let me secure
one World at least, and if but one, let it be the World to come. The more thou
abridgest me of earthly comforts; the more insatiable let me be in my desires
of those that are heavenly? The more hungry thou keep me, as to a supply of
earthly things, the more thirsty let me be after those rivers of pleasure,
which are at thy right hand for ever more. O Lord, if I want a groundwork for
spiritual joy, a root of peace within my self, let me want it no longer; if I
have a foundation for joy within me, but know it not: oh thou who have given me
to have it, give me also to know it; and when I once know it, give me often to
review and recollect it, to ruminate and chew the cud upon it, that I may enjoy
the sweetness of that, whereof I am really possessed; that I may eat the fruit of
the Vineyard, which thou have planted within me. Lord trust me with a stock of
spiritual comforts: with plenty of good hope thorough grace: kiss me with the
kisses of thy mouth, and let thy barner over me be love, and give me to sit
under the shadow of thy favor with delight; and if ever I envy those pitiful
worldlings that have more of this than heart can wish, but no more of any World
but this, if ever I be willing to change conditions with them, (all things
considered) though they be wealthy, honorable, powerful; I poor, mean,
despicable: let me forfeit all again, yea take thou the forfeiture of all thy
spiritual comforts again, which yet I would not thou should do for ten
thousand Worlds.

DISCOURSE VIII. Of its being a great mercy to most Men, that their lives are
continued, though their livelihoods are greatly impaired.
I Have not forgotten the words of good Elijah when he fled into the Wilderness
for fear of Jezabel, who sought his life, how he sat him down under a Juniper
Tree, and requested for himself that he might die, and said, It is enough now
oh Lord, take away my life, 1 Kings 19.4. Nor yet the words of Job to the same
effect. Chap. 7.15. My soul chooses strangling and death rather than life; nor
yet that peremptory answer of Jonah, when God asked him if he did well to be
angry for the gourd? who told God to his face, He did well to be angry, even
unto death. Jonah 4.9. These things are not recorded in honor of any of these
three Men, but as David speaks of himself; I said this is my infirmity: so may
we say, these were their infirmities; they were good men, but these were bad
expressions, and are delivered to us, not for our imitation, but for our
warning and caution; and as the Apostle speaks in another case, 1 Cor. 10.6.
These things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil
things, as they also lusted. But how incident is it to us to do the same thing,
even to wish for death, when God has deprived us of many comforts of life,
which formerly we enjoyed: as if it were not worth while to live, unless it be
in wealth, honor and prosperity.

This is such a pernicious error, that I am very zealous to confute it, and to
establish that useful principle which is contrary to it; namely, that to escape
with our lives is a very great mercy; though we have no such comfortable
livelihoods as we had wont to have: yea though a bare livelihood or mere
subsistence be all we have. Job says in one place, I am escaped with the skin
of my teet, Job 19.20. meaning very poor and bare. As Deodate parallels it with
a proverb some use, that such a one has nothing left him but his teeth. Though
it may seem a paradox, yet it is a very truth; that it is a great mercy to most
people living under the Gospel, to escape ( viz. death and the grave) though it
be but with the skin of their teeth: that is, in as bare a condition as bare
can be, and live; to live, though it be uncler poverty, disgrace, restraint,
and many evils more. Whilst the pride and passion of Men suggest the contrary:
Nature it self gives them the lie, and votes for living, when they vote for
death: as the fable of the Countryman, does ingenuously intimate, who being
weary with his bundle of sticks, laid it by, sat down and wished for death:
death over hearing him, came and desired to know what he had to say to him.
Nothing, replied the Countryman, but that thou would help me up with my
burden. Showing that he was more willing to take up his burden again, than to
lay down his life. Why should a Man give all he has for his life, ( Job 1.) if
life be nothing worth, when all a man has is gone? Were the enjoyment of
honor, riches, pleasure, the only or the greatest end of life: when those were
once taken away, it would be scarce worth while to live; nay death might be
more elegible of the two: but seeing the great ends of life are such things, as
are as much within the reach of those that are poor, despised, afflicted, and
that never eat with pleasure, as the phrase is, Job 20.25. As those who are
rich, renowned, abounding with pleasures, whose breasts are full of milk, and
their bones moistened with marrow, who are wholly at ease and quiet; as it is
expressed, Job 21.23, 24. I say, forasmuch as the great ends of life are as
pursuable, and as attainable by the former, as by the latter of these; as well
the afflicted, as the prosperous ought to look upon the continuation of their
lives, as a very great mercy.

Surely the great ends of life are; that whilst it is called to day we should
mind the things that concern our eternal peace: that we should seek after God,
if happily by seeking after him we may find him out, Acts 17.27. That we should
lay up a good foundation for the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal
life, 1 Timothy 6.19. That we should now sow what we desire hereafter to reap,
viz. To the spirit, that we may of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.8.
that we might fight a good sight, finish a good course, keep the faith, and so
become assured, that henceforth is laid up for us a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7. These are the things which God did principally aim at in bestowing
life upon Men, and to which he would have all the good things that Men enjoy,
subordinated: yea and all their evil things made some way or other subservient:
these are the greatest improvements that can be made of our lives, and the best
uses we can turn them to; therefore these are the great ends of life. Had Moses
thought otherwise, he had not esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater riches
than the treasures in Egypt: or chosen to suffer affliction with the people of
God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.25.26. Job
could easily have answered that question which himself puts, Job 3.20.
Wherefore is life given to the bitter in soul which long for death, which are
glad when they can find the grave? I say he could easily have answered his own
question, if he had not been in too great a passion; for he knew full well that
the great ends of life were those that I have mentioned, and therefore resolved
accordingly that all the days of his warfare he would wait till his change
should come, viz. preparing for it, as one that did remember, that if a Man
die, he shall never live again, viz. to amend the errors, and to supply the
defects of his former life, Job 14.14. Now what should hinder but that a poor
Man may pursue such ends of life, as well as one that is rich: yea the
Scripture speaks, as if it were harder for a rich Man of the two: Luk^ 15.24.
when Jesus saw that he was sorrowful, he said, How hardly shall they that have
riches enter into the Kingdom of God? It is easier for a Camel to go thorough
a Needles eye, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of God. But if
the poor man say; whilst I seek the Kingdom of God, what shall I do for other
things in the mean time? Let him take an answer from our Saviors mouth, Mat.
6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all
other things shall be added unto you.

I have spoken to the great ends of life, and the attainableness of them, as
well by persons of low as of high degree. But alas how few in comparison of the
lump of mankind, or of Men called Christians, have yet attained those end; for
which they live. viz. have laid up a good foundation for eternity, etc. and
they are yet fewer who are able to say they have done it. For some may have
attained thereunto, and yet not know it. How unsafely do they die, who die
before they have attained the ends for which they did live? and how
uncomfortably must they also die, who die before they know they have attained
them? Therefore I say it is a great mercy to the greatest part of Men and Women
to be reprieved from Death, and from the Grave. David as good a Man as he was,
begged hard for this, Psalm. 39.13. O spare me that I may recover strength,
before I go hence and be no more, yet was his condition at that time very
afflicted, for he says, verse. 10. Remove thy stroke from me, I am consumed by
the blow of thine hand, verse. 11. when thou do correct man for iniquity, thou
make his beauty to consume away like a moth. Which he seems to speak of, as
his own case at that time, when he cried out, O spare me before I go hence. Is
it not with most people in the World, as with idle Boys in a School, at a time
when their Master is absent? when it is almost time to give over, they have
scarce looked into their books, or done any thing they came for, but played all
the while? How necessary is it for such Men to live a little longer? How sad
would it be with them, if God should say to them, as to that secure fool: This
night shall thy soul be required of thee? were they sensible of their own
concernment, would not such men prize a little time in the World, as those poor
Levellers did, that were shot at Burford about ten years since: Oh that they
might live but one day, or but one hour longer to enjoy those Ordinances of
God, which they had formerly despised: or as she that in horror cried out upon
her deathbed; Call time again, call time again? If life be necessary for thee,
as (if thou have not yet attained the ends of life, I am sure it is more
necessary for thee than any worldly thing) by how much it is more necessary
that thou should be saved, than that thou should be rich or honorable. I
say if life be more necessary for thee than riches and honor, and any thing of
this World, as it is, because upon that moment eternity depends: then have thou
cause to look upon it as a great mercy, and to be very thankful for it.

May it not be said of some men that are dead and gone, that if they had died
but one year, or one month sooner, they had been damned? The last year, or the
last month was more to them than all their life before, for that they were
born (I mean born again) not long before they died. He that can cause the earth
to bring forth in one day; and a Nation to be born at once. Isa. 66.8. How
great a change can he make in the souls of men in a very short time? Yea, I
remember an excellent Divine of our own, has a passage to this purpose, viz.
That one day spent in serious meditation of God and Christ, the joys of
Heaven, the torments of Hell, the evil of sin, the excellency of grace, the
vanity of the creature, the necessity of regeveration, and such like things,
might contribute more to the conversion and salvation of a sinner, than all
that has been done by him in all the time past of his life, though possibly he
has lived many years in the world. We shall never know what the worth of life,
and of time is, till we come to improve it to those high ends and purposes for
which God has chiefly given it: as namely, unto making our calling and
election sure, etc. but when we have done, finding how great a pleasure a
little time has done us; of what unspeakable use and advantage it has been to
us, we shall reckon our selves more bound to God for it than for any other
temporal enjoyment; we shall think a little time (to speak in the language of
our Proverb) to have been worth a Kings ransom. Consider life as an estate of
hope, (as Solomon says, Eccles. 9.4. To all the living there is hope) and
death to the wicked as a hopeless state. Job 27.8. For what is the hope of the
hypocrite, though he have gained; when God takes away his soul? and then tell
me if it be not a great mercy, but to live? But on the base heart of man, that
will not suffer him to know how great a mercy life is, because it will not
serve him to improve it! A life so spent as multitudes of people do spend
theirs, will prove a curse rather than a blessing, as having done little in it,
but treasured up wrath against the day of wrath. Nor is it ever to be expected
that they will bless God for life, who have cause to curse the time that they
have lived (though all thorough their own default.)

He that would comfort himself in the thoughts of his being yet alive, and take
it for a great mercy that his life (though little else) is left him for a prey;
let him sit down and confider, what earnings he may make of that time which is
left him in the world, be it little or much. If from henceforth he shall set
his face toward Zion: set out in the ways of godliness: give up his name to
Christ: engage in the work he came into the world about: enter upon the fear of
the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom; set himself to seek the Lord with
all his heart, or at leastwise repair to the pool of Bethesdah, and wait there
for cure; follow on to know the Lord, that he may know him: strive to enter in
at the straight gate: dig for wisdom as for silver, and for knowledge, as for
hidden treasure: make it his business that his soul may be saved in the day of
the Lord; I say, whosoever shall do so, and persevere in so doing, will find
so happy a product of that work, whereunto he has consecrated and devoted the
remainder of his life, as will make him prize and value one day so spent, more
than many days and months ^n which all the comfort of his life; (as he
accounted it) came in by eating and drinking, and company-keeping; by hunting,
hawking, di^ing, carding, and such like divertisements. He will look upon that
time as spent in damning his soul (as much as in him lay) but the other in
saving it: and therefore he must needs value this more than that. One was a
time of running into debt, the other of getting old scores paid off, or blotted
out; and therefore must needs be the happier time of the two. One was a time of
provoking his adversary: the other a time of agreeing with his adversary
whilst he is yet in the way, Matthew. 5.25. or of kissing the Son, lest his wrath
be kindled, and he should perish in the midway. When thou shall begin to take
acquaintance with thy closet, with thy Bible, with thy own heart, with the
duties of meditation, prayer, self-examination, contemplation of heavenly
things, to which thou have forme^ly been a stranger: thou will confess thou
did but then begin to live, and that all thy time before, thou were but like
a dead body, assumed and carried about by an evil spirit; and were altogether
like the voluptuous widow, of whom the Apostle says, that she is dead whilst
she lives.

I know but one sort of men that may reasonably look upon life to be less
desirable as to them, than death: and that may justly reckon it a greater
privilege to die presently; than to live any longer; and they are those that
can say with Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our house of this tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God, eternal in the Heavens. Such only
may with good reason have mortem in desiderio, that is, long to be dissolved:
But yet they also must have vitam in patientia, that is, be content to live,
though in the midst of trouble. But alas, how few of these are there in the
Christian world; how rarely does this flower of assurance grow, even in the
garden of the Church; yea, and amongst those that are no weeds themselves?

Then bless the Lord, O my soul, and let all that is within me, bless his holy
name; yea, let others praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name
together, that we are yet alive, though happily stripped of many mercies and
comforts of life, which we have formerly enjoyed. O Life! thou art sweet,
though full of care and fear, and hardship, and trouble on ever side; because
thou art a day of grace, a time of making our peace with God, and getting the
assurances of his love. Art thou yet dead in sins and trespasses? go to Jesus
Christ for soulquicknings, and thou may come to live spiritually, ere thou
die temporally, and be secured withal from dying eternally. Has God hid his
face from thee hitherto? take a right course; and yet before thou die, may
thou see his face with joy. Has he concealed himself from thee hitherto, and
spoken roughly to thee, as Joseph to his brethren? (when he called them Spies;)
yet, as he at last said to them, I am your brother Joseph: so may God to us, I
am your father; I am he that blotteth out your sins for mine own names sake;
though thou have all this while sat in darkness, and as it were in the region
of death; yet may the Lord be hence-forward a light to thee. Some render those
words, Deuteronomy. 34.5. Moses died upon the mouth of God (as one descants) God did
as it were kiss him into heaven: so may he do by thee when thou come to die.
May thou not yet hear him saying to thee, as to his Church, Isa. 54.11. Oh
thou afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted, I will lay thy stones
with fair colors, and thy foundation with Saphires! Lord thou know how to
make me more thankful for life without health, wealth, ease, honor, liberty,
friends, than ever I was for life in conjunction with all of these. Cause me to
improve life to those ends for which thou have given it; and give me a blessed
fruit of that improvement: then shall I casily acknowledge that merely to live
with such a heart, and for such a purpose, is more valuable than without this,
to live and swim in all the profits. pleasures, and honors of this world.

DISCOURSE IX. Of the comfort that may be received by doing good more than ever.
A Man may do more good at a time when he receives less. No man ever received
less good from the world (or more evil) than Christ did; yet no man ever did
more good in it, nor yet so much. He went about doing good, Acts 10.38. yea,
and it was meat and drink to him, John 4.34. that is, it was matter of great
delight and comfort to him. There is a real pleasure in doing, as well as
receiving good, Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy law, and
nothing shall offend them. It is surely a peace which passes all
understanding, that can guard the heart and mind against all that might
otherwise offend. David had said, but just before, Seven times a day do I
praise thee (which shows how well he employed himself) and then he presently
adds, Great peace have they that love thy Law. I have pitched upon this
consideration, because there are some who since the Fire do even despair of
ever receiving so much good in and from the world as they have formerly done:
from their trades, because they are lessned: their estates, because they are
impaired; their friends, because they are impoverished. Now to such it may be a
great relief; to think they may receive as much comfort by doing, as ever they
have formerly done by receiving good: yea, and they may do as much good as ever
they did (I do not say as ever they could) when yet they receive nothing like
so much. Some Stars receive less light from the Sun, which yet give more light
to the world: some smaller lights are greater luminaries; so may the world be
better by us, and for us, than it had wont to be; when yet it was never so bad
(that is so unkind and so unpleasant to us, and so straight-handed) as now it
is.

There are more ways of doing good than with a man's purse only (though that
is one way in which all must do good that have it.) Men may do good with their
heads, hearts, tongues, pens, lives: by their prayers, parts, graces, precepts,
examples: most men have one talent or other wherewith to do good, though many
have no hearts to use their talents, though they be many and great. Men of
great estates do not always keep the best houses, or give the most relief to
their poor neighbors; neither are the ablest men in any kind, always the
most useful and serviceable to the public. Some persons as able (it may be) as
those that write Volumes, have never once appeared in print; yea, some of
meaner gifts have furnished the world with many useful Treatises; which shows
that they who have received less, may do more for God, more for themselves,
more for the good of the Church, and of the world, than those who have received
a great deal more; who it may be are either over idle, or over-bashful, or too
much awed by that Proverb, That he that comes in print, lies down and suffers
every one that will to have a blow at him; being over-tender of their
reputations, like the delicate woman, that for delicacie will not set the sole
of her foot to the ground (lest it should be any ways soiled or sullied) or
hoping to seem greater by concealing themselves; like those Eastern Princes,
that would not be seen of their subjects, because they would not be known to be
but men. Or as if that which Solomon says, is the way for a fool to be thought
wise, viz. by holding his peace, were also the way for a wise man to be thought
wiser. It is all in all in point of serviceableness, when men of but comperent
abilities do with the blessing of God set themselves to do good, and to be
useful, they out-serve many that outshine them; and have more comfort in two
talents well improved, than others have in five that lie dead upon their hands.
Some are all for the Rake, that is, what knowledge, and other good things they
can scrape together for themselves: but those that are for the Pitch-fork (in a
good sense) viz. for laying out, as well as laying up, shall have more peace. A
good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things.
Matthew. 12.35. What should a woman do with full breasts, if she will not suffer
them to be drawn? How many fine children has some one poor woman brought up
with her own breasts, whilst many gallant dames of stronger constitutions, and
that might have made abler nurses, never gave suck to one of their own
children? Creatures without life do act ad extremum virium, the fire burns as
much as ever it can burn: but so does not mankind in many cases, because we
limit the exercise of our power by the pleasure of our wills: and therefore may
be able to do more good in an afflicted, than ever we were willing to do, in a
prosperous condition. The good which we receive may refresh our senses, but it
is the good we do, that will more rejoice our consciences. David tells us, that
In keeping Gods commands there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11. Doing is a kind of
giving, and the Scripture says, It is a more blessed thing to give than to
receive.

Lord, I desire not to insist upon it, that I may receive as much good as ever
(temporal good I mean) but oh that thou would give me both an opportunity and
an heart to do as much good, yea more than ever. I would pray, read, meditate,
converse with God, watch over my self and others, warn the unruly, comfort the
feeble minded, support the weak, fight against sin, exercise grace, serve the
Church of God more than ever, or better than ever heretofore; and so doing, I
am confident, that though my estate and worldly allowance be diminished; yet my
real happiness and comfort shall be much enlarged.

DISCOURSE X. Of al stracting from fancy, and looking at those that are below
our selves, rather than at others.
TRy if it be not a mere fancy and conceit of thine, that thou do want any
thing. Put case no man in the world had any thing better than what thou have:
no better meat to eat, or clothes to wear, or house to dwell in; would thou
then find any fault with thine own? or would it not serve thy turn very well?
If thy real wants were unsupplied, thou would be sensible of them, though
every body else were under the same want. If there were a famine upon the Land,
thou would feel hunger as much as if no body were deprived of bread but thy
self, when indeed every body were in the same case. But if thy condition be
such, as does therefore only seem bad; because others have that which is
better; thou art but fancy-sick, and under self-created misery. Thou walk in
a vain shadow, and disquietest thy self in vain. Psalm. 39.6. Thou would be
well enough, if thou could but see and believe it is so well with thee as it
is. Creed quod habes and habes. Mere fancy causes neither good nor evil really
to exist, no more than colors do in the Rainbow, or those things which meet
us only in our dreams. Are not the riches of rich men a strong tower in their
imagination? but are they therefore really so? yea, are they not like birds
that take wing and fly away? Let a melancholy man read of all sorts of
diseases incident to the body of man, and presently he conceits he has them
all: But is he therefore an Hospital, or a Pandora's box of all diseases,
because he fancieth himself so to be? Was that mad man in the Comedy robbed of
any real happiness when cured, who in his distraction fancied himself a
Prince, and therefore when he came to himself cried out, Rem me occidistis
amici non servastis. You have not cured me, but undone me.

Fancy can make no man truly poor, or hungry, or naked, or deformed; though it
may make them really miserable, by a false supposition of any, or all of these.
For a man to think himself not to have enough, only because others have more,
is such a kind of deception, as if a man of sufficient stature standing by a
giant, should think himself to be a dwarf. If we have enough, what matter is
it who has more? Why should our eye be evil, because Gods eye is good? If you
think that others having more eclipseth you (and therefore thou art afraid when
one is made vich, and when the glory of his house is increased. Psalm. 49.16.
then it should seem thou art not content with the world for use, but would
have it for splendour, and to glory in. Now that is forbidden, Jer. 9.23. Thus
says the lord, let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that
glories glory in this, that he understands me, etc. If the world were any
matter of glory, if men could really shine with the beams of the world, (as a
wife is said lueare radiis marits) it is the manifest pleasure of God, that so
far forth they should outshine us, to whom he has given more of the world
than to our selves. Either thou have better things than those of this world to
glory in, or thou have not: If thou have not, thou have the one thing necessary
to look after, instead of vying with others about the glory of this world
(which is but a mere Scheme or fantasy, or piece of pure pageantrie.) And if
thou have interest in better things, thou do outshine many others in the
sight of God, and in real worth; and therefore have no cause to envy those
(whom all things considered) thou do outshine; but to be very contented and
thankful. If then thou would be happy, abstract from fancy, undeceive thy
self, know when thou art well. It is easier to fill thy belly than thine eye.
Nature may quickly be satisfied: but fancy is insatiable.

Lord give me to make Agurs choice, and to be pleased with it when I have done,
viz. not to have riches (which some have, and others thirst after) but to be
fed with food convenient.

DISCOURSE XI. Of near Relations and Friends, being greater comforts each to
other, than they had wont to be.
ONe of the best ways that I know for the great loss sustained by the late
Fire (and all other temporal losses to be made up to us, is, by promoting a
Brief (as it were) amongst relations and friends (if it may take) to contribute
to the reparation each of other: which may seem a great paradox; that those who
have been mutual and joynt-sufferers, should be recruited by a collection made
amongst themselves. But so it is, the wives may greatly help to repair what
their husbands have lost; husbands what their wives: children the losses of
their parents; and parents the losses of their children; servants the losses of
their masters, etc. My meaning is, let each of these, give themselves to be
more useful and comfortable each to other in the relation, in which they stand
one to another, and the contribution they shall make in so doing, will be very
considerable; even in proportion to so great a loss. The comfort or discomfort
of a relation (such as it may be) may signify more than the gaining or losing
a great part of an estate, if not the whole. How many good parents would
cheerfully part with more than half of their estates, on condition they might
be able to say of some one or more of their bad children, as that father of his
returning prodigal? Luke 15.24. This my son was dead, and is alive; was lost,
and is found. The miserable consequences of this dolefullest of fears, never
cost some parents half those sighs and tears, that the miscarriages of some one
child has done: nor would it refresh them so much to see London once again in
its former glory, as to see their children brought into an estate of grace.
When parents have been for several years together (as it were) in the pangs of
a traveling woman, which is the Apostles metaphor, ((...)) What would they not
give to be delivered, and to see the travel of their souls? Let children that
were formerly otherwise, but become humble, serious, contented, diligent,
dutiful, and above all, truly religious, evidencing the power of godliness to
be in them; their parents that are such, will easily acknowledge that God has
given them more in their children, than he took from them out of their estates,
though they lost many thousands by the fire. If ever children that have almost
broke their parents hearts, may so time their Reformation and Repentance, as to
do their parents as much good as they have done them hurt, now is the time; if
they shall labor to comfort them after so great a loss, by giving them
occasion to celebrate their birthday, (I mean the day of their new birth)
whilst they are yet in mourning for the destruction of London. Surely the soul
of a child to a religious parent is more than the glory of a City.

Can yoke fellows do nothing toward repairing the losses each of other? What
if husbands and wives should more study and practice the duties of their
respective relations? what if they should please each other more for their
good, to edification? what if there should be a mutual contention between
them, which should love and oblige the other most, and no contention but that?
what if they should bear more with each others infirmities, and seek the
comfort of each others lives, as of their own? what if they should strive which
of them should bear the loss most patiently, and most Christian-like, and
should most comply with the law of their new and mean condition? what if bad
husbands should henceforth become good, and good husbands better, and wives the
like; would it no ways compensate the loss which has been sustained? Surely
it would very much; yea, those that know how great a cross some masters have
had, and have in their servants, what with stubbornness, negligence,
unfaithfulness, and other ill qualities; especially those that have matters of
great trust to employ them in, cannot but think it would greatly comfort them
after their losses, if those servants of theirs, Onesimus-like, should of
unprofitable become profitable, and of rebels converts. If every family were
furnished with loving yoke-fellows, carrying (as it were) one soul in two
bodies, dutiful and gracious children, diligent and faithful servants, should
they wear, and fare, much more meanly than they did heretofore, yet would
their lives be much more happy than they had wont to be. If there be any
Relations so bad they cannot mend (as I hope there is not) or any so good they
need not mend (which I very much doubt) this counsel does not concern them: but
if neither, then is it a good expedient for every family in some measure to
repair their losses by; and how do I wish it may be put in practice?

Lord thou have told us that a brother is born for adversity. Prove. 17.17. so
is a husband, a wife, a parent, a child. Grant Lord, that we may all walk in
the several relations in which we stand, so like persons born or cut out for
such a time of adversity as this, that we may help to make up that breach each
for other, which thy righteous hand has made upon us all.

DISCOURSE XII. Of training up children in Religion, that they may come to have
God for their portion.
HAve we not heard some parents since this Fire, bitterly crying out, Alas!
what shall they do for their poor children? They are grown up, and ready for
portions to dispose in the world; and their portions, the fruit of many years
care and sore travel, were not long since as ready for them: but in came the
Fire like a giant refreshed with wine, mighty to run his race, and swept them
all away. And now where shall they have stocks for their sons that were about
to set up for themselves? where shall they have portions for their daughters to
bestow them in marriage? wherewithal shall they breed their younger children
like themselves, as they have done the rest? To them that ask these questions,
give me leave to answer thus: If your children want nothing else but hansome
breeding, as to curious works, Music, Dancing, and such like; if your sons
want nothing but great stocks to set up their Trades; and your daughters
nothing but so many hundreds to prefer them to rich husbands, you are happy
parents. For if that be all they want, they must needs be possessed of the one
thing necessary, of that better part which Mary chose for her self, that can
never be taken away from them. If so, though your affliction be great, yet the
mercy showed you in reference to them, is so much greater, that it is a shame
for you to make any great complaint. But if you say that your children are some
of them stark naught, manifestly in the gall of bitterness, and band of
iniquity; others of them towardly, yet but slenderly hopeful for matter of
grace: I am sure by your own confession there is something incomparably more
needful than stocks and portions to be sought out for them, as to which you may
take as effectual a care, and make as sufficient a provision (all your losses
notwithstanding) as if no such thing had ever befallen you. And what is it, but
that your children may become wise unto salvation, that they may know the God
of their fathers, and may serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind, as David exhorts Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28 9. That the disobedient may be
reduced to the wisdom of the just, that they may be born again, and may be
found in Christ, having the righteousness of God, which is by faith: In a word,
that they may attain that holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.
For this care God commends Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham, that he will
command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord, etc. As for giving your younger children high and genteele
breeding: may not that be spared? if God has taken away the estates you had
provided for them, what would such breeding do, but raise their spirits above
what their condition is like to be, as the case now stands? and may not a
plainer education better fit them for that course of life, to which the
providence of God is like to call them? As for your elder children, either they
are those bad ones you speak of, those Children of Belial, and why should you
covet great estates for them? would they not consume them upon their lusts?
would not the prosperity of such fools slay them? (as it has done many
others) and would not all those great things be converted by them either into
the lusts of the flesh, or the lust of the eye, or the pride of life? As for
those of your children that are now towardly, but not religious; either they
will come to have grace in time, or not: If not, there will be a smaller
account to give for a small estate, than for a great one, and it may be less of
a snare in it; but on the other hand, if God shall first or last bestow his
saving grace, either on your children that are merely civil, or on them that
are profane, or on both, trouble not your heads any further about them,
godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come: God will withhold no good thing from them that do, or shall walk
uprightly before him, Psalm. 84.

Now from these premises, how naturally may we ^nfer, that the great care that
is incumbent upon Parents, is, that their children may come to be truly
gracious. Grace without estates will certainly make them, (though an estate
with grace, like an inheritance with wisdom, would add something to them for
the present) but an estate without grace would probably undo them; or if not be
their very undoing, yet would aggravate their condemnation very much. It may be
your childrens advantage, that you are sensible, that if God be not their
portion, they will have none at all, (or very little) because otherwise it may
be you had entrusted them with the World, and never looked after an interest in
God for them. That your children may be seasoned with Grace, if you educate
them by a proxy, let me advise you to make choice of those that will truly
concern themselves for the good of their souls, and as much to breed them
christians as scholars; and make it your earnest request to them so to do.
Having committed them to the tuition of those that are pious and prudent, by no
means conjure them (as some fond Parents have done) always to spare the Rod,
lest they spoil the Child. Wheresoever you send them, let your earnest
prayers daily follow them: and for this above all things, that God would write
his Law in their hearts, and put his fear into them, that they may never depart
from him. If you train them up at home, bring them betimes acquainted with the
holy Scriptures (which Timothy is said to have been instructed in from a
Child) also with the Grounds and Principles of Religion, that they may
understand both Scripture and Sermons: be droping wholesome counsel into them
ever and anon; be possessing them with the danger of sin, the excellency of
holiness, the necessity of being new creatures, the doctrines of heaven and
hell, and such like great truths; fill their memories with such passages of
Scripture as do most concern them, which may both direct their practice, and
keep out bad thoughts; Discountenance all the manifest sin you see by them, as
lying, filthy speaking, pride, envy, passion, stubbornness, and ^^th like: and
encourage all the good you see ^y them, and reward them for it, speak to them
warmly and affectionately of the matters of region, that they may see you are
in good earnest. Keep no servants that may debauch them, but ^^ch as are
honestly inclined, and will help them ^n Religion, rather than hinder them. See
they get no baunt of ill company. Conceal your own infirmities from them all
you can, (Debetur ^ueris Reverentia) that they may not copy them but. Let what
concerns the souls of your children receive a sanction from both Parents: and
to make it more forcible, let one Parent if present, always second the other,
as to those matters. Let them every day, that you are with them, hear more or
less from you concerning God. Whet the Vitals of Religion upon them, rather
than enable them to tell you who was such a ones Father, or how long such a
Patriarch lived. Remember them daily and fervently both in your Families and
Closets. Bewail their sins next your own, and beg pardon for them. Not only
pray for them your selves, but bespeak the prayers of others, together with
your own for them, and take that for one of the greatest kindnesses that can be
done for you. Principle them against the most dangerous errors of the times
and places they live in: (as Popery where that spreads, etc.) Entice them to be
much in reading good books, and for that end furnish them with those that are
pleasant, as well as profitable. Acquaint them with signal passages of divine
providence, thereby to breed in them awful apprehensions of God, as the Jews
were commanded to tell their children the reason of the Passover, Exodus 12.26.
Verse them in the History of Martyrs, which may show them the faith and
patience of the Saints, and acquaint them with the doctrine of the cross. Keep
them always in action, to prevent the mischiefs that come by idleness. Get
Masters for them as soon as they are fit to go out, and before they grow too
sturdy to bear the Yoke, or make them so subject and serviceable, in their
nonage, in your own houses, that they may discern no great difference betwixt
home and an Apprentiship, or betwixt a Fathers and a Masters house. Breed them
rather beneathe, than above what you can do for them: use them to be contented
with any thing that is fitting, for matter of clothes and diet. Let morning and
evening be (as it were) your medicinal times, in which to give them something
for their souls health, next their heart in a morning, next their rest at
night. Be ever and anon physicking them for worms, that is, take heed of
suffering them to be humoursome, troublesome, and hard to please. Make them pay
respect to your persons, that they may reverence your counsel. Give them those
representations of God, as may cause them as well to thirst after him, to love
and delight in him, as to fear and stand in awe of him: and those characters of
Religion, as may cause them to look upon all its ways as pleasantness, and all
its paths as peace, as an easy Yoke and a light burden. Teach them to be
humble, and then God will teach them, Psalm. 25.9. Sin as little as may be for
their sakes, as well as your own, lest God should lay up your iniquity for your
children, as it is, Job 11.19. And whereas in many things we do all offend,
beg we earnestly of God that our Children may fare the better for our
prayers, and not the worse for our sins.

And now Lord that I have been writing what Parents should do for their
Children's souls, I dare not say with that young man in the Gospel, all these
things have I done; but only that all these things I desire to do, for, and in
reference to my Children, by the assistance of thy grace. As Peter said to
Christ, Lord thou know I love thee, so can I appeal and say? Lord thou
know I love my Children's souls, and am more transported with desires it
might be well with them, than that they might prosper upon all other accounts.
The only riches that I insist upon for them, (and Lord turn not away that
prayer of thy servant, which comes swiming to thee in melting tears, and may
it also in the blood of thy Son) I say Lord, the only riches I insist upon for
my children (whateser others do for theirs) is, that they may be rich in faith,
and heirs of the Kigndome, which thou have promised to them that love thee,
James 2.5.

DISCOURSE XIII. Of that comfort under trouble, which may be drawn from the
consideration of Gods nature.
I Honor the wisdom of David, who when God gave him his election of one evil
out of three, (which he would) made choice of that which might seem to come
more immediately from God, ( viz. the Plague) saying, Let us fall now into the
hand of the Lord, 2 Samuel 24.15.
and let me not fall into the hand of Man, and the reason he gives, is, because
his (that is Gods) mercies are great (or many.) It is a great relief in and
under troubles to look upon our selves as in Gods hands, and upon the nature of
that God (in whose hands we are) as far better than is the nature of any, even
the best natured of men. They misconstrue David, that think he intimates, as if
men were not always in the hands of God, in every kind of affliction that
befalls them (be it sword, or famine, by siege) for all he means is, that as
to some troubles, we do not fall into the hand of men, but of God: as namely
under the plague, which is an Arrow shot from God's bow, not from Man's. Men
are called God's hand, Psalm. 17.14. From Men which are thy hand, so that when
under the rage of men, we are in the hand of God; but we may be in the hand of
God and not of men. (By the way, what furious creatures are wicked men, that
David should be more afraid of Gods punishing him by their hand, than by
plague, or famine.)

That under all our troubles we are in Gods hand, is clear. Be also convinced,
that that is to be in a good hand, that you are in a good hand, when in the
hand of God, and that will comfort you exceedingly. If the nature and
disposition of God be very good, transcendently good, that is, kind, and
gracious, and merciful, as the scripture tells us in sundry places, it is,
Exodus 34.6. Nehem. 9.17, 31. Jer. 3.12. Joel. 2.13. (With an hundred more in
the old Testament, besides the new) then must we needs be in a good hand when
we are in Gods hand. Is a Child safe in the hand of his tender mother, even
when she has a Rod in her other hand? and are not Gods Children well in the
hand of their heavenly Father, who has said to his Church, though a Mother may
forget her Child, yet will not I forget thee, Isa. 49.15. I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands, etc. Methinks that heathen Poet spoke divinely,
who speaking of the love of God to man, (understand him but of good men, if of
a love of complacency; but of others also, if of a love of benevolence) Charior
est illis homo quam sibi. Man is more dear to them, meaning to the Gods, (which
plural number is the only thing in that saying, that discovers the Author to
have been a heathen, and not an eminent Christian) than he is to himself: or
God has more love for men, than they have for themselves. That text, Heb.
10.31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; if
rightly understood, no ways contradicts what I have said: for it is meant of
so falling into the hands of God, as they must do, who have trodden under foot
the Son of God, counted his blood an unholy thing, and done despite to the
spirit of Grace, verse. 29. for that is to fall, not under the mere correcting,
but the revenging and consuming hand of God, as he has said, vengeance is his,
verse. 30. he will pour out fiery indignation upon the adversaries, v. 27.
meaning such Apostates as after illumination turn enemies to Christ and his
truth. But what is that to others? It is ill for the rejecters and opposers of
Christ, to fall into the hand of God. God out of Christ, especially to them
that set themselves against Christ, is wrath. But it is terrible. But it is
well for the accepters and receivers of Christ, to fall into Gods hand, for God
in and thorough Christ is unspeakably gracious.

He is partly an Infidel that would have more assurance of the sweet nature and
disposition of God, than Scripture and experience; but if the weakness of such
men may be condiscended to; I can presently call in sound reason for a witness.
Who shed abroad all that love and kindness, and compassion, and tenderness in
the hearts of men and women, fathers and mothers, that is there found? who
taught men to know that love, and pity, and mercy, are real excellencies and
perfections: but hatred and cruelty are odious and detestable things, the
fruits of sin and weakness? that what we call good nature does as much excel
that we call ill nature, as light does excel darkness? who has given us to
understand, that to do good, and to show mercy, are sacrifices acceptable to
God; but fury and violence his soul bateth. Has not God himself taught us
these things, and is it not therefore, that the Gemiles are said to do by
nature the things of the Law? and that, they that have not the Law, are a Law
to themselves, and do show the work of the Law written in their hearts, Romans 1.
Is it not because love and mercy are agreeable to Gods nature (the Scripture
says, God is love) that he has commended them to us, and made us to see a
beauty in them, and to apprehend that God is therewithal delighted, and that
with the merciful, he will show himself merciful? Is it not therefore, that
God has called his mercy his glory, and told us that mercy rejoices against
judgment, James 2.13. Much of our disquietment under affliction proceeds from
misconceivings of God's nature, and of his heart toward us, and for that we
think we see a sword in the hand of an enemy, when it is only a Rod in the hand
of a father. Therefore it is excellent advice, that we should acquaint our
selves with God in order to being at peace, Job 32.21.

O Lord I know it is necessary I should be sometimes chastned, and better by
thy hand than by any other. Thou know how to do it in mercy and in measure:
Parents may correct their children for their pleasure; but thou chastnesty hine
for their profit, I shall count my losses a fruit of thy love, if thou will but
tell me that I am therefore chastned of the Lord, that I may not be condemned
with the World.

DISCOURSE. XIV. Of drawing the Waters of Comfort under affliction, out of the
Wells of Gods Promises.
AS full of love and goodness as the nature of God is, yet guilty Man is loath
to lie at pure mercy, and to stand to Gods mere courtesy, therefore in Heb
6.18. we read of a further provision which God has made for the comfort of his
people, viz. by his promise and oath, both vou^hsafed to Abraham, Genesis 22.16.
(and to other believers in and with him) that by those two immutable things,
the heirs of promise might have strong consolation. The end of divine promises
is, that God who was and had been otherwise free to do or not to do such good
things for us, might (as it were) enter into bond, (which he could no otherwise
do) and might give us the security of his truth and faithfulness, as well as
that other of his mercy and goodness. God knowing that we could no ways bind
him, that is, oblige him in point of justice, or as indispensible objects of
his mercy (which in our selves we were not) to show kindness to us, has bound
himself by his own voluntary promises, and engaged his truth (which cannot
fail) on behalf of his power and wisdom, and other attributes, that they
shall be so and so employed for us which otherwise we could at most but have
hoped, but may be now assured of, as we are, that it is impossible for God to
lie. Now, as there are promises for diverse other purposes; so not a few to
support and comfort us under various sufferings and afflictions.

I may recite but the heads of promises, relateing to adversity, and it may be
not all of them neither. There are promises of God's supporting his people
under affliction, sanctifying it to them: vouchsafing them his gracious
presence in it; and delivering them out of it in due time. And what more can we
desire, than to be seasonably delivered out of trouble, and mean time to be
upheld in it, bettered by it, and to have God with us, as he was with the three
Children in the fiery Furnace. I shall quote but a few promises of this nature,
and the rather because they deserve to want comfort, who will not search the
Scripture for it, that thorough patience and comfort of the Scripture they
might have hope. If men had no Bibles, nor could come by none. I would not do
them that wrong, as to fail of quoting any one such promise, that I could call
to mind: but now one instance of each sort may serve the turn. As for the
promise of support under affliction; it is as plain as words can make it, in 1
Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
you are able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape: that you may
be able to bear it. Then, as for the presence of God with his people in their
afflictions, read Isa. 43.2. When thou passest thorough the waters, I will be
with thee, etc. And Heb. 13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. That their afflictions shall be sanctified, is secured to Gods
people by those words, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for
good to them that love God. And lastly, as for deliverance out of trouble,
(which some do, but ought not most of all to thirst after) there are many
texts, that give us to expect it, as namely, Psalm. 103.9. The Lord will not
always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. Lam. 3.31, 32. The Lord
will not cast off for ever, but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion, according to the multitude of his ^^ercies. Isa. 57.16. I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wrath, for the spirit should failt
before me, and the souls which I have made. God, who is conscious to himself
that he cannot lie, may well expect that these, and many more promises of like
nature, which he has made, should contribute much to our support and comfort,
since each of them would do so, if steadfastly believed.

O Lord here are many deep Wells of living water, let me not want the bucket of
faith to draw out of them. Could I but as steadfastly believe them, as thou will
certainly perform them, to them that do, would not my soul be refreshed with
such promises well nigh as much, as it could well be with their respective
performances. Performances may be something sweeter, but can be nothing surer
than are divine promises.

DISCOURSE XV. Of fetching comfort from the usual proceedings of God, with his
people, in and under affliction.
AFter all that has been spoken, both from the nature and promises of God to
comfort us, our weak faith (more shame for it) seems to implore some further
relief from experience. Experience is a good crutch to a lame faith, which,
were it otherwise, then lame might stand and walk without it. Since the Apostle
tells us, that experience works hope, we will not reject its assistance. Let
experience then tell us how God is wont to carry himself toward his people, in
and under their afflictions.

First, hear what the Scripture says to that, Isaiah 63.9. In all their
affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them; in his
love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them and carried them all
the days of old. See also Psalm. 112.4. To the upright there arises light in
darkness: Add those words of God by his Prophet concerning his Church, Hoseab
2.14. I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak
comfortably to her. verse. 15. And I will give her Vineyards from thence, ( viz.
from the Wilderness) and the Valley of Acor (which signifies trouble) for a
door of hope, and she shall sing there as in the days of her youth, and as in
the day when she came up from Egypt. And 2 Cor. 1.5. Blessed be God who
comfort us in all our tribulation: For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. 2 Cor. 8.2. Speaking of the
Churches of Macedonia, he says, that in a great trial of affliction, the
abundance of their joy abounded, to the riches of their liberality, and 1 Pet.
4.14. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit
of glory rests on you. What do all these passages seem to imply, but that God
is wont to reserve the strongest cordials, (I mean comforts) for his people, to
the time of their deepest sufferings? Job 22.29. When Men are cast down, then
thou shall say there is lifting up, and he shall save the humble person. As our
greatest elevations do usually precede our greatest temptations and desertions,
(as Paul his rapture into the third heaven, was not long before his being
buffeted: and Christ himself had received his baptism, and been honored by a
voice from Heaven, not long before he was led into the Wilderness to be
tempted) so our greatest temptations and dejections are usually succeeded by
our greatest elevations and comforts. So it was with Christ after he had been
tempted; Angels came and ministered to him. When Christ was either in his agony,
or near unto it, we read in Luke 22.49. That there appeared an Angel to him,
strengthening him. If then it be true in a spiritual, as well as in a natural
sense, that it is usually most dark, but a little before break of day, and that
the bright face of heaven is better discerned under ground than above, (where
the reflection of beams dazle^h our eyes) and if it be so, that when the
Bricks are doubled, than God uses to send Moses (that is deliverance) if God
never speak more kindly to his people then he uses to do, when he has drawn
them into a Wilderness; if God smile upon his people then, especially when the
World frowns upon them; and when their outward sufferings abound, cause their
inward consolations to do so likewise, and make light arise to them in
darkness: why should I not then say, as David did, Psalm. 49.5. Wherefore should
I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me
about? (supposing him to mean the punishment or fruit of his iniquities) If
when I sit in darkness, Mich 7.8.
the Lord will be a light to me; if when I have more trouble in the World, I
may have more peace in Christ; if I be in a Prison, and God will there give me
Songs in the night, as he did to Paul and Silas, Acts 16. if I were at a stake,
and might there feel greater joys in my soul, than ever I was acquainted with
before, (as some holy Martyrs did) who could say I were miserable, and not do
me wrong? or how could I possibly think my self so to be?

Lord, Psalm. 23 4.
though I walk thorough the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no
evil, if thou will be with me, and wilt cause thy Rod and thy Staff to comfort
me. Though deep call upon deep at the noise of thy Water-spouts, and though all
thy waves and thy billows are gone over me. Yet if thou Lord wilt command thy
loving kindness in the day time, and cause thy Songs to be with me in the
night, I will not fear, though an Host of evils should encamp against me. Psalm.
142.8.

DISCOURSE XVI. Of that relief and support which the commonness of the Case of
affliction may afford us.
IT is a sign that Men walk in a vain show (as the Scripture speaks, Psalm.
39.6.) for that they are apt to be disquieted at those things which should
comfort them (so was Peter at the approach of Christ, crying out, depart from
me O Lord) and on the other hand, to be comforted with those things which one
would think would rather disquier them, as namely with others being under the
same, or other as great calamities as themselves. Solamen miseris socios
habuisse doloris. Though we may not say, the more (in sufferings together) the
merrier, yet according to the course of men so it is, that the more
fellow sufferers, the less sad are they that suffer. Neither may we impute this
wholly to the weakness and envirousness of men, since the Apostle from that very
consideration, does labor to comfort Christians, 1 Cor. 10.13. No temptation
has take you but what is common to men: and in 1 Pet. 5.9. The same
afflictions are accomplished in your brethren, that are in the World. Therefore
doubtless there is some reason why men should not be so much dejected, when
they consider themselves not to be alone in misery, (though upon other accounts
again we should be never less sad and solitary, than when none are in trouble
but our selves) then if they were as David speaks of himself, Psalm. 102.7. Like
a Sparrow alone upon the House top, or like a Pelican in the wilderness, or
like an Owl in the Desert. For in that case we might be apt to think that God
had some particular controversy with us more than with all other men, that he
had singled us out to make examples of us, that he had set us like beacons upon
a hill to warn and alarm others, or that our sufferings were such as could not
be borne, because we have no instances of those that do or ever did bear the
like.

Now the commouness of sufferings, and those of the same kind to others with
our selves, does much take off from all those suspicions and prejudices,
especially if they be such as we doubt not, but have interest in the love and
favor of God, for thence may we conclude that hatred is not to be known by
such dispensations as those. Afflictions in one kind or other are common to
men, yea to good men, or the generality of them at all times: but some have
them in one way, some in another, some in body, some in mind, some in estate,
some in relations, some in all; but all in some. For Man is born to sorrow, as
the sparks she upward, and whomsoever God loves, he rebukes and chast^eth, yea
every son whom he receive h^: but there are times in which the afflictions of
many are invisible, only their own hearts know their own sorrow, and wherein
they are so various, that as we say, so many Men ^^^many minds, so may it
almost be said, so many men, so many several sorts of miseries, and usually
every one thinks his own the greatest, and is ready to say, Is there any sorrow
like to mine.

But it is otherwise at this day, God having cast multitudes both of persons
and families at one and the same time into one and the same furnace, that none
might say, others were corrected but with rods, but we with scorpions. Now this
being so, there are the more to pity you, the fewer to insult over you: though
when all this is said, I honor them that say from their hearts, They wish they
had suffered more than they did (if more could have been) if it had been the
will of God that none might have been sufferers but they. But seeing such was
the good will and pleasure of God, that thousands should be involved in the
same calamity with our selves, and many of them our betters: who is not
ashamed, yea who is not afraid to contend with God for what has befallen
himself? who sees not reason to stand before God like a sheep dumb before the
shearer? Who would not lay his mouth in the dust if there may yet be hope? What
art thou, and what was thy fathers house, that the destroying Angel shall pass
over thee, and thy doors be as it were sprinkled, when he entered into the
houses of so many, not only Egyptians but Israelites? If our betters have been
equal shaters in this calamity (as who is so proud as not to think so) how can
we but think of those words, Jer. 49.12. Behold they whose judgment was not to
drink of the cup, have drunken, and art thou he that shall altogether go
unpunished? To have escaped had been a miracle of mercy: but to have been
involved with so many that deserved it less, was no wonder at all.

Lord, as for all those whose houses and substance this Fire has consumed,
give them much more to admire that their persons did escape the common calamity
of the Plague, than that their possessions were taken away by the common
calamity of the Fire: and as for those who have escaped both Plague and Fire
(they and their dwellings) let them be ravished with the remembrance of thy
distinguisting goodness, and so answer the law of thy kindness, that thou may
not reserve them to a greater judgment than either that of the Plague, or that
other of the late dismal Fire.

DISCOURSE XVII. Of the lightness of all temporal afflictions.
IT is well I have Scripture to back me, else I foresee I might possibly have
been esteemed both hard-hearted and heretical, for saying that all temporal
afflictions are but light: Whereas some would oppose their experience to such
an assertion, I may comply with that, and yet do the Scripture right. All your
experience can contend for, is only this, that some temporal afflictions (and
this in particular) absolutely and in themselves considered, are not light, but
heavy (as Job speaks) like the sands of the sea. That I can afford to grant I
but yet those very afflictions relatively considered, and compared with
miseries of another nature; namely, with internal and eternal torments, give me
leave to say are but as so many flea-bitings. Say who dare that utmost poverty
is comparable either to the pains of hell, or pangs of conscience. Who is so
desperate as to be willing to exchange mere beggary or famine its self, with
either of those? Does not Solomon say, and is it not most true, That the spirit
(meaning the conscience) of a man (if that be sound and in peace) can bear his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? That is, none can bear. If Job
sitting upon the dunghill, can then and there say, he knows that his redeemer
lives, and he shall one day see him with these eyes; he that thinks him half
so miserable whilst he can so say, as one that sits upon a throne, and mean
time sees the handwriting of God upon the wall, (as Belteshazzar did) telling
him that he is weighed and found too light: or cries out with Spira and others
in the like case, that he is damned, he is damned; or but as David sometimes
did, that God has forgotten to be gracious to him, and shut up his loving
kindness toward him in displeasure; I say, he that thinks the latter of these,
though upon a Throne, the less misetable of the two, knows not what he says,
not whereof he affirms. Should he be translated from a dunghill to a throne
with such different circumstances as these, oh how would he long to be upon his
dunghill again, with such language in his mouth and heart, as was that of Job,
I know my redeemer lives?

If thy affliction be but temporal and external, fear to say, no sorrow like to
thine, no not that of a wounded conscience; lest God hear it and be angry, and
should either exchange thy other misery for a wounded conscience, or add that
to all the rest, that by woeful experience thou may learn, neither to
overvalue the one, nor to undervalue the other. And do the pangs of a wounded
conscience far exceed the miseries of an impoverished condition, what then do
the pains of hell, which far exceed the pangs of conscience? The worm that
never dies (by which is meant a gnawing conscience) is but one part of the
torments of hell. Besides that, there is the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone; the smoke whereof ascends continually. What is it to have fire
consume our dwellings, in comparison of dwelling our selves with consuming
fire, and with everstasting burnings? who believes hell to be what it is, and
does not think one year or month in the torments of that place, to be more
unsufferable than all the vexations of a long and afflicted life; were it not
less misery to be as Lazarus, that beggar, full of sores, and craving of the
crumbs that fell from the rich man's table, and glad of dogs to lick his fores,
yea to be so for many years together, than for the space of one year to be as
Dives in hell, carnestly begging for a little water to cool his tongue,
tormented in flames, and could by no means obtain it? Add the circumstance of
eternity to the greatness of hell torments, and see if all the troubles of this
life do not even vanish before it, and appear as nothing. If then thou art
convinced (as I hope thou art) there is a hell, and have reason to believe that
multitudes are there (for all are there that have lived and died in their sins)
let me suppose thee the greatest susterer this fire has made (if there be any
one greater than any of the rest) and when that is done, compare thy condition
with that of the damned in hell, and then say, if thy affliction when laid in
the balance, be not found altogether lighter than vanity. If God will assure
thee that thou shall fly from the wrath to come, all that has yet befaln thee
may be born.

It is not for want of pity and commiseration toward you, that I write this
(I hope my bowels yearn toward you) but I would justify the Scripture, when
it says, that temporal afflictions are but light. 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light
affliction (says Paul) which is but for a moment, etc. Read but St. Paul's
perils, 2 Cor. 11.26, 27. and his sufferings, v. 23. In stripes above measure,
in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, thrice stoned, etc. and then tell me,
if his temporal afflictions were light, whose can be called heavy? Add to what
I have said, that the pangs of conscience, and the pains of hell (which I have
made appear, do so infinitely outweigh all the troubles of this life) are no
other than what our sins have deserved, and therefore our outward afflictions
may be said to be light, not only if compared with what is come upon others,
but also with what might justly have been inflicted upon our selves. So that we
may here take up those words of Ezra, chap. 9.13. Thou Lord have punished us
less than our iniquities deserve. If one that deserves to be put to a painful
and shameless death, comes off with a burn in the hand, who says not his
punishment is light, compared with his offense? I am deceived if by this time I
have not plainly proved all temporal afflictions to be but light, though some
are nothing like so light as others.

Now Lord, what I have proved by Scriptural arguments, let not me or others
ever seem to disprove by anti-scriptural practices, whilst we affirm Temporal
afflictions to be but light, let us not groan under them as if they were
unsupportable, or to be overwhelmed by them. Oh mix not Spiritual afflictions
with temporal. If thou will rebuke me, seem not to do it in thy wrath, neither
chasten me in thy sore displeasure. Let me ready thy love in and with my
temporal afflictions, and I shall ever acknowledge that in comparison, not only
of eternal torments, but even of inward and spiritual troubles, they are but
light.

DISCOURSE XVIII. Of the shortness of Temporal Afflictions.
THough afflictions be not sweet in themselves, yet it is one comfort, they are
but short: And how can the troubles of this life be otherwise than short, when
this life it self is not long? Paul exhorting Christians to weep as if they
wept not, 1 Cor. 7.29. promises this, Brethren the time is short, v. 28. and
to show the exceeding shortness of it, he calls it a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our
affliction which is but for a moment. Persons under affliction are apt to think
the time long: as those that are in great pain, be it but for a day, or a piece
of a day. In the morning they cry, Would to God it were evening, Deuteronomy. 28.67
and in the evening, would to God it were morning. They are ready to
exp^^st^late with the Sun, saying, why stay the wheels of his chariot so long,
though he be as a mighty giant that runs a race. They would make morning and
evening meet (if they knew how) and have it night so soon as it is day, and day
again so soon as it is night. But is time long because men think it so? is a
Summer-day short, because they that spend it in pleasure think it is night
quickly, and wish it were twice so long? shall we say the time is long, when
God says it is short? Let God be true, and ever man a liar. We our selves
shall say the same thing, if we compare time with eternity, as the Apostle did
when he said, Our affliction which is but for a moment, is not worthy to be
compared with the eternal weight of glory. A thousand years with God (because
eternal) are but as one day, or as a watch in the night: what then is fourscore
years which few exceed, yea few arrive to? There are eternal sufferings, how
long are they? and how short are these if compared with them? If our miseries
may end with our lives, we shall have no cause to complain they have been long.
God has made our days as a span, and our years are as nothing before him. Why
should we think that we are long deprived of those things that we could not
have long enjoyed? Do not persons that have the world at will bemoan themselves
to think how soon their souls will be required of them, and then whose all
these things will be? Had the City been standing, had trade been flourishing,
had waters of a full cup been wrung out to you, and had God given you a lease
of all that mercy during life, how soon would that life expire? how soon must
you be gathered to your fathers, and go the way of all flesh? how close does
eternity follow you at the heels? how suddenly will it swallow you up? They
that had but a little time to come in their leases, and no hopes of renewing
them, count not their loss so great. Thou have but a little time to come in thy
life, which is without hope of being renewed, and therefore what great matter
is it that thou have lost? within a few years they that have great estates yet
left, will enjoy no more of them than thou do of thine, which the fire has
consumed. Is it an eternity of ^^^piness that thou believe to be reserved for
thee; wait but a little while, and thou will be in possession of it, and then
thou will have no more need of those things.

O Lord, I shall not presume to ask how many days, or months, or years, my
sufferings must last, or whether all the residue of my life: only be pleased to
say, that they shall be but temporal; then shall I thankfully acknowledge that
the sufferings of Time are mercifully short, if compared with the joys of
eternity.

DISCOURSE XIX. Of the needfulness and usefulness of Affliction.
WE commonly say, that a rod now and then is as good for children as their
meat, and God knows that it is so for his; should he spate his rod, and should
his soul spare them for their crying, he should spoil his children. 1 Pet. 1.6.
For a season (if need be) ye are in heavinass. If God do not correct us for his
own pleasure (as it is certain he does not; for judgment is his strange act,
neither does he willingly afflict the children of men) then surely it is for
our profit. We read in Psa. 55.19. Because men have no changes ( viz. from
prosperity to adversity, but the mountain of their bappiness stands strong)
therefore they fear not God. And another Text says, Put them in fear, that
they may know themselves to be but men. (As if men, but for Gods terrifying
them by affliction, would conceit themselves to be more than men.) It is
tendered as a reason why the Moabites were so wicked, because they had no
affliction (at leastwise of a long time.) Jer. 48.11. Moab has been at ease
from his youth, and he has settled on his ^ees, and has not been emptied from
vessel to vessel, neither has he gone into captivity: therefore his ^aste
remained in him, and his sent is not changed: Agur gives this reason why he
prayed against riches, Prove. 30.9. Lest I be full and deny thee, and say who is
the Lord? David himself says, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went
astray, but now have I kept thy word. Believe these passages of Scripture, and
judge afflictions needless if you can. Wind, (to which actions may be compared)
may do some hurt; but if there were no winds the air would putrify, and there
would be no living in it. Standing waters, as some moats and lakes, and such
like (to which persons always in prosperity may be compared) how unwholesome
and unuseful are they? As it is necessary that the Sea (and some other waters)
should ebb as well as flow, and that the Moon should sometimes decrease, or
wane, as well as wax and increase at other times: so for us to have our ebbs as
well as our tides our wanes as well as our waxings.

It is a hard thought of God, that he should make us drink bitter and loathsome
potions, when we need them not. We cannot find in our hearts to use our
children so, nor yet to correct them (so much as gently) when we think there is
no occasion for it. Oh that we should think more meanly of God than of our
selves; or more highly of our selves than of the great and ever blessed God. Do
we hear him crying out, Hos. 11.8. How shall I deliver thee up Ephraim, how
shall I make thee as Admah, and Zeboim, my heart is turned within me, etc. And
shall we think he will do such things where there is no need? Take heed of
charging God with hypocrisy, who is truth it self. Far be it from us to say,
Afflictions are not needful, because our partial selves do not see how needful
they are. When will our children confess that they want whipping? spare them
till then, and you shall never correct them. Had Paul no need (yea he says he
had) of a messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be lifted up with
the abundance of revelations? we have not his revelations, yet are we not as
proud as he either was, or was in danger to have been? Some humble servants of
God have said they never had that affliction in all their lives which they did
not first or last find they had need of. He that wants no correction is better
than any of those worthies we read of in Scripture; and he that thinks himself
so, I am sure has need of it to humble him. Read the third chapter, and see
how many lessons afflictions do teach us, and then judge if there be none of
them you have yet to learn, at leastwise better and more perfectly than you
have yet done. Can nothing profit us but that which pleases us? Physicians
know that bitter drinks in many cases are more profitable (though loathsome)
than those which are most pleasant.

O Lord, why am I so childishly averse to that which is so needful for me? If
those to whom I commit the care of my body, do counsel me to bleed or purge, or
to be cupt or scarified, and do advise me to it as necessary for my health, I
submit to it, and why do I not submit to thee when thou orderest me unpleasant
things, which yet are more needful for me? Are not frosts and nipping weather
as necessary to kill the weeds, as warm Sunshine to ripen the corn? Though no
chastening be jo^ous for the present, but grievous, yet if it works the
peaceable fruits of righteousness ( Heb. 12.11.) I desire not only to be
patient under it, but also thankful for it.

DISCOURSE XX. Of the mixture of mercies with judgments.
NO man has truly either a heaven or a hell in this world. For as all our wine
here is mixed with water, so all our water is mixed with wine: God in this life
does still in judgment remember mercy. God has set the one over against the
other. Prove. 7.14. meaning, mercy over against judgment. It is not for nothing
that the Apostle exhorts us, in every thing to be thankful, and says, that
is the will of God concerning us: But therefore it is, because there is a
mixture of mercies with all the afflictions of this life. Some may sit in so
much darkness, as to see no light at all, but some light there is in their
condition, only they see it not. Our late Fire was as great a temporal judgment
as most have been, yet he sees nothing that discerns not a mixture of mercy
with it. Was it not great mercy that when God burnt the City, yet he spared the
Suburbs? that when men's houses were consumed, yet their persons were delivered,
yea and much of their goods and substance was snatched as a firebrand out of
the fire? your flight was on the Sabbath Day: but it was not in the winter, in
which the shortness of days, and badness of the ways had scarce permi^ted you
to have conveied away the one half of what you did, not only by day, but by
night. It was no small mercy that the Plague was gone before the Fire came For
had it been otherwise, who that fled into the Country to save his life, durst
have come into the City to have saved his goods? Yea were not many fled so far
from the face of that destroying Angel, that they could not have returned till
it had been too late? Would the Contrymen have brought their Carts and
ventured their persons if the plague had still been raging? Where could you
have bestowed your goods, yea where could you have bestowed your selves if the
pestilence had bin then amongst you? who would have received them? yea who
would have received you, if you had come from thence. The City could not dread
the fire more than the Country would have done the pestilence, and such as had
come from the place where it was. So far would they have been from putting your
goods into their houses, that they would not have received your persons into
their barns and stables; which in the height of the plague they refused to do.
When the fire burnt your City, there was no more it could do; but had an
invading enemy set the City on fire, would they not also have rifled your
goods, ravished your wives, deslowred your daughters, and put your selves to
the sword? Was it no mercy that God by sparing a remnant of the City, kept it
from being like to Sodom and to Gomorrah? that there is something left, out of
which to make a little of every thing? Some places for affemblies yet to
worship God in; some for Magistrates to dispense justice in, some for Merchants
and traders to meet and hold commerce in, some houses for persons yet to dwell
in, who cannot convenicutly dwell any where else, though now men crowd together
as in the wintertime three or four might do into one bed, or the most in a
family into some little warm parlour, which in the heat of weather had wont to
keep in spacious rooms.

Archimedes had wont to say, Give him but a place to stand, in the mean time,
and he would turn the world round. You want not a place to stand in, if that
may enable you to turn and wind the world. If then our condition be not all
misery, why should our posture be all mourning? If we receive good things at
the hands of God, why should we not also receive evil? Children can brook
correction from their parents, because they have all things else from them. Out
of the mouth of the most high proceeds not good, as well as evil? Is it God
that takes away, and is it not God that leaves also? Job 2.10. and should we
not therefore bless the name of the Lord? Does God create darkness, and does he
not form light also? Isa. 45.7. See how God makes the scales to play one
against another; judgment in the one, mercy in the other, that it is hard to
say which weighs heaviest. Is it not of the Lords mercies that we are not
utterly consumed, because his compassions fail not? Are we stung with the fiery
serpents of misery, and may we not receive some cure by looking up to the
brazen serpents of mercy? (if I may so call them.) How can we choose but call to
mind those words of God by his Prophet? I will correct thee it measure, yet
will I not make a full end of thee. Jer. 30.11.

O Lord, if thou had mixed no mercy with our misery, what could we do more
than utterly despond and cast away all our hopes and comfort? Thou have mixed
thy dispensations, let us also mix our affections: hope with our fear,
rejoicing with our trembling, thanksgiving with our lamentations. There is hope
of a tree if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender
branch thereof will not cease, if the root thereof be yet in the earth, and the
stock thereof in the ground. Job 14.7. Thorough the sent of water it will bud
and bring forth boughs like a plant. v. 9. Thou have left us a remnant to
escape, and given us a nail in the place of the great City, that the Lord
might lighter our eyes and give us a little reviving in our troubles. Thou have
said concerning London, as thou spakest to Daniel in vision, Dan. 4.14. Hew
down the tree, cut off its branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his
fruit, etc. nevertheless leave the stump of its root in the carth, and let it
be wet with the dew of Heaven, etc. Lord I desire much more to wonder that any
thing of London is left, than that the greatest part of it is consumed.

DISCOURSE XXI. Of the Discommodities of Prosperity and Benefits of Affliction.
PRosperity has its evils and inconveniences as well as Adversity; yea deadly
inconveniences, (as some use that Epithet) For says Solomon, Prove. 1.32. The
prosperity of fools shall dastroy them. And in Eccles. 5.13. he says, he had
seen a sore evil under the Sun, viz. Riches kept for the owners thereof to
their burt. Most men are in love with prosperity, and therefore cannot or will
not see the discommodities of it, as our Proverb says, Love is blind. But how
often does it prove a kind of luscious poison, which not only swells and puffs
up them that have it; but also frets and eats into them (like some deadly
corosive inwardly taken.) James speaking to those that had more wealth than
they knew what to do with, says, The rust of their gold should eat their flesh
as it were sire. Jam. 5.5. Why went the young man from Christ so sorrowfully?
Luke 18.23. Mat. 19.22. was it not, because he had great possessions, as
Matthew phraseth it; or as Luke, for that he was very rich. Thereupon says
Christ, A rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of God, and it is easier
for a camel to go thorough the eye of a needle; and Timothy must charge those
that are rich, not to be high minded, nor yet to trust in uncertain riches,
implying they are apt to both. How hard is it for those that have an arm of
flesh, not to make flesh their arm, and so to incur the curse? Jer. 17.5. How
hard it is to be so good a Steward of a great estate, as may enable a man to
give up his account with joy? How many that have resolved to be rich (yea, and
have been as good as their resolution) have pierced themselves thorough with
diverse sorrows, yea been drowned in perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. When Jesurun waxed
sat, he kicked, he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of
his salvation. Deuteronomy. 32.15. What Solomon says, Prove. 3.23, 30. Look not upon
the Wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup, when it moves
its self aright; at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an
Adder, may too often be applied to prosperity, which looks and tastes like
sparkling wine, but often times proves a stinging serpent. I doubt not but the
time will come when many rich men will wish they had begd their bread, rather
than to have had so heavy an account to give for abused prosperity.

Few men have received that hurt by their poverty that others have done by
their plenty: as, for one that is starved to death, there are hundreds killed
with surfeiting upon meats or drinks. Yea adversity has its conveniences and
its good things, as well as prosperity its mixture of discommodities and evil
things. As one said, he had received some hurt by his graces (which innate
corruption had abused to pride) and some good by his sins (which God had taken
occasion to humble him by, for so I understand him.) So have many received hurt
by their prosperity, and good by their adversity: been losers by the forrner,
been gainers by the latter. Many may take up the words of Themistocles, and
say, They had perished, if they had not perished. They had been undone in one
sense, if they had not been undone in another; or say as a Philosopher, I have
read of, They never made a better voyage than at that time when they suffered
shipwreck. Solomon knew what he said, Eccles. 7.3. Sorrow is better than
laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. Sweet
things are commonly known to turn to choler (which is a bitter humor) and
bitter things to cleanse and sweeten the blood. If then I may be better by my
affliction, and might have been worse for my prosperity; why should I think my
self undone for the loss of that which might have been my undoing? why should I
stand and wonder at that passage, James 1.10. Let the rich man rejoice in that
he is made low. Had not Manasses more cause to bless God for those Iron
fetters, wherewith he was bound by his enemies, the Assyrians, than for his
crown of Gold, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. When he was in affliction, he besought the Lord,
etc. Prosperity had been his worst enemy, and afterward affliction under God
became his greatest friend, did most befriend him, for it brought him home to
God, and to himself. For when the Lord chastned him, then, and not till then
did he open his ears, and seal his instruction. Job 33.16, 19.

When I consider these things, I cannot but break out and say: Lord never
restore prosperity to me, unless thou will give me a heart to use it, yea I
rather implore affliction, (whilst need requires) so thou will but sanctify
it. If my dross may not otherwise be melted away, put me into thy Furnace, only
when I am tried, let me come forth like gold.

DISCOURSE XXII. Of the gracious ends and intendments of God in afflicting his
people.
COuld we take any thing ill from God's hand if we did believe he meant well?
would we receive with our left hand what we thought that God did offer us with
his right? all those things in which God has good ends toward us must needs
end in our good; for the Almighty cannot be frustrated. Our Proverb says, All
is well that ends well, why then should we take on as if all those things were
against us, which shall in the event make for us and work together for our
good? Wherefore did God lead the Israelites about in the Wilderness 40. years
together? was it not merely, to humble them and prove them, and do them good in
their latter end? Deuteronomy. 8.2, 16. God speaking of debating with his people, viz.
by correction, Isa. 27.8. says, By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged,
and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin: verse. 9. And the Apostle says
Heb. 12.10. That God chastneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of
his Holiness. To think that God would correct his children but for some good
end, what is it but to think more hardly of God than we do of our selves, who
use to say, but that we think it for their good, we would never strike a Child
whilst we lived, nor should it feel the weight of our finger. Is not God as
unwilling to strike as you can be, if fair means would serve the turn? how
shall I give thee up oh Ephraim, but either he must take such a course with us,
or it will be worse for us. Even then when the means which God uses are the
fruits of justice and displeasure, the end which he propounds in so doing, is
the result of his mercy. Though the Husbandman break up the ground, plow upon
its back, and make long furrows, he intends no hurt, all is to prepare it for
the seec. Whatsoever the face of Gods actions or actings toward his people may
be, to be sure he has always good intentions as toward them, for he is
tender of them as of the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. And give me leave to say
there is a great deal more comfort in the good meanings of God than of men;
because men may mean well, when yet they may do very ill: yea that very thing
which they designed for much good, may do much hurt. The Amalekite that told
David he had killed Saul, designed to get a reward for himself, 2 Samuel 1.2. but
we see it cost him his life. But the designs of God cannot be defeated. Prove.
19.21. The counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Job 23.13. He is of one
mind, and who can turn him, and what his soul desires that he does. It is yet
a further comfort that we may not only know in the general that God intends the
good of his people in afflicting them, but also in particular that he intends
our good thereby.

For first of all, If it be so that God has created in us hungrings and
thirstings after a sanctified use of our afflictions, so that we more long to
be brought out of sin by affliction, than to be brought out of affliction by
deliverance: we may be consident, he that created those hungrings and
thirstings after learning righteousness by the judgments that are upon us, and
obedience by our sufferings, will satisfy them. Mat. 5.6.

Moreover, If God has given us a sanctified use of mercies time after time, if
mercies have done us good; afflictions shall do so likewise. We sometimes give
out children delightful things, only to please them: but not distastful things,
unless it be to profit them; neither will God do otherwise by his children.

Again, If afflictions actually do us good, and make us better, we may be sure
they were sent of God for that end and purpose: for it is not by accident, but
by divine appointment that evil things should do us good; though it is true
they may do us hurt thorough our own default, how be it God had made them
capable of doing us good, if we had not abused them. We can bring evil out of
good, and darkness out of light: but it is God only that can bring good out of
evil, and light out of darkness. God sometimes sends afflictions to do his
enemies good, (as Manass^h for instance) and will he send them to do his
friends hurt?

O Lord how usual is it with us to double and treble our miseries, by
misinterpreting the ends of God in inflicting them, as if thou did it only to
wreak thine anger upon us, and to wreak thy wrath from heaven against us, as if
thou did whet thy glittering sword that thou might render vengeance, when
yet thou chastenest us only as a Man chastneth his Son, Deuteronomy. 8.5. how often do
we think that thou have laid thy Axe to our Root, when it is but thy
Pruning-hook to our superfluous branches: Does it not grieve thy spirit to be
thus misconstrued and hardly thought of, as it would cut us to the heart to be
mistaken for enemies, when we have done and spoken as true friends? Lord open
thy heart to us, as Joseph opened his to his brethren, when after angry looks
and threatenings, he comforted them with saying, I am your brother Joseph, which
before they knew not. Lord it shall suffice, let our troubles be what they will
be, if we may but read thy love in them, and if thou will but say to us, as to
thy people of old, Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I think toward you,
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

DISCOURSE XXIII. Of Resignation to God, and acquiescing in his good pleasure.
HOw good is it to be willing to be at God's dispose? how meet is it to be said
to God, not as I will, but as thou will? shall we pray (as Christ has taught
us) that the will of God may be done, and yet be impatient of Gods doing his
own will? Is it fit that Gods will should take place or ours? who are we that
we should set our selves to contradict and oppose the good pleasure of God, be
it that our houses shall be fired, our goods burnt, our head City laid wast.
Did Abraham withstand God when he bid him to sacrifice his dear Isaac (the
heir of promise) with his own hand? Did he not, as to that, lie at Gods foot
when he called him to it? Are we better than Moses, then Aaron the Saint of the
Lord, than David, than Hezekiah, than Job, yea than Christ himself, who had all
learned to stoop to God in very difficult cases? Can we be too good to do it,
if they were not? When God told Moses he should go up to Pisgah, and take a
view of Canaan, but that he should never enter into it, Deuteronomy. 3.27. We find
not one word that he replied, after he had once made his request, and God had
said, speak no more of this matter. When God had by fire consumed Nadab and
Abihu, the two Sons of Aaron, Moses did but say to him, The Lord will be
sanctified in them that come nigh to him, and be glorified before all the
people, and Aaron held his peace, Levit. 10.3. When old Eli had received a
dreadful message from God by a Child, for so Samuel then was, 1 Samuel 3.18. How
meekly did he resent it, saying, It is the Lord, let him do as seems him
good. When David was flying from the face of his rebellious Son Absalom, and
taking leave of the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 15.26. If the Lord say I have no delight
in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me what seems him good? At another
time, when David was even consumed by the blow of Gods hand, Psalm. 39.10. he
says, I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. verse. 9. And
as for Hezekiah, though a King also, (as well as David) yet see how his spirit
buckled to God, when the Prophet brought him word, that God had taken away the
fee-simple of all he had from his children, who should be Eunuchs to the King
of Babylon, Isa. 39.7. And left him but his life in it. Good is the Word of the
Lord, (says he) which thou have spoken, verse. 8. As for Job who had been the
greatest of all the Men of the East, when he had lost all but a vexatious Wife,
prompting him to curse God, vet cried he out, Blessed be the Name of the Lord,
Job 1.21.

Behold a greater instance of patience and submission than any of these, both
for that his person was more excellent, and his sufferings far greater, having
been a Man of sorrows all his time. Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth, brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and
as a Sheep before the Shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. When he was
reviled he reviled not again: when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. 1 Pet. 2.23. Was not this written for
our imitation? verse. 21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example.
Did he, who is God equal with the father, submit even to the painful, and
shameful, and cursed death of the cross, and shall we think our selves too
good to stoop to lesser sufferings and humiliations? he that can submit to God,
may be happy in any condition: he that cannot, will be happy in no condition
this World can afford him, in which all our roses are full of prickles, and all
our ways strowed and hedged up with thorns, more or less. Yea not only the
Church militant upon Earth, but even the Church triumphant, in heaven, could
not be free from misery, if the will of glorious Saints were not melted into
the will of God. Abraham would be ever and anon grieving to think of Dives and
others in his case, if his will were not perfectly conformed to the will of
God. Many things fall out in this life, which we would not for a World should
be, if we could and might prevent them; but when the pleasure of God is once
declared by events, even in those cases ought we to sit down satisfied. Abraham
would not have sacrificed Isaac for the whole World, but that God made as if he
would have him so to do, and then he yielded presently. If blind fortune did
govern the World, whose heart would it not break to think of so famous a City
in a few days laid in ashes: but since it was the will of God it should be so,
who orders all things according to the counsel of his will, let all the Earth
be silent before him, let us be still and know that he is God. Who should rule
the World but he that made it, and that upholds it by the Word of his Power? He
can do us no wrong if he would, such is his essential holiness, (which also
makes it impossible for him to lie) he would do us no wrong if he could, such
is his infinite justice. He can do nothing but what is consistent with infinite
wisdom, patience, goodness, mercy, and every perfection, and how unreasonable
is it not to submit to that which is consistent with all of these? so doubtless
was the burning of our renowned City (as ghastly a spectacle as it is to
behold) else it had never come to pass.

O Lord I am sensible that I have need of line upon line, precept upon precept,
and example upon example, to teach me this hard lesson of submission to thee
(though the object of that submission seem to be only my condition in this
life) for I no where find that thou requirest me and others to be willing to
perish everlastingly) Thou know how much thy glory and the comfort of thy
poor Creatures are concerned in it, that we should know how to resign up our
selves to thee; enable us to be contented with whatsoever thy will has been or
shall be concerning us, and then be pleased to do with us (as to this World)
what thou will.

DISCOURSE. XXIV. Of taking occasion by this, to study the vanity and
uncertainty of all earthly things.
IF a glorious City turned into a ruinous heap in four days time, when no
visible enemy was at hand to do it: if the reducing hundreds of Families to
almost beggary, that lived in good fashion in less than one week before, by an
unexpected means, and in a way not possible to be foreseen: if knocking a
Nation out of joint all of a sudden (like a body that had been tortured upon a
Rack) be not loud Sermons of the vanity and uncertainty of all earthly things,
surely there will be none such till that time shall come, that St. Peter speaks
of, 2 Pet. 3.10. When the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with servent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. What a Comment was this providence upon that Text,
Psalm. 39.5. Verily every Man at his best state is altogether vanity? How did it
evince the Psalmist to speak right, Psalm. 62.9. Not only when he says, Men of
low degree are vanity, (which most people do believe) but also when he says,
Men of high degree are a lie, to be laid in the balance they are altogether
lighter than vanity (which few assent unto.) If things are called vanity (as
most properly they are) from their aptness, to vanish and disappear, from their
taking wings and flying away from us: then surely the vanishing and flying away
of a famous City upon the wings of the fire, and of the wind, (which were the
bellows inraging that fire) are a great argument of the vanity of all things
here below.

Amongst all sublunary things, what could be thought to have more stability and
certainty in it than the City of London had, as to the body and bulk of it?
else why were so many wise men willing to venture all they had in the world in
that one bottom? Most men dreampt as little of the burning of all, or the most
of London, as of burning up the whole World before the day of Judgment: and it
is like did think it not only improbable, but upon the matter impossible, as
not doubting, but if fire did happen in any part of the City, one or more,
there would be men and means enough to extinguish it (as they use to do) This
Mountain was thought to stand so strong, as that it could not be removed in
such a way as it was. He that had said, but what if the whole City should be
burnt? would have been answered by most men, with the Proverb, what if the sky
should fall? yet have we seen this famous City wither like Jonah's Gourd,
though not in one day, yet in a very few. May we not apply to it those words of
David, used in another case, we have lately seen it in great power, spreading
it self like a green Bay Tree: we passed by, and lo it was not, we sought it,
and it could not be found. Psalm. 37.35. Who can but think of the Psalmist's
expressions upon this occasion, Psalm. 74.5. A man was famous according as he
had lifted up Axes upon the thick Trees, ( viz. in order to building the
Temple: so likewise to build the City, or any part of it) but now they break
down the carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers: such execution has the
Fire done, that greater could not have been done, nor yet so great by Axes and
Hammers, and verse. 7. and 8. They have cast Fire into the Sanctuary, they have
burnt up the Synagogues of God in the Land. We read of Sodom's being overthrown
in a moment and no hands stayed on her, Lam. 4.6. Was it not so with London? Is
any Man's life so certain as the continuance of London was thought to be? Who
did not expect that both he and his should have been in their Graves before
London had come to lie in ashes? who thought not that the City, which had
survived many ages past, would also have survived many ages to come? who would
not have thought that a Lease for so long as London should stand, had been more
durable than if it had run for the lives of a hundred men? yet even in it have
we seen those words fulfilled, Isa. 40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the
goodliness thereof as the flower of the Field. Psalm. 90.6. In the morning it
flourishes and grows up, in the evening it is cut down and withered.

But may some say, Land is certain, though houses be casual, neither can moth
eat it, nor rust corrupt it, nor thieves steal it, nor yet fire consume it;
for that matter, all that can be said, Land is like to stand where it is, but
that it will always abide by the present and proper owners of it, that is as
uncertain as any thing else. If Ahab have a mind to Naboth's Vineyard, Jezabel
knows how to get it for him, though Naboth would not part with it. It is but
paper and parchment that men have to show for their Lands, and are not they
more easily consumed than a whole City: or may they not be lost or stolen, or
so bafled by the artifice of corrupt Lawyers, that they shall do us no good? we
see then that which was looked upon by all men to be as great a certainty as
this World has any, is dried up like a deceitful Brook in Summer. Job 6.17.

O Lord, when I remember these things, I cannot but pour out my soul in me, and
my supplication unto thee, saying. O Lord, give me not my portion in these
things, which may so easily be taken away, suffer me not to set my heart upon
things, of which it is said, they are not, because they take wings and fly
away, but give me to inherit durable substance, (or that which is, as thou have
called it, Heb. tesh. Prove.) Fire me out of the love of the World, by what thou
have done to the City, and give me to mind what thou have said, 1 John 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world, for the world passes away,
etc. Give me to consider how miserable I am, if I have interest in no good
things, but those which one nights fire, or one days trial at law may take
away from me? I see we are all tenants at will, as to all we have in this
world, and thou sealest a lease of ejectment when thou please: but there is
an inheritance incorruptible, and that fades not away, reserved for thy people
in the heavens. Oh give us here an abundant entrance into it, and hereafter the
endless possession of it. And as experience shows us the vanity of all things
here below, let us by means of faith, which is the substance of things hoped
for, and evidence of things not seen, foresee the reality, and in part
fore-enjoy the sweetness of those better things that are above.

DISCOURSE XXV. Of not being too eager upon the world, after this great loss.
I Am jealous over some men (pardon me, a godly jealousy) lest they should
verefie that Proverb, which says, that Fasting from two meals, makes the
third a glutton. Trading has been twice interrupted of late; once by the
Plague, and since by the Fire; and now it is much to be feared lest men should
fall too eagerly to it again, like those that having been almost starved, when
they come at meat again, are apt to surfeit. Now God has burnt your former
houses, take heed of burning your own fingers, in hiring new ones at too great
Fines and Rents. Remember the words of God to Baruch, Jer. 45.4. Behold that
which I have built will I break down; and seek thou great things for thy
self? See the world better, before you have more to do with it than you needs
must; Children that draw a breast too hard, that has but little in it, what do
they but fill themselves with wind? Trust not your selves too far with the
world, for it is a slippery thing, and may serve you such another trick: who
would toil, as in the Fire, to lay up treasure for another Fire to consume?
Ought they that have wives (and not much more they that have trades) to be as
though they had none? 1 Cor. 7.30. Because the fashion of the world passes
away. A moderate care to recruit some part of our losses is not to be blamed:
but an immoderate, will do more hurt than good. They that will be rich (be it
after great losses) fall into temptation and a snare, 1 Timothy 6.9. It is not for
us to say we will be rich, then of all times, when God has said in effect that
he will have us poor: though wait upon his providence we may and must, for a
convenient subsistence.

O Lord, thou have given us fair warning not to set our hearts upon this world,
or fly too fast after that which flies so fast away from us. Sin and the world
are two enemies we are not bound to love; yea, we are bound not to love the
first at all, the last, much. Seeing it is the pleasure of God to take the
world from us, let us take off our hearts from it. If God withdraw spiritual
mercies, it is to make us pursue them more eagerly; but if he withdraw
temporal, it is that we should prosecute them more indifferently. It being one
of thy designs, O Lord, in taking part of this world from us, to make us mind
this less, and the next, more; far be it from us upon that account to mind
this world more, and that which is to come, less; or to rob our general
calling, to recruit our particular; when we should rather borrow time from our
particular callings which thou have diminished, to add to our general. O Lord,
teach us neither to deal with a slack hand (which thou have said, tends to
poverty) not yet to be so hot upon it, as if we were resolved by the fire of
our zeal for the world, certainly to repair what thou have impaired by the fire
of thine anger: but give us rather to study how contentedly and comfortably we
may live for less, than how we may regain and repossess as much as ever.

DISCOURSE XXVI. Of choosing rather to continue under affliction, than to escape
by sin.
IT is the greatest misery that attends a suffering condition, that it tempts
men to seek a deliverance by sin. Agur gives this reason why he deprecated
poverty, Prove. 30.9. Lest (says he) I be poor and steal, and take the name of
the Lord in vain. Even Theft its self is a taking of Gods name in vain, as
being a practical denying of Gods alsufficience to provide for us, without the
interposition of our sin, and thereunto are men tempted by extreme poverty. It
were easy to recount many indirect courses which are taken by men and women,
utterly to defend themselves against want. Some betake themselves to unlawful
trades, no less than prostituting their own bodies, or the bodies of others,
therewith to provide for their backs and bellies; some have other trades as bad
as that (if so bad can be;) others use lawful callings unlawfully, vending bad
commodities, taking unconscionable rates, pinching those poor people that work
to them. Some go the way of open violence, (as by robbery, extortion,
oppression,) others the no less dishonest way, of secret fraud and cousenage.
Some are tempted to break, not because they cannot pay their debts and live:
but because they cannot live so as they were wont to do if they should pay
their debts, and therefore they will rather defraud their Creditors, than their
Genius. Some, if God take away from them but some part of what he has given
them, resolve to lend him nothing (in that sense as they who give to the poor,
are said to lend to the Lord) not but that they are more able than some others
who are careful to maintain good works, and to be very charitable: but because
they are not so able as they have been; as who should say, if God impair his
wonted bounty toward them, (though much of his bounty be still extended
toward them, howbeit not so much as formerly) they will put an imbargo upon
all their charity, nothing shall (...) out to the poor, if there come not into
them so much as formerly. It sounds like taking some kind of revenge upon God
himself.

I wish the words of David, Psalm. 10.9. were not applicable to many, where
speaking of a wicked man, he says, He lies in wait to catch the poor: he does
catch the poor when he draws him into his net. Are there not many that work
upon the necessities of poor men, and grind their faces when they have them at
an advantage? These are some of the ill methods and artifices whereby too many
attempt to make up their losses. But better it were to be always poor, than to
grow rich by such ways as these. Where sin is made use of as the cure of
Affliction the remedy is worse than the disease, and it is as our Proverb
speaks, Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire. Deliverance obtained by sin is
like Jacob's blessing procured by lying, which was many ways imbittered to
him: For none of all the Patriarchs had so many crosses as he. Sin is a worse
labyrinth than affliction: worse to stay in, and worse to get out of. So David
found it when he would have concealed his shame in the matter of Bathshebah by
making Uriah drunk, that would not do his business, neither did he see how he
could effect his design without killing him: and when that was done, he was in
a worse case than ever; for then watered he his couch with his tears, then were
his bones broken. So Peter thought to have secured himself, by denying his
master: but that denying cost him dearer than it is probable his owning of
Christ at that time would have done. All that men truly get by sin, they may
put in their eyes (as we say) and not see the worse. What had become of Job if
he had followed the wicked counsel which his wife gave him, whereby to put an
end to his troubles? saying, Curse God and die.

Let those that are tempted to repair their losses by indirect means, think but
of three Texts. The first is, Prove. 21.6. The getting of creasure by a lying
tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. The next is,
Prove. 22.16. He that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, shall surely
come to want. The last is, Jer. 17.11. As the Partridge sits on eggs, and
hatcheth them not: so he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave
them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. But as for
those that choose rather to suffer than to sin, God takes a particular care of
them: witness Daniel, preserved in the Lions den; and the three children in the
fiery furnace. They that sin under sufferings, what do they but take in more
lading in a storm, whereas the usual and best way is, to cast out part of that
lading which they had taken in before.

O Lord, I desire to depend upon this, that thou know how to deliver the
righteous out of temptations; and that without their unrighteousness. Let not
the lot of the wicked so long rest upon the backs of thy servants, as to make
them put forth their hands to wickedness. Cause us to believe, that thy
blessing only so makes rich, as to add no sorrow therewith. and let us never
forget or misdoubt what thou said to thy servant Abraham, I am God
all-sufficiernt, walk thou before me and be upright. Doubtless a little which a
righteous man has is better than great treasures of the wicked. Let me ever be
persuaded (as I hope I now am) that innocent poverty is much more elegible than
ill gotten prosperity.

DISCOURSE XXVII. Of preparing for our own dissolution, now we have seen the
destruction of London.
O London, art thou gone before us? who thought to have seen thee in ashes
first? who thought that the stakes of his Tabernacle would not be removed, and
the cords thereof loosned, whilst thou were left standing like a strong tower
not easy to be demolished, and as like as any thing to endure till time its
self shall be no more? How much less difficult had it been for a burning seaver
to have consumed me (and thousands more such as I am) than for such a fire, as
did that work to have consumed London? For is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass? as Job speaks, chap. 6.12. Such was the
strength of that City, and yet see where it lies. As for London its self, it
was a glorious City, beautiful for situation, and I had almost called it the
joy of the whole earth, alluding to what was said of Mount Sion, Psalm. 48.2.
(to be sure the joy of the three Kingdoms) but the inhabitants of London, as to
their bodies, what were they but dwellers in houses of clay, whose foundation
is in the dust, which might be crushed before the moth? Job 4.19. Who look not
upon strong-built houses as things more durable than their inhabitants? who did
not hope if they were their own, to transmit them to their children, and
childrens children to many generations? And yet we see that they are in the
dust before us. And is not that a fair warning to us, as it might be to an aged
infirm person, to follow a young lusty person to the grave. If this were done
to the green tree, what may not the dry expect? If the best houses in London
were half a year since not really worth three years purchase, how ever men did
value them, how small a purchase may our lives be worth for ought we know? Many
might reckon to lay their ruins (their carcasses I mean) in the bowels of
London, but who ever thought to have had his carcass interred in the ruins of
London? as some have had already. A little time has produced a greater change
than our great change would be, why then should we put the evil day of death
far off? why should we promise our selves length of days, as if the present
year might not put a period to us, as well as to a strong and stately City,
that was likely to have out-lasted a thousand of us.

How reasonable is it then for us whose lives are but a vapor, to expect but a
short continuance in this world, at leastwise not to expect any long duration
here; to say with the Apostle, The time is short. Yea, how needful is it we
should take the counsel which Christ gives, Luke 12.35. Let your loins be
girded about, and your lights burning, And your selves like men that wait for
the Lord, that when he knocks they may open to him immediately. As there is
no preparing for death without thinking of it, so who can think of death, and
not desire to prepare for it? if the destruction of London admonish us to
number out days, it does no less, to apply our hearts to wisdom. Who would be
willing to die unpreparedly, that thinks at all of dying?

That you may know what I mean by preparedness for death, take this account.
Then is a man fit to die, when he is in a condition to die both safely and
comfortably: when he is translated from spiritual death to life, and knows
himself so to be. He that is not so translated, has no fitness at all to die,
he that is and knows it not, is fit in one sense, and unfit in another: is
partly fit, but not so completely, but he that both is so, and knows himself to
be so, has all the essentials of fitness for death, though if a man be in the
actual exercise of grace and discharge of his duty, it must be confessed that
does give him somewhat more of an actual and accomplished fitness, than the
mere habits of grace and of assurance can do. He that has made his calling and
election sure, he that is sealed up to the day of redemption by the spirit of
promise, he that can say with Paul, he knows in whom he has trusted, and as
St. John, we know that we are of God; I say is fit to die. He that has not
that fitness for death, but yet desires to have it, let him make it part of
every days work to get it; let him be daily learning how to die. Has God
afforded no means whereby to bring us to a fitness for death? what is prayer,
reading the Scriptures, hearing the word, converse with Christians, examining
our selves, serious meditation of spiritual and eternal things, avoiding the
occasions of evil, keeping our hearts with all diligence? Is it likely that a
man should conscionably use all these means, and not attain the end of them?
why then is faith said to come by hearing the word preached? why is the word
called the ministration of the spirit? why says Paul to the Galathians,
Received ye not the spirit by the hearing of faith? Gal. 3.2. why did Christ
counsel men to search the Scriptures, seeming to approve their thinking, that
in them we have eternal life? why does Christ speak of our heavenly father,
giving his spirit to them that ask him? why does he say, Ask and it shall be
given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened to you, Mat.
7.7. For every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to
him that knocks it shall be opened, verse. 8. why must all that come to God,
believe that God is a rewarder of all them that seek him diligently? Heb. 11.6.
It seems to consist but ill with such texts as these, for us to look upon the
means which God has appointed as insignificant and ineffectual. And seeing
they are not so, let us diligently use them in order to our preparation for
death, now at leastwise that God has spared us so long as to see London laid
in the dust before us.

Now God has fired your nests over your heads (dear friends and much lamented
Citizens) will not each of you say as David, Psalm. 55.6. O that I had wings
like a Dove (which is the emblem of innocence) for then would I fly away, and
be at rest. I see no great reason we now have to be fond of life, if we were
but fit to die. May we not say with Solomon, we have seen an end of all
perfection? Seeing we have brought forth an Icabod (so far as concerns our
selves only, and in reference to this World) what great matter had it been, if
with Eli's daughter in Law we had died in Childbed? Now who would not long to
be dissolved, as Paul did, if he could but say with him, We know if our Earthly
House were dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1.

O see then as concerning Death, there are three lessons to be learnt from this
sad providence. viz. to expect it, to prepare for it, and to be willing to it.
To expect it, is the way to prepare for it: and when once prepared for it, we
have no great reason, after such a desolation, to be unwilling to it.

O Lord I dare not say, as Elijah did, 1 Kings 19.4. It is enough, take away my
life. He might better say so than I. Possibly he foresaw by a spirit of
prophecy, that fiery Chariot which was intended to carry him to heaven. 2
Kings 2.12. Yet neither he nor I may say so by way of discontent. O Lord, I
have many things to desire, as in reference to death, let me not die till I am
willing, make me willing when I am fit, let me know I am fit when I am really
so, that I may be willing, make me early fit, that I may be timely willing: yea
desirous to be dissolved, and whenever (...) am desirous to dye, let me also
be contented to live, if thou have any work to do for me. Let me only desire
that thou may be glorified in me, whether by life or death. Lord what work do
I and some others make of dying, as if it were more for us to die, than for
London to be burnt to ashes. Did Aaron make any such stir about it? Up he went
to Mount Hor. Moses stripped him of his Garments, and put them upon Eleazar his
Son: Numb. 20.26. And me thinks he made no more of it, than if he had put off
his clothes to go to Bed, or than if with Enoch, he had been about to have been
translated, rather than to have seen death; or with Christ after his
resurrection, rather about to ascend than to die. O Lord have not some of thy
servants known the time of their approaching Death, and knowing it, called
their friends about them, prayed together, suing Psalms together, cheerfully
conferred about that better world they were going to, took their solemn leave of
all their relations and friends, as if they had only been about to travel into
some far Country, from whence they were never like to return again, and then
composed themselves to die, as if they had only laid themselves to sleep, and
commended their souls into thy hands with no less cheerfulness and confidence,
than Men do their bags and bonds into the hands of faithful friends? May I not
(with submission) desire to die upon the same terms? yet, if it may stand with
thy blessed will, let me live to see London rebuilt in some competent measure:
thy people reunited: England resetled: Protestant Nations reconciled each to
other: thy Gospel every where spread: this Land a Mountain of holiness, and a
valley of vision, or if not all, yea if none of these, at leastwise clearly to
see and read my own name written in the book of life: then shall I say with
good old Simeon, Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation.

FINIS.

