Astrologia Restaurata; OR, Astrology Restored: BEING AN INTRODVCTION TO THE
General and Chief part of the Language of the STARS.

In Four BOOKS.

THE FIRST,

Proving the Legality of ASTROLOGY, both by Scripture, Reason, and the
testimony of the Ancients and learned in former Ages, wherein is cleared to
every Rational and Impartial man the Authors Lux Veritatis in Answer to Doctor
Homes, to remain unshaken notwithstanding the Doctors unowned Reply.

THE SECOND,

By a plain Method teaching the Names and Characters of the Planets and Signs,
as also the Reasons thereof: and of their Dignities, Terms, Faces, Houses,
Exaltations and Triplicities; with the Reasons why the Signs are reckoned from
Aries; and in number just twelve; and ^^^ither more nor less; with the number
of the Spears; their Order and Motions: being a most necessary Introduction to
the whole ART, and very useful to all well willers thereunto for inabling them
to give Reasons for any part thereof, etc.

THE THIRD,

Fully comprehending Instructions and Rules for electing any manner of Work;
never before made public in our Mother Tongue; the which both for the
Administration of Physic, Letting of Blood, Husbandry and other necessary
Works is both useful and profitable.

THE FOURTH,

By a most easy Introduction teaches, by Revolutions of the Years of the
World, Eclipses, great Conjunctions, Comets and Blazing-stars, how to Judge by
the ordinary course and order of Nature, of the general Accidents of Countries,
Kingdoms, Provinces and Cities, Alterations of Kingdoms and Empires, Laws and
Customs, Cause of Plenty, Dearth, Wars, Peace, Health, Sickness, Alteration of
the Air and (to be short) of all things appertaining to the life of man in a
Natural Way; wherein is the infinite Wisdom of GOD seen manifestly in the
Government of the World by the Influence and constant Harmony of the Celestial
Planets and Stars; the Innocence, Legality and Purity of the Art demonstrated,
and proved by demonstration of the inevitable events of the Heavens, so long as
GOD upholdeth the Order and Course of Nature unperverted; and the Students
thereof consequently proved rather Divines then Conjurers, or Practisers of
what is unlawful.

By WILLIAM RAMESEY, Gent. Student in Astrology, Physic, and the most
Heavenly and Sublime Sciences.

Astra regunt homines, sed regit astra Deus. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Robert White, 1653.

SERENISSIMO ILLVSTRISSIMOQVE PRINCIPI AC DOMINO, DOMINO HONORATISSIMO IACOBO
STVARTO DVCI DE RICHMOND ET LENOX: COMITI DE MARCH: DOMINO IN AVBVGNY, DARNLY,
TARBOLTON, ET METHVEN: BARONI DE LEIGHTON, BROMSWOLD ET S. ANDREWS, etc. ET
PERISCELIDIS INSIGNIS MILITI;

DOMINO SUO CLEMENTISSIMO Salutem and Felicitatem Perpetuam. HANC SUAM
ASTROLOGIAM RESTAVRATAM

SUBMISSE CONSECRAT

Wilhelmus Rameseus.

TO THE Illustrious and Highborn PRINCE, JAMES STVART, Duke of Richmond and
Lenox; Earl of March; Lord Aubugny, Darnly, Tarbolton and Methven; Baron of
Leighton, Bromswold and St. Andrews, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the
GARTER.
May it please your Highness,
IF Nobility of Birth, Antiquity of House, Magnanimity of Spirit, Multiplicity
of Virtues, and the most excellent Endowments that a Mortal Man can attain unto
may justly (as their due) challenge the patronage of these my Labors, there
will be none found to anticipate your Highness; and though my misfortune is
such, that I never had the Honor in the least to kiss your Highness hand, or
to appear in your presence, but remain as yet a Stranger to your Highness; yet
by reason the Work is of that sublime Worth and Excellency (I mean the Science
of Astrology, as appears by the first Book of this Volumn, it being the chief
of the Liberal Sciences, together with Astronomy, Physics and Natural
Philosophy (which are all but part of one entire Science) and that wherewith
none is able to compare) have I humbly presumed to cast it at the feet of your
illustrious Self; whose incomparable worth and indowments are unparalleld: so
that if your Highnesse's Munificence does favorably accept of this small Token
of my wel-wishes to true Nobility, ^^d in a particular manner to your Highness,
I must necessarily be constrained to acknowledge my self arrived to the highest
pitch of Honor that (for the present) I am capable to expect. The subject of
this my unworthy Work (for so I may call it in reference to your Highnesses
unparalleld excellency to whom it is presented) is that part of Natural
Philosophy (vulgarly termed ASTROLOGY) which teaches by the Natural Motions,
Configurations, Aspects and Inclinations of the Celestial Stars and Planets to
Judge of the Natural Accidents, Mutations and Alterations of Laws, Customs,
Kingdoms, States and Empires, and the general casualties of the whole World in
the Natural way of its Government, by the Celestial and Superior Bodies:
which next under GOD are the efficient Causes of all corruption, generation,
production and nutrition in this Elementary World, the knowledge whereof is to
know NATURE the great Handmaid of the Almighty, and the temper and quality of
all things; and although through the mercenary practices of some by setting of
Nativities, and answering of Horary Questions (thus abusing the Art) the
validity of this Science has been brought into question, reproach and
contempt, yet I question not but your Highnesses innate magnanimity is such,
that it will not condescend to give any censure on what has not first been
summoned to the Bar or Tribunal of your Highnesses piercing Judgment; for
because a thing is calumniated and questioned, is no proof of its illegality,
neither does the abuse take away the use thereof; for were this admitted, even
the best of Sciences and chief of Studies, Divinity it self could not be exempt
from prohibition and condemnation; wherefore since the first BOOK of this
Volumn tends wholly to the Vindication thereof from the aspersions of the
Antagonists, and the abuses of the seeming Friends thereunto, I shall not
further enlarge on this point; since it is well known unto the Learned, that
among the Ancients and graver sort of people in all Ages, this Science (being
unpolluted and unsophisticated) has been still had in most high esteem; nay,
it is of that profundity and excellency, that it was first taught to our first
Father ADAM by GOD himself (as testifyeth Josephus, Lib. 1. Cap. 2. of h^^
Antiquities of the Jews) who taught it to his Posterity; for he further
records that Seth was so excellent therein, that foreseeing the Flood, and
the destruction of the World thereby, ingraved this Art for the benefit of
after-Ages in two Pillars, the one of stone, and the other of brick, and that
he saw himself that of stone to remain in Syria in his own time; and in the 3.
chap. of his aforesaid book, he further witnesses and affirms, that man
lived so long before the Flood to learn Arts and Sciences, especially naming
Astrology and Geometry; and in his 8. chap. of that same 1. Book of the
Antiquities, he does yet further testify, that Abraham having learned
Astrology in Chaldea [being the place of his Birth] when he came into Egypt
taught the Egyptians the knowledge of Astrology and Arithmetic. Wherefore I
humbly conceive, whatever some weak disputants [not worthy the noting] have
affirmed in the disparagement of this Authors Credit, thinking to make for
their own envious and idle conceits; I say (my Lord) I humbly conceive since he
bears so great an applause and credit among the Learned and Fathers of the
Church, of whom I shall only mention the testimony of Eusebius, who abundantly
throughout all his ten Books of his Ecclesiastical History makes use of this
Authors words, for further confirmation of his scope; and in lib. 1. cap. 6. de
Hist. Eccles. (with diverse other places which for brevitie sake I omit) he
particularly uses these words (in the English version it is in the 7. chap.)
Hereof thou have Josephus a witness worthy of credit: Wherefore since by so
worthy a man as Eusebius was, Josephus is thus deemed: how worthy of credit are
they that now adays traduce him rather then want of their wills, or confess
themselves weak in confuting what they are ignorant of? Wherefore (my Lord)
since this Science is of such Antiquity, worth and excellency, it imboldneth me
humbly to make choice of your Highness for my Patron in this froward and
confused generation, such sublime Sciences being too good, too worthy to be
owned by any but who are truly Noble both in Virtues and Descent; for let men
be of what opinion they will, yet I am merely persuaded, and I have also some
Natural Reasons inducing me to this bel^^^, that meanness of Birth and Descent,
though exalted to the most eminent places and worldly dignities that may be,
cannot but still retain some smack of a mean spirit, and can never be thoroughly
acquainted with magnanimity, or be truly heroic, though some glimmerings they
may have of both: Even as a Dunghill-Cock, although he be never so well fed,
trimmed and ordered for the trial of his prowess and courage, and although to
the outward appearance he seem strong, able, brisk and courageous, and begin
with an undaunted courage and boldness, yet when he is forced to feel either
the sharpness of the Conflict, or the want of breath, has not that Heroickness
of Spirit to die rather then yield, but (which is worse) does then divulge his
own detestable pusillanimity and dunghilly cowardice by running away; which a
true Game-Cock that is lineally descended of Noble blood, although taken from
the field, and overladen with his Feathers, Comb and Gills, before he will be
guilty thereof, will choose rather to die, not preferring life before Honor,
but Nobleness of Spirit before life, choosing rather that death should be acted
on him with extremity of rigor, then that he should with ease act the least
unworthiness though to his greatest advantage. Wherefore my (Lord) though my
offense has been inexpressibly heinous by this my boldness, being altogether a
Stranger to your Highness; And although I want both words and audacity to plead
for my self in so foul a Fact, yet my comfort is, your own Munificence and
Nobleness of Spirit will seal my Pardon; then which he is nothing more
ambitious of,

Die, 17 Januarii 1652. My LORD, That is really Your Highnesses Wel-wisher And
most humble Servant. Whilst I am William Ramesey.

TO THE Judicious Reader.
WHen I Considered the wickedness of this present Age, how envious, how
malicious, how slanderous and how evil some men therein are through ignorance,
it was no small discouragement to my intentions, having experimentaly tasted
of the bitterness of both their Tongues, and viperous, inhumane, malicious,
slanderous and approbrious reproaches, for vindicating this Liberal Science of
NATURAL PHILOSOPHY vulgarly known by the Name of ASTROLOGY by reason it
declares the motions and words or language of the stars; from the greek word
(...) and (...) id est The Language or Preaching of the stars, because their
various and constant influencies dictate unto us daily new things or mutations
in the Elements or Elementary bodies.

This is the fourth time I have undertaken to undeceive my Country men of such
Calumnies as are cast upon this Heavenly and chiefest study merely through
tradition and envy: yet have I been still reviled and ill requited not only by
the Antagonists thereof, but also by such as are seeming friends thereunto and
who have advanced so much of the drossy and more ridiculous part (or rather
abuse) which (though it has advanced them and their purses) has brought the
Art and its purity by their practices into contempt, and the Artists that study
and practice none of their Chimera's but Natural Philosophy only, to suffer the
harsh censures, abuses and abominable slanders and affronts from the most
inferior and rural of men Cobblers, Hay-makers and such trash, to whom though
in the first Book of this subsequent discourse I am forced to say somewhat for
my own vindication, yet I have not so far forgot my self as to name the Animal,
least posterity should think him more then he is* wherefore I say I being
hitherto envied by both the Antagonists of the Art for vindicating and
maintaining the Inocency and Legality thereof; and by the Seeming friends
thereunto traduced for showing myself so forward therein and endeavoring to
demonstrate the use from the abuse, and for delivering some rules and secrets
of the Art to the world which they would have kept to themselves: for some are
so ambitious and self-ended as well as conceited, that they would not have any
other hand in the labor but their own, and pretend great forwardness and
wilingness to lay plain the whole body of the Art, but act nothing less;
satisfying themselves that the particular and vain part or rather the abuse of
this Art is a sufficient instruction to the whole; wherefore out of this
consideration and no other, he I now as it were challenged all their
invectiveness and malice by these my Labors (which I must assuredly look for)
the which for the good of my Country, the Propagation of the Art, and for the
undeceiving of the World touching the false aspersions cast on it, I have
endeavored to Compile in this manner.

The Tenure of the first Book.
In the first Book I have as brief as may be proved that Science, which we
commonly term Astrology, to be one of the Liberal Sciences, together with
Astronomy and Natural Philosophy, and that by the Ancients there was made no
distinction between the one and the other as several Sciences, but diverse parts
only of one Liberal Science, as the Head, Trunck and Limbs, though distinct
parts and members, conduce all to the making up but of one entire body; to be
Warranted by Divine Scripture, and the Writings and testimony of the Fathers;
the Objections against it removed, and the Art cleared from all the abuses
thereof; as also my Lux Veritatis in Answer to Doctor Homes vindicated from all
the cavils and sophistications of both himself and his pretended second.

The subject and scope of the second Treatise.
The Second, comprehending the Names, Number and Characters of the Signs and
Planets Celestial, together with the Reasons why they were so named and
charactered, and why there are but just twelve Signs, and neither more nor
less, and why the Planets are assigned Rule both by House, Exaltation,
Triplicity, Term and Face therein, and the Reasons why the Signs are reckoned
from Aries; with the number of the Spears, their Order and Motions, whereby is
plainly delivered a most easy and short Introduction to the whole Art of
Astrology, and the great and Universal Book of the Creatures made manifestly
legible to the meanest and ordinariest capacity; as also sufficient grounds
whereby to answer all Gainsayers and Carpers thereat, and to vindicate it in
every respect.

Of the third.
The Third Treats of the Rules of the Ancients, touching the Election of a
time proper for the accomplishment of any manner of Work necessary in this
life, but more especially for the Administration of Physic, letting of Blood,
Husbandry and the like; to the which it is both effectual and lawful, though
in every particular in other matters not altogether so certain, except
depending on the general Accidents of the World, as Revolutions, Eclipses,
Comets, Great Conjunctions, Blazing-Stars, and the particular Nativities of
men. Yet I have thought fit to deliver the Instructions of the Learned in
former Ages in those matters also; for that they may in sundry things (by the
weighing and considering the Natures and Temperatures of the Celestial Signs
and Planets) be of much use to the Wel-willers and Students in this most
Heavenly and Lawful Science of ASTROLOGY.

Of the fourth.
The Fourth, is a compendious Tract of the whole general part of the Art,
wherein is at large manifested the Order and Course of the Government of the
World, by the Natural Operations and Harmonical Motions and Aspects of the
Heavens, Celestial Signs, Stars and Planets, in Revolutions of the Years of the
World, Eclipses, Great Conjunctions, Comets and Blazing Stars, whereby is
portended the general Accidents of Countries, Kingdoms, Provinces and Cities;
the Alterations of Kingdoms and Empires, Laws and Customs; cause of Scarcity,
Plenty, Wars, Peace, Health, Sickness, Alteration of the Air, and to be short,
of all things appertaining in a Natural way to the life of Man, whereby is
manifest the infinite Wisdom of the Great Creator, and the Innocence, Legality,
and Purity of the Art, demonstrated and proved by demonstration of the
inevitable Events, so long as God by his Providential Care upholdeth the Order
and Course of Nature inviolate and unchanged: Also the Students thereof
consequently proved rather Divines then Conjurers or Practitioners of what is
unlawful; for thereby may a man easily judge of any Revolution, Eclipse, etc.
or any part of them to the end of the World, by being thereby instructed of the
Nature and Signification of every Planet in every House and Sign of the
Heavens, and Aspects one amongst another, and of their effects when Lords of
the year and well or ill located, etc.

In which Book if thou be well instructed and perfected, thou have the whole
body of Astrology; The Body of Astrology in its Purity.
for neither is the Judgment of Horary Questions, Ordinary Elections,
Charactery-Astrology, Nativities, or any other to be esteemed in comparison
thereof, but as trifles, uncertainties, fallacies, illegalities, and abuses of
the purity of the Art.

The Reason why so many Books are Printed against Astrology.
For truly, may I say the truth, such like Practices of men, unacquainted with
the depth of this most heavenly Science by their frequent failings have been
the main and only cause of so many Books against Astrology, which is in it self
so pure and undefiled, that the most scrutinous Wit alive cannot have one Word
for the Condemnation thereof; for amongst the Learned, the abuse never takes
away the use of a thing, for then there would be nothing under the Heavens
Lawful; for we see even the Purest and most Lawful Arts, Sciences and things
most abused, and most apt to be counterfeited.

As for instance, is there any thing in the World more Lawful then Divinity in
its purity? and is there any thing more hard to find, or more commonly abused
by false Tenets, Schisms, Sects and Heresies? And yet if upon these grounds, or
out of these considerations, a man should positively conclude no verity in
Religion, or truth in Divinity, you would say that man were in a most gross
Error, and very Impious: Then I say, let no man that is not willing to forfeit
both his Reason, Discretion and Understanding, be so weak as without an
assurance of the Nature and Quality of this most Lawful Art which I here
undertake to Vindicate and deliver to the World conclude ought against it
either by Tradition or the common Voice of the World; both which being known to
the Judicious to be very false, and to hold nothing of Credit in them.

The Authors first inducement to vindicate Astrology.
For as it was merely a Natural inclination within me to the Truth, and the
propagation thereof, so far as in me lies, that first drew my Pen to Paper; so
is it the same which makes me now this once more appear and content my self to
incur all the Currish Snarls, Barkings and Bawlings of the envious and
ungrateful, and the same it is also that imbolbeneth me not to fear nor be
danted at them; it is no new thing with me to know that Dogs will bark at
Strangers, and such as are not of their kind; Gentlemen will show themselves
what they are, and love each other; but what shall I expect of Gallantry from
Cobblers, Hay-makers, Tailors and Serving-men?

The first occasion of his writeing.
The first occasion of my Writing in the Vindication of this Science, was the
appearance of a railing Pamphlet against it, without any fear or wit, to whom I
returned a Reply in the year 1650. it is a short Tract of two Sheets; what, and
who the Author thereof was you may see in the latter part of my Lux Veritatis,
Printed 1651. for I hold him not worthy the inserting in these my Labors.

The second occasion.
The second time of my Writing was occasioned through the weak Arguments,
flashes and suppositions of Doctor Homes, who (being a Scholar) should (me
thinks) have had more understanding then to condemn this worthy Art under the
notion of Witchcraft, Sorcery, and such like illegalities; or discretion, then
to rail down one of the chief of the Liberal Sciences, merely for the abuses
thereof.

The third occasion.
The third was, that I might manifest the innocence of this Science, and the
legality, verity, excellency and validity thereof, if not abused; and therefore
who so shall warily peruse that Discourse of mine, entitled Vox Stellarum, or
The Voice of the STARS, Printed in the year 1652. shall be satisfied, that God
does work by Causes, and that he has ordained the Stars and Celestial Planets
to be immediate Causes next unto Him of all our Natural enjoyments and
casualties, viz. Fertility, Sterility, Wars, Peace, Health, Sickness,
Alterations of the Air, Inundations, Earthquakes, Thunders, Lightnings, Storms,
Tempests, Commotions, Troubles, Alteration of States, Kingdoms, Laws, Customs,
and of all things in a Natural way incident to, and in this Elementary World;
for there is nothing more certain then that the Portencies of the Stars (so far
as conduces to the government of the Natural and Elementary World, and the
things therein composed of the same matter and stuff) shall prove true and
effectual, unless God do work a Miracle, and pervert the Order and Government
of the World, etc.

I do not deny the omnipotent power of God, that he is able to alter the course
of Nature; he that made them with and by the word of his mouth, can
(questionless) by the same word not only alter their motions and pervert their
effects, but also annihilate them again; but as this is not by me denied, so
cannot the Objectors against this Science but confess that God is the God of
Order, and works in order, and not preposterously; for because he can alter
the course and influence of the Stars, argues not at all that therefore he
will for why should this be any Argument to us, since we read but of three
times he has wrought in this manner since the Creation of the World? viz.
first in Joshuahs time when he made the Sun stand still; the second in
Hezekiahs time when he made the Sun go back; and the third and last time at the
passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, when he miraculously Eclipsed the Sun at
the time of the Full Moon, which caused Dionysius the Areopagite thus to burst
forth, Aut Deus Naturae patitur, aut Mundi machina dissolvitur, Either the
World is at an end, or the God of Nature suffers.

Wherefore it is clear God works not, or creates new things; he finished his
Work in the first six days, he therefore now upholdeth all things by his
Providence, and brings them to pass by secondary causes, according unto his
inevitable Decrees and Divine Will; for it were great impiety in us, and
detraction from the All-sufficient Wisdom and Power of the Almighty, to affirm
he has not preordained all things to come to pass from the first Creation even
to the Subversion; and that they are signified unto us in the Heavens, have
recourse to Gerson his Trilogium Astrologiae Theologizatae; for we read that
before the destruction of Jerusalem there appeared a Comet in the Heavens in
form of a Sword for many days, Horsemen also fighting in the Air, Josephus Bell.
Jud. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. presaging the
overthrow thereof, which was after accomplished by Titus Vespasian; also before
the death of Claudius Caesar there appeared a Comet for a long time, and before
the Civil broils in Rome, Octavius being Consul; and again, before the War
between Great Pompey and Julius Caesar, as Pliny testifies, Lib. 2. Cap. 25.
De Not. And if we come nearer home we shall find the Comet in 1618. to be the
forerunner of all our late Civil Un-civil Wars in England Scotland and Ireland,
as well as of the Commotions and Desolations in Germany, etc. But this will be
very clear unto us even from The word of GOD, That Theology and Astrology
agree together.
if we but with diligence and observation read the Histories of the Old
Testament, of the Subversion of Kingdoms and Nations; but especially that of
the Jews by the Babylonians, the which People, upon condition they would follow
the Law of the Lord, were promised to be established for ever; shall any one
from this Promise aver, that their Kingdom was not preordained to destruction
in its due time, and the limitation thereof long before set down? but that
immediately because they disobeyed, they were destroyed and carried away
captive; or rather that that Age wherein they were so captivated, should in the
fullness of that time be so inclined to wickedness, as to bring that affliction
so long before threatened upon them? So then these two, THEOLOGY and ASTROLOGY
must agree together, or we shall never be able to agree in Truth, but run our
selves into many Errors and Absurdities.

In that Book also you may see how far we may safely attribute to the power of
the Stars, and that their effects may be altered, yet but by one means, viz.
Prayer; for if GOD give an heart to pray as it ought, no question he also
therewith grants the Petition requested in those Prayers.

Lastly, my main scope, and chief drift in this my fourth fourfold Work is
(since I have so often stood up for the maintenance of this Science) to
endeavor to manifest unto the World the purity thereof, The Authors chief
drift in these his Labors.
having cleansed it from its pollutions and abuses, that so it may appear what
TRUE ASTROLOGY is, and what I maintain to be so, and the abuse be not only
discovered but taken away, that once more it might shine gloriously, and be
able to stand against all Gainsayers whatsoever: For notwithstanding I had
delivered my self so plainly in my former Works, especially in my Vox
Stellarum, yet did the purity of this Science remain under the censure, being
by many deemed no other then juggling; by others, to extend no further then to
the resolution of Horary Questions and the Judging of Nativities and the Fates
and Fortunes of men thereby, or at least that this was the main and chief
subject thereof, when the truth is, the practice of some men in these
ridiculous vanities, together with some other abuses of this MOST NOBLE SCIENCE
OF ASTROLOGY, have brought the purity thereof into question by the unworthy,
and the Science it self generally into reproach with the illiterate.

The Authors opinion touching Nativities and Horary Questions.
For I dare positively affirm (and shall be ready to prove it to any Rational
man) That the Resolution of Horary Questions is wholly vain and uncertain; as
also Nativities, on which they depend (or at least should) excepting how to
Judge of the particular Constitution and Temperature of the Body, and the
Natural inclination of Man; as I shall specify in the 20. Chapter of the first
Book of this Quadripartite, fol. 38.

But it may be some may here demand the Reason then I do in my Lux Veritatis
undertake the Resolution of some Questions? But I shall answer in that vulgar
and rustical Proverb, It is a good Horse that never stumbles; and truly this is
Language fit enough for such Horse stuff as are they. I am but flesh and blood,
Ergo, (as all in my condition) have failings; I desire not so much as to hide
my fault when I find it either of my self, or by the loving advise of others,
much less then do I desire to continue in an obstinate way of simplicity: I
must confess there are many Faults in that Tract (yet not so many neither, as
some would persuade the World there is, as shall be in part cleared in the
first Book of this Volumn) the which I am not ashamed to confess, but confess
my self ashamed [rather] I published it so rashly. And although I dare not
maintain those Rules I there set down as infallible, yet I must let the World
know, I can (and many others of good quality) justify the verity thereof at
that time, and therefore very fitly brought in answer to Doctor Homes, to show
him, that if he be disposed to cavil, there was matter enough for him, it being
his part to prove, but mine to defend.

And here now I must needs confess I have spent much time and pains in these
Nativities and Questions.
toys and trifles: And truly I am so far from being sorry therefore, that I
much rejoice thereat; for GOD has in mercy thereby showed me the Foolery,
Vanity and Insufficiency thereof [which some covetous Wretches and mean
Spirited People, contrary to their own knowledge, rashly attempt and practise]
and so I am the better able to distinguish Truth from Falsehood; for I must
confess that in as much as in me lies, I have set my heart to know Wisdom,
madness and folly, and am able (with the Wise man) to pronounce the sentence of
Folly upon most things that I know, and truly the best of things, and all
things [in comparison of that One and Only thing, The care of our Souls] are
but vanity and vexation of Spirit at the best: What does a man toil and labor
for all his days, vex and fret himself, rise early, go to bed late, weary
himself all day, spend his spirits, when alas! could he attain to the highest
dignities, possess the greatest Riches the World can afford, have the most
absolute command that ever Prince had, nay the whole Universe under his
subjection, he cannot enjoy it above an hundred years, should he begin to
possess them the first hour he is produced or born into the World; this is with
the most that I speak; the life of man is threescore years and ten, Psalm.
90.10. but a span, a shadow, Job 8.9. Sure this is worse then madness, and
vanity in the abstract. I have a large field here to walk in, might I with
civility intrude on the patience of my Reader; wherefore I shall desist, since
Verbum sapienti sat est. I speak not this verbally, from the sayings of that
Holy and Incomparable Man GREAT SOLOMON, but he that knows the heart, knows
that this proceeds from an experimental knowledge of my own.

But why should I thus fear to rehearse unto thee these so necessary
considerations? Art not thou at leisure to read them? thou will be employed
worse; if thou have heard them already, and so perhaps judge me vain in this my
needless prolixity, I must needs tell thee thou have never heard them from me*
and desire thee to learn this Lesson, That a good Lesson can never be too well
learned, nor a good Tale too often told: Wherefore let me entreat thy patience
a little, before I come to declare what I have yet to say touching these my
Labors; for though perhaps thou may find some of them, nay perhaps all in
the Writings of other Authors, yet since I can deliver them as my own, [having
tasted of the vanity of them all experimentally,] I know no reason why I may
not assume the same liberty as others.

Of the vanity of our childhood.
I will begin with our beginning; The Prophet DAVID the most great and glorious
King of Israel, and the most renowned in his days, Psalm. 51.5. says, Behold, I
was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me. Our very
conception, initiation, before we have either sense or motion you see is vilde,
it is vildness and wretchedness; Surely this is vanity and a great evil, even
whilst we were still in our Mothers wombs. And when we were produced, to how
many dangers, and troubles are we prostrate? the which as being sensible
thereof before we feel them or as a testimony thereof, We cry at our first
coming into the world, presaging thereby, we shall have no other cause even in
the height of our prosperity, but with Heraclitus to continue the same tune,
if we but consider our Cucko-folly: are not many by their inhumane mothers even
strangled in the birth to hide their whorish condition, their throats cut,
thrown into houses of offices alive to be stifled there, buried alive,
strangled, drowned, burnt, their heads cut off, massacred, an hundred manner of
ways according as the Devil works upon the inclination and humor of the
Diabolical Mother, so are these poor innocent (save for the Original sin they
have from these Vipers) Children murdered, murdered, murdered; and all but
to hide their Lust and Shame from the World as they think, and yet thereby they
bring themselves, and run themselves into not only what they shunned, the open
divulging of the Fact and the shame of the World, by an untimely death
extirpated from the society of men, but also endanger themselves utterly to be
banished the unspeakable glorious company of GOD and Angels. This is worse then
madness.

But we shall suppose the best, that we are saved alive, and then again on the
other side, we shall be forced (such are our innumerable Calamities,
Infirmities and Diseases, Mischances, Disasters, Troubles, Vexations,
Persecutions, Imprisonments, Fears, Anguishes, Discontents, Jealousies,
Dissentions, Quarrels, Anger, Strife and Debate) with Job ( Job 3.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11,. 12.) to curse the day of our birth, and to wish the womb had
been our grave, Job 10.18, 19. or that we had died when we first were born Job
3.11. For do we first but consider the uncertainty of this life, we shall
conclude it Much more then vanity; When we are the most carefully looked too,
are we not often overlaid, and smothered, surprised with Apoplexies,
Convulsions, the Rickets and Defluctions of Rheums? do not Chincoughs, Lasks,
Vomiting, most frequently anticipate us of our Lives?

But to pass this, and to speak the best of it, being a two years multitude of
dangers and casualties, spent in sleeping and eating, when we are set upon our
own bottoms and stand on our own legs, how many knocks, how many falls? and
which is worse, how often are we pitifully whipped and beaten by our senseless
and foolish inconsiderate Parents, and Giddy-headed shallow-brained Nurses, and
punished for punishing our selves by these unavoidable casualties? how often fall
we into the fire, water, from on high, loose our lives by all, break our limbs,
legs, arms, heads, faces, disfigure our selves for ever, lose an eye, both,
criple and maim our selves? How are we subject to Measels, Small Pox, Scabs,
Botches, Boils? How are we tormented with such like infirmities and vexations?
How gnawn and pulled with Worms both in the Maw and Belly? Can we help our
selves? Are not we forced to submit to the ordering of those set over us, our
Parents, whether rational, irrational, wise, foolish, sober, rash,
understanding, ignorant, discreet, simple, etc. and so consequently exposed
even in this our greatest extremity, which is worse then our present sad
condition, to all the perils and dangers of ruin both of health and life that
can be expressed? and do we not many times hereby lose our lives, or which is
worse, live in misery all our life after? Do they not teach us as soon as we
are capable of learning, all the evils and mischiefs in the World? Malice, Give
me a blow and I will beat him? Lies, no, say, and I, say? when we ought rather
to say clear contrary or nothing at all; with an hundred such, which being so
soon put into us, are easily retained, and prove sometimes our destruction,
having once taken root in our hearts; This is also vanity.

But pass we these five troublesome, uncomfortable years also; we no sooner come
to the least capacity or understanding, but we are then severely corrected by
such as are set over us, if we are not so wise presently as themselves, and
understand what they either say or teach us; O ridiculous creatures, to think
beating their buttocks, backs and sides, will put brains or more capacity then
GOD has given them into their heads! what mischiefs are we now at this Age
prone unto? I need name none since I cannot name one which we do not with
eagerness run into; and how grievous does it prove unto us in the end? Learn we
not vice? despise we not virtue? Are we not still under the lash and correction
of one or other? Do we not follow trifles? Play with toys? and neglect our
Book, or Trade, that which might make us men herafter? Have we any forecast?
And yet will we be advised? Know we what is good for our selves? and yet can we
condescend to be taught? run we not into all evil and extravagant courses? and
yet will we be taught the way of goodness? What shall I say? when I have said
all, and have made the best of all, I must necessarily be constrained to say,
All is vanity and vexation of spirit.

The Vanity of our Youth.
Let us come now to the fourteenth year of our age, and see if we grow wiser as
we grow older. Now we fall in love, fond fools! with what, can we tell? know we
why? have we reason sufficient to guide us? have we sufficient Judgment for
these our fond and childish actions? Is she beautiful? how simple are we so to
besot our selves with that which at the best is but uncertain, and with one
puff of the stormy wind of sickness, the Smallpox, Fever, or such like, etc.
withers and fades? How weak are we to shipwreck our Judgments on such
quicksands, to build our house on so tottering a foundation which is impossible
to stand? How childish are we so to bewitch our selves to bare outsides! Catch
at shadows and neglect substances! when Virtue, Religion, Chastity, Humility,
Patience, Prudence, Modesty ought rather to be the rolling eyes, the love
dimples, curled artificial locks, naked breasts, cherry cheeks, coral lips,
black eyebrows, lilly white hands, soft, gentle and slender which we should
look too, and covet, and esteem as the greatest and chiefest beauty, though
vaild under a Canvess Curtain; this is the Jewel rather to be prized of the
two, though locked up in an homely Cabinet; this is that virtuous Woman which
shall he a Crown to her Husband, Prove. 12.4. The glory of the man, 1 Cor. 11.7.
and the wife that builds up her house, Prove. 14.1. But the other which has
only beauty and a bare outside, is the foolish that plucketh it down, as is
expressed in the following words; For as a jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is
a fair woman without discretion, Prove. 11.22. But alas! now we are rash,
indiscreet, think our own wits best; like wild Bucks; over hedge and ditch we
go without fear or wit; restrain our selves of nothing for these seven years
till we have sown all our wild Oats, and come home with weeping cross; think
we have time enough to repent; delay the time; we are young enough, and
therefore go on in our ways: O but let us consider the words of that blessed
man, But know O man that for all this thou shall come to Judgment, Eccles.
11.9. We shall answer for every idle word, Matthew. 12.32. Much more assuredly
then for every vain and foolish idle action, especially when we voluntarily run
thereinto, and wilfully and willingly give our selves over to looseness which
profits not, but is a great evil and vanity it self.

How do we Game, Sport, Drink, Rore it, and make Revel-rout, Rant, Cut it, and
tear the ground, Vapor, Swagger, Domineer, Stare and Swear, follow a company to
do evil, do as our Companions advise us, or as we see them do, never
questioning whether there be Reason, Wit, Discretion or Honesty in it; Whore,
Drab, and take Tobacco, all for company, and so destroy both body and soul,
being now for any design* drink healths to our Mistresses till we leave our
selves no health, and make beasts of our selves in not denying to do that which
beasts cannot be constrained to: And truly, this bestial vice of Drunkenness
may also be reprehended in those of more mature years, nay, to the shame of
this our Land be it spoken, even the most grave age of men is too much addicted
hereunto; so that it is observable that hardly any Houses thrive of late since
our manifold distractions, but tippling and gusling Alehouses, the which as is
very well known, are more in number by many then all the inhabitants of other
Trades (in London) put together; This also is vanity, and a great evil.

Again, let us see the end of such doings; what advantageth it? does it produce
any good? are not the effects hereof, Quarrels, Dissentions, Fightings for
Mistresses; for not drinking of an Health; for not saying this Woman is
handsome; for affirming that is not comely; for disparaging of a Lady, a Person
of Honor, Quality, Renown, because he has been admitted her presence for an
affront, nay for a pin, point, or pins-head, must they into the field, off with
their doublets, and too it, murder one another, and then fly, or else be
caught and hanged; This is madness, vanity and folly. It mattereth not with
these, whether they are Friends, Familiars, or Enemies, if once they are
set-ont, they must kill or be killed, die in a Ditch, and that they call
Honorable, then they die in the bed of honor (they say) and this for the
smallest trifles, as I could testify, might I relate their names, and so again
revive men's rashness which was but lately acted: However the story of one is
thus, Two Gentlemen in this City of London, happening to meet together and
being very loving Friends and intimate acquaintance, went into one of these
devilish Tipling-houses, called for a Pot of Ale, the which the one tasting of
it commended to be very good; the other was of a clean contrary opinion, and
did altogether as much discommend it, thinking no hurt, but that he might
freely give also his Judgment thereof; but to be short, the other again
reitered its excellent goodness, and was also replied to the contrary, and so
they fell to words and at last [to end this Whimsical controversie] they
resolved to kill one another; the day being appointed, and meeting, the one was
slain; and it was upon a good ground, was it not? yet could nothing satisfy
these hot spirits, nor stand with their Honors, as they supposed, but this
madness, madness, madness.

Many such like vanities and rash actions (I say) might I here relate; but I
fear I should in recording of them render my self most vain, and show my own
vanity, whilst I am reprehending it in others: Does not this Drinking and
Revelling, which they call good Company-keeping, not only declare it self to be
clean contrary thereunto, but also spoil their society they pretend to enjoy?
they meet together, but oftentimes know not how they depart; are not the
effects thereof over and above what has been said, poverty, disgrace, running
in debt, cheating, lying, dissembling, vainglory, pride, lust, prodigality?
and when all fails, and Creditors call for their money, will be put off no
longer, set Sergeants to dog them, and Tailors will furnish them no more to
flant and carry it out for their further running in debt with others unknown
unto them; is not their Refuge at last to the Highway, turn Cutters, and from
thence return to Tyburn, where too late they Repent, and wish any would cut the
Rope, but cannot advantage themselves then, and there is an end of them?

Poor Wretches! were not they better be old whilst they are young, rather then
be hanged, killed, and murdered upon every occasion before they be old? be
grave, sober, serious, then whymsical, fickle and fantastical? apply their
minds to the study of virtue and the liberal Sciences, then thus to learn
nothing but vice, foolery, foppery, and vexation of spirit? Knowing that their
time is short enough to learn goodness, and therefore not prodigally thus to
squander it away upon trifles and childish conceits: Had they not better be
contented with a competency, and live within compass, and addict themselves to
their Book; then flant it, roar and swagger it about the streets with the
Drapers cloth on their back, the Tailors Workmanship, Points and Fancies, and
all unpaid for? the Haberdashers hat, the smirking Semsters half and whole
Shirts, Bands, Cuffs and Boot-hose-tops, with the Shoe-makers Boots? Like Esops
Bird that had borrowed and trict himself up with others Feathers, was thought
some body, so that he presumed to be King, till his Plot was discovered, and
every Bird took his own again, and left him despicable; even so do these
Chrysalides carry themselves high, advance themselves above their Betters,
think every one their inferior that has not such gaudy fine quelkeshoses
about them; and so forgeting themselves, they run headlong into many absurdities
and Premuniries, being applauded of the World for this their outside, though
vicious, (which had every one his own, he would be speedily stripped of, and left
as naked as any Nayl) not inside, although virtuous, if outwardly mean; This is
also vanity.

The vanity of man in general, from the 21. year of his age, to the end thereof.
Well, we are now come to Age, and we may lawfully inherit what is our own,
which we may quickly do GOD knows; but what is this our Heritage? surely not
worthy the naming or particularizing; a bundle of Cares, Troubles and all kind
of miseries, fears, horrors and tribulations, maladies and infirmities, exposed
to all dangers, and that upon every occasion, so that I may say as one once
very well said, Man has but one way into the World, but (I may affirm) an
hundred thousand ways out. This is vanity and vexation of spirits; no sooner a
man has sowed his wild Oats, but the black Ox treads immediately on his Foot:
No sooner a man comes to be a man, that he leaves his childish toys,
extravagant courses, and his wild untamed accustomary life, but he is
overwhelmed with all these; If he have money, he is troubled and perplexed with
care to lay it out to the best advantage; and although he has employed it as
well as heart could desire, yet is he still in the same condition, thinking he
might have improved it so and so, much better; or suppose he be sufficiently
satisfied it is no better to be husbanded, yet is he on the other side eaten up
with fear, sadness, melancholy, and discontent, as much as if it were utterly
lost, when indeed he had more matter of joy; This is also vanity.

If he want money, what misery is he overcharged with! a continual fear
possesses his Spirits, that he shall starve, lie in Gaol, have no friend,
abound with disgraces, slights, frowns and affronts, even from the most rural,
although never so well deserving; is he not then ready to take any desperate
course and design in hand? and is not this troublesome, loathsome, abominable
life enough to make him do that which in his own natural humor he ever
detested? Is not this vanity and folly then? sure it is a great evil.

Has he a competency [which is the golden mean to be desired of all men] yet
he is not content, he must have more, he lives not so high as his Neighbors,
his Wife and Children flant it not like them, he has not his Coach,
Saddle-horses for himself, and a couple of men, nor the attendance, cap in hand
that he sees others have; O miserable man! how vain art thou, that thou know
not thine own happiness? Contentation is the chiefest gain: and as one most
elegantly said, It is not the abundance of Riches or Possessions a man has,
that makes him Rich, but the contentedness of this mind. For how many old,
grubbing Usurers (who as Anacharsis said, carry Gold like Asses, yet eat but
Hay) pine themselves? feed upon porridge a whole half year together, make a
penny serve them a day, will not bestow a farthing to the making themselves
well when sick, for fear of parting with their Mammon-money, although but a
trifle; but choose rather to put it to the venture, and let it wear away (as
they use to say) when oftentimes it wears them away, or at least bears them
away; and so are justly dissipated of all, for fearing to part with some. Are
not these men wretched, poor, even whilst they possess the greatest Riches? Is
there any of them can afford themselves necessaries? do they not live more like
Beggars, or Peasants [at the best] then rich and wealthy men?

And now I might here show the odiousness and vitiousness of coveteousness,
which of all things is most detestable; but I fear I have already transgressed
the ordinary bounds of an Epistle; wherefore least the Porch of this my Fabric
arise to a greater bulk then the whole building, I shall pass it by.

And truly to go on in this I am upon (without branching it in the least) were
an Herculean Labor, and to insist on every particular vanity in this vain,
vain, vain World; Besides should I be so peremptory as to attempt it, my
present condition, want of memory, and insufficient capacity, would render me
defective in as many things as I have already or can hereafter express, and my
vanity therein the greatest of vanities; wherefore as hitherto I have but
hinted at things, being (as I have said) not able to do any other, nor indeed
willing (if I could) to weary my Reader with so long a preamble; I shall proceed
directly forward through the rest of man's life, and give you also an hint
thereof (having began) and that as brief as may be.

Is he single? he desires marriage; Is he married? he desires again to be
single; as the story goes of a fellow which whilst he was a bachelor, was a
boon-companion, and would spend his money freely, and therefore with his Hosts he
was termed A good fellow; but so it happened, that at length he was married,
and coming not so frequently to his Hosts as formerly, nor spending his cash so
freely when he came, was by one of them demanded the reason of this his
unwonted strangeness and great change; who replying, said, I am now married;
why then quoth she, Thou art now an honest man; but he sighingly made answer in
these words, Ha, but if I were once a good fellow again, I would never be an
honest man whilst I live.

Thus you see we are never content with our condition, neither full nor
fasting. How are we grieved and perplexed at the loss of husband, Wife,
Children, Goods? And how again do we fret, pine and consume our Spirits, Bodies
and Souls, that we cannot be rid of our Husbands, Wives and Children? How
careless are we of them when we have them? Spend all our selves, Grudge them
pennies, when we squander away pounds upon Whores, Projects, Drink, Cards,
Tables, Dice, and an hundred such Vanities, Vanities, and study to render our
selves hereby worse then Infidels, and Deniers of the faith, according to the
Apostle 1. Tim. 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and especially for
those of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an
Infidel. Is not this Vanity? What is this but Vanity? Surely it is the Vanity
of Vanities.

Was not Marriage first instituted for procreation? Genesis 2. yet how many are
there that would fain marry, were they but assured they might never have Child?
O wicked wretches thus to set themselves opposite to Gods own Ordinance! They
would practice their lascivious lusts, but deny the fruit of the womb; and
truly I must confess it mattereth not how little we are troubled with the breed
of such beasts; for let me tell you, and take it for a rule, you shall never
find any of this humor, but such as are most vilde Whores, though they may
cover it and hide it from the World; I have observed it in very many, and have
still found them no otherwise reputed. Are not these Vain fools? And is not
this a great folly so to desire what the LORD has threatened for a curse? Hos.
9.14. Give them O LORD: what wilt thou give them? a miscarrying womb and dry
breasts; and refuse what he has promised for a blessing? Genesis 49.25. I will
bless thee with the blessings of the Womb, and so earnestly to covet what
virtuous Women in old time counted a Reproach? Genesis 30.23. says RACHEL there,
GOD has taken away my reproach, when he had given her a son. This is worse
then Vanity or Madness.

Does not the riches and preferment of many men, although naturally mean, base
and unworthy, so elevate and transport them above themselves, so as that they
despise, neglect and contemn their betters, both for birth and endowments?
merely because they have not those preferments, that power, that esteem with
the Vulgar, nor those fine knacks about them which he has; when, should we but
give to every creature its own, how naked should we be left? we should be more
mean and poor then the brutest creature, who has hair [at least] to cover his
skin; This is a great evil, and vanity it self.

And how vain are we to boast, and take pride in what is our shame? we were
Created naked, and had we not sinned we should have so continued; we clothed
our selves first for shame, and now we are so void of shame, we are proud of
our clothing, glory in our shame; but I say, let us consider the things we are
proud of, they are but excrements, at the best but vile, and naturally, I say,
belong to other Creatures, and therefore we have little or no cause to esteem
so of them, much less to be proud of that which we are beholding to our
inferiors for: For to the Beaver we are indebted for our Hat or covering to
the head, the chief member; to the earth for our shirt, which is nearer to us
then our Petticoat* to the Sheep or Silkworm, for our clothes and stockins* to
the Oysters for our Neck-lace and Pendence; for our Shoes, Boots, and drawling
Galoshes to the Goat, Ox, Cow, Bull, etc. and to the Cordivant, Buck, Stag,
Kid, Lamb, Sheep for our Gloves: and to the earth, rocks and mountains for our
Gold, Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Jaspers, Chrysalites, Heliotropians, etc. And
lastly, for our Fans and Feathers, which we so swagger with in Hide-Park down
to our backs, to the Ostridge; and for our Perfumes, to the Civet Cat, etc.
what comes from their Tails, we glory to have at our Noses. How can we be more
vain, then to set our minds on such Trifles? be proud of such trash and
trumpery, vile abjects? This is vanity, madness, madness, madness; we dote, are
stupid, besotted, stark mad fools.

A short description of the world, and the vanity thereof.
To be short (for from this 21. year of our age, I intend to show, or give at
least an hint to the folly of most men from this year to their very last: for
although I might a little insist on the craziness, peevishness and waspish
wilfulness of pettish old Age, and the calamities whereunto they are most prone
and incident, yet, I say, I shall rather pass that by) Let us first examine
what the World it self is, and the several degrees of men therein, and then he
that shall conclude it to be other then vanity, foolery and simplicity, and the
men therein other then fools and mad, Erit mihimagnus Apollo; but then I must
tell him, he must not only conclude so, but prove it to be so; or he shall (on
the other side) be Mihi hominum stultissimus, or Sapientum Octavus.

Is the world [first] any other then a School of Knavery, Juggling and
hypocrifie, and (as it were) a Nursery of Vice, Villainy and Profaneness, where
every one is for himself, and his own self ends, valuing nothing to the
accomplishment thereof, no not the fear of GOD, nor his Commandments, which is
according to the Royal Law of Liberty, To love our neighbor as our self? Is
Christianity, Love, Consanguinity, Alliance, Charity, Friendship or mutual
Acquaintance sufficient to reclaim us? Is not this Proverb, No longer Pipe, no
longer Dance, verified in most of the People of the World? Is not every man a
Friend and a professed Lover to him that has no need of their Friendship? O
what greazing of fat Sows in the -- is there frequently to be found throughout
the whole face of the Earth! but which is worse, is not this vanity committed
by such as profess and make a great outward show of Religion and Christianity?
And yet to an Acquaintance, Associate, a decayed Kinsman, better and more
worthy both for Birth, Parts and Breeding then themselves, do they extend any
thing save a bundle of flattering words, and dissembling Protestations of Love,
affection and good will? and then as soon as their backs are turned, give it
out, he is wicked, a swearer, a beggar, he lives by this and by that; here lies
all his hope, and here his greatest refuge; never remembering, It is an ill bird
that defiles his own nest, rejoicing at the decay and poverty of them, that
themselves might be had in greatest esteem? Is not this a great evil? How many
Ambodexters, Janusses, Hypocrites, does the world abound with, that are
outwardly Lambs, yet inwardly Wolfs, that play Legerdemain, and practice naught
else, Hocus Pocusses, seeming Saints, yet really Devils, that have excuses for
the greatest sins, nay for pride it self which hurled Lucifer the great Angel
of light, the great Carrier of light (as his name imports, being interpreted)
headlong to Hell and eternal destruction? We know the Apostle to Timpothy, Tim.
1.2, 9, 10. exhorts, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefastness and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array; but (which becomes women professing godlness) with good works.
Whereby we clearly see good works (according to the intent of the HOLY GHOST)
ought rather to be the attire of women (especially such as profess the Gospel
and Godliness) then such vanities as are there expressed, and many now adays
assume above their rank and quality; least (as the scope of these words
intimates unto us) they become a shame and reproach to the Gospel and purity
thereof; and Christianity be lightly esteemed for their sakes, and these their
vain practices. I say, notwithstanding all this, some who pretend much to the
world of Holiness and Religion, are so hypocritical (nay I may well say
devilish) as to maintain openly the gorgious apparel of women, and their
vanities in such practices, To be a grace, and an honor to the Gospel;
choosing rather thus highly to sin against GOD, and displease him both in the
maintenance of the act, and [which is worse] the vindication thereof, then in
the least to reprehend it in their children, it displease their fantastical,
whimsical, hypocrital wives; but heap sin upon sin, that sin might be hid from
the eyes of the world, fearing more he censures of frail, despicable unworthy
man, then the eternal Judgment of the great, terrible omniscient, omnipresent
and omnipotent GOD that will call one day all to account; that will not measure
men by the outward appearance, but the inward testimonies of the Spirit; that
will reckon for every idle word; much more for every vain action, and
premeditated and studied lies and fallacies to cloak and cover our wickedness
and detestable actions; What profit will these vain, foolish, mad things be
unto us, whereof we shall one day be ashamed? our laying the fault on our
Husbands, and saying he will have it so; or upon our Wives, that she will have
it so; will not then excuse us, will not then plead for us, will not then
advantage us a rush, will not expiate our sin, nor will not protect us from the
punishment; This is also vanity.

How do we suit with every occasion, with every company? Do we not when we
visit the Religious, the Ministers, attire our selves modestly, put on our
plain black gowns, hide our necks, breasts, gorgets, with our scarfs, our
curled locks and broidered hair with our hoods; sit demurely, talk of
profession, and of this body, and the other body, rather then want discourse
and occasion to cry up our selves? and yet do we study ever the more sanctity?
Our SAVIOR CHRIST teaches us to know such as are indeed his Servants by an
infallible token, Matthew. 7.16. Yea shall know them by their fruits; do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? their outward pretenses are not
grounds sufficient to convince us of their innocence; they may be thus in
sheeps clothing, yet inwardly may be also ravening wolves, as you see in the
preceding verse. Wherefore I must needs reprehend such as positively conclude
men either good or bad, according to the report of the world of them, or their
seeming pretenses; deviating from this Rule, this infallible Rule; for as it is
rashness in any to believe windy reports; so is it folly, and worse then
madness to be carried away or deluded with pretenses, and seeming outsides,
without first seriously examining the truth of both; the want of this lesson in
wisdom is the cause we run our selves into millions of Premunires, which but
for brevitie sake I might prove by a particular recital of many; wherefore
learn this, and thou shall be an absolute Politician; for so shall thou easily
pluck off the mask of pretenses, disperse the mists of envy and reproaches, and
free thy self of many inconveniences.

What coveting is there of this Daily applause of the world? Do we not run
here, and run there, visit this, relieve publicly, and that to be seen of men,
make gatherings to our own advantage; speak to the godly for money, clothes,
and other necessaries, to relieve the necessitated, and do it in our own Names;
be known to none we have it from any, but that it is our own goodness and
liberality, and yet hide our faces from our own flesh? Is this Charity? Is this
Christianity? Is this according to what we profess? Will we part with six
pence to one that is in the most extremity of necessity when we see they cannot
show it to the world, or think it will not be known? Do we not abound with
these formalities, nay do we not rather swarm with them?

How many men follow tradition and common custom, rather then their own
Judgments, Sense or Reason?

What greater madness, folly and vanity can there be, then to see Soliciters,
Clerks, Scriveners, be better rewarded for running of errands, writing of a
Bill, or a Bond in a neat hand and flourishing Letters, and it may be neither
true English nor Sense in it, then a Scholar and ingenious person for teaching
them wit: To see Huntsmen entertained, receive stipends, discoursed with, when
Learning goes a Begging? A lying flattering Favorite, that is a mere outside,
get more in a year then a Philosopher all his life? A quondam Beggar, that was
glad to do any thing for a mess of Porridge or a scrap of Bread, flant it, and
ride in his Coach, have the worst of his Attendants better then the best of his
kindred, or any of his Predecessors? That was formerly a servant to every one,
now Lord it over all? Gentlemen goon foot, Beggars ride on horses, prancing
Steeds? Philosophers, Scholars and ingenuous souls crouch to Clowns,
illiterate Curmudgins for a meals meat, or a nights lodging? Clothes esteemed
before Wit, Learning, and understanding? mere outsides honored, insides
slighted, not esteemed or valued? Men to have their guts in their brains, and
brains in their guts? To strain at Gnats and swallow Camels? To skip over
blocks, and stumble at straws? To be angry for trifles, not moved for things of
consequence? Those in Authority, Place, enjoying possessions, though Idiots; be
honored, reverenced, applauded, esteemed of, crouched to: when virtue, and the
chiefest of endowments a mortal can possess, wanting preferment, and trash
riches, shall be disrespected and undervalued? Then to see riches make a man
wise, solid, discreet, judicious and virtuous, though a natural Fool; and
poverty to render all these, and the man that possesses them, a Fool, a
Coxcomb, an Ass? Wise men degraded; Fools preferred to office? Orators and
Judicious men to be silent; Fools and Idiots prate, and have all the talk, and
reprehend others, of what they themselves are justly to be reprehended? Men
that have enough, make Vassals of themselves to their Inferiors to get more?
Diligently to scrape with the one hand money together, and to squander it away
without care with the other? To be penny wise* and pound foolish? To buy
shadows and neglect substances? Then to see so much difference between words
and deeds? Men rob Peter to pay Paul? Act all kind of villainy, and pretend to
be Saints? The Fox preach? Vice correct sin? The Pig play on the Organs? Blind
men judge of Colors? A world in the Moon and other Planets? Hell and damnation
in Saturn and Mars? the Earth turn round and the Sun stand still? A man to
smile in your face, and cut your throat? Pretend one thing, do clean contrary?
Neither speak what they think, nor think what they speak? To hear every one say
he is your humble servant, yet ayms to be your insulting Master? Cuckolds to be
contented, wink at their wives abuses, and make much of those that Cornuted
them? Women to wear the breeches, men made a Nose of Wax? Horses ride in
Coaches, men draw them? The Cart before the Horse? Men build Castles in the
Air? Towers build Masons? Men conquer Kingdoms, and be subdued by their own
Passions and Affections? Rule Empires and millions of men, and be ruled
themselves by one Woman? Domineer abroad, be a sneaks at home? Men possessed
with the Devil-flattery, turn themselves into all shapes and forms? be
Religious with the Religious: profane with the profane: a spend-thrift with the
Prodigal; a Miser with the Usurer; fawn and wag their tongues, hats and hands,
as a Dog does his tail; be furious like a Lion: mild like a Lamb; commend,
dispraise; domineer, crouch; vapor here, be baffled there; and what not, may
it but advantage them six pence? Then to see men and women force their children
to marry for Riches, Honor, this end and that, and compel them to reject and
refuse their loves to their utter ruin and destruction? Love is the bond of
perfectness, and as it covers all sins, Prove. 10.12. so does it also hide all
faults; I dare not transgress on thy Patience to show thee the excellency of
Love, and the folly of Parents in this their extreme vanity, since I have been
already, I fear, too tedious, but desire thee, since verbum sapienti, to be
content with this, and for that I desire to hasten to a conclusion.

Then to see women think themselves better, or at least equal, or as good as
men? Men not equal nor so good, much less better then women. A man to be Jack
Jackson in the Country, and Mr. Johnson in the City? To live in a Christian
Commonwealth [or at least so in pretence] and dare not believe a word a man
speaks? Every whiffling Mechanic, a Politician; Gentlemen, wise, and learned,
Simpletons? Lies, Plots and inventions to cozen be believed and credited; plain
dealing, truth and honesty suspected, derided, and accounted weakness? The most
rational, solid, sober and most discreet of all Gods Creatures Man, become the
most fickle, whimsical, simple and ridiculous? Men to become absolute Apes? one
while in a narrow brim'd hat, a long waste, his breeches to his knees; Boots
and Boot-hose-tops, and great gingling Spurs, their feet as long as their legs,
or at least full as long again as their foot naturally, as in the year 1645.
and 1646. In 1648. and 1649. a broad brim'd hat, and no other must serve; our
breeches must be long, even down to our ancles; Boots with the tops trailing on
the ground, little Spurs that must not gingle in the least. In 1650. and 1651.
we tumble into short breeches again: In 1652. and this present year 1653. we
think it ridiculous to wear boots, but altogether shoos and stockins, turning
down with a top as the French Lackies have used to go for these many years; one
while we have too long curling locks on both sides of our head! anon all the
whole side must be of a length and short behind! Thus verifying the old
Proverb that we English know not when a thing is well.

I have hinted but at these last seven or eight years for that these vanities
might be the better remembered by us, and to our shame called to mind; as also
for that I account not the subject worthy of further recital of other foregoing
years; besides, I blush to think men should be such Weather-cocks, or rather
Cox-combs, thus never to resolve on a set habit: might I give my Judgment what
habit is most becoming, I should commend this we now use, saving that our shoes
and fantastical stockins speak us rather Skip-jacks, Whifflers or Anticks, then
sober and solid men: I would have Boots, if I might give my verdict, used in
their stead: for the length of our Breeches they cannot in my opinion be
mended, being most rationally made according to the length of our thigh, not
hiding our legs as formerly, and our doublets are made of the exact length of
our wastes: I am not so traditionally spirited as to commend Trunk-breeches,
making our Buttocks as big as a Barrel, nor the other extreme, made close to
our thighs like a pair of stockins, neither their doublets with the waste just
under our Armpits (contrary to our natural shape) and flanting skirts reaching
down to the seat, whence it was said of old, I will sit on your skirts, when an
injury was threatened; for truly in my opinion thus to besot our selves, and
overshoot our Judgments in following such a monstrous and Clownish habit, were
to render our selves more ridiculous by far then we are already: great Bands
and Cuffs, and a little narrow brim'd hat also, unless I could see any reason,
comeliness or profit in them, I can no wise commend.

It were a vain thing in me thus to recite the several alterations and
mutations in the garbs of Women, since every day produces a new Toy; wherefore
I shall only name some of their darling-trifles, which are as dear unto them as
their lives, and which they constantly observe and resolve to keep, viz. Their
embroidered, curled, powdered hair; their washings, paintings, waters and
Pomatoes to their faces; and when they have done all, their several sorts of
patches, half-moons, stars, coach and horses, round, triangled, quadrangled,
pointed, little, great, long and short: Vainly and foolishly hereby imagining
to make themselves handsomer then GOD has created them, or is willing they
should be, and choosing rather to please themselves then him; nay, though it be
to the displeasing of him they must and will do it, what care they; their face
is their God; they look no further; they believe no other; they care for no
more. And as touching their Attire, it would tire Hercules, nay Sampson, which
were far stronger then an hundred such as am I to relate it; and truly were I
able, yet have I not patience, there are so many unworthy stinkards and flirts,
sneaking Mechanics wives to be mentioned, which should I attempt, would turn
my stomach to think of them, and then instead of Writing, I should present thee
with a foul Paper; yet these must be lapt in silk, they are no body if they
have not a Silk-Mo-hair, Taffaty, Tabby Gown (nay but for shame they would have
cloth of gold or silver, forgetting it is a shame for them to attempt the worst
of these) a scarlet, watchet, tabby petticoat, and that must be laced too,
gentle-woman-like; thus multiplying garment upon garment, till the apparel
exceeds the worth of the bearer by an hundred degrees. They must have these
outsides, though their in-sides be as bad as may be; though they are as dirty
that they are not to be tonched with a pair of tongs; though their smocks cost
not ten groats apeece, nay, though they pinch their bellies, and have hardly
bread to eat, yet they must have clothes, and that a thousand times beyond
their quality. Can any thing be more vain then this? Do not our Governors
deserve severely and sharply to be reprehended they look not into these abuses
and vanities, when we know not a Gentlewoman from a Mechanical flirt? Joan is
as good as my Lady; there is no more difference between them in their clothes,
then is in the dark; all is one; except she write Lady on her back, she shall
never be known in this Age: Wherefore for distinction sake [if for no other] it
is most requisite (as I humbly conceive) it be looked into, and an order taken,
so as that every Jack and Gillet may be known to be Tradesmen, Serving-men,
etc. and not equal in habit with their Superiors, by many degrees, and
Gentlemen of quality; for now with them (because they are not reprehended in
this their vanity) all are counted fellows at football, to the shame and
blemish of the glory of this Nation; It would be much better certainly if the
Cobbler would not go beyond his Last, and everyone go according to his rank.

Again, what greater madness then to see Lords no Gentlemen, no Gentlemen
Lords, no Lords Gentlemen? Serving-men able to buy out their Matters? Wise,
sober, solid and judicious Gentlemen be led away, gulled, persuaded to any
thing by their Vassals, even against their own knowledge? Men to believe any
reports whether good or bad, with or against their friends or foes, without the
least search into the truth thereof? Illiterates that can hardly speak sense,
write or read, preach and teach others; learned, reverend, orthodox Divines
silenced, or at least not regarded? Such as deserve not only reprehension but
severe chastisement, to reprehend and teach others? Such as are guilty of
folly, to laugh at folly? Of which number I must now needs rank my self, and be
so ambitious as account my self the chief, or greatest Fool, more deserving to
be laughed at then any other; wherefore I my self may justly thus question with
my self,

Art thou not more sullen, melancholy and mad then Saturn? More jovial, merry
and temperate at another time then Jupiter himself? More fierce, choleric,
peevish, waspish and angry then Mars? And again, more gentle, wanton, and
fuller of sport then Venus? More lofty, proud, ambitious then the Sun? More
fickle, wavering, and unconstant then the Moon? Good with the good, bad with
the bad like Mercury? Ever in extremes, too merry or too sad? How silly art
thou to tell others of their being led away by fair words, and none so soon
wrought on as thy self? Condemn others for following Antic Fashions, and none
so soon run into them? Plead for wisdom, act naught but folly? Cry down Duels
and single Combats, yet account it better not to live then live with an
affront? Condemn Drinking, and stay a whole week in a Tavern? To be so mad, as
to tell madmen of their faults? To expose thy self to the censure of every
fool by writing publicly, thereby losing the happiness of enjoying thy self to
thy self? And to think the smiles and applauses of some, can countervail the
frowns and reproaches of others? Art not thou silly? The greatest Fool of all?
Worse then mad?

I must confess, should I answer for my self, I could not in the way of excuse
plead one word in my own behalf; I must acknowledge my self guilty, and can say
nothing but this, that it is a mad world, and therefore should be worse then
mad, should I think my self other then mad. Yet less some conceited youngster
imagine himself more then he is, I must turn him to Prove. 26.12. and then let
him be so mad, as to cast the first stone at me, whence I may conclude all are
mad, or at least fools, we being so generally guilty hereof; but I shall name
the words of the Text, that you may the better judge of it, See thou a man
wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of him. Now I would
fain know, if one should strictly examine who is not guilty hereof, whether he
should find any that is free: In former time there were but seven Wisemen; now
adays there is hardly so many Fools. Ergo, all fools, all vain, all mad, mad,
mad for company; This is the world, other's the Country.

Thus have I given you a general character of the world or an hint thereof,
being altogether unable to paint it out to the life, yet what has been said
[being so obvious to the sense of every capacity] is sufficient to prove it
altogether vanity. And now I might also here fitly give you the description of
the Courts and Palaces of Kings, Inns of Courts, or the practices of Lawyers,
and of Markets; but I fear then I should be inexcusably guilty of prolixity.
Wherefore of each of these I shall only give thee a touch, and hasten to
conclude.

A short description of Markets.
I shall begin with the last, because it is a thing so frequent amongst us, viz.
Markets. Anacharsis does well define it thus, Est forum locus in quo alius
alium circumvenit. The Marketplace, is a place where one cozeneth and
defraudeth another. I may well term it (all things being considered) a
convention of Cheaters and circumventing Liars; a place where must much evil
needs be committed according to that of the Wiseman, Between the buyer and the
seller must needs be sin.

Of the Inns of Court, or the Practices of Lawyers.
And what are our Inns of Court but mere conventions of Politicians, fomenters
of strife and debate? For fight Dog, fight Bear, they will never part you;
Incendiaries? Lovers of mischief? Takers of bribes? Resisters and perverters of
justice, provided they are well fed? Do they not Justify the wicked for a
reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him? Isa. 5.23.
For does not money do all? Is it not it that makes the Mare to go? right or
wrong does it not carry the cause with these Catiffs? How hard is it for a man
to be a Lawyer and an honest man both together? How many such think you, you
might find in a century of years? Wherefore the time is coming, and is now even
at hand, wherein the Prophets very next words will be verified upon them, viz.
Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff,
so their root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust,
because they have cast away the LAW of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word
of the Holy One of Israel, Isa. 5.24.

Of the Palaces of Kings.
And now should we but examine the state of the Chief Courts, viz. he Palaces of
Kings, we shall yet find therein naught but vanity and madness; from the
lowest to the higest, from the King to the Beggar, all are mad: what greater
vanity, then to see men that are to Rule thousands, be carried away with every
breath of flattery of any one Parasite? Then to see Kings and the Grandees of
the World so easily persuaded contrary to what they in their own judgments
know. If there be any blemish in a King, how soon is it applauded, admired
rather for a grace, a virtue rather then a vice? Alexander stooped in the
shoulders, wherefore all his Soldiers and Courtiers did so too. Yet here I
cannot but set down the wisdom and gallantry of our late King James of happy
memory, in this particulars, as I have been by several informed who were
conversant with him. Considering one day the vanity of his Courtiers in
applauding still all his actions, very seriously about noon looking up to the
Heaven out of a Window, demanded of those that were about him, whether they saw
not a Star near such a cloud; for (he said) he was confident he did; whereupon
every one looking up, began to deliver their opinions thus, one said he saw it,
and that it was a little bright star; another that it twinckled very much, etc.
every one with a several addition, concluded positively as he said: whereupon
he burst forth in these words, or to this sense, How unfortunate a man am I to
have so many Fools to be my Counselors! No wiser men then right or wrong to
say as I say! Again, what Revelling, Masking, Playing, Feasting, Toying,
Fooling, Whoring, Pride, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Wastry, and what not that is
evil, or to be reprehended, but is to be found in these places most abundantly?
There is no place free, nor thing free, but all, and in all is vanity.

The Authors exhortation to this mad world.
Wherefore since it is so, I can commend nothing in this transitory, momentory,
vilde World, but the knowledge of GOD and his Son JESUS CHRIST whom he has
sent in the flesh into the World to save sinners and the world, and that we
might through him obtain everlasting life. We have here no abiding place,
wherefore what profit will it be unto us should we gain the whole World, and
lose our own souls? We came naked in to the World, and we shall carry nothing
out with us; all must be left behind, our pleasure, riches, honors,
preferments, parts, endowments, wives, husbands and children; he that the whole
earth could not contain, and that sighing said, Is there no more worlds to
Conquer? was at last contained in the narrow confines of a Coffin, and could
possess no more of what he had gained, then his just length and breadth, which
was not denied to the meanest he subdued; you have heard what the Great
Conqueror of the East, Saladin, carried to his Grave of all he had gained, bat
a poor black Shirt; wherefore let the WORD OF GOD be thy whole study, thy
delight both day and night, that when thou ceasest to be here, thou may be
eternally glorified hereafter, this is the summum bonum, the chiefest good; yet
next unto it, let me recommend the study of Nature before any other thing
whatsoever, for that it is the great handmaid of the Almighty, by which thou
may daily and hourly see the secret operations of his hands, and be drawn
nearer and nearer to him; for according to the Apostle, by knowing Natural
things, we come to know Spiritual the better.

And now here it remains I should again return to show thee the method and
manner of the subsequent Work where I left off, and so hasten to a conclusion;
but since I have recommended unto you that which is the chief means of our
future felicity, I think good first (since our happiness here, and the hope
thereof hereafter consists much on the goodness or badness of our friends and
associates) here to deliver thee some Rules how to choose a true Friend, to
know a true Friend, and to keep a true Friend; for commonly according to the
company, so we conform our selves, the which if it be other then good, proves
our utter destruction, according to the old Proverb, Evil communication
corrupts good manners.

Instructions how to choose a friend.
In choosing then of Friends; first negatively, and then affirmatively I shall
desire thee to observe these Rules: Negatively, that by no means you familiarly
associate your self with a liar, dissembler or a flatterer, neither with a
proud man, nor covetous person; for they will prove deceitful, treacherous and
self-ended; beware also of Bragadotia's; I mean such as boast and glory of
their charity or courtesy to others, that they have done this good turn, and
the other good turn for them; for though it be true they have been beneficial
to such, and that they have done all that they brag of, yet will such [take it
for an approved maxime] be never true-hearted unto thee: And such as are so
base as to desire or beg that which they see is precious and deer in the sight
of any one, are also to be shunned, with those that are not able to keep secret
what is committed to them in Trust, and Promise-breakers, and such as merely
esteem of thee for thy Riches; for these although they carry a great appearance
or outward gloss of Friendship unto thee, yet are they never cordial and real
Friends, but fained outsides. But on the other side let such be deer unto thee,
and chosen for thy friends and familiars that are honest and prudent, and as
Cicero says, whose integrity, constancy, fidelity and liberality is known to
all their acquaintance: Let him that is zealously affected with and to virtuous
and religious acts, be thy associate and choice companion; for as Plato says,
friendship was given by nature to Mankind to help us and further us to virtuous
inclinations, not to vicious, lewd and sordid practices: wherefore Pythagoras
very excellently said, if we would shun vice we must be familiar but with few;
and Dicearchus would intimate the same unto us, when he advises us to make the
virtuous only our Friends, if we desire to keep the name of virtuous and honest
men, and the rest of the world, if possible, welwillers unto us; wherefore wise
Bias very wisely said, He was not wise that would make every one his Familiar;
whence I may also conclude, that in the multitude of friendship is friendship
violated. Do not exceed then in abundance of friends and acquaintance; for if
thou have but a few honest men and real friends to be thy friends, thou may
be assured thou do exceedingly abound in friends.

Caveats in choosing of friends.
And now that thou may not be an enemy to thy self in this thy choice, let me
here give thee one or two Memorandums. First, that you let not common applause
or reproach be a rule or ground to your affection or dis-esteem of any one; but
first seriously examine the truth, and then accordingly may thou use thy
discretion and reason: Secondly, let not the Nation of a man deter thee from
real affection, if there be sufficient cause and ground to the contrary; for it
were absurd in us to think all Nations evil, and our selves only good: As there
are both good and bad amongst us, so is there also in the very ruralest of
Nations; what reason have we to think all the Irish blood-thirsty, all the
Scots deceitful, all the French fantastical, etc. because many of them are so?
For my part, if I meet with any man of these that is true-hearted and honest,
or of any other Nation, they shall be more deer unto me then a thousand English
Knaves; and as I will not conclude any man of another Nation a Knave or Honest,
till I have experience thereof, so will I not be so indulgent as to make no
question of those of my own Nation, but carry a like suspicion of both the one
and the other, till I am rightly and truly informed: The Scots are vulgarly
amongst us traduced and envyed, and yet they cannot be so odious here, but
amongst them we are as contemptible; Tradition carries a great sway with fools
and the vulgar, but with wise men it is never regarded. Thirdly, let not the
apparel or clothes of any one stave thee off from the familiar society of
friendship; it is not the Peacocks fine feathers, that can make him sing like a
Nightingal: a Philosopher may be in rags, when an Idiot is gorgeously arrayed;
look not to the outside, but the inside rather of a man, and thou shall not be
deceived.

How to know a true friend.
Now to know the reality of thy friend, or whether thou have a true friend or
no; see that in your trial of him, you let him not know your condition, let it
be in what degree or thing soever you prove him in; it would be too tedious a
thing for me to speak of every thing and way whereby thou may try him,
wherefore I shall here only instance one, by which according to the same method
thou may judge of the rest. Admit you would borrow money, then be sure first
you want not money, lest if your friend fail you, you are exposed to want and
sorrow; yet be not known upon any condition to him you are or can be supplied,
lest then on the other side, he knowing your ability, readily performs your
request, and you thereby kept still ignorant of his affection; for take this
for a sure Rule, that that, and that only is real love, that without regard to
requital or consideration at all thereunto, sets it self on work, let it be in
this or any other kind whatsoever; wherefore if thou have found such a Friend
as this, thou have assuredly a faithful and real Friend indeed: never believe
the fair pretenses and promises of men, neither their alluring tongues and
smooth speeches, which commonly are the properties of dissemblers and
false-hearted, or hollow-hearted people* for you shall seldom see a fair tongue
and a dissembling heart go asunder; wherefore if any such thou find, thou
have more matter of suspicion then credit given thee. But remember that in
proving of thy Friend thou render not thy self so unfriendly to him, as to
require any unlawful thing at his hand; for then assuredly thou must not only
expect a denial of thy present request from thy friend, but the future
friendship of thy Friend hereafter.

How to keep a true friend.
That thou may now keep a true Friend when thou have found him, it is
requisite (as I have promised) to give thee some Rules. Wherefore then let your
patience be reciprocal, your opinions mutual, your love in all matters
(especially things of indifferency) free, let your love be for love, not
recompense or gain. And for that, Nemo sine crimine vivit, there is none
without a fault; you are to hide them, and to wink at them in one another,
provided they proceed from frailty and imbecility of Nature; and when you
admonish or reprehend a friend, let it be in a place and at a time convenient;
not openly in company, but privately between you and him, otherways you will
harden him in his way, and work no good on him; not when he or thy self is in
passion, for this will cause thy words to be lightly esteemed, and work no
impression on him: And let thy speech be gentle and mild, yet be plain with
him, and speak to the purpose, overcome him rather with mildness and clemency
then anger and rigor, by which he will be constrained rather to adhere unto
thee and acknowledge himself obliged for this favor, then remain obstinate and
wilful.

But let me now return to show thee the method of these my subsequent Labors.
In the penning of them I have bin very plain for that I desire to be understod;
Animis scribo non auribus, I write to edify my readers understanding, not to
please his ear with fine words, rather respecting the matter then syllables;
and I have endeavored to compare one Author with another, and those with a
third, and again a fourth with all, almost on every subject; and where one has
been short, I have enlarged with another, and where all have failed to my
expectation, I have supplied of my self, according to Didacus Stella in Luc.
10. Tom. 2. Pigmei gigantum humeris impositi plusquam ipsi gigantes vident.
Dwarfs or Pigmies standing upon the shoulders of Giants, may see farther then
those Giants: I would have none therefore wonder to see me frequently dissent
from the Ancients and relate my own conceptions in diverse places; yet in most I
follow my Authors, at least in sense, though not verbatim. And in some places I
have trod the very ignorant and irrational paths of the Ancients, that so the
ingenious and wel-willer to this Science may have matter wherewith to exercise
himself, and not wholly to give himself over to traditional precepts; for my
own part I abhor implicit Faith, or erroneous tradition, without sound and
sufficient reason given for it; and therefore you will find I have often in
these my labors dissented from my Predecessors. By some perhaps I shall be
discommended, and again by others applauded for it; it is an hard matter to
please all parties, and therefore I have (I say) let slip some places, on
purpose to convince thee that former Ages had not all the knowledge in the
World, that so thou may be weaned from thy confidence in the writings of the
Ancients when neither reason nor experience are on their side; I shall not need
to turn you to any of those places in this Book; I hope your ingenuity will be
a sufficient index thereunto: yet least some Momus should convert this my
silence to ignorance, and endeavor to wound me with my own weapon, by imputing
that as a fault in me, which I did wilfully neglect, I shall here mention one
place, being so remarkable and so palpable an absurdity, See Bonatus de
Revolutionibus, cap. 95.
Lib. 4. Sect. 2. Chap. 18. of this volumn you will find the significations of
the Sun when he is Lord of the year in any of the twelve signs Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer and Leo being expressed, and the rest by varying the former
Rules employed, which of all absurdities is the greatest, it being impossible
for the Sun to be in Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Scorpio, Sagittary, Aquaries
or Pisces, in any yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly ingress, which is ever made
at his entrance into the first point of the Equinoctials Aries and Libra, or
Tropicks Cancer and Capricorn; and therefore I must needs conclude the Ancients
have herein been very weak and as worthy reprehension as applause in other
matters. Yet I would not have thee expect any new thing; for I must conclude
with Wecker in his Praef. ad Syntax. med. Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius;
there is nothing said or to be said that has not been said before; or if you
will not believe him, take the testimony of the most wise Solomon, Eccles. 1.9.
The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, and that which is done, is
that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the Sun: and if this
were so in his days, so long since, how can we in the least expect novelties in
this Age, or in these latter days, wherein though the world abounds in Books,
so that D. King sometime B. of London very well noted, they are in number
without number, yet we shall find the most of them one and the same, expressed
in several and diverse terms and phrases, according to the strain and fancy of
the Penner, and for the most part we see him that comes last, to exceed his
Predecessors.

It had been too intricate a thing for me to have noted where I have in any
place enlarged of my own, since it is so general throughout all the four Books;
yet my phrase and style will lead thee I believe unto most of it; it is wholly
my own method and no translation, but rather a collection, so that I may well
say with Macrobius, Omne meum nihil meum; mine is none of mine: yet this I can
assure thee, that I do not remember any point or place where I have willingly
been dark, or desired to detain any thing from thy understanding: It is, as I
may say, even hewed out of the Rocks, and therefore I expect some places may be
rougher and more unpolished then I could wish; it is the first draught, and
therefore I hope that may a little plead for me; wherefore be pleased
(Courteous Reader) to accept of my wel-wishes, and out of thine own goodness
and grateful disposition pardon my defects, which I cannot but fear are many,
having not had time to correct it, or alter the style or phrase, which at the
best is but homely, and sometimes very harsh, according to the present
condition and fancy of my genius at times, not at all studying to frame or
place my words, but quicquid in buccam venit served turn; and to tell you the
truth, it being once brought forth, I could not endure to think of correcting
it, it being a work both so painful and troublesome, so that I had rather write
another Book as big again, and could as soon accomplish it, as correct what I
have here written; besides, should I have gone about it, as often as I should
have read it, so often should I have altered it in one kind or other, according
to that of Ter. Adelph.

Nunquam ita quicquam been subduct a ratione ad vitam fuit,
Quinres, aetas, usus, semper aliquid apportant Novi.
The which you may English thus,

Naught ever was at first contrived so fit,
But Use, or Age, or something altered it.
Wherefore in this regard I was the more negligent thereof, but left it unto
thee and thy courtesy, knowing that when I had done my utmost therein, I
should never be able to please all parties; if by some I were accepted, by
others I should be rejected; I must look for as well frowns, slights and
derisions from some, as applause or countenance from others, Quot homines tot
sententiae, so many men so many minds; wherefore (gentle Reader) let this
consideration plead for me, and be thou so favorable as to pass by my
failings, and remember that the best of the Ancients had their faults and
defects, the which I could here recite, might I justly vindicate my self by the
condemnation of others. Besides, I would have thee also know I have not dwelt
wholly on this subject, neither do I wholly devote my self to any one study or
Science whatsoever, or limit my Spirit to so strait a prison, or narrow
confines; I was ever of a roving humor for matter of knowledge, and could
never persuade my self I should ever know enough of any thing: and although I
am not of capacity to attain ought but the froth or superficies of any study,
yet have I endeavored to be aliquis in omnibus, though (being brought to the
proof) I should be found Nemo in singulis; wherefore let this with the
preceding prevail with thee, so as that my most absurd faults may seem little
or nothing in thy eye, since indeed these my Labors were penned at spare
hours, and on purpose to please my own fancy and humor, although Providence
has now made them public.

But here it may be some will carp at my writing in English; but at such I
shall only laugh: for I aim to benefit the ingenious of my own Country, and
write to their edification, not to show my self a Scholar or a welwiller to
Forrainers: but I would fain ask such Creatures, whether Homer that wrote in
Greek, or Cicero in Latin, were not as worthy reprehension, as I that write in
English? since those were also their vulgar tongues; or what advantage or
benefit should the people of my Nation receive by having an unknown language
delivered them? I write not to a few, but to them all in general: But if I may
be plain, the thing that most troubles them is, their Trade will be spoild* by
reason their Juglings and Cheatings are beaten down, and the substantial part
of the Art so plainly divulged.

But to these men I say, let them sorrow and repent themselves of their
hypocrisy, self-endedness, pride and coveteousness the root of all evil, and
learn love, humility, charity, and to purchase unto themselves general spirits;
I know the consciences of some of them will testify unto themselves they are
herein spoken to, and presently imagine I speak in ill will to them, being
conscious to themselves they have given me sufficient cause by their frequent
disparagements of me to some of my acquaintance.

But I appeal to an higher power to be Judge of this my action, I do not envy
or bear ill will to any of their persons, but I cannot endure to have men
pretend to promote an Art or any thing else, and yet in the mean time act
nothing less, nor nothing more then the engrossing of it wholly to themselves:
it is this, and this only that causes me in any place to hint at them;
wherefore since I know my own innocence herein, I shall be content to let them
rail and revile me at their pleasure.

The Authors l^fe.
It rests now I refer you to the subsequent Discourses; but first I shall
deliver unto the World a testimony of my Birth, Breeding and Life hitherto,
being by some calumniated of late, and now likely to incur more of their
bitterness by these my labors, and let not the Reader wonder I witness of my
self; for it is no more then many of the Ancients and Fathers of the Church
have done before me; besides I am not so ancient, but what I write may by one
or other also be justified.

The time and place of his birth, and his parentage and family.
I was born the thirteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1625. stilo
Angliae, in the City of Westminster, in the County of Middlesex Angliae.

My Mother was by birth of England, as were all her Predecessors, my Father of
Scotland and that of an ancient family viz. of Eighther-house, which has
flourished in great glory for 1500 years till these latter days, as the Records
there testify.

The original of my Name and stock.
The Original of our Name was from the residence of his and my Progenitors in
the Land of Egypt, from the pleasantness of the soil where they inhabited, or
of herbs growing thereon, which therefore had the same name, RAMESEY, in
English being as much as to say Joy and Delight, and this was in that County
which is called Goshen; from thence they came into Germany under the conduct of
the Roman Emperor, in which Wars for their service they obtained of him in a
field Argent, the Eagle sable displayed, with one head for their coat of Arms;
whence (the War being ended) being desirous to travel, they took ship,
intending for England, and being often kept back by stress of weather and
Divine Providence, they at length resolved to take that place for their
residence to Posterity where they should be first forced to Land; and not many
days after, it so happened they were driven into an harbor in Scotland on that
coast which is called Fife, where they being but eight in number left alive,
built the aforesaid house, and called it by that name in their Language, which
has since been thus called, according to the speech of the Country, viz.
[Eighther-house] It is further recorded of them, that as they increased in
number they dispersed themselves into several Families, of the which Dalhousie
is now reported the chief, William Lord Ramesey being Earl thereof.

Of But to come nearer home, when our late Sovereign Lord King James of happy
memory came to the Crown of England, he sent into France for my Father, who was
then there, and made him Page of the Bedchamber and Groom of the Privy-chamber,
and Keeper of all his Majesty's Clocks and watches; this I mention for that by
Viz. So ^e of that Trade to countenance and credit themselves in the Kings time,
affirming him to be their Master; and now since by others, through envy,
think^ng thereby to upbraid and reproach both him and me.
some he has bin termed no better then a watch-maker; I contemn no trade or
lawful vocation whatsoever, but I would have men speak the truth; it is confessed
his ingenuity led him to understand any piece of work in that nature; we read
the same of Henry the 4th. of France and Lewis the 13th. and many Princes and
Emperors of Germany and others, which I could (but for brevities sake) record,
and therefore the king conferred that place upon him: Now how this should prove
him a Watch-maker and no other, more then the late Earls of Pembrook ordinary
Chamberlains because they bore this office in the Kings house, do thou judge;
but this by the way.

Where the Author had his education, and how he has since spent his days.
As soon as I was of any capacity, I was put to School in St. Albones in
Hartfordshire, Bushy, Westminster, Milend-green, and other places; and when I
should have gone to Oxford, by reason of our late differences I was prevented,
and therefore being desirous to further my Learning, I importuned my Father to
send me to St. Andrews in Scotland, but there also I was disappointed by the
frequent approaches of the Marquess of Montrosse and his Army; I therefore
(rather then fail) settled in Edinburgh College, where I continued till it
pleased God to visit that Town with Pestilence, the which at length growing
very hot, I returned in April 1645. into England, and have remained in London
ever since, wholly applying my self, as ever, to the study of Nature, and the
more secret and sublime Sciences, but practiced nothing save Physic; for our
homebred differences and distractions, rending me (with many others) mean in
the sight of the more inferior Spirits of the world (for wealth and honor I
perceive brings not nobleness of mind) I would not associate my self with many
men and much acquaintance, but still lived an obscure, retired and reserved
life, dedicating myself wholly (I say) to my book, so that I dare boldly averr
(notwithstanding I was born and bred-up all my days in and about this City of
London, save only the time I was in Scotland) I am not familiarly acquainted
with three people in all England; for such is my disposition, that I had rather
be a stranger in the Land of my Nativity (in this perverse and rebellious Age)
and to the generality of men living therein, then to my self and my own
conscience; the which so long as I may freely enjoy, I shall never repine but
be ever content with what condition, loss or change soever, God has farther in
his Wisdom and Providence decreed for me; to whom for eternal protection I
shall here commend thee and remain

Die 19. Januarii, 1652. Thy Loving Friend, William Ramesey.

On his Ever Honored, and most Ingenious Friend the unparalleld AUTHOR.
WHy were not thou produced in those Days
In which Philosophers did wear the Bays?
Learning and Art in this Age are beat down!
Learning of old was had in great renown.
In Syria, Greece and Babylonia,
A rabia, Persia, Lacedemonia,
Amongst the Caldeans also and Assyrians,
Renowned Egyptians and Sydonians,
And Indians with our Neighbors of France
Much honored it, and still did it advance;
Each then in virtue striving to exceed,
So virtuous were they; Now in our need
Even when it was almost forgotten quite,
You were brought forth to bring it unto light.
W. D. Iatromathematicus.

On this incomparable Work, and my worthy Friend the Ingenious AUTHOR.
What shall I of these learned Labors write,
Or of the Author what shall I indite?
Come all ye Gods, assist this pen of mine,
Come all ye Sisters, come ye Muses Nine
Lend here your help, and let now all men know,
If they in Mysteries desire to grow,
Here they the Treasure of the East may find,
And Natural hidden causes to their mind,
How by the virtue of the glorious Stars,
Health, Sickness, Plenty, Scarcity, Peace, Wars
Are brought to pass in their due time, and all
Things that are done in this World, great and small;
And that God works not prepostrously,
As some men strangely have maintaind; but by
Order and Nature he brings all to pass,
Which we may clearly see as in a glass,
Could we but read the volumes of the Sky,
As here the Author clears it to the eye
Of every notion; whose elaborate pains,
Be recompensed with immortal gains:
And when he shall be taken from this place,
Let him be fixed amongst the Stars, to grace
Those Heavenly bodies and those Lamps of Light,
For he has made them glorious in our sight.
I. W.

Upon the Authors Elaborate Pains in these his Labors.
WHO in his Writings seeks all men to please,
Is not unlike the Merchant on the Seas,
Meeting with rocks, winds, pirates, shelves and sands,
Yet boldly ventures, ere at home he lands
His Ship full fraught, returned safe and sound,
Discharged of Wealth, wherewith she did abound,
He sits him still, and lives at quiet ease,
Thinks the Land better then the boystrous Seas;
Even so our Friend in these ungrateful times
Has brought home learning bred in Foreign Clymes,
Is sure to meet with Find-Faults for his pains,
When he seeks naught but profit to their brains
And pleasure all men; Dolts do ever pine,
When they see Learning live, and Virtue shine:
All Ages, Sorts of men, and Learned Schools
Have honored this rare Science, save some Fools,
Who neither know, nay, will not understand
Unto what purpose God has given command
To the great Lights of Heaven, Planets and Stars,
To show their power on these Inferiors:
I envy none, yet he is no Friend of mine,
Who having Pearl's will cast them unto Swine.
The Commonwealth of Learning cannot flourish,
If she instead of True-born, Bastards nourish.
Some say those things are best which are in common,
But in these speculations, there is no man
Will so adjudge; For, an illiterate head,
But only taught to spell, perhaps to read
His mother Tongue, high Secrets to expound,
Mis-leading others, runs himself on ground.
But as our Merchant in some Foreign soil
Has got a precious Jewel by his toil
And industry, hoping thereby to raise
His Fortunes, brings it home, which he does praise
Unto his Friends; It they much magnify,
And some choice person does his Jewel Buy,
And much esteem it: So this Far-fetcht piece
Of Heavenly Science will the Golden Fleece
Even much resemble. The Author honored be,
As Jason was to all Posterity.
I. B.

The Contents of the First BOOK.
CHAP. I. PRoving Astrology to be one of the Liberal Sciences. Fol. 1. CHAP.
II. That Astrology and Astronomy are one and the same Science, and that they
were ever so received by the Ancients. Fol. 3. CHAP. III. Showing the
excellency and nobility of the Science of Astrology, as also its antiquity, and
the admirable power and virtues of the Heavens. Fol. 4. CHAP. IV. That the
Stars and Heavens have influence on inferior and elementary bodies, proved by
Scripture or the Word of God, and acknowledged by the Philosophers and the
learned in former Ages. Fol. 5. CHAP. V. Showing that observation may be made
of the motions of the Stars, in answer to those that hold it impossible for any
man in his days to observe the particular configurations of every Planet with
the fixed stars, and with one another, as also that thereby we may discern
their Influences, if we have any capacity. Fol. 7. CHAP. VI. That the variation
of the Heavens from their places wherein they were in Ptolomies time, or at the
first Creation, causes no Error in Astrological judgments. Fol. 8. CHAP.
VII. Showing the powerful influence of the Stars and Planets, and how far we
are to have regard to the fixed stars. Fol. 10. CHAP. VIII. Showing further the
influence of the Heavens on inferior and elementary bodies. Fol. 14. CHAP. IX.
Showing that the influences of the Heavens and predominancy of the stars in
every climate, is the cause of the several Laws and Customs of the people
therein. Fol. 16. CHAP. X. Containing the resolution of the main objections
against this Divine Science. Fol. 18. CHAP. XI. Containing an Introduction to
the vindication of my Lux Veritatis from the aspersions of Dr. Homes and his
second, with the first reason why I accounted him not worthy of my notice. Fol.
23. CHAP. XII. Comprehending three reasons more why that rabble of theirs was
not worthy answering as to every quirk. Fol. 24. CHAP. XIII. Containing the
Authors fourth reason, and a vindication of both him and his Lux Veritatis from
some of their abuses and untruths, and their juglings and evasions manifested.
Fol. 26. CHAP. XIV. Containing the Authors fifth Reason, and the Scripture
proofs, alleged for Astrology in his Lux Veritatis, proved to remain unshaken.
Fol. 30. CHAP. XV. Showing that the Text in the 19. Psalm. ver. 3. alleged by
the Author to prove the Stars have influence, is no wise refelled. Fol. 32.
CHAP. XVI. Proving their Reply to Job 38.31. showing the Stars to have
influence, to be frivilous and of no effect. Fol. 33. CHAP. XVII. Proving their
Reply to Judge. 5. and the 20. weak, and no wise available to their intent or
purpose. Fol. 34. CHAP. XVIII. That the Stars are proved both signs and causes
by the word of God, and the Art lawful, notwithstanding all their malice. Fol.
35. CHAP. XIX. Proving Astrology to be warranted by Councils in spite of their
rabble. Fol. 37. CHAP. XX. Containing the power and subject of Astrology, and
how far the Author vindicateth it. Fol. ibid.
ASTROLOGY FULLY Vindicated and Defended FROM ALL The Aspersions and Calumnies
of the Antagonists thereof: As also its Legality and Verity proved, both by the
Testimony of the Scriptures, Fathers, Ancients, and the consession of Councels:
With a clear Vindication of the Authors Lux Veritatis, from the vilifying
Reproaches of Dr. Homes and his Second; and that the purity of the Science
remains still untainted, notwithstanding all their Reply.
CHAP. I. Proving Astrology to be one of the Liberal Sciences.
WHen I first entered upon these my Labors, I thought by reason of the bulk,
and for that it had been of late traduced by the ignorant, it would be very
convenient to prefix some Discourse which might tend both to the vindication
thereof, and the manifestation of its sublime excellency and verity; whereupon
at my spare times, I entered upon this subsequent Discourse: upon my first
conception thereof, I thought it would not have exceeded a short Preface; but
being brought forth, I perceived both for the largeness of its bulk, and
variety of discourse, it deserved rather the denomination of a Book, which I
call A Vindication of Astrology. I shall not need to say any more thereof, only
refer thee to its perusal, and here begin our matter, with the Answer of an
Objection, the better to usher in our following intentions; which is, Astrology
is none of the Liberal Sciences, Answ.
but Astronomy is. The vanity of which Objection shall be cleared here beneath,
it being indeed one and the same Art, though two distinct parts or properties.
But first, least some may question whether it be an Art, for that, as they
suppose, Aristotle in some parts of his Works seems to deny it; yet upon better
consideration, there is no rational man but will soon find that he is so far
from denying any such thing, that he speaks as much thereof as any Astrologer
can. Aristotle makes no difference between Astrology and Astronomy, but
together wi^h Physics acknowledges them all one and the same Art, though
distinct parts.
Look further, Aristotle Methaphys. 6. and 12. and 1. Polit. cap. 7. and
several other places, too tedious to relate here. Also his 2. De Coelo text 17.
and lib. de proprieta. element. and lib. de mundo cap. 9. and in the 4. de
generatione animalium, cap. 10. for there is none that is well acquainted with
his manner of Writing, but knows that he indifferently uses the Name of
Astrologer and Astronomer for one and the same; and also in other places,
Astrologer and Philosopher, as making no difference between them, which here to
particularize were both tedious and superfluous in so clear a case; and in his
Phys. lib. 2. cap. 2. he makes no more difference between Astrology, Astronomy
and Physics, then the particular names of the head, hand and foot, etc. do
make that they are different things from the body, though distinct members,
when all rational men know that notwithstanding they are several parts, yet
they all conduce to the composition of one entire body.

Wherefore in my Lux veritatis or defense of Astrology, chap. 1. sect. 3. I
bring Aristotle to affirm Astrology to be Scientia media, a Science between the
Mathematics and Natural Philosophy; wherefore those that find not these very
words, Scientia media, in the above said 2. of Phys. cap. 2. if they find so
much inferred, it is sufficient to evince such carpers at Truth, to be either
void of matter of discourse, or envious, or both; when it is clear he makes no
more distinction between the one and the other, then what you have but now
heard.

I forbear here, to set down the testimony of Averroes in his Com. on the 12.
of the Metaph. Text 44. and on the second Book of Phys. cap. 2. but refer you
to the perusal of that 3. Sect. aforesaid, where you shall also find that in
his Comment 7. of the third of his Metaph. he affirms Astrology to be a
Mathematical Art; and this is acknowledged by all the Judicious and learned;
neither do any but Fools and Novices make it a distinct Art or Science of it
self, but a part of Astronomy, Physics and Natural Philosophy, which make up
one entire Liberal Science; Astrology one of the Liberal Sciences.
this is well known to the Learned; yet for the satisfaction of some weak
headed Momuses have I thus plainly delivered my self, who carp and rail at what
they are ignorant of.

Further Averroes, Text 44. of the 12. of the Metaph. (amongst many more, which
to insert here would make my labors of too great a bulk) acknowledges
Astrology to be an Art; but in this place, I say he has these words, Ita autem
ars propria est huic intentioni inter alias Mathematicas, quia considerat de
substantiis aeternis sensibilibus; aliae autem Scientiae Mathematicae
considerant de accidentibus, ut ars Arithmetica, and Geometria. And in his
Comments on the 2. de Coelo, Text 58. he attributes so much to the power of
the Heavens over these inferior Bodies, that he confesses one Star to have a
greater power then another: and also in the 68. Text of the same Book, he
acknowledges every star to have his own particular operation, etc.

Of the legality, great esteem and antiquity of Astrology standing firm and
unshaken for ought all the envious carpers and Ignoramuses can say. How
Astrology and Astronomy came separated. Astrology and Astronomy one and the
same Science.
As touching the legality and great esteem Astrology was in in former Ages, I
shall here (for brevitie sake) refer thee to the perusal of the 4. Section of
the 1. Chapter of my Lux veritatis, and for its Antiquity to the 5. Section of
the same Chapter; for there is nothing more certain, then it has been ever in
most high esteem by all the more grave sort of Councels, States, Kingdoms and
Empires; as also by the chiefest and wisest sort of men studied and maintained,
it being the chiefest of all studies under the Sun, and among the Learned the
most coveted after.

For though it has been (by the malicious adversaries thereof) distinguished
from Astronomy, yet (I say) by the Learned and Judicious never; for though they
are distinct parts, yet are they one entire Science, and that, one of the seven
Liberal Sciences, as you have heard; wherefore the simplicity and ignorance of
some weak-braind men who make this distinction, ought not to be countenanced,
staining and traducing thereby the chiefest of Sciences that was ever studied
by men; for that they, and they only were the first that made them any wise
reputed several, shall beneath appear; for since it comes here so opportunely
in my way, I will give you (for the farther clearing of this point) the
testimony of some former and authentic Writers, though were I not confined to
somewhat a narrow bounds, I might insert most or all Writers that were any ways
Judicious; but since, Verbum Sapienti sat est, and the case so clear and
unquestioned amongst rational men, I shall (as brief as may be) give thee some,
and then proceed, that I may hasten (as has been said) to say somewhat of one
that has put forth a patcht pretended Reply to my Lux Veritatis in answer to
Doctor Nathaniel Homes.

CHAP. II. That Astrology and Astronomy are one and the same Science, and that
they were ever so received by the Ancients.
I Have already declared the testimony of Aristotle on this point, and if we
peruse the works of Ptolomie, we shall find also, Ptolomy makes no difference
between Astrology and Astronomy.
that he makes no difference between the one and the other; and more
particularly (not to insist long hereon) Lib. 1. cap. de Quadr. and cap. 3. de
Quadr. he calls there the Art of Astrology Astronomy, and the Predictions
Astronomical; so confounding the distinction of the parts with the essential
name of the Science. Wherefore though Ptolomie has, by some brainsick men,
been brought to condemn Astrology, The apparent folly of these men that
produce Ptolomy against Astrology.
we see thereby the folly of such envious and ignorant gainsayers of what they
are altogether unknown in: for it is very strange that he should be produced to
condemn what he has taught to the world in four Books in Folio; but such is
the stupidity and perverseness of the Antagonists thereof, that when Astrologers
declare and show manifestly the power and efficacy of the influence of the
Stars, there they accuse them with impiety and illegal practices: and when they
sincerely teach not to ascribe so much to the Stars, as to neglect these
inferior causes, but to join the consideration of the one with the other; here
(not considering, nor indeed understanding the scope and intentions of their
Writings) they pick out certain particular places of their works which they
think makes for their idle conceits and cavils to the condemnation of
Astrology, What the Ancients deserve at our hands for their care and pains of
us; for ingratitude is abominable.
and the labors of those that herein have spent their whole lives for the
benefit of these after Ages; who have by us small requital of their care and
pains thus to traduce them, when they ought rather by us to be eternized with
Statues of Gold, and whole volumes of praises in perpetuum.

Hermes Trismegistus also in his Centiloquium, calls the Art no other then
Astrology, Hermes.
and the Students Astrologers.

And Tully also in all his Works calls the Art no other then Astrology,
Tully.
never so much as once mentioning Astronomy; for in Lib. 2. de Divinitat. he
makes predictions a part of Astrology, and not an Art of it self, when he
testifies of Cassander and Archelaus that they were excellent in other parts
of Astrology, yet never used Predictions.

And Pliny lib. 7. cap. 37. witnesses that Berosus, And Pliny.
for his Divine Predictions in Astrology, had his Statue erected him with a
golden tongue.

The Septuagints in the 47. of Isa. also make no difference of Astrology and
Astronomy, nor Astrologers and Astronomers, The Septuagints also.
comprehending them both under the name Astrologers, and the Art under the word
Astrology.

Galen also, lib 3. cap. 6. and 12. Likewise Galen
De diebus decret. contrariwise calls the Egyptian Astrologers Astronomers.

And the same does Cassiodorus, Plato, and Philo.
And again Cassiodorus comprehends the works and effects of the Stars under
the word Astronomy where he defines Astrology: so also Plato, Philo, and indeed
all learned Writers; which, since to the Judicious this is so well known, I
shall not need here longer to insist; only shall also add this, that Bonatus in
his 11. chapter De confirm. Astrol. Scientiae, makes Astrology as did Aristotle
(as you have already heard) a part of Astronomy in these words, Astronomia est
Sciencia per quam non solum praesentium, Bonatus consents to the same.
verum etiam praeteritorum ac futurorum habetur cognitio. See also his 14 chap.
where under the word Astronomy, as you may see in the Contents of the chapter
he proves Astrology to be one of the Liberal Sciences.
Astronomy is a Science by which not only present things but what is past and
to come may be known. Here you see by these words he comprehends Astrology
under the name and word Astronomy. And then as I have said in the following
words, shows it is a part of the same Art; definitur etiam alio modo, viz. In
duas parts sive species ipsius breviter, contemplativam scilicet and activam;
quae sunt Astrologia and Astronomia. It is defined also another way, viz
divided into two parts or kinds, to wit, contemplative and active, which are
Astrology and Astronomy.

Thus you see here what difference the Ancients have made betwixt the one part
and the other; and he in that same chapter further shows how they differ,
where he says, In quo differunt istae duae parts dicam tibi, in what these
two parts differ I shall show thee; and so forward; wherefore then this being
apparently manifest, I shall not here spend more time or trouble thee,
referring thee for further satisfaction to his twelfe chapter, where he shows
clearly both the parts and species of Astronomy; and I believe an artificer is
best able to deliver a definition of his own Art, and rather to be believed
then one altogether ignorant therein, which that man must needs be, that will
be so peremptorily base and impudent, or rather imprudent, as to deny what is
thus confessed by all Ancient and Authentic writers of this heavenly and most
delectable and admired Science; neither upon due consideration will any man
find the knowledge of the motions, Astronomy of no great use or validity
without Astrology.
which is one part of the Science, to be of much use or validity without the
true understanding of their effects, etc.

And here also I may add one word to that fourth Section of my first chapter, I
have referred thee to, that he also in his next chapter, viz, the thirteenth,
witnesses that Abraham taught the Egyptians his Art, and that Atlas who was
afterward so excellent therein that it was thought of him, he was a God, and
therefore was supposed (through his excellency in his knowledge therein) to
support thr Heavens on his shoulders.

CHAP. III. Containing the Excellency and Nobility of the Science of Astrology,
as also its Antiquity, and the admirable power and virtue of the Heavens.
Astrology first revealed to the first man Adam by God himself; Not Diabolical
or illegal, but most lawful and most to be desired of all other natural
Sciences. A great means to draw us to God and acquaint us with his Divine
incomprehensible self. Nota.
LOok also into the Preface of Gerson his Trilogium Astrologiae Theologizatae
(who reduces in that piece Astrology to Divinity) and you shall find that he
acknowledges it an admirable and Noble Science, revealed to Adam the first
Patriark by God, and so to his posterity; Ergo, most lawful, and to be desired
above all Sciences in the World, not being either Diabolical, Illegal,
opposite to trust or confidence of God, but indeed rather a great means to
acquaint us with his Heavenly and incomprehensible divine self, when by the
motions and constant influences of the Celestial bodies, we know the
corruption, generation and procreation of all things in this Elementary world,
and so contemplate and talk or converse daily and hourly with him who is not to
be beheld by frail mortal eyes, or flesh, nor to stand in the immediate
presence of that dreadful omnipotent God, whose voice alone is a consuming
fire, etc. Gersons words (I say) are Propterea non est hoc negandum de
Astrologia, quam esse Scientiam Nobilem, and admirabilem, primo Patriarchae
Adam, and sequacibus revelatam, Theologia non abnegat. Wherefore it is not to
be denied of Astrology, but to be a Noble and admirable Science, revealed first
to Adam and his posterity, Divinity refuses or denies not; for there is
nothing more certain then that God has in his secret wisdom so disposed of the
constitution of the Celestial bodies, that his Will by their operations and
several influences is acted and performed thereby; so that to the end of the
world it is foreordained and decreed by him to be so performed and
accomplished by them, according to the opinion and excellent judgment of P. de
Ariaco, who in his Concordance of Astrology with Divinity, proves the Flood,
Sects, Noah's flood, Sects, Schisms, and other accidents foreknown and signified
by the Heavens. The Heavens is Gods instrument, by which he governs and
rules this Elementary world. The Heavens have many and diverse virtues and obey
the Commandment of God.
Schisms and other most notable accidents to be signified in Heaven long
before; and this is confirmed also by Gerson, who in his second Proposition,
acknowledged Heaven to be (as indeed it is) the Instrument of God, whereby he
governs this corruptible and inferior Elementary world. And further says
he, Erraverunt hic aliqui, dicentes coelum nihil agere, sed tantummodo signum
esse, allegantes illud, and erunt in signa and tempora. They err who think the
Heavens do nothing, but are only for signs, alleging that, and they shall
be for signs and seasons, etc. For he further in the third Proposition, says
and approves it to be a probable and subtle opinion, that God foreknowing the
chances of men, had described certain agreeable tokens in Heaven, concurring
with the course of the world even to the day of judgment. By this I say is my
words, and the opinion of P. de Ariaco confirmed; and in the fourth
Proposition, he declares that Heaven has received many and diverse virtues of
God, according to the variety of the parts of the Stars, of the Planets and of
the motions of them, though not comprehended by all men; and so forward he
testifies, that they obey the commandment of God. But this by the way; let us
now proceed.

CHAP. IV. That the Heavens and Stars have influence on inferior and
Elementary things, Proved by Scripture or the word of God; And acknowledged by
Philosophers, and the learned in former ages.
LEt us now then, (having cleared this Objection, viz. That Astronomy is an
Art or one of the Liberal Sciences, but not Astrology, and proved that they are
one and the same Science, though distinct parts, and that they were
distinguished but of late times by ignorant cavillers against it,) prove that
the Heavens have influence together with the Stars, on Elementary and sublunary
things; being also by many unknown in the works of God, (not to use a harsher
term) denied to have any.

The Heavens or influence of the stars cause of Fertility and Sterility. Of
Sterility.
That the Heavens have a great and strong influence on sublunary Elementary
things, as touching sterility and fertility, which we shall here begin first
with, there is none but who are most impious, will dare to deny, since the Word
of God himself shows us the truth thereof: for first if you look into the 26
of Leviticus, ver. 19. you shall find there, the Lord threatening his children
with sterility for disobedience, says, I will make your Heaven as Iron, and
your Earth as Brass; viz. The Heavens shall not duly by their influence distill
those comfortable showers of fertility, they shall be hard as Iron, and your
earth as brass, that it shall not receive any impression there from, etc. And
so likewise on the contrary, when of his infinite Goodness and Mercy he
promises plenty, he says, I will hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall
hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.21, 22. Of Fertility.
So that hereby you see clearly a dependency of the earth on the Heavens, and
their influence; Jezreel the people of the Lord, when their ways shall please
him, shall be heard by the corn, wine, and oil, viz. all sufficient
necessaries, they being comprehended under these words; and these having their
dependency as it were from the earth, as growing out of it, shall be heard or
assisted by it, or furthered to its utmost ability; but all this will not do,
without the Heavens hear or assist the earth with its sweet influence; nor,
then, except God the disposer and orderer of all things, hear and give his
blessing to the Heavens; so that hereby we see God most clear in the order and
disposal of nature, God is to be seen in the order of nature, and in his works.
Nota.
who is the first moving and efficient cause, to whom all causes are but
subordinate; yet you see that next unto himself the Stars are secondary causes,
and from him immediate causes of all our earthly enjoyments or afflictions; for
what causes that amongst corn, the ground being diligently tilled and
painfully mannured by the Husbandman, and the Corn sowed herein being clean
and pure, from other mixture of seeds; what causes, I say, that yet
notwithstanding, there will several flowers both blew, red, and purple, grow
amongst it, also out of the same seed, Darnel, solders, and smutty gear? if
this be not occasioned through and by the influence of the Heavens, it is
occasioned by nothing in the whole fabric of the world. But yet for further
confirmation hereof, the 33 of Deuteronomy. v. 14. you see, does manifestly make it
apparent, where the whole influence of the Heavens, and the increase of all
Vegetatives are attributed to the Sun and Moon, viz. For the precious fruits
brought forth by the Sun, and for the precious things put or thrust forth by
the Moon.

Again we see clearly in many places of Scripture, the stars are called the
Hoasts of Heaven, Further that the stars have influence.
which certainly would never have been thus named, were they of no force and
efficacy, the word hosts intimating their power and strength; see 2 King. chap.
17. ver. 16. and chap. 21. ver. 3.5. and chap. 23. ver. 4, 5, etc. So likewise
God himself expressing his omnipotent and irresistible power and force, he is
called the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 24. v. 23. Is. 23.9. and chap. 22. v. 5.12.14,
15, 25, and many several other places which are worth the while to peruse.

But further to put this matter quite out of doubt, viz. That the stars have
their influence on Elementary bodies, see Deuteronomy 4.19. where you see clearly they
are for the use of man divided or imparted unto all Nations under the Sun, by
which if any man shall conclude and affirm is meant their light, Answ.
and of seasons; I must needs tell him his conclusion is very weak, since we
have so small use of their light either in the day or night, that it may very
well be counted none at all; and as touching that distinction of days and
seasons, the Sun and Moon would be sufficient for that matter without those
innumerable Hoasts of Heaven the stars: stars must in this place have a
further constrution.

The influence of the stars extends to the temperature of men, as we see in
Lunatic. To the success of men's affairs also, though denied by some. The
influence of the stars acknowledged by Philosophers.
Moreover that their influences have power and extend to the temperature of men,
appears Matthew. 17.14. where the lunatic is offered unto Christ to be healed,
whose distemper, as experience and common example shows, follows the course
of the Moon, and to the success of men's affairs, does yet further appear by
Judge. 5.20. where it is recorded that the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera, of the which more anon, as also that passage in the 38 of Job, and the
19 Psalm. as touching the Pleiades and Orion, and that the Heavens declare the
glory of God, their voice or language of the stars being gone through the whole
earth, etc.

Thus have we clearly seen the influence of the stars proved by the Word of
God; how they were esteemed in former ages by all Philosophers, Emperors,
Kings, and the nobler spirited people you may see if you will have regard to
the 4 Sec. chap. 1. of my Lux Veritatis, where you may see not only the great
esteem the Art was in amongst all wise and learned men in former ages, but also
the names of the chiefest Patriarchs, Fathers, Philosophers, Emperors, and
Kings that were students herein; which notwithstanding the pretended arguments
of the envious against it, stands unshaken, as will appear to any that shall
peruse it, comparing it with the pretended Replyers discourse; therefore here I
shall refer thee thereunto, being desirous to be as short as possibly I can.

CHAP. V. Showing that observation may be made of the Stars motions, in answer
to those that hold it impossible for any man in his days to observe the
particular configurations of every Planet, with the fixed Stars, and with one
another; as also that thereby we may discern their influence if we have any
capacity.
Observation teaches us the stars influence.
I Shall here therefore now show, that observation will clearly evince us that
the Stars have admirable influence on these inferior and elementary things;
for though it be most certain that the Heavens make not their Revolution under
36000. years, yet is its variation so slow, as that it depends upon the
motion of the fixed Stars; so that before there can be any great difference
worth speaking of, the same constellations may be often observed in particular,
though not in the whole; for the fixed Stars according to the nearest account
of our late Writers, or the sphere in which they are, move not above one
degree, which is 60. minutes in 72. years, in which time there is none, but who
are altogether ignorant, that cannot make sufficient observation of every
constellation worth noting for the confirmation of their influence; for though
they move from East to West once in 24. hours, so making this Diurne Revolution
366. times in a year, yet since in respect of the motion of this Sphere from
West to East these 366. Revolutions causes not a minutes difference; it must
needs follow that the very same fixed stars do rise, culminate, set, That the
true nature of the Stars may be known and how.
and lie in the same Circle of position, and also may be in configuration of
the Sun, and any of the other Planets, and that so exactly in one and the same
place or part of Heaven, that it is impossible with any instrument to discern
any variation either in the longitude, latitude, declination, right or oblique
ascension thereof; so that hereby it is clear the nature of any star may be
found out, and be exactly known.

The power of the Planets.
But now as touching the Planets; first, we attribute, as is clear to every
vulgar notion most power and efficacy to the Sun, next to the Moon, then to
Venus, and so to Mercury, and next to Jupiter and Saturn, and lastly to Mars;
this (I mean) in relation to their motion with the Sun; for by how much the
light of the Planets to us is greater and their motion swifter, by so much are
their operations necessarily the more apparent and manifest to us or our sense:
we prefer Venus before Mercury, for that though he be swifter, yet is she the
greater, and so consequently of more efficacy: and the reason why Mars is of
least note, or most obscure unto us is, for that he is less then Saturn and
Jupiter, who are preferred before him, and moves in so large and great an
Epicycle, that he seldomest rancounters with the Sun.

The significations of the influence of the Stars are soon found out in
relation to their configurations with the Moon, with the Sun, Venus and
Mercury. In relation to the configurations of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars with
them.
And we know that the Moon (as I have said in chap 4. of my Lux Veritatis, sect.
2.) finisheth her course through the Zodiac every 28. days and some odd hours,
viz. twelve times in a year; by which we may, and do plainly perceive her
configurations, viz. Conjunction, Sextile, Trine, Square and Opposition with
every Star in the whole Heavens, both fixed and errant, and thereby their
nature and mixture often to be known and discerned, and that very certainly.

The Sun, Venus and Mercury also, do every year once finish their course, so
that also hereby every year we may, and do plainly see and find out their own
specifical nature, and the properties of the other Stars, viz. fixed, as also
their mixtures, and that before any sensible error can be made by the motion
of the Starry Sphere.

Again, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, although they are (by reason of their
superiority) of flower motion, yet does it neither any ways hinder, but that
their effects may easily and soon (as also their mixtures among themselves and
the fixed stars) be known; for though Saturn be 29. years, some odd months and
days, making his revolution, or running his course through the twelve Signs of
the Zodiac, Jupiter twelve years, Mars three years; yet by reason of their
long continuance in every sign, as also by their retrogradations, stations and
directions coming often to the conjunction of the Stars in the Sign wherein
they are, and to the Aspects of others in other Signs, we cannot but often and
plainly be taught to perceive the several influence of every star in the whole
Zodiac without the least sense of error, especially since the Luminaries
also, the Sun and Moon in the mean time come to them, and so make commixture of
their influence, yearly and monthly.

The Influence of the Stars taught at large by former Astrologers.
Of all which the Student in Astrology cannot be ignorant, if he but warily
observe his Authors, who have sufficiently and largely declared them all unto
him, as they by observation, and frequent practice have both been found out and
approved by them to be most effectually true from Age to Age; yet if thou be
so curious (as I could wish thou were, and all other ingenious souls) as that
thou will make particular observation thereof thy self, Saturn, who is the very
slowest of the Planets, finisheth his course, and comes to Conjunction,
Sextile, Square, Trine or Opposition of every particular Star, of every
particular magnitude, in every particular of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac
twice; and Jupiter six times, Mars 24. times; the Sun, Venus, and Mercury 72.
times, and the Moon 864. times or thereabouts; but oftener and more frequently
they meet with one another (I mean the Planets) as the great Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter happens once in twenty years; of Saturn and Mars once in
two years, etc. So that particular observation of their effects may easily, and
that in a man's life be both observed and known distinctly, I say, if any be
thus curious.

Thus far chiefly, to clear the point I intend here next to insist upon, viz.
That the Stars and their influence have power over all sublunary things; least
some should (as of late they have) render themselves ridiculous to posterity,
in denying both their effects and power, or at least, in affirming man (if they
have any) is not able to comprehend the depth thereof, etc.

CHAP. VI. That the variation of the Heavens from their places wherein they
were in Ptolomies time, or at the first Creation, causes no erring in
Astrological Judgments.
stars cannot be known by us, for that Ptolomie, whom we account as a chief
Doctor amongst us in the delivering the mysteries and instructions of this Art,
writ so long since, that the Heavens are gone some whole degrees from their
places, they were in at his time, and therefore the same Rules will not now
hold which he delivered.

Answ.
For the answering of this Objection, I should do well to say no more then
this, that it is altogether weak, and occasioned through ignorance, etc. and
not trouble my self further to answer what needs no answer; The motion of the
Heavens since Ptolomies time, nor indeed since the first Creatlon, is any cause
of error in Astrologers judgments in this our Age.
but least those for whom I have undertaken these my labors, should then, for
that they are not well grounded in the Art, think this Goliath to be more then
it is; I shall say thus much, that Ptolomie tied us not by his Writings to be
confined to use his Rules for those places the Signs were in at that time; but
thus, Saturn in Aries signifies so and so, where ever Aries be removed; for it
is the nature of the Sign the Planet is in, that causes him to have such and
such a signification, not the place where the Sign is, in respect of the
Revolution of the Starry Sphere; for then we (making no such observation for
the direction of our Judgments) should never be able to predict any thing of
certainty; besides if this had been necessary, Ptolomy would have taught us
accordingly, and also have directed the precepts of the Art to have dependency
on the place of the Heavens at the Creation, which were as far removed before
his time as they have been since; so that since the first Creation of all
things, Aries the first sign (and so consequently uniformly all the rest in
that Starry Sphere) is removed and revolved in the course of its motion near
upon three whole signs, according to Ticho his Account, which if this were of
any, or the least moment (as I have said) we should never possibly be able
(having no regard thereunto) to foretell any thing with certainty; But our
Rules run on another strain (as has been said) viz. a Planet in such a Sign,
signifies so and so, let it be by its revolution where it will, etc. But this
we find daily certain, and the other consequently then of no efficacy; as for
example.

We see clearly, and that to be testified by every vulgar notion, that when the
Sun comes into the Equinoctial point of Aries, the Spring forthwith begins to
show it self; The aforesaid objection cleared by example.
every thing by its humidity and temperate heat, being thereby made to
flourish, and as it were to rise again from the dead, which have by the tedious
blasts of the Hyemnal Air been kept in obscurity; and this without respect to
the place where Aries was in Ptolomies time, or at the first Creation; which
neither then at that time had any other but the same efficacy now they have,
though they may be intended or remitted by the conjunctions and configurations
of the Planets, or by the variation of their declination, as they dart their
beams more or less down perpendicularly upon us, and so work more or less
powerfully at one time then another in the same place.

So likewise when he enters into the first Solstice, or the Tropic of Cancer
(he being then nearest our Zenith) causes Summer; in the second Equinoctial,
Libra, Autumn; in the last Trophick, Capricorn, Winter, etc.

But to put this matter quite out of doubt, let us but observe when the Sun
comes into the Sign Taurus, and stirs up the virtue of the Pleiades and
Hyades in that sign, Manifested by common experience.
and the Hoedi to the North thereof, and Orion to the South, as also Arcturus
then setting; and we shall see these Constellations (being naturally violent
and tempestuous) do raise Southern and moist winds for certain days together,
watring the earth, and causing those seeds and vegetables (not before to be
discerned) to spring forth and appear; and this has not only been delivered
unto us from Antiquity, but we every year (toward the latter end of that
month, we vulgarly call April) find it by experience most true: Hence that
old English Proverb, even amongst the illiterate that know nothing of the
cause, April showers, bring May flowers.

Farther yet manifest.
Again when the Sun rises with the Dog Star, we see it causes many
infirmities, and vehemence of heat, so that Hipoc. Aphor. 4, 5. says,
Medicines are hard, or obnoxious that are administered under the Dog Star;
likewise we see Dogs at this time apt to run mad, the Sea to be troubled, and
all Creatures whatsoever in one sort or other perplexed; and this is known
commonly to all the vulgar, as well as the learned, and therefore needs not
farther to be amplified: yet in some Summers, Why the Dog Days are not all
years alike contagious.
this time is not so contagious as again in other years, which happens
according to the places and configurations of the Luminaries with the other
Planets and fixed Stars, according to their intentions and remissions, neither
cold nor heat proceeding from the absence or presence of the Sun, as some
weakly conceive; for then all Summers would be alike hot, as also all Winters
alike cold, since the Sun keeps his constant motion, and is never more
elongated nor appropriated, one year then another: And this we see also every
year when the Sun comes near the 18. Degree of Cancer, wherein the little or
lesser Dog is, notwithstanding the Revolution of the Starry sphere; for
otherwise it would be about the time he is in the 27. Degree of Gemini, which
is about the latter end of that month we commonly term May.

A third manifestation thereof.
Lastly, and with this I shall conclude as touching this point, and then
proceed: There is no man that has any knowledge in Astrology, but can affirm,
that the Weather will be tempestuous, stormy and turbulent, Saturn going out of
one Sign into another, according to Hermes, Centil. 33. and other sayings of
the Ancients, which if to be observed as they were just at the time Ptolomie
writ, or at the first Creation, it will now be when he is in the middle, or
toward the latter end of a sign, as the signs are now; for that Aries is now
in our times very far in Taurus, or where Taurus was in Ptolomies time; but
this hinders or varieth no more the Influence of the Heavens from their
natural properties and inclinations, then to affirm a Faggot or any other
combustible thing will not burn, although it be put into the fire, because it
is not in a Chimney, or any such whimsical assertion, etc. wherefore let us now
show the power of their Influence, and so discharge our former promise, since
it here so fitly offers it self.

The Stars causes next under God the first moving cause. By the study of the
Stars we see God in his works.
What has been already said is sufficient to satisfy any man who is not
disposed, or given over to obstinacy, of the verity and certainty of Astrology:
but for farther satisfaction, I think good yet to proceed to some particular
effects of the Stars, that God may be glorified in his Works, being himself the
first moving cause of all their wonderful operations, that we may (according
to the Apostle) see him in his Works, though not worthy to behold him as he is
in himself, nor indeed able, so long as we carry this earthy Tabernacle about
us unchanged and unglorified.

First then, because we are to hasten to say somewhat to a pretended reply to
my Lux Veritatis, least this first Book swell to a bigger bulk then I would
willingly have it: I shall briefly speak of the Planets first, and then of the
fixed Stars, or as they are both joined together, and so hasten to a conclusion.

CHAP. VII. Showing the powerful influence of the Stars and Planets, and how
far we are to have regard to the fixed Stars.
MOreover, having then seriously considered what has been said, it is clear to
every capacity, that by consequence, according to the account of Ticho, the
annual motion of the stars, not being above 58. seconds, and 58. thirds; it is
most palpably clear, that all that while, they rise with the same degree of the
Zodiac unto which the Sun yearly coming, at times prefixed and known, further
by their presence the work and effects of the Sun, after one and the same
manner, and so do not of themselves at all betoken plenty or scarcity more in
one year then another; The fixed stars no cause of plenty, or scarcity of
themselves: but the Planets by reason of their various motions are. Dearth,
plenty, drought, plagues, alterations of the air; the course of Navigation and
Husbandry, also the rule and sole government of the earth, as all accidents
therein, ascribed to the influence of the Planets.
but this variety and change (as also the generation and corruption of all
things) is to be referred to those stars that have diverse motions, viz. the
Planets, and this there is none that is Compos mentis will show themselves so
ridiculous as to deny; for by means of their various motions, they being
particular Agents, apply their virtue and influence diversely on these inferior
bodies; causing thereby the difference of the plenty of one year over another,
etc. So that hereby the weakest Judgment may soon discern that the diversity
of plenty and scarcity between one year and another, depends not on the
rising or setting of the fixed Stars, but on the commixture of the Influence of
the Planets with them; wherefore we see Clem. Alex. in his Eglogues does not
only make the Stars signs, foretelling the changes of the air, and plenty,
dearth, plagues, drought, etc. and in his Strom. lib. 6. necessaries to direct
the course of Husbandry and Navigation, but also in the same sixth Book a
little further, in his discourse of the seven Planets, he ascribes the Rule
and Government of the Globe of the earth thereunto, testifying farther that the
Chaldeans by them* did judge of the future events of all things appertaining to
this frail life; and also of Accidents to come. Look more Ptol. lib. 1. cap. 2.
de Quadrip. where may be seen the several operations of the Planets and fixed
stars in and over all Nations, Countries and People, and the reason of their
several Customs, Laws, Manners, and Inclinations.

Thus much for the general, since you have already heard that their force and
power may be and is known by observation; wherefore to descend to particulars.

That the Sun has influence.
If we have regard first to the Sun, we shall find that the power of the Sun,
and the quality of the Heavens cause the inhabitants of the Torrid Zone, to be
black; such are they which we call vulgarly Blackmoors, or Negroes, and causes
them also to be of constitution Choleric, their hair curled, of mean stature
by reason of the temperature of their bodies, which is hot and dry; Look Ptol.
lib. 2. cap. 2. de quadripar. We further know the Sun does also tan even us in
this our climate; and is the cause also of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter,
day and night; and the chief cause of the generation of all living creatures,
but more especially those which proceed from putrefaction, etc. (every one
knows) brings also to maturity all the fruits of the earth, and extimulateth
all creatures to the act of generation for the procreation of their several
kinds. But to be short, that 33. of Deuteronomy. ver. 14. before mentioned, and the
testimony of Moses, Genesis 1.14. (of which anon) that the Sun and the Moon were
constituted for signs and seasons, as well as other stars, is clear. We know
also he is of a drying and attractive Nature. That Chronick diseases follow his
course, as acute and sharp the course of the Moon, cum multis aliis; but here I
shall pass them by, since there is no Peasant but can acquaint us with some one
effect or other of this clearly, by experience known unto him.

And who is so ignorant but knows that the Moon has a great influence on the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea? which every waterman on the Thames can justify;
The Moon. Object. Answ. Why there is no Tides, or such as can hardly be
discerned in the Atlantic seas. Why there is no Tides in fresh waters, and why
in some places there are no Tides.
but if some urge, that in the Atlantic sea there is no Tides, and so think by
this their ignorance, to make ought against this most heavenly Art, they are
mistaken; for as touching this their idle and vain conceit, I shall not need
for the answering thereof, use many words, but let them know, that by reason of
the profundity and vast wideness of those seas, I must confess, little or no
Tide can be discerned; yet is it most probable, there is an increase and
decrease of that current, as I shall appeal to all the learned in Navigation;
for by reason of the indisposition of the subject, the influence (I must
confess) of the Moon is not so much discerned as in other things, as all moist
and watery bodies; that she wholly, rules as in fresh waters, by reason of the
rarity and subtilty thereof, she not having that fit subject to work on, which
is requisite, causes no Tide there; also expert Navigators can testify, that
in some places of the Ocean, Tides are let by the strength of a contrary
Current, etc. But there is no female of twenty one years of age, though some at
sixteen, nay sooner, but can testify its effects on their bodies, by causing
their menstrues once a month; this they find by experience, though perhaps
all know not the cause or reason thereof; you have already heard her influence
on lunaticks, causing their fits sometimes to be more grievous then again at
other times; wherefore then if we further look to shellfish, we shall see
clearly that they are made by her diverse illuminations of or with the Sun* both
to increase and decrease (this there is no Oyster-wench but knows) the same
effect she has in the humors of all bodies sublunary. And there is none so
ignorant but knows also, that those who sleep in the open fields in
Moon-light-nights, she fills them with dullness and heavy drowsiness, and
their heads with moisture; moreover flesh newly slain, being hung forth in
moon-light-nights, does soon putrify; and Pease sown in the increase of the
Moon, never leave blooming and blossoming; and that she is the cause of
critical days, and also judicial, you have had shown you in my Lux Veritatis;
wherefore here I shall not insist thereon, but refer you thereunto; and to
Galen de diebus decretoriis; and you shall there find what admirable virtue
and power he assigns her over all alterations of air and other inferior
Elementary things, as well as over diseases, especially acute, etc. And not
only shellfish and the humors in men and women do increase and decrease
according to her increase and wane, but also the Brain of man and other living
creatures.

Again, there is no Sow-gelder but can justify he observes the age and
configurations of the Moon with the Sun, for gelding of Cattle; and every
husbandman or Peasant knows that it is very useful for him to observe a time
of the Moon to put his cattle to engender; and as it is reported by Gesner in
his 300 page of beasts, Democritus affirms that if a Horse cover a Mare the
third day before the full Moon, the Mare shall conceive a male foal; if the
third day after the Full, a female; If a Horse cover a Mare the third day
before the Full Moon, a male Foal will be conceived.
and also in his 207 page testifies that Pliny (knowing the strange secret
operation of the Moon in Elephants) does as it were ascribe a kind of Religion
in this creature; for from the Change of the Moon till the prime and appearance
thereof, they take boughs from off the Trees, and first look or lift them up to
Heaven, and then look upon, or toward the Moon, which they many times together
do as it were in a supplication or adoration thereof. He further relates of
the Baboon, who by the influence of the Sun and Moon on him in the equinoctial
times of the year, barks every hour once; viz. twelve times a day, The third
day after the Full Moon a female.
and as often pisseth; and at the Change of the Moon, the male Baboon will
neither look up, or eat, but in a forlorn condition (through the sense of that
conjunction of the Luminaries) goes up and down; and the female purging her
self of abundance of blood: But this is further handled in the fourth chapter
of the second Book of this Volumn, viz. That which we call the Introduction;
wherefore here I shall hasten to proceed.

Those born at the time of an Eclipse, or Change of the Moon, live not long,
and why.
Again, we see that those that are born at the time of an Eclipse of either of
the Luminaries, or at the Change of the Moon, cannot live long; for the Sun or
Moon being eclipsed, he being fons vitae, and she the mother (as it were) of
moisture, the native then by this defect must be deprived (in the eclipse of
the Sun) of natural heat and nourishment, he being deprived of his light; and
in the defect of the Moon, of convenient moisture to mitigate and to temper the
heat, and so also in her Change, etc.

Moreover, there is no Herb nor fruit, that is either set or sown in the wane
of the Moon, but the taste thereof is neither so good as naturally the fruit
is, nor so kindly, except Pease only, (which you have already heard) being set
or sown in the increase of the Moon, will still bloom and blossom.

So also that Vines may not spread and grow too fast, and be too forward, they
are pruned and cut in the Wane; and such Timber or Wood which we desire to keep
long un-worm-eaten, we cut in the wane, for that then the Moons light being
abated, so is the sap and humidity of the Tree, which causes corruption being
once lopt; thus much concerning what we would not have grow; but as touching
such Vegetables as we would have increase, it is but observing the Moon
contrariwise, and we shall soon accomplish our desires therein; as if we be
desired any thing should grow up in height, we take care she be at the time of
setting or sowing thereof increasing in light and motion, and in an aerie sign;
but contrariwise, if to take deep root and to grow downwards, we place her in
an earthy sign, A remarkable thing of the Pomegranate.
etc. And it is reported of the Pomegranate (which is a thing worthy the
noting) that it will not grow longer then so many years as the Moon was days
old when it was first set; and this is most credibly reported by Lucius
Bellantius in that Treatise of his in answer to Picus Mirandula. But Pliny and
others will at large testify of the admirable power and influence of the
Planets and stars over Vegetables; wherefore what has been already said is
sufficient to evince any man (who has not wholly given himself over to
obstinacy) of the verity and certainty thereof; for since you have already
heard how evident and clear it is, that the Heavens have Dominion of, and show
their effects on sensitive things, I suppose there it none will render
themselves so weak and ignorant (after a serious consideration thereof) as to
deny (contrary to the opinions and testimonies of all learned Philosophers) the
Heavens and Planets to have influence over Herbs, Corn, Plants, and all
Vegetables; for if the vegetative faculty be comprehended and included in the
sensitive; (as there is none so stupid as to deny) then as a Triangle is
contained in a quadrangle, so is this most certain and consequently an assured
truth.

And thus much shall suffice at this time for the manifestation and clearing,
that the Moon has influence over as well men, bruit-beasts, sensitives, and
vegetables, plants, herbs, etc. as over things without life; viz. of the sea,
causing (as has been said) its ebbing and flowing, humors in men and women,
diseases, critical-days, etc. I might here, but for tediousness, deliver unto
you the fivefold government of the month by the Moon, viz. of the latitude of
the Moon, apparition, synodical, periodical and medicinal; but of these ( God
willing) I may hereafter say somewhat, and that at large, God sparing me life
and opportunity, etc. In the interim, I say, let what has been said suffice as
to the proving the influence of the Sun and Moon, and now let us hear what we
are taught by Saturn.

The influence of Saturn proved.
Not to insist long then on the Planets, since their influence is not (by the
rational) in the least denied, and we are anon to handle their effects at
large, we shall therefore be as brief as with convenience may be; in my Lux
Veritatis, chap. 1. Sect. 6. P. 35. I have declared how that Climacterical
years happen, The cause of Climacterical years.
and are caused by the profection of the Planets, and first house to the Square
and Opposition of their places in Nativities, being more especially occasioned
by the motion of Saturn, he having as much power in the decree several of
years, The power of Saturn in diseases.
as the Sun has in months, or the Moon in days; he coming every seven years,
to the Square or Opposition of his place in the Radix of any man's Nativity.
Again, there is no skillful Physician that is acquainted and verst thoroughly in
his Art (as Galen and Hippocrates say none are, but who are skilled and
acquainted with and in Astrology) but knows that he after the Revolution of the
Sun be comes chief ruler and orderer of the Disease and critical days; and
many times by his configurations with the Moon hinders the Crisis in acute and
sharp Diseases; and, observation as has been said, and the manner taught, will
clearly evince all the ignorant, that Saturn is cold and Melancholy, as the Sun
is hot and inclining to mirth; for as he is opposite to the Sun in nature, so
is he opposite in relation to the signs and mansions of the Heaven he rules,
and therefore inclines always to cold, as the does to heat; whence the in being
the house of and opposite to his own house; the weather inclines more to cold.
And by reason the light, and so consequently the influence of the Sun and the
Moon is most manifest and apparent unto our sense: yet I say, though the other
stars by reason of their obscurity and remote distance from us cannot so easily
be discerned, a short time spent in the observation thereof will soon clear the
truth of their several influences and inclinations. But to speak more plainly,
and home to the matter, Sun and him (except the body of Jupiter or Mars
interpose or some of their Aspects;) cold air and wet weather is thereby
produced, according to the season of the year, notwithstanding the natural
inclination of the Sun to heat and dryness: and this since so manifest, and
that even in the heat of Summer, we may well conclude he is of a cold nature,
especially since by often experience we so find its effects.

The inclination of any one who has in their Nativity Saturn Signifitor.
Moreover there is none born that has either the Sun, Moon, Mercury, or the
Lord of the Ascendant disposed of by Saturn, and he located in the ascendant,
or in square or opposition thereunto, or to Sol, Luna, or Mercury; or the Lord
of the Ascendant (as has been said) but the native will be much addicted to
melancholy, and surly chumpish dispositions; and in configuration of Mercury
(as I can justify by many testimonies for truth) the native shall be of slow
and ill utterance, of a dull and hard wit and capacity.

And thus much of Saturn; and we are next in order to descend to Jupiter, and
so hasten to proceed, since this point is so clear; viz. That the Planets have
influence on sublunary and elementary bodies and things: The Authors appeal to
what he himself has delivered in his Vox Stellarum, for the justification of
the validity and certainty of Astrology, and for the proving the Stars and
Planets to have influence over sublunary bodies.
and that by our monthly and yearly prognostication made apparent to every
vulgar notion and capacity; so that for the further justification and
confirmation thereof, I shall not need to desire any better testimony then my
Vox Stellarum and the writings of some of those seen in this heavenly Art,
published for the last year, and the two ensuing years, viz. till the latter
end of 1654, provided they are guided by the rules of Art.

For instance, since as touching my Vox Stellarum, now I have so fit an
opportunity, First, from page 19, to 21, and from page 105 to 107, you may see
I positively concluded we should have war the year 1652, and yet by all
judicious men it seemed very improbable both at the time of my penning and
publishing that book, it being wrote in August 1651, and Printed in October
following, at which time we were in a very seeming settled condition; yet we can
all now experimentally testify, that by the time the Summer quarter was well
began, we were at slashing and pelting with the Hollanders, and they with us,
and at swords drawing in the Spring quarter.

Secondly, in the thirty third page (though I durst not speak plain English
then, yet I hope it will be no offense now it is past to mention it) I declared
in Latin that those signified by the sign wherein Saturn was, should have the
better; Saturn was then in Cancer, under which sign is Holland and Scotland;
and I need not ask either our Army in the one, and Fleet against the other, of
the verity thereof; and it is further to be noted, that both these were acted
about one and the same time.

Thirdly, in the 134 page, I showed the inclination of those in Authority to
Taxations; and what man is there that looks into his purse, but can aver that
in that very Winter-quarter, the Tax was raised 30000. l per mensem, above what
it was before?

Fourthly, in the 103 page you may see I mentioned mischief to men by Thunder
and Lightning; and how fatal this proved, even to the astonishment of us all,
is well known to all England, especially to those in Leiton in Cheshire, in
which Town on the 20 of June 1652 being Sunday, there was in the Sermon time
eleven slain in the Church by Thunder and Lightning, and many hurt.

To be short, let the Merchants, and such as make long Voyages (hinted at in
the 16. and 17. pages, and other places of my Book) testify, whether they have
not received many crosses, losses and miseries, and the people in general; and
whether many have not sustained losses by thieves, and hurts or wounds the year
1652. Also whether there was not an unusual dryness in the Summer, a scarcity
of Fruits, insolency in the Commons, fraud and deceit amongst most men,
treachery and such like evils, abundantly mentioned in many places of that
Treatise; and many more, which at this time I forbear to particularize.

Only for a farther testimony of the verity and admirable excellency of this
Science, let me entreat thee to make particular observation of what I have
predicted by the Eclipse of the 29. of March, 1652. treated of also in that
same Vox Stellarum, and Lux Veritatis, whose effects will operate till toward
the latter end of the year 1654. and tell me then what you think thereof, when
you shall see what is here mentioned come so punctually true; as also, excess
of heat in Summer, and diverse maladies and infirmities, afflicting men in
general.

Wherefore let the weakest capacity judge then, what reason or sense there is
in such men as shall traduce so worthy and incomparable an Art as this, which
they never broke sleep to understand, but content themselves (being altogether
ignorant) with a bold facing down the unspeakable validity, worth and
excellency thereof, which of all Arts and Sciences is both the most noble (and
so deserving the study of the more refined and heavenly Spirits) and also the
chief and most delectable of all the liberal Sciences.

Wherefore what has been said, shall suffice at this time, for the
confirmation of the influence of Jupiter and the rest, since I desire not to be
more tedious then I needs must; and since this will be cleared more fully anon
when we come to treat of Eclipses, Comets, Great Conjunctions and
Blazing-stars, where we shall show and teach their nature and influence over
all earthly things whatsoever; I shall for this consideration, as also for that
we are here in this place still to treat of the influence of the Heavens, and
then to speak a word or two of that Discourse late published in pretense of a
Reply to my Lux Veritatis, least this Treatise grow too big, crave your pardon
till anon.

CHAP. VIII. Showing the Influence of the Heavens on Inferior and Elementary
Bodies.
All general accidents whatsoever, are and may be known by revolutions of the
World, Eclipses, Comets, great Conjunctions, and Blazing-Stars, in a natural
way.
IN this place then we are to treat of the Influence of the Heavens; you have
already heard how for matter of plenty or scarcity they are the immediate
causes next under God, and that proved and warranted both by Scripture and the
Learned in former Ages; for, then that Eclipses, Revolutions of the World,
Comets, Blazing-stars, and great Conjunctions treat of the Accidents general
of all Nations, Kingdoms and Languages, there is nothing more true; viz.
plenty, scarcity, health, plague, wars, peace, alteration of air, and mutations
in the Laws, Customs, Rights and Privileges of Nations, and to be short, of
things appertaining to the life of man in a Natural way, etc.

And if we have regard to Ptolomy, lib. 2. cap. 2. and 3. de Quadr. we shall
find that he does not only refer the Nature and Custom of Nations unto the
general Inclination and Nature of the Triplicity they are under, but the
inclinations of their mind particularly, as well as the shape and form of
their bodies; as also their manners and kind of life; as those who are
inhabitants of the Torrid Zone (as has been said) are black, Of those that
live in the Torrid Zone.
having also black and crisped hair, of a mean stature, and of a hot
constitution, and of a fierce and cruel spirit, propter longam and assiduam
solis moram in eorum regionibus, by reason of the long and constant stay of the
Sun in that Region or Climate: and nigra sunt corpora eorum quia Sol per Zenith
suorum capitum currit eosque comburit; they are black over all their body, by
reason the Sun constantly transites their Zenith, and so scorcheth them, that
they are of that hue.

Of the inhabitants of the South.
And these Inhabitants of the South to be of a better and quicker wit, and more
ingenious and apter to learning, especially the study of the Stars, Propter
circuli signorum and stellarum erraticarum loco Zenith eorum capitum
propinquitatem, because their vertigal point is near the Zodiac in which the
signs are, and under which the Planets move. He also farther teaches, Of the
Inhabitants of the North.
that those that live further North are of stronger body, but of ruder manners
and conditions, because their vertigal point being far removed from the Suns
course, they more abound in cold and moisture, which for that it yields
plenty of nourishment, is not by the heat of those places at all exhausted, or
but very little: from whence it follows, that they are of complexion fair,
long and smooth hair, their stature tall, and manners fierce and rude.

Object. Answ.
But it may be some cavillers and envious carpers at the truth, will object and
say, That custom and good discipline, we see, does alter this general
inclination. But I answer, That though oftentimes, through the force of good
discipline and custom (which is according to the opinion of Philosophers,
secunda Natura, a second Nature) I must confess this is, or may be much
altered; yet we see it hardly so removed, but that some, and those most evident
marks thereof, will still remain in force; and this is evident in most or all
Nations under the Sun, which might, but for brevities sake, be at large proved
and cleared; but we shall here content our selves with the testimony of Bodin,
who in his 5. Book of his Method of Histories, chap. 5. (though I might show
you what Galen, Hippocrates, Tacitus, Arist^tle and others hereon say) says,
and reports of the Germans, An example in the Germa^s.
that in Religion they might equal or compare with the Hebrews; in Astrology,
to match the Chaldeans; in Philosophy, to strive with the Grecians; in
Geometry, to equal the Egyptians; and in Arithmetic, to exceed the very
Phoenitians themselves: and yet there is no Historiographer worth a pins-head,
but knows they formerly were a most savage and rude people, without either
civility or humanity (as a man may say) so that they did far, in savage and
rude behavior, pass our wild Irish: and if we farther look to their ingenuity
and sharpness of wit, what Nation is there under the Sun, to be found able to
match them in Handicraft and Mechanic Arts?

Yet, I say, notwithstanding all this, we shall find, that neither time,
custom, nor education has been able to extinguish their old and ancient
fashions, which is by the genius and nature of their Country hereditary unto
them; if we but look into their form and stature of body, their immoderate
inclination to tippling and homely diet, their continency, simplicity, severity,
exercises and aptness to War; for notwithstanding all their other excellent
indowments, we shall still find in them a smack of these, which is unto them
Natural.

There is no man that ever dived into the cause of men's inclinations and
dispositions, especially of the several customs and manners of Nations (which
is the main scope of Philosophers labors; who are never contented to know this
thing is of such and such an inclination, temper and nature, but the reason
thereof) but knows the truth of this point: wherefore I shall render my self
most weak longer hereon to insist, since not only the Learned, but also every
ordinary Reader of Histories (if with diligence he has observed what he has
read) can testify the same.

I might also here show you what the same Ptolomie says of the Inhabitants of
the East and West, but then I fear I should too much transgress my bounds; as
also how the whole earth is divided into parts, and how governed by the fiery,
earthy, aerie, and watery triplicities; and the reasons of the several
inclinations, customs, laws, manners, and tempers of all Nations, Kingdoms,
Countries and Provinces; but I shall here, for brevities sake, refer thee to
the aforesaid second and third chapter of his second Book of his Quadripartite.

Of the Inhabitants of Europe, or those under the fiery Trigon.
For there he does not only show thee under what sign of the Zodiac every
Nation and Country is: but also, that those who are under the fiery
triplicity, viz. Europe, are (by reason of the triplicity they are under, being
in the North-west part of the earth, and by reason of the Planets ruling the
triplicity) of magnanimous spirits, given to exploits and feats of War (and
truly no disparagement to other Nations, this our Island of Britany may compare
with the greatest Conquerors, if not far transcend them) Anglia Ariete and
Mart assimulantur, ideoque bellicosi: England is under Aries and Mars, and
therefore are the Inhabitants and Natives thereof addicted to be expert in War
or feats of Arms. I omit here to insist on every particular Region in this part
of the world, as he there declares it, particularly naming every Region under
each sign of the Zodiac, but refer you thereunto; only in this place we desire
but to satisfy our Reader with some particulars, that he may be assured of the
verity of the strong influences and manifest operations of the Celestial Signs,
Stars and Planets over all Kingdoms, Nations, etc.

Of the inhabitants of Asia the greater, and the reason of their several
inclinations.
Again, in the second part of the World, viz. Southern, which he nominates to be
Asia the greater, being under the earthy triplicity, he shows that (among the
rest of the Regions and places subject to that triplicity) those who are
governed by Taurus (being the house of Venus) are generally effeminate and
delicate; given to their pleasure, especially to the games and sports of Venus;
wherefore they go still open breasted: likewise those under the sign Virgo
(being the house, exaltation and joy of Mercury) are exquisite in all kinds of
good learning, and observers of the motions of the Stars: and those ruled by
Capricorn (being the proper house of Saturn) are of form and shape commonly
deformed, of condition sordid, and of inclination fierce; but this I conceive,
by reason it is the exaltation of Mars.

And if we have regard to the third part of the World, viz. Northern, or
betwixt the North and East, assigned to the Aerie Triplicity; as also to that
part under the watery; we shall abundantly be satisfied of the undeniable truth
of the influence of the Celestial Planets and Constellations in the signs;
wherefore in this place, because (as I have often said) I desire not to be too
tedious, I shall refer thee to that learned Ptolomie himself, and now proceed.

CHAP. IX. Showing that the Influences of the Heavens and predominancy of the
stars in every Climate, is the cause of the several Laws and Customs of the
People therein.
Ptolomy, in the aforesaid place, Answ.
abundantly shows to the contrary, and also confirms by reason; look Ptol.
lib. 2. cap. 3. whither I shall (at this time) refer thee; since natural reason
will show us, that through diversity of Manners, which is caused through the
diversity of situations of the places or parts of the World, diverse Laws and
Customs according to the Natural inclination of the Constellations they are
under, are apparent in each Nation, being far different from others; otherways
I would fain know, why all Nations do not, or cannot subject themselves to one
Law or manner of Custom. I could out of Livie, Pliny and others, show thee the
Authority of some Nations in these matters; but for that I desire to draw to an
end, I shall here content my self with this one testimony of Bodin (before
mentioned) who in his fifth Book de Repub. affirms, that the Low Countries
shook off the Government of the King of Spain, by reason their manners are so
far different from theirs, insomuch that hardly can there be any thing more;
for Laws, all Rational men know, ought to be agreeable, and be applied to the
manners of a Nation, and not the inclinations and manners to the Laws; for what
is repugnant to the Natural inclination of the People, cannot be of any long
continuance.

The English have shaken off the Monarchical government by reason of the
natural antipathy between their inclinations and the Scots, and the reason of
their contrariety in Nature.
And here I may also affirm, that by reason of the Antipathy between the sign
ruling England, and that under which Scotland is, the English out of this
consideration, together with some others, as etc. have shaken off the
Government of Monarchy, being before under Scottish Kings for above forty
years; the reason is, because Aries (the proper Ascendant of England) is hot
and dry, and Cancer (the Ascendant of Scotland) is cold and moist; again Aries
is a fiery sign, and of the fiery trigon; Cancer is a sign watery, and of the
watery trigon: so that since there is as much difference between the natural
inclinations of those two, as there is between fire and water; so is it as much
impossible to unite them and make them of one inclination and mind, as to make
the water and fire so agree, as that the one being thrown into the other, they
shall so unite, as not to make a noise or thundering bustle; for they are
Nations that do naturally abhor and detest each other; and this I can aver, by
what I have by observation found in their inclinations etc.

But if any say, this is not the reason, and affirm that the English do
absolutely detest the Monarchical Government, and therefore have settled another
kind of rule; I answer, that for the removing this Objection, I shall not say
any thing but this, Agunt sed non cogunt, they incline, but compel not, as to
enforce the will of man, (this is more cleared anon;) besides, all rational and
knowing men can tell, verbum sapienti sat est, or erit, since I am not
permitted to speak all I either could or would; but thus much I shall affirm,
that the natural inclination of the people of England, (according to the
influences of the Heavens and constellations they are under,) are inclined to
be subject to Monarchy; from whence I do positively affirm, that before many
years be expired, there will be a Catastrophe mundi; we must be content, and
not repine at the hand and will of God; who (according to his divine pleasure,)
has ordered all things, so as to work according to his will, even from the
first creation, till the subversion of all Kingdoms and Nations, and the earth
it self, nay and those celestial constellations who then shall fall from
heaven, as being longer of no use.

Wherefore, I say that not only vain and silly are they who object and talk of
the custom of Countries, and yet refer all things to man's own Consultation and
opinion. Diodorus and others testify that the Persians and the rulers of
Africa do not only maintain Incest, but also whole Legions of Concubines: That
laws are ordered and constituted according to the inclinations of the people
that makes them, is hereby furtherd proved.
it had been most preposterous therefore for these people to have created laws
against what they are so naturally inclined to. The reason why they are so
addicted to Venery, Ptolomie in the aforesaid 2. de Quadri. cap. 3. will show
thee who says, in coeundo superabundant, ita quod eorum conjugia fiunt vi
atque rapina; multoties etiam eorum rex cum alienis sponsis, priusquam earum
sponsi, venereos actus exercet; and quorundam eorum sunt uxores communes inter
ipsos; ipsi quoque picturas and ornatus concupiscunt, and se more foeminino
adornant propter Venerem. They exceed and abound in venery, so that their
marriages are by force, and their Kings use oftener to accompany, or covet more
other men's wives then their own; many have their wives common for one another,
and for the most part they delight in pictures, and go dressed much after the
fashion of women; and all this by reason they are ruled and governed by Venus.

This point might be further amplified by many more examples; but since to the
judicious and rational it is so clear, it were vain longer to insist thereon.
Thus then have you heard how the Heavens are rulers and disposers of Kingdoms,
Nations, and Countries; and that by their influence, they do differ from each
other, both in nature and temper; and so consequently the inhabitants, as much
vary in their natural inclinations and conditions, Laws, Customs and manners,
as each Climate does in its herbs, beasts, and Birds; wherefore now it
rests, that we show you the influence of the Heavens on the earth, causing
health, sicknesses, plagues, plenty, scarcity, mutations of the air,
innundations, wars, peace and all general and particular accidents in the whole
world; but since we shall have occasion to treat of this more anon, when we
come to handle the rules of the Ancients touching the judgments of Eclipses,
Comets, Blazing-Stars, Revolutions, and great Conjunctions in the fourth book,
I shall here desist; since by all the learned it is an approved truth, The
stars have influence over all things in the world. The Heavens compared to a
Book.
that by the diverse motions, aspects, and conjunctions of the stars and
Planets, all particular and general events are signified and known; which
caused Origin and all other good and learned writers, who have anywise had
occasion in their works to speak of them, to compare the Heavens to a book in
which God has as it were writ all that should according to his pleasure come
to pass in this world, even to the subversion thereof as also the actions of
men, though some have exempted that; wherefore Origin for the confirmation
thereof alleges the Narration of Joseph, which was in his time extant and in
great esteem; affirming therein, that Jacob told his sons, the twelve
Patriarks, that he had read in the Tables of Heaven whatsoever should for the
future befall them and their children: Sun is the cause of generation, life,
motion, nutrition, growing and perfection of all visible and sensible bodies.
Nihil enim visibile est, quod ille non penetret excellenti lucis suae
magnitudine: sed ad ipsam quoque generationem sensibilem corporum confert,
ipseque ad vitam movet, and nutrit, and agit, and perficit, purgatque and
renovat.

And now this does give me here a fit opporrunity to prove unto thee by the
sacred word of God that the stars are both signs and causes: but (as has been
already said) since we are anon to clear that, when we come to answer what the
pretended Replyer to my Lux veritatis, has or can say against it, we shall not
in this place touch thereon; but refer thee thereunto.

Wherefore now all this being considered which has been said, let the most
malicious against Astrology stand up and say if the study of the stars be
unlawful, Astrology lawful and the best of studies.
or anywise in the least derogating from the Word of God or Religion; nay
whether it be not a great means of drawing men to acknowledge a God, who if
they saw him not in his creatures, perhaps would deny him; for what hinders
but a man may as safely study the natural influences and motions of the stars
without offense to God as the use of Herbs, Drugs, and Minerals for Physic, or
the cure of such and such diseases, which at the first was by the influence of
the Celestial bodies (by which they are ruled) found out; for if it be a sin
to study and know nature, there is no study lawful; and if not, Astrology must
then not only be accounted lawful and good, but the most beneficial and best
of all studies.

Yet does the rashness and ignorance of some men so abound, that they are not
only (contrary to any sense or reason) averse thereunto, but also together with
Sextus Empericus, Heminga, and others, not knowing what to say against it, or
what it is indeed they so desire to cry down, they raise idle and foolish
questions, making Objections more worthy the laughing at then the answering, or
rehearsing; yet by reason of late, some of the same have been by the Ignorant
objected to me, I shall in this place touch or hint at one or two of them for
the satisfaction of the well-willers to Astrology, that they may not by the
idle and shallow brains of these men be discouraged from their study in this
most divine and heavenly Science.

CHAP. X. Containing the resolution of the main Objections against this divine
Science.
DO we but seriously consider the vanity of these Objections, it will be
sufficient to testify unto us they have no reason for their high words.

Astrologers, have one and the same fortune. But who knows not that of all
Objections, this is the most weak? since as the influence of the stars comes to
us by many means, so they reject not other causes and circumstances; Answ.
for there is none acquainted with learning, but knows that a man and a beast
are more then membra dividentia, in that they differ the whole kind: and since
we are taught by God himself in his holy Word, that he created every thing in
his own kind, and endued man with a rational soul, thereby to bear rule and
dominion over all creatures who are not reasonable creatures: wherefore these
objectors and cavillers do render themselves most ignorant and impious,
endeavoring thus by their envy to Astrology, to take away Gods Ordinance in
the generation and conservation of all creatures here beneath, by the subtle
virtue of his second causes; viz. those heavenly lights the stars. I would have
no man be so ridiculous as to mistake me in this matter, in catching before
they read to a full stop, as of late the ignorant has done, and so rendered
himself a dolt to posterity. Quest. Answ. The Objection touching the various
ends of Chickings, Dogs, and the like; unfitly brought to gain say the validity
of Astrology.
Yet if one were disposed to be as ridiculous in answering, as some men are in
questioning, it might be averred for ought they can say to the contrary, that
the good constellations at the entrance of some horses into the world, makes
them to be tended, rubbed, kept well and delicately with little or no toil, and
labor, or stripes; and again, the malevolent constellations do cause some
again to be kept in perpetual slavery hard usage and stripes; but thus to
compare horses with men, is but to render our selves worse then Asses, or the
brutest of creatures; since you see they were from the first creation; destined
to the use of man, and to be subordinate to his dominion, and will which is
indeterminate, and so consequently out of the verge of Astrology, as you may
see at the latter end of this Treatise.

Again, some demand whether or no Dogs, Chickens, and such like, must needs
have one and the same end and life, or whether otherways Astrology be of any
validity or certainty, etc. Truly I fear I do toy in recording these vain
Objections, and answering thereunto digress more from the ordinary bounds of
Reason, then the Authors thereof; when still what has been said in the former
objection, may and is sufficient to refell this also; besides it remains, that
these Objectors prove all the Chickens they speak of, to be hatched at one and
the same moment of time, and the Dogs to be all whelped together (which is
impossible) or else they render themselves very currish and snappish against
Astrology. But whosoever desires to be further satisfied, because I hold it not
either credit or discretion to insist long hereon, let him peruse Peucerus his
Tract of Astrological Predictions, and he shall amongst others there find the
vanity and childeshness of these foolish cavils silenced, by the example of
three whelps (not being worthy to be refuted by learned reasons) which being
whelped in an Eclipse of the lesser Luminary, being grown to some bigness,
fullfilled the effects and significations of the eclipse by their several
deaths; one of them being torn in pieces with Hounds; the second, first by a
fall from an high place broke his Thighs, and then the second time his Neck;
and the third was burnt.

A third kind of cavillers we are now to speak of, who not observing and
warily searching into the order of causes in Nature, nor the government
thereof, are dazzled and puzzled with the contemplation of the mavelous and
admirable works of God, and so by reason of the diversity and dissimilitude of
events and effects in diverse matters and subjects, rashly and most
inconsiderately deny the powers and virtues of the causes themselves.

Answ.
that causes them thus to render themselves ridiculous; for there is no
Astrologer but does especially regard in any man's Nativity, the time, place.
Parents, and the seed, for the better inabling him in his judgment therein:
for he is most shallow and weak, that thinks it not material to consider
whether the Native be born the child of a King, The quality of the Native,
constitution of the Climate, Laws, Customs, and other causes necessary to be
observed in every man's Nativity.
or of a poor and mean parentage: or that it imports not whether all the
causes (the presence of whose help is necessary to the constitution of an
effect) do concur: or that some only be present, or that knows not that the
force of the general does prevail over the particular: and of those that are
universal, that the first cause does excel the rest, which it sustaineth. I say
he that thinks not these things to be most material, and worthy the
consideration, is not only shallow and weak, but most ignorant in the Art, or
at least wilfully obstinate. For there is nothing more certain then that
Astrologers which are true Artists indeed, do warily consider these inferior
causes, according as their Rules in Art do prescribe, and admonish to have
respect (as I have but now said) to the situation of the Climate or Place,
Parents, Laws and Customs, etc.

Nota. The instance of a Kings son and a Beggars both born at one very minute
(if such were known) of no validity against Astrology.
For it were a vain thing for any man to pronounce that such a constellation as
gives beauty here in England, should have the same effect in Ethiopia; or that
he that is the son of a beggar, should (because born at the same time the son
of the King was) be a a King, or the like; but he the beggars son shall as far
transcend the degree of his Parents at that time the Kings Son does come to the
Crown of his Fathers, or enlarge his Territories (which is the only way a King
can be honored or raised to dignity) as the Kings son does his (they being
both born under one and the same fortunate constellation;) and thus is the
beggars son extolled and raised, in comparison of his degree, as much as the
Kings son in relation to his; he being perhaps made some Tradesman, or one in
good repute, and well to live among his Neighbors, which his Predecessors were
not able to do; For you must know that the general fate does overruled the
particular; for it is neither agreeable to reason or policy that two Kings or
more should be in one Country, etc. This, I say, were I disposed to vindicate
the practice of some men in judging of Nativities, I might speak in their
behalf, and to the silence of the Objectors, who know not how in the least to
reply.

Moreover, others I have heard also question, nay affirm positively, (and those
too which seemed to be of some judgment in other matters; but truly in this
rendered themselves the most void thereof that can be imagined) that a figure of
Heaven, which Astrologers do use to set for the goundwork of their business, is
Conjuration, and illegal, nay Diabolical; What a figure of heaven is.
When at the worst it is but thus, The form and shape of the Heavens, or rather
the picture thereof, by which the Astrologer is made acquainted with the
positions and several situations of the Pianets and Stars in every sign in the
Heavens, as we see in a Map the several situations of Countries, Provinces and
Cities: and if it be illegal, diabolical and a Magical trick to set or make
such a figure of the Heavens in a piece of Paper, I know not what is lawful;
but this may suffice for the silencing of such simpletons; for let them be
demanded what a figure is they thus condemn, and you shall soon find they have
not a word to answer, nor cannot tell how to give any definition thereof, which
is sufficient then to satisfy any rational man of their stupidity, who thus
rashly and ignorantly go about to condemn that as illegal and Diabolical, That
there is no harm in setting of a Figure of heaven, is manifest.
which they are ignorant of, and is no more hurt, then to draw a man's figure or
picture; for knew they what it were, they would never thus falsely conclude,
having no ground for their words but ridiculous tradition: for indeed, it was a
most rare and fine invention, and of great use; for I can show any man thereby,
the whole use of the Globe, and the rising, setting and culminating of every
Star and Planet in the whole Heavens. So then you clearly see the harmlesness
of setting a Figure of Heaven, and the envy of the Antagonists; as also their
extreme ignorance, thus to traduce so noble, so worthy, so excellent, so
delectable, so satisfying, so lawful, so true, so transcendent, and so
incomparable and innocent an Art.

I, but say they again (or others) though the Art in it self be lawful, being
a contemplation only and study of Nature and its causes; and though the setting
of a Figure of Heaven be so far from any illegal or diabolical practice, as
that nothing can be more innocent, yet is the study unlawful, Astrologer, on
purpose to cause the heart to be assured of the inevitable truth thereof; and
so brings, by degrees, the Student into the labyrinth of believing a
fatality, and so consequently, to deny or distrust the Providence of God.

Answer in part. It is confessed by all but Atheists, that God the first and
chief cause of all causes can alter and frustrate the power of the stars.
But as touching this confidence, there is none that knows that God is the
first cause of all causes, (to whom all other must, and do give obedience, and
art subordinate) but knows there is no fatality on any inevitable decree in
the Heavens; but that He the God of all the whole Universe that created them
all, can, and may according to his good pleasure alter their several decrees;
this there is no Christian, or any who is not indeed an absolute Atheist, but
will acknowledge: but this is sufficiently cleared by what has been already,
and what is anon to be said.

Now say some again, If it be so, there is no verity or validity in Astrology,
worthy any man's trust or belief;

Answ.
To answer this vain Objection, I shall not need long to insist in this place,
since all rational men know, Though God can alter and annihilate the effects of
the Stars, it follows not that he does, or that therefore the Art is
uncertain.
that though God the omnipotent Creator of those glorious Creatures the stars,
can at his good pleasure alter, divert, prevent and annihilate whatsoever is
effected by them: yet hereupon it follows not that he does so; for God
works ordinately, and not preposterously; for as he has made the Heavens for
the ordinary administration of Nature, so he can whenever it is his good
pleasure, as in the days of Joshuah, Hezekiah, and at the death of our Savior
Jesus Christ, alter their course; but since these were miracles, and thus to do
were miraculous, and that we read but of these three times he thus did work
since the Creation; it is not therefore to be ordinarily or frequently seen,
neither ought it then to be objected, since as long as God does continue the
order of Nature, it must needs follow that the effects of the Stars, by which
nature is upheld, have very much of certainty and truth, and so consequently
the study thereof, and that more then any other study whatsoever, and that for
the most part they never fail; but if at any time the Artists fail, it is their
ignorance; and likewise theirs that conclude thereupon that the Art is faulty.

Answ. to the full.
Thus far then to clear the latter part of this grand Objection, and the dangers
supposed to be brought or caused thereby; but as touching the Objection it
self, viz. That the Devil brings the predictions of Astrologers to pass, etc.
The vanity of this objection.
Now it is evident that the Devil knows not things to come, and therefore is
not able to bring these things about according to his pleasure, ergo; to be
confessed he cannot thus delude the Astrologer, and cause his heart so to err,
as to run himself over head and ears into the belief of a fatality, and so
consequently, not caused thereby to deny the providence of God, which is the
main thing these punie Adversaries drive at in this their cavil.

That the Devil knows not future events, is clear.
For if the Devil knew things to come, he had never tempted and egged on the
Jews to crucify our Savior, when his death was the utter confusion of his
Diabolical Kingdom and Government; neither had he attempted to tempt our
Savior in the wilderness, had he known he should have had such a repulse: or
would he be so busy about the elect in their temptations, did he assuredly
know that they would not be subordinate to his will. Wherefore then since this
Devil, they talk of, is such a simple fool, The Devil a fool in comparison of
what some would make him.
who indeed for knowledge of future events they may well shake hands with, it
is evident their cavil is alike weak, if not most ridiculous. For if we will
admit that the Devil do know assuredly things to come, what difference is there
between the Angels that are not fallen and them? besides, there is no man will
be so vain as to imagine the Devil knows any man's thoughts or heart, and
therefore cannot tell whether his bringing a purpose to pass will a whit
advantage his desire, by making the Astrologer believe a fatality. But this is
so clear, that I will not dwell longer hereon, but now proceed, etc.

Again, others have this fling at this most heavenly study of the stars,
Astrologers therein do busy themselves, and pry into the secrets of God, etc.

Answ.
To which there needs no more answer then this, that they are most falsely and
scandalously abused, I mean Astrologers, when thus impeached, since the very
word of God does testify, that the secrets of the Almighty are past finding
out: thus much for the clearing of the Students thereof, whose practice and
study is altogether legal, being only natural: for how is it possible that that
study should be so illegal and diabolical (as they call it) that extends it
self to nature only, and the causes thereof?

That the study of the stars or Astrology, medleth not with the secrets of God.
And as touching the Art it self, you have it defined here beneath, whither at
this time I shall refer thee; for the study thereof is merely natural; and if
to know that, be to search into Gods hidden secrets, let the weakest capacity
judge; when that is only to be accounted a secret, which immediately depends
on the secret will of the Almighty; wherefore what is manifest and clear to us
in nature then, must consequently be no such thing; for there is none, I am
confident, that has any reason or understanding, and is compos mentis, that
will say it is a diving and searching into the secrets of God, and so
consequently illegal, to foretell any mutation of the air, or other accident by
the causes thereof, which is manifest by the stars to our sense; when the word
of God tells us, that our Savior himself confesses, the Pharisees were able
to discern the weather by the face of the Sky: and since you have already
heard that the Heavens are the secondary causes of all generation and
corruption, and cause of all mutations on and in Elementarie bodies, causing
health, sickness, plenty, scarcity, wars, peace, etc. If any Astrological
Philosopher (which of all Philosophers is the chiefest) do foretell any or all
of these a thousand years to come, as plain as if they were to happen to
morrow, or were present, which they may do, if God so long continue the
ordinary course of Nature, shall any one render himself so ridiculous, as to
imagine this man to pry and dive into the secrets of God, when he sees plainly
the events by the causes? truly if there be any such, they should be by my
consent begged for --.

The influences of the heavens take not away Gods government.
So that then hereby thou do clearly see that the influences of the stars do
not according to the vain opinions of some weak heads, take away Gods
Government; for if we will believe that God works daily new things according
as we see them procreated, and brought forth by Nature, we shall run our selves
into a gross error; when we are taught that he finished his work in six days,
Genesis 1. Exodus 20.11. Ergo, he works now no more, but (according to his
inevitable decree by his Providence) upholdeth all things by the same power of
his word by which they were first made, and leaves the effecting of all things
to the influence of the Heavens and Stars, which you have already heard, by the
word of God has been proved to be next under him the sole cause of all
mutations and blessings here on earth, and in elementary bodies.

What shall I say then, for the farther clearing of this point? I shall not say
much more, since who so desires to be further satisfied how far casual events
may be referred to the influences of the stars, and yet the government of God
and Angels no wise diminished or denied, let him peruse Lucius Bellatius his
answer to Picus Mirandula, lib. 4. cap. 2. and 3. Yet one thing as touching
Nativities I must here needs clear, which oftentimes the Artist may be deceived
in, if he have not special respect to the general fate of the place, occasioned
by the general influence of Eclipses, Comets, Blazing-stars, great
Conjunctions, and Revolutions of the World, etc. For ofttimes though the
Nativity of any man promise health or long life, yet by reason of the affinity
he has with the place of his birth his health may be much impaired, and life
shortened, by wars, general diseases and the like; but more especially if the
Topical stars of that place be in the Horoscope or medium Coeli, viz. the
ascendant or first house or tenth or mid-heaven in the Nativity; and if so,
this does rather give him a fate still subject to general accidents. There are
many other ways which may alter the Nativity of any person, but they would be
here too tedious to relate, since I have an earnest desire to be no tediouser
then I needs must, and for that I fear before I have delivered what I am yet to
say, I shall far exceed my bounds; yet are not these so intricate, but by a
skillful and ingenious Artist they may be found out etc.

stars and Celestial bodies;

How far the Author holds of casual events.
That who so thinks by what in any point or part of what has been already said
or to be said, I do detract from the Government of God or Angels, in my tenets
and scope, is altogether mistaken; for I do not so attribute all the actions of
men to the Heavens as they consist of Bodies elementary, and so subject them to
the heavenly influences; but I acknowledge them also subject to Angels rule and
government, as being endued with understanding; and to the Government of God,
as using will; Astra igitur nisi agunt, the Heavens but incline; and we (being
induced by passion) incline either to anger, love, pleasure or the like: but in
these the Angels may so illuminate the understanding of our minds, that by some
intelligible consideration we are therefrom delivered; and God directs the will
far beyond that wherewith we are inclined to by the Heavens or disposed to by
the Angels; for by how much God and Angels exceed the Heavens, being of a
Corporal essence, and they of a Spiritual, by so much the more does that
whereunto we are carried by the illumination of Angels, and the direction of
God, exceed those inclinations, to which we are by the influence of the Heavens
and Stars disposed. Let men therefore apply their study to the knowledge of the
chief part of the Art; viz. that which teaches general accidents; for all this
being considered, the judging of the fate of any man by the time of his birth
must needs be uncertain, and therefore not maintained by me, being not of very
much moment.

Ignorance the only cause of men's ill conceit of this most lawful and heavenly
Art.
Wherefore then, let not ignorance and stupidity carry thee beyond the bounds
of reason and discretion, to condemn or censure what thou understandest not;
for it is naught but ignorance which is the cause of all those open mouths
which have of late so furiously barked at this most heavenly, dilectable, and
most lawful study; for did they understand it, they would be more hot against
the gainsayers thereof, then Astrologers are with them, or they with the Art;
for you shall find their discourses fraught with naught but ignorant mistakes,
as to think the Art Witchcraft, Diabolical, Illegal, and the like, barely
because thereby we declare things to come, not considering that we do it by no
other means then the influence of the Heavens, which is altogether natural:
when they might even as well say, it is Witchcraft for any man to say or
affirm; that such an herb, Astrology as lawful, as the use of herbs, or any
other thing.
drug, or composition is good and available to the expelling of such or such an
infirmity, before he applies the medicine, when all knowing men know such
imaginers to be most ridiculous, since they are infallibly known to be of such
and such a nature and temper, and so consequently available for such and such
infirmities or diseases; for no more then this, More to be desired by
Physicians then any other study.
is Astrology unlawful; nay, it is more then this to be esteemed, and to be
allowed of and desired, since without it, the other is of no use or certainty;
for Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen and Paracelsus, the main pillars on which the
fabric of Physic Medicinal is built, found out the uses of herbs, drugs,
minerals, stones, and other medicines, by the influences of the Heavens, as
they were known and found by them to be under such and such a constellation,
and so concluded by them to be of such and such a nature, and then consequently
a remedy for such and such a disease. Hence it was that Hippocrates said, that
that Physician which is ignorant in Astrology, cannot perfectly be knowing in
his Art, being never able without Astrology to give Physic safely, viz. when
to purge by evacuation, or vomit, or phlebotomie, or for what humors, or in
what quantity, Look my Iux Veritatis, chapter 1. Sect. 6. p. 32.
neither can he know or come to the true understanding of the chief pillar of
his Art, viz. the true cause of the malady, without it; neither with it (if
well learned therein) can he err. And Galen accounts that man rather a fool
then a Physician, that is not an Astrologer; and he farther says, that Physic
given at unseasonable times, does not only little avail or help, but oftentimes
prove very hurtful, even to the indangering of the life of the Patient; and
that these times are only to be known and judged by the stars.

CHAP. XI. Containing an Introduction to the Vindication of my Lux Veritatis,
from the aspersions of Doctor Homes and his second, with the first Reason why I
account neither of them worthy of my notice.
EVen amongst us, notwithstanding all this, there are some that labor all they
can to eclipse the radiant splendour of this most heavenly Science, being
blinded with ignorance and malice, as has been said; for Ars non habet
inimicum praeter ignorantem, Art has no enemy but an ignorant man; Ignorance
converteth all the desires and inclinations of a man to wretchedness, The
wretched estate of an ignorant man.
and takes away the sight of the mind and intellect, that he is herein as
blind as a man is externally that has lost his eyes, of which the former is a
great deal the greater curse: for knowledge does distinguish us from bruit
beasts; and by how much we excel in knowledge and understanding, by so much we
transcend the inferior Creatures; What distinguishes us from bruit beasts.
for it is (in my opinion) better not to live, then to live in ignorance; for
an ignorant man is not indeed worthy to live, or the earth to bear him; the
consideration of which, caused the Ancients to say, That every ignorant man was
evil, etc.

Wherefore then since it is so, of necessity there must much inconveniency and
mischief come thereby, both to the ignorant themselves and others; I forbear
here (for brevitie sake) to show you the prodigious and woeful effects of
ignorance in some of former ages as well as in this wherein we live; this is
already clear to all judicious and ingenious souls: wherefore to our purpose, I
say there are in this perverse age, many sticklers (or so in pretense) against
this Liberal and most divine Science, one whereof (for the undeceiving of my
Reader, having published a pretended Reply to my Answer to Doctor Homes) I
shall (craving pardon for my tediousness) here take notice of, although he be
not worthy of the same, as you your self shall judge, when you have perused
what follows; for, both his quality, and For I am informed he is an Hay-maker,
Plaster maker, Chyrurgion, Quack-salver, and Tub Preacher, or at least after he
has been all these, he ayms at the Preaching of the Gospel; but I will advise
him first to get a good and true tongue in in his head.
variety of professions, as also rural behavior and disposition, in whose name
it is published, speaks him not worthy the naming or answering, as I would
have done had it been otherwise and better fathered, that the errors and
absurdities of that railing Pamphlet might have been divulged to the world.
This may be the first reason why the Author holds not the pretended Reply to
his defense of Astrology worthy the answering.

CHAP. XII. Comprehending three Reasons more why that Rabble of theirs was not
worthy the answering.
THus have you one reason whereby I am induced to slight it, yet have I these
five more for my further inducement thereunto; first for that there is nothing
in it but what has been long since answered by Bellantius, Goclenius,
Marasealertes, Pirovanus, and Sir Christopher Heyden, though in the Title page
there be sophistically promised an answer thereunto; which the penner thereof
is as much able to do, as to remove St. Paul's Church.

The second reason. The third reason.
Secondly, for that by the Author himself it was not thought worthy of his name
in the Frontispiece thereof, or else his name was not worth the inserting.

Thirdly, for that it was not worthy of the Authors owning, or else he was
ashamed of it, or he had never sent it abroad in another man's name; for let
whose name will be at the end of the Epistle to the Reader, it is well known by
Mr Daniel the Printer in Paternoster-row, and the then Composers and
Presse-men, that Doctor Homes was the Author of it, and not only paid for the
printing, but also Corrected every day at the Press; and let him deny if he can
his peevishness with the Presse-men, when they were angry he came not to
Correct, and made them all that afternoon stand idle. For it is not likely that
a Hay-maker (as it is very well known the owner thereof, or he under whose name
it was published, was but two or three years since) should be able to hold an
Argument against one of the Liberal Sciences, although his ignorance might
condemn it.

But truly I cannot but commend the policy of the Doctor herein, who knowing
the insufficiency of his brat to refell the Arguments in my Answer to his first
discourse, being loath to be seen bafled the second time in Print, for a piece
of money knew how to make another father it; and truly therein he also did a
very charitable deed; for of all sneaks that ever I saw in my life (that
pretended to any thing) was this poor fellow he got to be the father of this
Rabble; for hearing he lay at the Bell in Carter-lane, I went purposely to
confer with him touching some passages of that book which went under his name,
but could not meet with him, whereupon I left a note, desiring him to do me the
favor if it were he that owned such a book (for I was unacquainted with him)
to let me know, (or whether it might be some other of his name) and he should
oblige me therein, and for an answer thereunto, I would be there again the next
day at eleven of the clock, etc.

To this purpose (I say) I writ a note and left it with the Chamberlain of the
aforesaid Inn, and desired that he would importune him for an answer; he
promised me he would, and so for that time I departed, came the next day
according to promise, inquired for the Chamberlain, demanded an answer, who had
no more for me then this, that he had delivered my note, and importuned an
answer, but could receive none; then I acquainted the Chamberlain with the
business, that there was a Book published in the name of such a one, and being
informed it was him that lay there, that owned it, and therefore I desired him
in my note to let me receive that favor from him to know whether he was the
man, or some other of his name, and so wished him to acquaint him again with my
being there at the time appointed, and wondered he would refuse to do so small a
favor as to resolve me in such a question, I or no; which he again promised me
he would.

But what courtesy could I expect from so mean a spirit, which was never
either acquainted with courtersie, civility, or manners, who would refuse to
answer me, who wrote unto him in so indifferent a ma^^^r? for had I known it
had been him, which at last I found it was, I should have saved that pains I
put my self to, and had never expected other then I found at his hand. For what
can one have of a beggar but a louse? but thinking it might be some other of
his name, was the cause of this my oversight; but to return again to our
business, I told the Chamberlain (after he had promised me (I say) to acquaint
him with my further desire) I would call again the next day at two of the clock
in the afternoon, and if he were the man, I should be very glad to converse
with him, if his occasions could permit; but when I came at the aforesaid hour,
his answer was, he acquainted him to the full with all my desire, but could not
persuade him to stay within to speak with me, but bid him tell me, he scorned
to deny any thing he owned; whereupon I answered, I did no wise question that,
if he were a man that had any spark of honor dwelling in his breast, and this
was all I could understand.

The which rugged, preposterous and uncivil answer, caused me presently to
believe him to be whom I found him at the last; for I knew one of that name and
no other, but could never imagine it was he that should show himself to be
Author of such a Discourse, though for the simplicity thereof he might very
fitly have served: so then I inquired of the Chamberlain what manner of a man
he was, and upon his ill-favored description, I immediately resolved my self
of my former question; and then I was very urgent to know when I might meet
with him; he told me about noon any day, but he knew he was resolved not to
speak with me, and so indeed I perceived by a friend of mine, as soon as I was
parted from thence, whom I met, and in some discourse, I acquainting him with
what I had been about, he told me that the other day he was chid by this ^ral
Rufus Rolandus, or Orlando Furioso; Persuading him that he and none other had
acquainted me with his lodging; and then also I was assured and confirmed, that
it was him of that name which I knew, that was the Author (or at least so in
pretense) of that Pamphlet.

After this, being very desirous to meet with him, that I might show him some
of his absurdities and abuses toward me, whom for matter of acquaintance he
was a stranger to, I went twice or thrice about noon, thinking I might meet
with him, but could not; till the 22 day of January 1651. I accidentally
rancountred him; it were here both superfluous, and too tedious to relate what
discourse we had, he not being able to speak one word without anger and choler,
as if his heart were also on fire as well as his head, but amongst other
passages, I fell into a very great laughter, the which he not seeming to take
notice of, I asked him if he wondered not at this my sudden passion, who
answered, yes; I told him then; I could not possibly forbear laughing to see so
young a man as he was, pretend to be the Author of that Book wherein I am
termed but a boy, and he not above three or four years (at the most) older then
my self, and therefore I told him I rather expected to see some grave fellow,
whose Beard was at least as long as his waste, and not one whose Beard was
hardly so long as his teeth.

But both he and the Ancient Doctor his Master, and Author of that wise word
(who confessed (to a friend of mine) nothing vexed him, but that he was
answered by so young a man) must know that neither wisdom, learning, knowledge,
nor grace is to be measured by the Beard or age, and therefore but a most weak
evasion in his Arguments, of the validity and verity of Astrology; neither is
it any extraordinary witty quibble, since he cannot as yet confute with all his
manhood, what a boy has affirmed; and if he thought I would take acceptions at
this, with the rest of his silly jeers and affronts, railings and abuses,
wherewith his Pamphlet is fraught, and therefore thought it fit to make it
proceed from one so near my own age, he must needs think it worthy of much more
notice, to procure laughter only, but no otherwise; perhaps out of a tender
respect to my health he did it, knowing me to be a melancholy man: for I know
he is also a Doctor of Physic; testis Bredstreet; nihil amplius dico; for the
which good receipt, before the closure of this Book, (if I forget not) I shall
requite him with a double Fee, for I abhor to be in his debt; but therein he
did very ill to send me this medicine by so unworthy an Apothecaries boy, or
man (I crave your pardon) if he intended I should ever have taken notice of it;
otherwise he had been repayed long ere now; I must confess I am not able to
compare Beards with the Doctor; for mine is not by at least two inches so long
as a Goats, yet it was full as long as his (though not so hoary) the Sunday
after the Eclipse of the Sun in March last, when he beat down Astrology which
Phreneticus, and such like Phrensies; and therefore in this he shall have the
prehemiency for senex bis puer, and so being now in his dotage, I will give him
^eave to reckon up as many Boys of 26 years of age as he pleases, and make
himself more ridiculous then already if possible, it being no unusual thing
with him to speak repugnancies to both Reason and Sense, as will appear to any
that shall peruse his Book, and therefore I shall not need here further to
enlarge.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the fourth Reason, and a Vindication from some of their
abuses, and untruths.
HAving thus entered, let us proceed to a fourth Reason.

Fourthly, for that it is a discourse patcht up with nothing but evasions, as
not disputing ad idem, and scurrillous railing language and abuses toward me;
amongst hundreds of which, I shall here-onely trouble thee with these three.

that a godly scholar reported unto him, I was assisted in the penning of my
defense of Astrology, Page 33 of his discourse; the which he heathenishly,
simply, and ignorantly (I will not say foolishly) terms unchristianlike; I
would he had not been thus hypocritical, but had named his godly scholars name
(if any such there were) and not have left his Reader and indifferent men thus
in doubt; nor so diabolically wicked as thus to invent untruths, rather then he
will not disgrace and disparage me, which I shall prove; and also that he is as
I here term him, and so consequently not worthy the taking notice of,
crediting, and that first affirmatively and then negatively.

That he is most diabolically wicked, and inventer of untruths.
First affirmatively, that since it is granted that no godly man will lie, he
could not by any one be informed of any such thing, since I never in the least
was assisted, or enlightened in any part of the Art, by any man or party living
or dead, much less in penning of that Book, which none ever saw till it was
finished and brought to be Licenced; besides, I do here declare to all the
world, I am not familiarly acquainted with any man living upon the face of the
earth, that is a student in this most Noble Science, and therefore defy that
man whosoever he be, that shall herein so grossly abuse me; for I desire any one
(be it whom it will) that can herein disprove me, to publish it to the world,
and I shall be content to subscribe my self no other (and then I am sure I
shall be bad enough) then this most malicious and unworthy Orlando would
persuade the world of me.

But he had done well for the prevention of this my Answer, to have acquainted
his Reader (as I have said) both with the name of his godly scholar, and the
names of those that I borrowed aid of; wherefore to any rational man, what has
been already said, is sufficient to conclude him not worthy my Answer to every
particular of his Rabble, and that he is as I have affirmed him. And therefore
I refer him to Rev. 21.8. to receive his portion with such as are there expressed.

That he is not godly or religious.
Secondly negatively, that he is neither Godly nor Religious; for since there is
nothing more certain, then that a godly man will not lie: so (by the rule of
contraries) is there any thing more affirmative, then that that man that does
lie, is nowise godly or religious; and that he erred in this particular is
clear; Ergo, Not Religious nor godly himself, Upon the clearing of his words,
the Author promises him that honor, as to answer him, which otherwise he holds
him not wo^thy of.
although such a pretender. And for the assurance thereof, let him but make it
yet appear to the world that he was by any (whether godly or no) informed of
any such matter, and the names of those should give me any assistance, that
there be any in the world that will justify it, and I do here promise (though
if I overcome, I shall gain thereby no credit) I will honor him so far, as to
let posterity know he was worthy of RAMESEYS Answer.

And such is his malice, he cannot be content with this, but upon my expression
of the Blessed stone of the Philosophers which was but brought in by the way,
he quibbles on it, (leaving the matter still in question, and his Reader
unsatisfied) and that with invective, malicious, slanderous speeches against my
father, inferring by his rabble in the 39 page thereof, that my father was not
only ruined by his study in that matter, but also lay in prison thereby, which
is most notoriously false, as all that are of his acquaintance can justify,
for that he neither is in prison or ever was upon any such score; there is
nothing more certain. It is true, much he has expended in trying conclusions
that way, but I defy any man living to say he put him to a penny charges
therein; but so intolerable is his further abuse herein, that I cannot but
deliver it to the world, both for the clearing of my father and manifesting
this Furioso's maliciousness; in the same place he has these words, persisting
thus in his wicked standers; and truly for this had he his due, his ears should
be cropped to teach him to keep his tongue within compass; after he had mentioned
most falsely and unworthily, he was in prison thereby, he says, though the late
King bore with his defeating him of his expectations, and of scores of pounds,
yet other men will not, cannot bear such wrongs; intimating as will soon appear
to the judicious Reader, that he had money from the King for his charges in
those works, but to his great damage brought naught to pass, which of all
mischiefs and envies, is the greatest; for there is none who had any
acquaintance with the King, but can acquaint the world, he was ever averse to
such a belief, and had many times dissuaded him from such expensive courses
(this truly is a pretty world when such fellows as he shall speak of kings
actions and expectations) and so far was he from lending him money, that he owed
him in arrear when he died, 5500. l. as is testified under the hands of Sir
Robert Pie, Sir William Vuidale, Sir David Cunningham, Cap. Falkonbridge,
Auditor Collins and others; but certainly he that will presume in print thus to
affirm untruths, and those so scandalous, will not stick to say any thing,
right or wrong, so he may but advantage himself sixpence.

Wherefore what he says in derision of that most sublime Revelation and
heavenly secret, which men vulgarly call the Philosophers Stone, but in effect
the soul of the world, and that whereby all things both Celestial and
Terrestial that are creatures, subsist, increase, and next under God himself,
have their being; I say whatever he or any such Animal to whom God has not
bestowed so much mercy, as to believe such a thing to be in rerum natura, or in
posse, says against it, is not much material; for my part, if I should see
such kind of creatures believe and discourse thereon, I should (had I never
before heard thereof) have concluded it to be mere foolery, and madness, as
these mad kind of people do; A good jest, were it not too tedious to relate.
but if I should ask him what he thinks of Coining, I believe he would conclude
that a great deal the better Trade; but I shall pass by that, for he knows well
enough what I mean, I Will warrant you, he thinks his a more blessed thing a great
deal.

Again secondly, in his 43 page he says, I was set on by my Brethren the
Astrologers (being one of the silly weak ones) to confute Doctor Homes; and in
diverse places he informs and assures his Reader, I study and practice the Art
in a mercenary way, and gain money by resolving questions; whereby you may
plainly see how his envy runs him into an absurdity, and instead of speaking
sense, he commits nonsense, and renders himself ridiculous by this his
Bull, that I being one of the silliest and weakest Students in Astrology was
chosen out of all the other to confute the Doctor and vindicate the Art; Ha,
ha, he! by this, the Doctor and he are both very much credited that their
strong Arguments should be refelled by the weakest Astrologer, and that all
that they can do cannot silence him, nor vindicate themselves in the least
point, save with railing, quibling, and evading with quillets nothing
appertaining to the business in hand; for if high words and abuses are of
sufficient force to maintain an Argument, I will get an
Oyster-Belins-gate-wench shall confute them both in any Argument they dare
mention; and as touching my practicing Astrology in a mercenary way, I shall
appeal to all my acquaintance; for I practice no such thing; my practice
publicly is Physic, and with it I privately consult with Astrology, and all
such Sciences as conduce to the knowledge of Nature, of which I prefer
Astrology; for without it (as you have sufficiently heard before) there is no
Physician able to be perfect in this Art, let them say what they will, and
color their ignorance over as they please; I have both Hippocrates, Galen,
Avicen and Paracelsus for it, which I am sure were better and more expert
Physicians then any now adays which are against it.

Thirdly, whereas he says, and that most impiously and falsely, that I hold and
maintain a necessity and fatality in the stars, Lux Veritatis, which these
malicious wretches so endeavor to rail down, and my Vox stellarum will witness
for me; and as for my Vox stellarum, there is hardly three leaves can be read
together, wherein a clear manifestation of my denying fatality may not be had;
therefore I shall not need to particularize any part thereof, only refer thee
to the perusal at thy best leisure; but as concerning my Lux Veritatis, which
they so pleno ore endeavor to cry down, it being thus under the censure, I
shall here give you its language.

First, In the Epistle to the Reader it has these words, Astrology, or the
influence of the stars has no fatality, except some contingency be mixed
therewith; for this were to deny the Providence of God: and again, in the 97.
page of the Book (being the first Sect. of the 4. chap.) it says thus (and so
forward) Sapiens dominabitur astris, a wise man may rule the stars (but this is
The Religious, and such as are thoroughly regenerate and born again by water and
fire: on such must confess, none but the Son of righteteousness, and the lesser
stars of his graces and blessings have influence or power; but so long as they
continue to be born only according to the flesh, and the natural course and
order of the world, Astra regunt homines, etc.
Solomon's wise man that is here understood) and Astra regunt homines, sed regit
astra Deus, the stars rule men, but God rules the stars; not meaning when we
say, Astra regunt homines, any fatal necessity to be attributed to the
influence of those heavenly bodies, nor to have power over men farther then
such men are guided only by sense as bruit beasts, and not by reason, and
farther that they Agunt, non cogunt, they act or incline, but no wise compel;
but where grace or reason supports a man, there, or on such a man the stars
have no power: And in the 52. page thereof, thus, The stars of their own wills
(as if they were living souls) decree not future events, nor necessarily usurp
power over our minds, but only to signify the inclinations of the elements,
and of all things compounded of them.

All this thou may clearly see in my Lux Veritatis; and but for tediousness,
I might rehearse yet some other passages in Page 65. line 15. page 70. l. 17. p.
75. l. 11. p. 85. l. 17. p. 97. l. 28. p. 94. p. 90. l. 29. etc. But by what
has been already said, thou may see their palpable malice and envy, as also
their intolerable abuses and untruths; for you see they care not what they say
or affirm, so it may be but to their advantage, or what they rail out so to the
disparagement of those that please them not.

Both the Dr. and his man by their own words convinced of the badness of their
cause, and therefore other testimonies are needless, etc.
Wherefore now Reader do thou judge, and tell me (all this being considered)
whether by their own words (It is to prudent men the sign of a bad cause, that
needs to be defended by bad words) their cause be to be judged or accounted
good, who have so often been guilty thereof, and that most maliciously, in both
inventing and affirming detracting and most abusive speeches and stories: and
whether their cause then be not only bad, but the baddest and worst of causes,
who in all that rabble of their pretended Reply have hardly one page wherein
there is not some abuse, foul language or an untruth.

Now as touching their evasions, I shall briefly run over two or three of them
that so they may be known for Sophisters, and then proceed; for it would be
folly in me to take notice of more. In the first page of my discourse I show
the Reader, the Doctor in all his Book declares not what Astrology is he so
strives to beat down; and therefore for their better understanding of what we
so pro and con maintain, I there delivered a definition thereof, which I
gathered from the 1. chap. and 1. book of Ptolomies Quadripartite, the which,
say they, is not in that place, nor any other set down by him, after they had
as you have heard, gone on in their invective railings and abuses to make me
odious, and then by this their weak evasion they endeavor to give an inlet to
all their absurdities, which indeed must needs consequently follow, if this be
admitted.

But admit that definition was never recorded by him or any other Astrologer,
yet are they never the nearer to their purpose; for, if I may (that am to
vindicate the Art) have liberty to tell them what it is that I stand for and
maintain, since they have not, nor cannot show what it is they condemn; why
then, I say, I define Astrology to be that Art, which by the constant motions,
configurations, and Influences of the Stars and Planets, The definition of
Astrology.
teaches how to judge of the Natural effects and mutations to come in
elements, and in and on elementary bodies; the which I say again, although not
in ipsissimis verbis, is to be found in the aforesaid place; yet would rational
men have found the same in effect, which might and does very well serve turn,
which they know well enough, though they endeavor by this their weak assertion
to evade, giving any answer thereunto, which indeed they are not able to do
otherwise; wherefore what in all this their Galimaufry they condemn and argue
against, deviating from this my definition, they neither speak nor argue to
what I have said; Ergo, against what they know not, nor are capable, in saying
they write against Astrology; for what is more then I have here expressed, I
deny to be Astrology in its purity; but if they will not admit me to tell them
what it is I hold to be lawful or maintain, I must confess they may easily
convince me; but to this definition I stand, upon which as I in the 100. page
of that Book in answer to the Doctor say, so here again I dare undertake the
vindication of the validity and legality of the Art, against not only what he
has said, but all the Divines and men in the World put together in one can or
will say against it: for I am certain he that can find fault herewith, is not
Compos mentis; and therefore I shall appeal to the learned and indifferent
Judges that are judicious, whether my Arguments, that are grounded hereon, are
not in full force, and remain as yet by them unshaken, notwithstanding all
their simple querks, whimsical tricks and quillets, and ridiculous quibles like
themselves, which soon vanish, not being worthy of any wise man's notice, they
no wise disputing ad idem.

But this is not all; Who so shall but take the pains to compare my discourse
with their pretended Reply (although they pretend to the Reader they set down
my chapters and sections verbatim) will soon find their Sophistical juggles,
and the Reader deceived; for they not only omit here and there somewhat, which
makes absolutely against them, but also in most sections and chapters there is
some very considerable points escaped their notice, for that they had
disparaged themselves to have expressed them, knowing they could not give any
solid or sober Reply thereunto, I shall here only mention one whole section
they have omitted, referring the rest to your own search at your leisure; for
it were an intricate and too tedious a thing in this Book to particularize
every one, and the reasons why they omitted them; since, I say they have been
herein so generally guilty, and not only so, but also in many places of what
they have set down thou will find they have clearly wrested the sense and
meaning of my words, and made them conformable to their own intentions, the
better to have liberty for their bald jeers, abuses and sophistications:
wherefore should I take notice of such shufflers so as to trouble my self to
return them an answer, according to that of the wise man, Prove. 26.4. I should
render my self more ridiculous (if possible) then they are already.

But (as I said) if you have regard to the 104. page of their ridiculous
pamphlet, you will soon find (not knowing how to give any satisfactory Reply)
they have omitted my whole 6. Section of my 3. Chapter, being an answer to the
2. of Da^. the 1, 2, 3, 4. and 5. verses, alleged by Doctor Homes to condemn
Astrology; pretending to their Reader there is nothing therein contained, but
what was left to me by Sir Christopher Heydon, and therefore not worthy the
setting down; and this the impudent Penner endeavors to prove by these words,
As I dare be judged by the learned in his own judgment; and if so, I am sure
he will be condemned both for his false assertion and his impudence thus to
appeal to the Learned, in my judgment, in so untrue a thing, which his own
conscience accuses him of, and must needs fly in his face for this, as for
many other his abuses and untruths; for Sir Christopher in no part of his
Discourse so much as mentions that passage; for indeed, it came not at all in
his way, not being alleged by Mr. Chambers whom he wrote against; and
therefore, before a friend of the pretended Replyers in the aforesaid Inn where
he lodged, the 22. day of Jan. 1651. I offered him 10. l. to show me any one
passage in all that Section in Sir Christopher Heydon, or so much as that
passage of Scripture mentioned by Mr. Chambers: wherefore what reason the
Reader has to credit him in his other assertions and allegations through out
all that Book, that dare thus peremptorily say and affirm any thing, though
never so false, let him judge; but the truth is, he could not (though he stood
upon Doctor Homes his shoulder, who had formerly wrested that text, thinking no
body understood the Scripture but himself, because he is a time-serving Divine)
answer, or give any sufficient reply to my Arguments in that sixth Section, and
therefore omits it, that his Reader might not know what was therein, and so
comes sneakingly off, with telling him it was not worth the setting down, being
left to me from Sir Christopher Heydon; the which if it had been true, being a
passage of Scripture, and brought by the Doctor to condemn Astrology, and
again his affirmation refelled, it had not only been worth the setting down,
but also answering (if he had been able) had he had any desire to give his
Reader any satisfaction in the thing in question.

But alas poor fellow, he never looks to that, knowing he cannot well lose his
credit more then he has already; so he might have money for the fathering of
it, what cared he what was in it, good or bad, sense or nonsense, it is all alike
to him. And thus much shall suffice for my fourth Reason, why I hold not that
pretended Reply worthy my Answer.

CHAP. XIV. Containing the Authors fourth Reason, and the Scripture proofs
alleged for Astrology in his Lux Veritatis, proved to remain unshaken.


In my 2. Section and 1. Chapter, being about to undeceive my Reader, that the
Divine Writ allowed not of Astrology, and that it was not everywhere therein
condemned, as was wisely affirmed by Doctor Homes, who when all came to all
could produce but six places against it, and those but imaginary neither, as
may appear by the third chapter of my Lux Veritatis; I use these words, being
penned by that glorious King David, who was a great Prophet, That the stars
have influence, is here proved by the Divine Scripture.
and had a large measure of the Spirit of God, being a man after Gods own
heart: The heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. The language of the
stars is heard over all the earth, or the uttermost parts thereof, Psalm. 19.3.
As if he had said (say I there) there is no part free from the power of their
influences; for their power has a general extent over all Nations, Kingdoms,
Countries, Provinces and Languages; I pray who can restrain the sweet
Influences of the Pleiades? Job 38.31. And did not the stars in their courses
fight against Sisera? Judge. 5.20. One of these places had been enough to have
convinced him of great wickedness, in denying the Scripture does anywhere allow
of Astrology, etc.

To all which they reply thus. To that of Psalm. 19.1. they say those words show
only that the Heavens were framed by the Word and power of God the Creator,
which if no other meaning were in these words to be understood, the Prophet
might as well have said, a Dog, Cat, or any other Creature declares the
wonderful works and glory of the Almighty; but the meaning thereof is, that he
effects thereby and works, and herein are his wonderful works the more
manifest, and to be admired. I thought the Doctor and the other now of late
pretending to be a But some of his other old Trades do better become him: for
neither his humor, nor natural inclination do anywise suit with it.
Minister of the word, had been better versed in the sense and meaning of that
Scripture; but this by the way.

And as touching Psalm. 19.3. in their 22. page, where they should have proved
it no ways available to my Argument or purpose, disputants like, alas, they
tell their Reader, my interpretation must give place to the Apostles, Romans
10.18. viz. preaching of the Gospel, not of Astrology; and for the Pleiades in
Job, say they, they are answered after; and for the fighting of the stars
against Sisera, compare Josh. 10.11. Exodus 9.23. but name the words of none of
these places; for that would discover their wickedness in wresting the
Scripture by affirming what is not; as also their ignorance and weakness in not
knowing how otherwise to answer the business, but by quoting the like number of
Texts, and pretending to their Reader, therein he shall receive clear
satisfaction, never regarding whether they were any thing or not to the purpose.

But since ye are so cunning, I will be as cunning as you; and since the point
is so considerable, as that the legality of the Art, and the warrant thereof
from Divine Scripture depends thereon, I shall show you (because you have
thus played the Sophisters with your Reader in this as in all other) what those
passages you quote speak, and then let any that has but half an eye to discern
between light and darkness, good and bad, truth and falsehood, judge of the
business.

But first, let me show you what they have unawares confessed touching that of
Judges, thinking it will confirm that ridiculous assertion of theirs, That the
meaning of that Text is, the storms, Tempests, wind and rain fought against
Sisera: Ha, ha, he! I never knew in my life (nor (I am confident) the
antientest and wisest Philosopher that ever was) any star that had the name of
storm, tempest, wind, rain or hail; the Divine Writ expressly tells us, that
the stars in their courses fought, etc. and yet these --, what shall I call
them, render it storms, tempests, wind, etc. and therein themselves both
envious and ridiculous, having no better a come off; if all their learning
cannot distinguish betwixt stars and storms, they are not so fit to hold or
maintain an Argument, as to go to school to learn to spell better; for although
they are so ancient, nunquam sera est, etc. for (no disparagement to them) I
have known wiser, nay and far more solid and discreet at 18. years of age; but
perhaps this their error proceeded not from any defect of Judgment, but of
old Age and wanting their spectacles mistook and read storms for stars, as
their quondam brother read green-bay-horse for bay tree; wherefore since they
are in their dotage, or at least since these and such like mistakes are usual
with them, I shall not farther take notice of such animals; but return to show
you what a rod they have given me to whip themselves, which they had very well
deserved, had they been thus tardy at School.

That the stars have influence, is clear from their own Arguments and words.
In the same 22. page of their Pamphlet, they confess (but certainly unawares,
as I said before) that those storms, tempests, winds, etc. were accounted by
Junius to be caused by the Influence of the stars and heavenly bodies; whereby
you may clearly see how much they know what they write against, when the
influence of the stars is confessed by them to be the cause of those storms,
tempests, etc. that discomfited Siseras Army (this is as much as I desire) and
yet in their very next words they deny that that passage of Scripture makes
any thing for Astrology; wherefore since you have at large already heard, and
now here again by their own Arguments and words I have fully proved and
warranted that the stars have influence on elementary things, I need not here
spend time to show you farther what might be understood, and is indeed to be
collected affirmatively out of that text for this our purpose; but hasten to
show that (notwithstanding what they have said) the stars are by the same
testimony, viz. the word of God, proved to be both signs and causes; yet first
let me show you their impudence, wresting of Scriptures, and concealedness,
touching whom the wisest of men, (Solomon) Prove. 26 12. testifyeth.

CHAP. XV. Showing that the Text in Psalm. 19. v. 3. alleged by the Author to
prove the stars have influence, is no wise refelled.
Their reply to Psalm. 19.3. proved insufficient and weak for their purpose.
AS touching the first, viz. Romans 10.18. which they say is rather to be taken
then my interpretation, merely hereby to deceive their Reader, not being indeed
able otherwise to give any solid answer thereunto (as has been said.) The
words are (the Apostle having before spoken of the difference of that
righteousness which comes of the Law, and that of Faith in the foregoing
verse, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, and then he
says) but have they not heard? (meaning the People or Nations) yes verily;
their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world;
being about to show that both Jews and Gentiles shall hear the word preached
unto them; but hereby they prove not (to any rational man) that because these
Texts agree and come near to one another in words, therefore they are one and
the same in sense; for that were to render themselves both void of sense and
reason; for we see clearly the Apostle here promises in a Prophetic way the
Universal preaching of the word, or at least that it should shine in the dark
corners of the Gentiles, who were then unbelievers; but not one word or mention
either in this Text, or to be gathered out of all the Chapter, of the stars or
their influence: but in that 19. Psalm and the third verse we see clearly,
there is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard; meaning the
voice of the stars, viz. their influence; having (as you have heard) in the
preceding words said, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work, and in the subsequent words, viz. verse. 4, 5, 6. their
line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world: in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which as a Bridegroom
comes out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a race; his
going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it,
and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof; By which you may plainly see
that David there speaks of all the Heavens in general; the heavens declare,
etc. and stars therein, when he mentions their voice, and particularly the
Zodiac, which he calls a Tabernacle for the Sun; moreover, you are quite put
out of doubt, that he before spoke of all these, and the influence of the stars
by his mentioning this more particularly, the Sun, Qui est Rex astrorum, and
his heat, and so comprehending all under him being the chief of them;
intimating also that his influence is universal throughout the whole earth from
the East unto the West, the which course he rejoices to run as a strong man to
run a race; so that from hence here can nothing in the least be gathered for
the uniting those two Texts in sense being as different as the North is from
the South, or as Heaven is from Earth, and altogether as impossible to be
united, as it is to join the East with the West, or the Pole Artick with the
Antartick; for it was merely the marginal notes in some of our Bibles, which
led these two learned Teachers of the Word of God out of the way, and into this
weak business, serving no whit at all to their purpose; which they knew well
enough; and therefore it was they delivered not the words of the Text they
quoted, persuading themselves that their telling the Reader it was St. Paul's
interpretation of the Psalm agreeing somewhat in words, would be sufficient;
and truly so it is for the making them ridiculous, but for nothing else; for
sure I am St. Paul, never made either an interpretation or exposition of the
Psalms, or the marginal Notes in our Bibles; but me thinks they should have
taken the 4, 5, and 6. verses before mentioned with them, and have made all
concur, they depending so unanimously one upon the other: but this is clear,
let us now to their answer to that in Job by me alleged, and so proceed.

CHAP. XVI. Proving their Reply to Job 38.31. showing the stars to have
influence to be frivolous and of no effect.
MArk how as touching this point, they tell their Reader it is answered after,
Their Reply to Job. 38.31.
but they tell him not in what manner; for if they had, they had been unwise;
for all the answer that I could find in all their Galimaufry was only this,
that what I said was false, according to the old saying, in a word thou lie;
a pure way to confute an Argument, and very easy! But whosoever shall peruse St.
Augustine upon Job, which here would be too tedious to discuss, and in a manner
(being so clear, and that by the testimony of so good an Author) superfluous; I
say no more on this matter, only desiring thee also to peruse but the preceding
and subsequent words of that passage of St. Augustine which they bring, seeming
to make for them, and thou shall find therein also their juggling tricks to
deceive their Reader: just as they brought Ptolomie to condemn Astrology,
which I hinted at in the beginning of this Book; for it is very strange that
Ptolomie should speak against that which he taught to the World in four Books
in Folio; but if the sense and meaning of the Author be not regarded, it is an
easy matter even in the best of Writings to find out some seeming
contradictions.

But I dare positively affirm and maintain that St. Augustine does in no place
of all his works condemn, and positively dis-allow of Christian Judicial
Astrology in its purity, and not abused; and this may sufficiently be
manifested by those five opinions I have set down in my Lux Veritatis, chap. 2.
sect. 3. which he records in libro de Civitate Dei, lib. 5. cap. 1. for
though the superstitious abuses thereof be by him condemned, it argues not
therefore the natural uses are to be abolished; and therefore though before his
conversion he followed the Heresies of the Manichees, Lib. 5. cap. 4. and lib.
20. cap. 6. contra Faustum Manicheum.
who maintained the stars to be adored and prayed unto, and afterward wrote
against them, yet can it not be made apparent, that he utterly condemned this
liberal Science, as will appear by these words of his in libro 5. cap. 6. de
Civitate Dei; Non usque quaque absurd dici possit ad solas corporum
differentias, afflatus quosdam valere sidereos, sient in solaribus accessibus,
and recessibus; videmus etiam ipsius anni tempera variari, and lunaribus
incrementis and decrementis angeri and minni quaedam genera rerum, sicut
echinos and conchas, and mirabiles aestus oceani, non autem and animi
voluntates positionibus syderum subdi: whereby we see nothing exempted from
subjection to the stars that is bodily, but only our spiritual part; neither
does he ascribe this power to the stars in general, as that their specifical
virtues are not possible to be known by man; for in his Book De genesis lib. 2.
cap 5. he agrees with Astrologers that Saturn is cold.

Again shall we admit that St. Augustine, and with him all the Fathers
unanimously are against Astrology; yet may we not hence make our selves so
ridiculous as to conclude Astrology of no validity or efficacy, they being but
men, and therefore subject to error; and since it is nowise condemned by the
word of God (which should be the touchstone of all men's writings) further then
that men should not give the power of the Creator to the creature, nor impose a
fatal necessity and trust therein; and therefore St. Augustine in the aforesaid
fifth Book, and first chap. of his City of God, delivering five opinions (as I
said) concerning destiny, in his first shows, that by destiny is understood
The providence, will, and power of God; and therefore he warns Astrologers,
that they continue their opinions, but correct their tongues; for that through
custom of speech the vulgar commonly understood nothing by the word fate, or
destiny, but the inevitable power of the stars; and so becomes a means to draw
them from a true trust and confidence in God and his word.

And truly were it not for fear of making this Treatise too great, I could show
you that every part of Astrology, nay even monthly Prognostications (which
some men think are condemned by the word of God) being grounded upon
observation deduced from causes in nature, have ever been permitted and
suffered in all well ordered and Christian Commonwealths; and that not only
the Fathers and latter Divines, but even Mr. Calvin himself in his admonition,
with others (that attribute as little to this Art as they may) do allow
thereof, so far forth as it extends to the state of the weather, of health,
sickness, plenty, dearth, and to the direction of the Physician when to purge
by Pill, when by Potion, when by letting of blood; this being as far as I
maintain the Art, and make my study therein proceed, as shall be cleared before
the closure of this Treatise; but let us here proceed.

CHAP. XVII. Proving their Reply to Judges 5.20. weak, and nowise available to
their intent or purpose.
ENter we now on the last Text, viz. That in Judges, with which they bid us
compare Josh. 10.11. Exodus 9 23. the which you shall see makes altogether as
little for their turn as all the rest have in the other, and therefore it was
they durst not deliver the words, which are these, Josh. 10.11. And it came to
pass as they fled from before Israel (meaning the hosts of the 5. Kings) and
were in the going down to Bethoren, that the Lord cast down great stones from
Heaven upon them unto Azekah; they were more which died with hale-stones, then
they which the children of Israel slew with the sword: in all which, we see
only the vengeance of God executed on those people that Ioshuah was ordained to
drive out from before the children of Israel: how does this prove that the
stars in their courses fought not against Sisera, in the fifth of Judges? or
that they did not indeee fight also against these 5. Kings? for by their own
confession, the storms, hale, wind, and tempests that discomfited Siseras Army,
were occasioned by the influence of the stars; and therefore I know no reason
to the contrary, but that they were also occasioners of these hale-stones, so
that they have gained little by this their first place to be therewith compared.

As touching the second, it is this, Exodus 9.23. The words are, And Moses
stretched forth his Rod toward Heaven, and the Lord sent thunder and hale, and
the fire run along upon the ground, and the Lord rained hale upon the Land of
Egypt; a strong argument truly, that the stars in their courses fought not
against Sisera! what would they have it to be, or their Reader to understand by
these their weak come-offs? would they have it the hand of God? I say the same;
would they have it hale-storms? I say so to; what would they have it to be? Can
they show me in either, or both these their texts, that the stars in their
courses fought not against Sisera? or can they show that thereby we are taught
and shown to read that place otherwise? but they must know this, that though in
neither of them there is a word to be found or mention made of any stars, yet
in that of Judges there is both mention of them, and express testimony they
fought against Sisera, The stars in their courses fought against Sisera.

So that you see clearly my Arguments, proving Astrology to be warranted by
the word of God, do remain yet unshaken, and that notwithstanding all that they
have or can say; no solid Reply can be by them produced to the contrary;
wherefore it mattereth not (should we make no more words) what either of them
both or all the men in the World that are either ignorantly or obstinatly or
traditionally against it, do say against it; for as I end that 2. sect of my 2.
chap. where I prove the stars to be both signs and causes, I may here, you see,
again triumphantly sing, Et si Scriptura, and ipse Deus nobiscum quis contra
nos? If the Scripture and God himself be with us, who can be against us?

Wherefore you see now what great cause the Penner of that rabble had to say
after these evasions and juggles, Thus with a touch it appears that Mr. Ramesey
is deceived in his conclusion to the said proofs, that one of them were enough
to convince any man the stars have influence; for, nor one, nor all, nor an
hundred such, are in any show sufficient to convince a prudent man of this, etc.

Thus you see he denies the very testimonny of the word of God, nay although it
were affirmed by an hundred places, and yet with all his wit he cannot refell
the least of these, save with his facing down with a bold forehead, which to
the judicious will be but a laughing stock; for now it is most manifest, that
whereas he said, I was then in a dream, he is in such a dream that he knows
not where he is, nor how to beturn or betake himself for refuge, but by railing
and spitting his venom Viper-like against me and that wherewith I have wounded
him to the quick; for it is most apparent, that (although he says thus with a
touch, etc.) he has so slightly touched my Arguments that they yet stand
unshaken; and had he not said thus with a touch, we had not known whether he
had touched them or no. Wherefore now lets see how my Arguments also by the
word of God that the stars are both signs and causes, are still left also
unrefelled, and so hasten to a conclusion.

CHAP. XVIII. That the stars are proved both signs and causes by the word of
God; and the Art lawful, notwithstanding all their malice.
That the stars are both signs and causes, proved and cleared.
SO in my Lux Veritatis, chap. 2. Sect. 2. From these Texts you will find I
prove that the stars are both signs and causes, Genesis 1.14. Hos. 2.21. and Deuteronomy.
33.14. the which because it would here be too tedious to rehearse, I refer unto
thee to peruse at thy own leisure; to all which thou shall find no other reply
returned then this at the latter end of the 73. page. The Doctor denies not
that the stars are causes, and this I believe is granted me, because they knew
no other reply, without rendering themselves ridiculous to the World; but if so*
and (as it is farther granted) that he allows of Natural Astrology, and so
consequently that the stars are also signs; let me ask any rational man what
they argue against then, if the stars be confessed signs and causes of wind,
hale, storms, tempests and alteration of weather? or how is it then unlawful,
Diabolical, or a doctrine of Devils, to practice or prognosticate thereby of
these accidents? as Doctor Homes most wisely and discreetly terms it: And
thus have thou briefly been shown the utmost of that discourse for the
refelling of mine, by which you see, notwithstanding, Astrology to remain in
full force; that the stars have influence, and are both signs and causes
warranted by the Divine Word of God. It rests therefore now, I only add this
one place more in the 4. sect. of the 1. chap. of my Discourse, wherein I prove
that the Art of Astrology is not prohibited by the word of God, nor the study
thereof by God himself, but rather by him allowed, and then shall conclude with
a Relation of the power and subject of Astrology, and how far it is by me
defended or maintained, and pass over all the residue of that rabbling, railing
reply as not worthy my notice.

^n th t fourth Sect. (I say) proving the legality of Astrology, and that God
does not proh^^ite the study thereof, as is clear by that testimony of the Holy
Ghost by St. Stephen in the 7. of the Acts ver. 22. speaking in the
commendation of Moses, he gives him over and above the commendation aforesaid
in that same 7. chap. this praise, That he was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds, which (I say in that place) is
clear to any rational man, That if it had been anywise sinful, Diabolical or
odious in the sight of God, Moses would not have applied his study thereunto,
or at least it would never have been recorded in his praise: I might instance
here Daniel, Solomon and others; but this is so clear that to insist longer
hereon, were but vain; thus far I insisted in that place above quoted.

Now as touching a Reply thereunto, they have none in the world, but a bold
Assertion of an untruth in these words, page 38. of that Pamphlet, The Doctor
has fully answered that these Saints were not judicial Astrologers. But in
what place, the Reader is left to to seek, which right Disputants are never
guilty of; but catch either the Doctor or this Rufus, without an evasion or
juggle, and -- you may do what you will with them.

So also when I prove further, that Astrology is a lawful Art, being not
prohibited by the Word of God, their Reply is, it is only my passing my word
for it; but I would fain see them pass any sound word or Argument against it,
and not content themselves with these silly and weak come-offs.

Again, in that 4. Sect. I come further to show that, We see by experience,
that God does (so far is he from disallowing and prohibiting the practice of
Astrology) absolutely allow of both the Art and Artists, in his showing of
blazing-stars to them only that study Astrology (not to the vulgar and
proficient in other Arts) to forewarn his people of the danger and punishment
to come; and if it were not so, he might as well show signs of his future
pleasure to the Illiterate by common vulgar things, as in heaven, to the
learned Astrologer who can only judge of their effects.

Now but warily observe their Reply, and thou will have fit matter of laughter;
for in the 38 page, they say that my alleging that God shows blazing-stars
only to Astrologers, is a grot^ untruth, Confessed by thousands of the vulgar
yet alive in England, who saw the blazing-star many nights that appeared before
the Swedish wars in Germany; for what hinders but shepherds, sailors,
watchmen, and Illiterates should perceive that which is obvious to the common
eyes of mankind, and distinguish a Comet from a star by his neerness, moti n,
and his feather or long tail?

And truly herein they have told us a long tale to no purpose; for should I
deny that such things can be discerned that are obvious to the common sense of
seeing, I should indeed render my self as ridiculous as they have in not
apprehending my words, who deny not in the least, but that they may plainly be
seen of Sailers, Watchmen, Shepherds, illiterate Hay-makers, also dolts and
Asses if they be not blind or asleep, which is nothing at all to my Argument;
for I was to let my Reader know that God more especially (allowing of the study
and contemplation of his heavenly creatures in his servants) shows such
things as are Comets and Blazing-stars to Astrologers only; I say because they
only of all other men, are the ablest to judge of their effects and portences,
that the people might be forewarned of their misery and the like; for otherwise
he might show his wonders in common vulgar things.

Neither the Doctor nor Rusus understand English or Sense.
But if we observe, it is wonderful to see how learnedly these zealous blades by
this their Reply prove that God (contrary to what I have alleged) does not in
the least allow of Astrology, or the Students thereof, by this his showing of
Comets or Blazing-stars; and that this my Argument conduced not to the validity
of the Art or Artists, and not to come off so blewly to argue on what was never
affirmed; but poor men they are to be excused come once to talk to them of
Comets and Blazing-stars, and you put them quite out of their sphere: therefore
I shall only propound this question to them, and look for an Answer when they
are able to understand English; they say I am shamefully out in my Latin,
because I interpret not the words of the Bachharen Council verbatim, but
deliver the sense of them. I thought I had writ to men, which would have been
content with the sense, and not to children that must have it word by word
expounded; but however, this must needs be a Bull to affirm that therefore I
was out in my Latin, but they cannot deny they are in this place out in their
English, which is a far greater fault, and deserves both the ferula and
flagellum, and therefore I say I shall only ask them this question* because
they understand neither English, sense nor honesty, for perhaps thereby they
may come to understand what I said; viz. whether it was the Astrologer I spoke
of, or the Shepherd, Sailer, Watchmen, and Illiterates they speak of, that
told them the Comet in 1618. foreshewed the Swedish wars in Germany, that they
talk of?

CHAP. XIX. Proving Astrology to be warranted by Councels, in spite of their
Rabble.
EVen in that same 4. Sect. having thus (as you have heard) showed the legality
of Astrology, and validity of the study thereof, not being prohibited by God,
etc. I conclude then, that whatever Doctor Homes alleges was the Law of the
Romans against it, was of no validity; since of necessity (if warranted by the
Word of God) it must be allowed by the Councels, especially the godlier sort of
Conncels, whose Acts and determinations will be grounded on piety and the Word
of God; and if otherwise, I value not what their censure is; for they are but
men and (guided by their own reasons and opinions) frail, subject to
infirmities and errors; ^umanum est errare.

To which in their 39 page they Reply, that as I prove Astrology not to be
condemned by the Word of God, just so (and no wiselier) do I prove it not
impugned by Councels, namely by bare facing it down with a bold forehead.

Now I desire no better proof that it is not condemned by Councels then this;
for if their wisdoms will admit this to be proved as wisely, and just as I
have the other, which all their wit you see, could not in the least and weakest
point silence, my Argument will be good and firm enough, and evident to the
Reader, that they remain as yet by them unshaken, and that they have no other
refuge but barely to face it down with a bold and impudent forehead, especially
being in the former so shamefully bafled.

Wherefore now it rests I snew you the full power and subject of Astrology,
and how far I maintain or allow of the Art, and here desist, referring you for
further satisfaction to that discourse of mine, which is able to justify these
my words, since for all that the Replyers thereunto can say, the Art remains
still unshaken, and it unanswered; wherefore they had but small reason to title
that weak piece, Judicial Astrology Judicially condemned, when alas there is
hardly a judicious sentence to be found between the beginning and end thereof,
unless borrowed of some other Author, neither are they or it able to show their
faces before the judicious and impartial Judges of the matter, without
suffering condign condemnation themselves.

CHAP. XX. Containing the power and subject of Astrology, and how far the
Author vindicateth it.
YOu are now to receive The power and subject of Astrology, which by all what
you have heard, How the Author sets down the power and subject of Astrology.
deals with such things as are performed by Art and Nature, with the will of
man indirectly and accidentally, and his inclinations temperature, and
dispositions; as also with his affections and body, and with natural and
secondary causes, and general accidents and contingencies: But not with rare
contingencies or such as have an indifferent respect to the opposites, as
depending upon unknown and indeterminate causes, which may happen one way or
other: neither with man's will does Astrology meddle, but accidentally, so far
as the Soul with the faculties thereof follows the temperature of the body;
neither with the Providence of God or show a cause of miracles; or with the
secrets of God; for they are (says the Scripture) past finding out. Ergo,
Astrologers, that are men that contemplate but natural causes, are falsely and
most scandalously abused when thus impeached, neither has the influence of the
stars any fatality as inevitable, except some contigency be mixed therewith;
for this were to deny the Providence of God.

How far the Author maintains or justifies Astrology.
Now as touching the parts of Astrology, I shall here according to Ptolomy, in
the beginning of his second Book of his Quadripartite, chap. 1. divide into
two, the first and chief part being general, as having relation to Countries,
Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities, alterations of Kingdoms, Laws, Customs, death,
plenty, wars, peace, health, sickness, and mutations in the Air, etc. The
second particular, viz. To men's Nativities, as to know the particular
constitution, temperature and natural inclination of any man or woman, but not
other accidents, as whether a man shall live long, the time when he shall die,
and what manner of death, whether he shall be rich, and how attain it, etc.
which are, as also Horary questions depending thereon, not certain.

The first is judged by the position of the Heavens and the Planets, and their
Natures and significations at the time of any Revolution of the years of the
world, the appearance of Eclipses, Comets, Blazing-stars, or great
Conjunctions; The latter, at the time of the parties birth: and so far and no
farther do I any wise allow of the Art; for, what is called Astrology more then
this, is not ASTROLOGY, but the mere abuse of the Art; I meand
Charactery-Astrology, and other superstitions of the Arabians, and Chaldeans,
also horary questions, and elections, if not depending or grounded on the Radix
of the parties Nativitie, or rather on that part which teaches of the general
accidents of the world, are neither countenanced or vidicated by me in the
least; for I have studied and know sufficiently the experience thereof, neither
do I wholly rely on the setting of any man's Nativity, though it has been
approved of by some of the learned; The Authors opinion touchiug Nativities.
fer, since the stars have no power on such as are ruled either by Reason or
Grace, (as you have heard where I say, Astra agunt, not cogunt, are sapiens
dominabitur astris) to what end then is it for a man to busy his head about
such uncertainties, when except the native be a man merely natural, no
Prediction shall fall out true, as to accidents and disposition? sure is worse
then madness then, to spend time on this part of the Art.

Touching Horary questions, and Elections.
Wherefore it must needs follow then, that the resolutions of questions and
elections thereon depending, are more uncertain; yet I must confess the
Astrologer may undertake in some sense to answer the demands of the Querent by
his Art, without regard to the Radix or ought else, since he may be confidently
assured that such inquirers are nowise either rational or religious, and so
consequently are easily carried on to the temptations and delusions of the
devil, or according to the natural inclination and influence of the Heavens.

Yet know, that Elections touching the administration of Physic, Phlebotomy,
using of Husbandry and Navigation, I do allow of, as also all other elections
if they depend on this matter; but what is more then this, does (in my opinion)
subject man's will to the power of the stars, and all his voluntary actions;
which to affirm, were most ridiculous.

Needs must he be most impious and ignorant that traduceth Astrology.
And thus far is the glory of God made clearly manifest in his creatures; and to
deny this which is indeed the pure Art of Astrology, is to deny the most
heavenly and chiefest study (next to Divinity) under the Sun, and also that
which of all studies else most conduces to the praise and glory of the
omnipotent and omniscient creator, for which they and all things else were
first created; and then consequently must the treducers thereof be most impious
and ignorant.

Reader, I shall here for conclusion say no more then this, that thou first
seek thy Creator and serve him, before thou apply thy mind unto this
subsequent or any other study, for that so thou shall be made the more
excellent and perfect therein; yet particularly as for this heavenly
contemplation, let me tell thee, were thou an Heathen before thou were seen
therein, yet will thou clearly be made thereby (when thou art acquainted
therewith) to see thy Creator and his unspeakable wisdom therein Ergo, far from
making men Athiests (as some have affirmed) except they believe a fatality,
which in this study is to be wholly denied, and by me ever was.
; wherefore in all thy study give him the whole praise and glory, who has
disposed and ordered all things according to his divine will, and inevitable
decree; and that thou may be the better enabled thereunto, thou shall never
want my prayers nor service.

Die 31. Januarii 1651.
FINIS.
AN INTRODVCTION TO THE Judgment of the Stars. WHEREIN The whole ART of
ASTROLOGY Is plainly Taught, and the Groundwork or Reasons thereof for the
benefit of the Students therein delivered, the better to confirm them in every
point thereof; as also to satisfy such who shall either enviously or
ignorantly traduce or cavil against it.

By WILLIAM RAMESEY, Gent. Student in Astrology Physic, and the most Heavenly
and Sublime Sciences.

Job 38.31, 32, 33. An constringes delicias Pleiadum? aut lora Orionis
dissolves? induces ne remotiora signa, quodque tempore suo? aut Arcturum cum
filiis suis duces? An cognoscis de statutis Coeli? an disponere potes dominium
ejus in terra? etc.

LONDON, Printed for R. VV. 1653.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO NON MINVS VIRTVTE SVA QVAM GENERIS SPLENDORE INSIGNI,
ILLUSTRISSIMO WILHELMO SEYMOVR, MARCHIONI ET COMITI DE HARTFORD: DOMINO IN
SEYMOVR, BEAVCHAM, etc.

Salutem and Felicitatem Perpetuam. DOMINO SUO MVLTIS NOMINIBVS OBSERVANDO HANC
SUAM AD ASTROLOGIAM INTRODVCTIONEM SUBMISSE DEDICAT

Wilhelmus Rameseus.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Truly Noble both for Learning and Parts, William
Seymour, Marquess and Earl of HARTFORD, Lord SEYMOVR and BEAVCHAM, etc.
Right Honorable,
SHould I have least hope of merit from your Honor by this my Dedication,
Having never had the happiness to appear in your Honors presence, I should
render my self both weak and presumptuous; but my comfort is, I write to a
Person of Honor, Learning and Parts, who is of that Magnanimity, that he will
not despise the smallest gift or the meaness of the Giver, or the first for the
unworthiness of the last; Artaxerxes King of Persia disdained not the water a
poor man, as he saw him pass by, brought from a River in his hand and gave him,
but received it with a smiling countenance, not measuring the grace of the Gift
according to the value of the Present, but according to the good Will and
intent of the Giver, accounting it no less an act of Magnanimity and Kingly
bounty to take small Presents in good part, then to give greater. And truly,
though this my mite may seem small, proceeding from so mean a hand as my own:
Yet let me say thus much of this Science, which is the chief of these we call
Liberal, together with ASTRONOMY, PHYSICS, and NATURAL PHILOSOPHY which make
up all but one entire Science, and of themselves are but parts thereof, And not
only Aristotle, but also all other Ancient and Authentic Writers, as does more
appear in the first Book of this Volume.
as witnesses Aristotle Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Phis. as also further in his Metaphis.
6. and 12. and 1. Pol. Cap. 7. and in his 2. De Coelo, Text 17. and Lib. De
Proprietat. element. and lib. de Mundo, cap. 9. and in his 4. De Generatione
Animimalium Cap. 10. using in all his Writings indifferently the Name of
ASTROLOGER and ASTRONOMER, and ASTROLOGER and PHILOSOPHER for one and the same;
for the Contemplaters of Nature in and by this Science, are of all Philosophers
the chiefest; and this Antiquity makes plain unto us, as testifies the most
Ancientest Historiographers, who Record that the Priests and Kings amongst the
EGYPTIANS, the CHALDEANS among the BABYLONIANS, the GYMNOSOPHYSTS among the
INDIANS, the MAGICIANS among the PERSIANS, the chief PHILOSOPHERS of GREECE and
ITALY, and the DRUIDES of FRANCE were all ASTROLOGERS; and esteemed by these
Nations as the wisest men. And therefore fore I say, as it is a part of the
chiefest of the Liberal Sciences, so has it been still in high esteem amongst
the Nobler and Graver sort of People, and the more refined Souls in all Ages,
especially amongst the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Assyrians, Lacedaemonians,
Sydonians, Indians, Persians, Greeks and Arabians; for amongst the Egyptians,
it was not Lawful for any man to take the Function of Priesthood on him,
except he were an ASTROLOGER; neither could any be chosen King, except he were
of the College of the Priests: And Rodiginus reports, that for the
prevention of Treason, the Nativities of all Infants born therein was brought
to the King to be judged on; and Dion records the same to be practiced by the
Emperor Tyberius; and in the Prophecy of Daniel, we may see that the Monarchs
of Babylon attempted nothing of importance without first asking Council of the
Caldeans; And the Kings of Lacedemonia suffered none to sit in their Councels,
but who were Astrologers; And amongst the Persians none was admitted to the
Crown, but who were excellently skilled in ASTROLOGY.

Wherefore (my LORD) since this is an ART that has ever been esteemed amongst
the Nobler, Wiser, Greater, Ingeniouser and the most refined Spirits of the
World from Age to Age, and chiefly Studied, Maintained, and Upheld by them, I
humbly presumed to Dedicate this Introductory Part unto your Honor, since all
these Properties are Naturally Inherent in your Noble Self; for true Nobility
is the fittest Patron for such Noble SCIENCES, neither are they fit to be
offered to any but who are really such, it surpassing the reach of the ordinary
capacity of the World; so that (my LORD) my hope is, that if not for the
Wel-wishes and Honor the Presenter thereof bears to your Lordship, nor the
Antiquity and Excellency of the Thing presented; yet your Honor will accept
thereof out of the Munificence of your own Innate Magnanimity, it being
sufficient honor for me to acknowledge my self

MY LORD, Your HONORS Most Humble Servant, William Ramesey.

To the Reader.
HAving before in the First Book sufficiently proved, and shown the validity,
excellency, certainty and legality of this Noble Science, and vindicated it
from all its aspersions; it rests now I show thee the grounds and reasons of
the Art, viz. the Number of the Signs, their Names and Natures, the Dignities,
Number and Names of the Planets, and the Reasons of all these, and what is else
most expedient and necessary to be known, that thou may not be to seek, but
be sufficiently enabled to answer all opposers and gainsayers thereof; in which
thou have also a plain and easy Introduction to the whole Art; wherefore thou
ought to be very well skilled and perfect in every point and part contained
in this Book, before thou venturest to proceed to the two other subsequent
Treatises; for otherwise thou shall never be able to apprehend them; the which
(contrariwise, if thou art perfect in this) will prove very easy unto thee;
wherefore that it might be so, I have in this place prefixed it: Let the
benefit be thine or no, I am sure the Pains and Labor has been mine; yet now
I rest

Thy Loving Friend, William Ramesey.

The Contents of every Chapter contained in the Second BOOK, being an
Introduction to the Judgment of the STARS.
CHAP. 1. OF the names and number of the Planets, with their several
Characters, and signification and Nature of Saturn. Fol. 49. Chap. 2. Of the
signification and Nature of Jupiter. Fol. 52 Chap. 3. Of the signification and
Nature of Mars. Fol. 54 Chap. 4. Of the signification and Nature of the Sun.
Fol. 56 Chap. 5. Of the signification and Nature of Venus. Fol. 59 Chap. 6. Of
the signification and Nature of Mercury. Fol. 61 Chap. 7. Of the signification
and Nature of the Moon. Fol. 63 Chap. 8. Of the Essential and accidental
Dignities of the Planets according to Ptolomie. Fol. 65 Chap. 9. Demonstrating
the use of the Dignities of the Planets. Fol. 67 Chap. 10. Of the houses of the
Planets, and wherefore they were so distributed. Fol. 68 Chap. 11. Of the
Exaltations and Falls of the Planets, and wherefore they were so constituted.
Fol. 69 Chap. 12. Of the Triplicities of the Planets, and wherefore they were
so appointed. Fol. 70 Chap. 13. Of the terms of the Planets, and wherefore so
called and appointed to the five Planets. Fol. 71 Chap. 14. Showing the use
which is to be made of the terms. Fol. 72 Chap. 15. Demonstrating the use,
nature and reasons of the faces of the Planets. Fol. 73 Chap. 16. Of the joys
of the Planets. Fol. 75 Chap. 17. Of the head and tail of the Dragon. Fol. 76
Chap. 18. Of the Antiscions and Contrantiscions of the Planets. Ibid. Chap. 19.
Showing the Reasons of the names and characters of the Planets. Fol. 77 Chap.
20. Of the number of the Heavens and Spears, their places, order and motions.
Fol. 78 Chap. 21. Of the Circles of Heaven, the Zodiac and the divisions
thereof. Fol. 79 Chap. 22. Of the twelve Celestial signs, and their manifold
divisions. Fol. 80 Chap. 23. Showing theuse which is to be made of the former
Chapter. Fol. 82 Chap. 24. Demonstrating the Reasons of the names of the 12.
Signs, and why there are just twelve, and neither more nor less. Fol. 83 Chap.
25. Showing the Reasons why the Signs are reckoned from Aries, and not from any
other sign, as also why they are not placed according to the Order of the four
Elements. Fol. 84 Chap. 26. Of the Nature, Signification and quality of the
signs, and first of Aries. Fol. 86 Chap. 27. Of the Aspects of the Planets and
Signs, their Names, Characters and Natures, and wherefore they were so named
and charactered. Fol. 92 Chap. 28. Of the Fixed stars in the Zodiac, wherefore
they are called fixed, their number, particular names, natures, magnitudes,
latitudes and longitudes, and first of those in Aries, as they are delivered by
the most learned in this Art. Fol. 93 Chap. 29. Of the fixed stars in Taurus,
their number, names, nature magnitude, latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 95 Chap.
30. Of the fixed stars in Gemini, their number, names, nature, magnitudes,
latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 96 Chap. 31. Of the fixed stars in Cancer, their
number, names, nature, magnitudes, latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 97 Chap. 32.
Of the fixed stars in Leo, their number, names, nature, magnitudes, latitudes
and longitudes. Fol. 98 Chap. 33. Of the fixed stars in Virgo, their number,
names, natures, magnitudes, latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 99 Chap. 34. Of the
fixed stars in Libra, their number, names, natures, magnitudes, latitudes and
longitudes. Fol. 100 Chap. 35. Of the fixed stars in Scorpio, their number,
names, natures, magnitudes, latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 101 Chap. 36. Of the
fixed stars in Sagittarius, their number, names, natures, magnitudes, latitudes
and longitudes. Fol. 102 Chap. 37. Of the fixed stars in Capricornus; their
number, names, natures, magnitudes, latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 103 Chap.
38. Of tho fixed stars in Aquarius, their number, names, natures, magnitudes,
latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 104 Chap. 39. Of the fixed stars in Pisces,
their number, names, nature, magnitudes, latitudes and longitudes. Fol. 105
Chap. 40. Showing the use of the former Tables. Fol. 106 Chap. 41. Of the
significations of the 12. houses of heaven, and wherefore they have such
signification. ibid. Chap. 42. Of the division of the houses into twelve equal
parts. Fol. 109 Chap. 43. Containing some terms of Art very necessary to be
known, as also Instructions how to erect a Figure of Heaven. Fol. 110
AN INTRODVCTION TO THE Judgment of the Stars.
CHAP. 1. Of the Names, and Number of the Planets, with their several
Characters, and of the significations and nature of SATVRN.
The Number of the Planets. Their names and Characters
WE are to know first, There are Planets in number seven, viz. Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury and the Moon; and according to the usual custom of
the most learned, they are thus Charactered; Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercury, Luna or the Moon, there are also other Characters which thou will meet
with in this Treatise, and others of this nature, and those are, Dragons head,
Dragons tail, part of fortune. Every of which Planets have their several
significations and influences on Sublunary and Elementary bodies; viz.

The nature of Saturn.
Saturn is the highest of all the Planets, which is the reason the Ancients
begin with him, both when they relate their names, and declare their natures
and qualities; he is masculine and cold, he is not of a bright splendent
color, as are Jupiter and Venus, neither is he so big to our vulgar sight, but
as a star of the third magnitude; yet according to Tycho, his Orb exceeds the
Orb or Globe of the earth 22 times. Albotegnins says 79 times, and Alfraganus
91 times, The Globe of Saturn.
(their reasons for these their opinions, were too tedious here to relate, I
refer therefore the curious therein, to their works) he is easily known, he
never twinkleth, (neither indeed do any of the Planets) he is of a pale wan
leaden color; Color. Revolution. Diurnal motion. Distance from the earth.
slow in motion, not finishing his course through the twelve signs of the
Zodiac in less then 29 years 156 days; for he seldom goes above three or four
minutes in a day, but six minutes is his swiftest motion; this is in relation
to us by reason of his distance; which according to the former Tycho, is,
10550. semidiameters of the earth, Albotegnius and Alfraganus say 15800
semidiameters; A semidiameter of the earth. when well fortified.
the semidiamenter, or half thickness of the earth, is, 860 miles.

Saturn well fortified, and Lord of the year in any annual revolution,
signifies that the people shall that year, or during that revolution, build and
erect houses; shall make many alterations in Fabrics, and shall abound in all
things: the earth shall be fruitful, and the people shall be in esteem and
honor with all their neighbors; the husbandman shall exceedingly increase
his store and wealth, and be successful in all his labors.

When weak.
But if Saturn be Lord of the year and weak, there shall be much cold during
that Revolution, great and grievous infirmities, and men shall sustain much
sorrow, losses and crosses, and great damage by storms, wind and rain (but
this must warily be considered, if other significators of weather concur, and
then may thou be the more assured thereof) ancient and old men and women
shall die; and these things shall chiefly happen to those Places, Cities and
Regions under Saturn his Dominion, and the Dominion of the sign which he does
then possess.

Humors.
Of Humors, he is author of Melancholy. And such men if they take to love any
one, let them be man or woman (which happens but very seldom) they love most
constantly and entirely; and if they hate (as most commonly they do) they hate
to the death, and with a perpetual hatred, hardly to be removed.

Profession or mastery when well fortified.
If he be fortunate, of professions and Mastery, he denotes such as are
profound and occult, antiquities, things and callings belonging to labor, care
and rarities, and such as belong or have any relation unto water, or near
water; Sailors, Tankerd-bearers, Plummers, Ship-Carpenters, and the like; and
such as belong to the earth, as Curriers, Broom-men, Bearers of dead corpse,
Hostlers, Brick-makers, Plow-men, Scavengers, Colliers, Ditchers, Carters,
Chandlers, Gardners, Herds-men, Dyers of black cloth, Shepherds, Coach-men and
Cow-herds, Brick-layers, etc.

Profession when weak. Nature.
When unfortunate, he denotes generally laborers, emptyers of Jakes, Diggers of
Cole-pits, and the like fordid and base occupations.

He is cold, dry, Melancholic, author of solitariness.

Corporature or shape of body.
Corporature or shape of the body, he gives a middle stature, pale, swarthy, or
muddy, small black eyes, looking downward, a broad forehead, black or very dark
hair, and it rugged or harsh, great ears, lowering eyebrows, thick lips, and
Nose, thin beard, a lumpish heavy countenance, large shoulders, stooping, and
many times crooked, a short lank belly, thin thighs, indecent feet, shuffling
against one another.

Oriental.
Oriental, the stature is more short, but decent and well composed. As touching
this and other terms of Art, have recourse to the 43. chapter.

Occidental. Without latit. Meridional. North latitude.
Occidental, more black, and lean, less hair.

If he want latitude, he is more fat; if it be Merdional, but quick in motion,
fat and fleshly, and so of the rest of the Planets.

If the latitude be North, hairy and much flesh; his greatest North latitude is
two degrees, 48 minutes.

South latitude.
His South latitude is two degrees, 49 minutes, and more he has not.

1. Station.
In his first station, a little fat.

2. Station.
In his second station, fat il-favoured bodies and weak; observe this in all the
other Celestial bodies.

Qual. of men.
Quality of men in general, he signifies fathers, grandfathers, old men,
day-labourers, Beggars, Clowns, Husbandmen, Monks, Jesuits, etc.

Savours.
Savours, bitter, sour, sharp.

In man.
In man he rules the spleen.

Herbs, plants and trees.
Herbs, Hemlock, Starwort, Bears-foot, Wolf-bane, Fern, white and black Helebor,
Henbane, Burdock, Dragon, Parsnip, Poppy, Pulse, Mandrake, Vervine, Nightshade,
Moss, Angelica, Box, Tutsan, Orage, Sage, Bithwind, Spinach, Cummin, Fumitory,
Shepherds-purse, Horse-tail, Tamarisk, Capers, Polipody, Seen, Hemp, Savin,
Rue, Willow-tree, Pine Tree, Yew-tree, Cyprus-tree.

Birds.
Crow, Owl, Crane, Thrush, Ostritch, Lapwing, Peacock, Bat, Blackbird, Cucko.

Stones subject to him are the Saphir, Lapis Lazuli, Stones.
or that stone of which Azure is made, unpolished black and bluish stones.

Minerals.
Minerals, he governs Lead, the Lodestone the dross of all Metals.

Fishes.
Fishes, the Tortois, Eel, and shel-fish.

Beasts.
Beasts, the Ass, Cat, Hare, Mouse, Mole, Dog, Wolf, Bear, Elephant, Basilisk,
Crocodile, Scorpion, Serpent, Adder, Toad, Hog, all manner of creeping
creatures breeding of putrefaction.

Places.
Places, he delights in deserts, woods, obscure valleys, dens, caves, holes,
sepulchers; Churchyards, ruinous buildings, cole-pits, sinks, muddy dirty
stinking places, wells, and houses of offices.

Weather.
Weather, cloudy, dark, obscure air, cold and hurtful, thick, black and
condense clouds, this is but generally; his particular and immediate alteration
of weather is to be known from his several positions and aspects with other
Planets, Fortitudes and Debilities, etc. of the which more hereafter, according
as I have leisure.

Winds.
He delights in the East quarter of Heaven, and causes Eastern winds.

Gathering of Herbs.
In gathering of his herbs, turn thy face toward the East, in his hour when he
is in an Angle, and well fortified essentially, and no wise accidentally
impedited, and let Luna apply by a Sextile or Trine to him.

Observe this method in the rest of the Planets, mutatis mutandis.

Signs Triplicity.
Of the signs, he rules Capricorn by night, and Aquarius by day, and the aerie
triplicity by day.

Age.
Old Age.

His Angel is Cassiel. Angel.


His Friends are Jupiter, Sol, and Mercury. Friends.


His Enemies are Mars, Venus, and Luna. Enemies.


Day of the week.
He rules Saturday, beginning the first hour after Sun rising, and that night
we commonly call Tuesday night.

Regions, he rules Bavaria, Saxony, Stiria, Romandiola, Ravenna, Constantia,
Regions.
Ingolstad.

Orb.
His orb is 9. degrees before and after any Aspect; which is to say, his
influence begins to operate, when either he applies to any Aspect of any
Planet, or they to him, and is within nine degrees of the perfect aspect, and
continues in force until he is fully separate nine degrees from the aspect
Partill. What a Partill aspect is, you shall have anon in the 28. chapter; but
note this in all the rest of the Planets.

Conception. Years.
In generation, he rules the first and eighth months after conception. His
greatest years he signifies are 465. His greater 57. His mean 43. and a half.
His least 30.
The meaning hereof, is no more but this; If a Kingdom, City, Town, Family, or
the like, have its beginning when Saturn is essentially and accidentally well
fortified, its probable the Monarchy, City, Building, etc. may continue firm,
and in good condition, as at the first, 465. years; and so of the rest, etc.

Journeys.
In long journeys, when he is Significator, he portends long and laborious
travel, perilous dangers and imprisonments.

Diseases caused by Saturn, are, the Falling Sickness, Phlegmatic humors,
Defluctions, Diseases.
Melancholy, Leprousie, Fistulas, Morphew, Aches and Colds in the joints,
Deafness, Toothache, pains in the bones, in the bladder, all cold diseases,
the Gout, Scab, Palsy, Consumptions, Black-jaundies, Quartan Agues, the
Iliack-passion, Dropsy, Chin-cough, Catarrs, etc.

Stationary.
He is Stationary before Retrogradation five days, and five days before
direction.

Retrograde.
He is Retrograde 140. days.

CHAP. II. Of the Significations and Nature of IVPITER.
The nature and complexion of. The globe of.
IN the next place we are to proceed to Jupiter, who is in height next unto him;
he is masculine and temperate, the greater fortune, bright, shining and clear;
the biggest star in magnitude (as to our sight) except Venus; yet according to
Tycho he exceeds the globe of the earth in bigness 14 times. Albotegnius says
81 times, Alfraganus 95 times, yet many of late hold him to be equal in bigness
with Saturn.

Mean and diurnal motion.
He is swifter in motion then Saturn, (as to us) his middle motion is 4, m. 59,
s. his diurnal motion is 8, 10, 12, or 14. m.

He finisheth his course through the twelve signs of the Zodiac in 12. years.

Revolution. Distant from the earth.
His distance from the earth is according to Tycho 3990 semidiameters; yet
Albotegnius and Alfraganus say 10423 semidiameters of the earth.

when well fortified, and Lord of the year.
Jupiter when he is Lord of the year and well dignified, the King shall do
Justice, and it shall be happy for those that are Noblemen, Judges, Counselors
of the Law; and men of all sorts of Religious Orders shall be in a successful,
happy, pleasant and good condition, and shall live pleasantly and contentedly,
in honor, and also great esteem; and the people also shall be in a good and
prosperous condition, and shall receive good from their King and Superiors, and
they from the people, and the year shall be healthy, plentiful and good, a
temperate air, rain, fair weather, and frost in due season, etc.

When weak.
But if Jupiter be weak, judge the contrary, according to the strength of the
affliction wherewith he is afflicted and impedited.

Humors.
Of Humors, he is author of the Sanguine or best complexion, moist, temperate,
sound, healthful etc.

Quality of men when well placed
Quality of men; in general this is to be understood, as indeed most of the
qualities and attributions aforesaid: he signifies Judges; Counselors, all
Ecclesiastical men both Priests and Levites, Chancellors, Lawyers, or those
that follow the Law from the highest to the lowest, all Scholars and Students
in general, Clothyers, Woollen-Drapers.

Quality of men when weak.
When he is weak, he signifies Mountebanks, Quack-salvers, Empericks, Cheaters,
Takers of Bribes, etc.

Nature.
He is author of sobriety and temperance.

Corporature or shape of body.
He gives an upright strait tall stature, brown ruddy and lovely complexion, an
oval visage, plump, high forehead, soft hair, large gray eyes, brown hair, and
it thick, and a strong well set body, a short neck, and usually a kind of a
black spot between his two fore-teeth, and indeed throughout a hansom complete
body, sober and grave in discourse, and of a most noble disposition.

Oriental.
If he be Oriental, the skin is usually more clear, sanguine, great eyes, a
more fleshy body, etc.

Occidental.
If Occidental, a pure complexion, yet a more short stature, a browner hair,
smooth, not curling, etc.

North latitude.
His greatest North latitude, is 1. d. 38. m.

South latitude.
His greatest South latitude, is 1. d. 38. m.

Qual. of men.
He signifies Religious men, Church men etc.

Savours.
Sweet, delicious pleasant favors.

Colors.
He rules the ash color, green, blew, purple, green and a mixed yellow.

In man.
In man he rules the Liver.

Spice, herbs, and drugs.
Gilly-flowers, Nutmegs, Sugar, Mace, Cloves, Straberries, Flax and Bitony,
Balm, Fumitory, Lungwort, Walwort, Wild Marjoram, Sweet Marjoram or Organy,
Pimpernel, Rubarb, Alheal, Wheat, Bazil, Bugloss, Borage, St. Iohns-wort,
Laskwort, Pyony, Liquorish, Violets, Pomgranates, Mint, Mastix, Saffron, Dazy
and Feverfew, and all such herbs as are helpful to obstructions of the Liver,
etc.

Trees.
The Almond-tree, Hazel, Fig Tree, Olive Tree, Oak, Cherry-tree, Ash, Goosberry
tree, Pine Tree, Coral-tree, Pear Tree, Birch-tree, Ivy, Vine, Mulberry-tree,
etc.

Birds.
Of Birds, he rules the Eagle, Peacock, Phesant, Partridge, Stock-dove, Snipe,
Stork, Lark, Bees etc.

Stones.
The Topaz, Amithest, Marble, Emrald, Crystal, Saphir, Hyacinth, Bezoar,
Freestone etc.

Minerals.
Tin, Pewter etc.

Fisnes.
The Whale, Serpent, Dolphin etc.

Beasts.
The Sheep, Unicorn, Do, Heart, Stag, Ox, Elephant, and all such beasts as are
beneficial and useful to mankind.

Places.
Churches, neat and curious places, Gardens Synods, Courts of Justice,
Wardrobs, Palaces, sweet places, Oratories.

Weather.
He commonly causes pleasant healthful weather, serenity, temperate air etc.

Winds.
He rules the North and North-east winds.

He rules of the Celestial signs, Sagittary and Pisces, Sagittary by day,
Signs.
and Pisces by night; the meaning thereof is, that if Jupiter be significators
in the Revolution of any year, being by day, and in Sagittary, he is so much
the more fortified; in Pisces in a Nocturnal Revolution etc.

He rules the fiery triplicity by night; so that if Jupiter be in the 20. d of
Aries, Triplicity.
or the 10. degrees. of Leo in any Diurnal Revolution, he shall be accounted
peregrine, as not having any dignity there, not being in his house, exaltation,
term, triplicity or face; in a Nocturnal Revolution he had not been peregrine;
for then he has triplicity in these signs.

Exaltation. Detriment.
He is exalted in the 15. d. of Cancer.

He suffers detriment in Gemini and Virgo; for that they are signs that are
opposite to his Houses. This you must observe in all the other Planets.

He is in his fall in the 15. d. of Capricorn, ^all.
for that it is opposite to the sign of his exaltation; so also note that all
the Planets are in their fall in that sign which is opposite to their
exaltations.

Age.
Middle age or years of most perfect judgment and discretion.

His Angel is Zadkiel. Angel.


His Friends are Saturn, Sol, Venus, Friends.
Mercury and Luna.

His Enemy Mars only. Enemies.


Day of the week.
Of the days of the week, he rules Thursday, and of the nights, that which we
call Sunday night.

Spain, Hungaria, Babylon, Regions.
Cullen and Persia.

Orb.
His Orb is 9. d. before and after any of his Aspects.

Generation. Years.
In generation, he rules the second and ninth months.

His greatest years he gives are 428. His greater years are 79. His mean years
are 45. His least years are 12.
Iourneys.
In journeys, when he is significator, he denotes pleasant travel, good
success, safety, health and mirth.

Diseases.
Infirmities of the Liver, Obstructions, Plurisies, Apoplexies, inflammation of
the lungs, infirmities in the left ear, palpitation of the heart, cramps, pains
in the back, all infirmities of the reins, or proceeding from corruption of
blood and putrefactions therein, Squinzies, windiness, Fevers proceeding from
abundance of blood; all griefs in the head, pulse, seed, arteries; convulsions,
prickings and shootings in the body, etc.

Stationary.
He is Stationary five days before retrogradation, and four days before
direction.

Retrograde.
He is Retrograde 120. days.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature and Signification of MARS.
The nature and complexion of. Globe of.
LIkewise after Jupiter, or next under him, is located Mars, of whom we are now
to treat; he is of a fiery shining bloody color, or as you see the fire
burning in its strength to our ordinary sight he is somewhat bigger then
Saturn, yet not so big as Jupiter, but as a star of the first magnitude (he is
masculine and nocturnal) or somewhat less, and according unto Tycho, he is 13.
times less then the earth; Albotegnius says he is (in comparison of the earth)
as seven is to six; and Alfraganus says, Distant from the earth.
he is bigger then the earth by one half, and distant 4584 semidiameters of the
earth; yet Tycho says but 1745.

Mean and Diurnal motion. Revolution.
His mean motion is 31. d. 27. m.

His Diurnal motion is sometimes 32, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 44. m. a day.

He finisheth his course through the 12. signs of the Zodiac in one year 321
days, or thereabouts.

when well fortified.
When he is Lord of the year, strong and well placed, all such as belong to
arms, as soldiers, and the like, shall be fortunate and in good condition, and
shall overcome their enemies; there shall be also, during that Revolution,
sufficient and plenty of rain, and at such times (and no other) as is
convenient and requisite; and the people shall be prosperous and happy; but if
he be weak, judge the contrary, and that the good or evil by him portended,
When ill placed
shall be chiefly incident to those Places and Regions subject to the sign
wherein he is.

Humors.
He is author of anger, haste, choler, and rules these dispositions in man;
hot, fiery and dry.

Qualities of men when well placed.
Conquerours, Usurpers, Tyrants, Generals of Armies, and all Soldiers in
general, Physicians, Apothecaries, Chirurgions, Alchymists, Marshalls,
Butchers, Gunners, Watch-makers, Barbers, Armourers, and all such as use Iron
tools, Curriers, Tannes, Gamesters, Dyers, Carpenters, Cooks, Cutlers, Tailors,
Smiths, Bakers, etc.

When ill placed. Nature. Corporature or shape of body.
When he is ill placed and not strong, he denotes hangmen, thieves, bailiffs,
sergeants, cutters by the highway, murderers, jaylors, and all cutthroat
people.

He is author of passion, extravagancy, heat and choler.

Red-haired, a red face and round, a fiery sparkling eye, yet tending to a
saffronish color; of stature, neither high nor low, but between both; I have
still observed that a right Martialist does seldom exceed in height; or to be
at the most above a yard and a half high: a bold confident countenance, and it
most commonly very harsh, strong and big-boned, seldom fat.

When oriental.
When Oriental, he is somewhat above the middle size, and hairy-bodied, and a
purer complexion then has been already rehearsed.

When occidental.
When Occidental, he is ruddy, and not so tall, a little head, and not so
hairy-bodied, yellowish hair, and of a drier constitution.

North latitude.
His greatest North latitude is 4. d. 31. m.

South latitude.
His South latitude is 6. degrees. and 47. m.

Savours.
Sharp, bitter, and unpleasant.

Colors.
Red, yellow, or saffron color.

In man.
He rules the back, veins, gall.

Herbs and spice.
All such herbs as are hot and dry, and such as have sharp-pointed leaves, and
are red, they usually grow on dry places and such as are barren and hard stony
places; the thistle, Devils-milk, brambles, briers, nettles, cammock, onions,
lingwort, radish, arsmart, mustard seed, ginger, pepper, garlic, hemlock, red
sanders, tamerindes castoreum, Carduus benedictus or the blessed Thistle,
horehound, leeks.

Trees.
All Trees that are thorny or prickly.

Birds.
The Hawk, Kite, Raven, Vulture, Owl, Cormorant, Crow, Mag-pie, and all
ravenous birds or birds of prey, etc.

Stones.
Boodstone, Lodestone, Jasper, Touchstone, Adamant, the Amethist of diverse
colors.

Minerals.
Iron, Steel, Arsenick, Antimony, Brimstone and red Vermillion.

Fishes.
The Shark, Pike, Barbel, Fork-fish, all stinging Water-Serpents, and hurtful
Fish.

Beasts.
The Mastiff, Wolf, Tiger, Cockatrice, Panther, and all such beasts as are
ravenous and bold.

Weather.
Thunder, lightning, fiery-meteors, pestilential air, and in it strange
apparitions, etc.

Places.
All places that are appertaining to fire and blood, as slaughter-houses,
Furnaces, Smiths shops, etc.

Winds.
He rules, and causes Western winds.

Signs.
Of the Celestial signs, he rules Aries and Scorpio.

He has Triplicity or Rule over the watery Triplicity or Trygon, viz. these
signs, Triplicity.
which are Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces; he has absolute dominion therein both
night and day; yet some of the Ancients do join with him the Moon, etc.

He has exaltation in Capricorn in the 28. degrees. Exaltation.


He suffers detriment in Libra and Taurus. Detriment.


He is in his Fall in the 28. degrees. of Cancer. Fall.


Age.
From 22. till 45.

Samael. Angel.


His Enemy is the Moon only. Enemies.


His Friends are Saturn, Jupiter, Sol, Venus and Mercury. Friends.


Day of the week.
Of the days of the week, he rules Tuesday; and of the nights, that night we
vulgarly call Friday night.

Jerusalem, the Roman Empire, even to the West, Regions.
etc.

Orb.
His Orb is seven degrees before and after any Aspect.

Years.
His greatest years are 214.

His greater years are 66.

His mean years are 40.

His least years are 15.

In journeys, he portends thieving, sacking, robbing, slaying, much danger or
hurts, viz. to the Traveller, if Mars be significator, and weak, and
ill-placed, Journeys.
etc. of the which more hereafter, in our Treatise of Elections.

Diseases.
Fevers, and those burning, contagious and pestilential; Megrims, overflowing
of the Gall, Phrenzies, the Plague, distempers through the whole body,
Shingles, Fistulaes, Stone in the reins, yellow Jaundies, and all such diseases
as proceed from excess of Choler, Passion and Anger; all diseases proceeding
from the Gall, Putrefaction of blood, etc.

Stationary.
He is Stationary two or three days before Retrogradation, and two days before
direction.

Retrograde.
He is Retrograde 80. days.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nature and Significations of the SUN.
LEt us descend now unto the Sun. We are by Gods blessing come now to the Sun,
which is successively next to be treated on; he is under Mars, placed in the
midst of all the Planets, being the chief light and president of them all,
sitting as a Judge or King amongst his Nobles; The order of the Planets.
for as Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars is placed above his sphere, so are Venus,
Mercury and Luna beneath him; wherefore some of the Ancients have ascribed to
him chief rule, and made him, as it were, an Emperor amongst the Stars.

Saturn is his Viceroy, for that all Planets give unto him their light, or do
homage and reverence unto him, by reason of his slowness.

Jupiter has assigned him chief rule and dominion in the Realm, for that he is
of a temperate, sober, good, honest and religious inclination.

Mars is his chief Captain, or General of all his Forces.

Venus is Receiver, or Master-Comptroller of his house, by reason she is nearer
Sol then any other.

Mercury has assigned him chief Secretary of State, by reason when the King
goes any Progress or Journey, he goes; and when the King stays, so does
also Mercury, for he is never far from his beck.

Luna is his Standard Bearer, being furthest from him; she is also, as I may
say, Ambassador, Messenger, etc. to do his business.

The fixed Stars of several magnitudes, are Officers and Commanders under
these; I mean those especially of the first, second and third magnitude; the
other are only subjects, as it were, to the abovenamed, or equivalent to
common people.

Wherefore then upon the meetings of these Superiors, are concluded the rise,
subversion, confirmation, alteration, prosperity, scarcity, plenty, poverty,
beginning and subversion of States, Kingdoms, Empires, Commonwealths, and what
not? nay and the whole government of the Elements and this Elementary World,
and all things and causes external and internal in them, as in a Council or
Senate, etc.

The nature and complexion of.
The Sun is so vulgarly known, that here to insist on his color, complexion or
light, were but vain; he is masculine, Diurnal, the fountain of life, etc.

Globe of.
He exceeds the earth in bigness according to Tycho 140 times, Ptolomie says
166. times, and Copernicus 162.

Distant from the earth.
He is by the estimation of Tycho distant from the earth, 1150. Semidiameters of
the earth. Ptolomie says, 1165. semidiameters; and Copernicus says, 1142.
semidiameters of the earth.

Mean motion.
His mean motion is 59. m. 8. sec.

Diurnal.
His Diurnal motion is sometimes 57. m. 16. s. never exceeding 59. m. 8 sec.

He finisheth his course through the 12. signs of the Zodiac in 365. days,
Revolution.
and six hours or near upon etc.

When well placed and strong.
When he is well dignified, the King and Nobles shall exceed and increase in
glory and renown; Corn, Beasts and Birds shall be plentiful; the people
generally prosperous and successful, and all things in a good condition,
whereof the Sun has any signification: All this is meant, if he be Lord of the
year in any annual Revolution; but if he be weak, judge the contrary.

Quality of men when well placed.
Emperors, Kings, Monarchs, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and indeed all Noble
and Highborn people, and in general all Gentlemen, and those that are in
office or command of superiority in City, Town or Country; Coyners, Masters of
the Mint, Goldsmiths, Spinners of Gold and Silver, and all such neat Trades,
Silver and Gold-wyer-drawers, and the like.

When ill placed or weak.
Tyrants, Usurpers, Constables, Head-boroughs, and all such as bear any petty or
usurped authority.

Nature.
He is Author of magnanimity, state and majesty, heat, etc.

Corporature or shape of body.
One of no tall stature, but about the middle size, strong and portly, having a
stately majestical gate, of a saffron-coloured complexion, or Sunburned,
flaxonish, or light fair hair, somewhat crisping or curling; a large full hazle
eye, a broad forehead, a very decent, hansom body throughout.

Oriental, and Occidental.
The Sun is not, nor cannot be said to be Oriental, or Occidental, otherwise
then as he is in any Figure located near the East angle, or verging toward the
West; for all other Planets are said to be Oriental, or Occidental, as in
relation to the Sun, in that they rise before him, or set after him.

The Sun has never any Latitude; Latitude.
for he ever moves forward in the Eccliptick.

Savours.
Sour and sharp savours.

Colors.
Yellow.

In man.
In man, he rules the heart, brain and right eye; in women, the left eye.

Herbs and spice.
Saffron, Pyony, Mary-gold, Balm, Ginger, Dittany, Sallendine, Vervine, which
being gathered under its proper constellation, drives away evil Spirits; and
it is also used in prophesying; Pomcitron, Ambre, Rosemary, St. John's Wort,
Musk, Herb-grace, Rosa-Solis, Cinnamon, Eyebright, Cinquefoil, lignum Aloes,
Barley, Lavender, Sweet Marjoram, Pepper, Frankinsense, Honey, Aromaticus, etc.

Trees.
The Bay Tree, the Ash, Cedar, Ivy, the Vine, the Orange and Lemmon-tree.

Birds.
The Phoenix, Swan, Cock, Hawk, Nightingal, Lark, the Buzzard, etc.

Aetites, the stone called the eye of the Sun, Stones.
because it is like the apple of the eye in form, the Carbuncle, the
Chrysolite, the stone called Iris, the stone Heliotropion, the Hyacinth, the
stone Pyroyphylus, the stone Pantauras, Pantherus or Pantochras, in the
Scripture it is called Evanthum; the Topaz, Rubie, Diamond.

The learned and most famous Cornelius Agrippa, Lib. 1. Chap. 23. of his
Occulta Philosophia says, that Albertus Magnus and William of Paris gave to
these stones these virtues as follows.

The virtue of Aetites.
Aetites, or the stone that is found in the Eagles Nest, cures the
Falling Sickness, and poisons.

Of the Eye of the Sun.
The eye of the Sun, is singular good for comforting the brain, and
strengthening the eyesight.

Of the Carbuncle.
The Carbuncle, is of great virtue against Aerie and vapourous poison.

The Chrysolite, is of mavelous operation, in preserving the Lungs, and
helps much those that are Asthmatical; Of the Chrysolite.
and if it be bored through and filled with the Mane of an Ass, and bound to
the left arm, it drives away idle imaginations, melancholy fears and
foolishness.

Of the Iris.
The Iris, it is like the Crystal in color, it commonly having six Corners; it
being part held in the shadow and part in the rays or beams of the Sun, it
gathers the rays of the Sun into it self, and reflecteth them again in the
form of a Rainbow.

Of the Heliotropion.
The Heliotropion, is in color green like a Jasper, speckled with red; this
causes the bearer to be constant, renowned, famous, and conduces to long
life; it is said to turn the beams of the Sun into the color of blood, viz.
when it is joined to the juice of the herb of the same name and put into water,
it dazleth the sight so much that the bearer can hardly see it by the help of
the aforesaid herb.

Of the Hyacinth.
The Hyacinth, is good against poison and pestiferous vapors; it keeps the
bearer safe and acceptable; it conduces also to riches and wit; it strengthens
the heart, being held in the mouth, and wonderfully cheereth the mind.

Of the Pyrophilus.
The Pyrophilus as Aesculapius makes mention, There is a certain poison so very
cold, which preserves the heart of man (being taken out) from burning, so that
if for any time it be put into the fire, it is turned into a stone; whence it
is called Pyrophilus from the fire.

It is marvellously efficacious against poison, and it makes the bearer renowed
and dreadful to his enemies.

Of the Pant^^^a.
The Pantaura is of that sympathetical virtue that it draws other stones to it
as a lodestone does iron; admirable against Poisons.

I know there are many good wits in this Nation that have not the least faith
in these matters concerning the virtues of stones, and indeed of the whole
scope of these my writings; yet they must pardon me if I will not conclude as
the vulgar and illiterate in such mysteries do; for I have learned this modest
lesson (which I could wish were also imprinted in their breasts) Not to condemn
what I am ignorant of; for of all things (in my opinion) there can be none so
ridiculous as for a man to dislike, contradict, gainsay or condemn what he is
ignorant of: if thou have no belief in these matters; yet may thou benefit
thy self thereby; it is but thy pains in trying the conclusions; if they fail,
then may thou on good ground condemn them; if they hit, thou reapest hereby a
double benefit, knowledge and experience; wherefore by the way I thought good
to hint at this, that thou may not persist in thy ill conceit of this
Heavenly Art of the Judgment of the stars, Look my Lux Verita^^s.
or Astrology, since thou may let it alone till thou be urged by any
Artist to have any esteem thereof, though never so slight: but to our business
in hand.

Minerals.
Of Metals or Minerals, the Sun ruled gold.

Fishes.
The Sea-Calf, whose Nature is to resist lightning, Shel-fish, the Star-fish
for her parching heat, and the fishes called Strombi that follow their King,
and Margari which have a King also; these Margari being dried, are fixed into a
stone of a golden color, as witnesses Cornelius Agrippa.

Beasts.
All such Beasts as are stately, bold, strong and invicible, as the Lion,
Crocodile, Wolf, Ram, Boar, Bull, Horse, and Baboon, of the which it is
Recorded, that he barketh every hour in the day, viz. twelve times in a day,
and that in the Equinoctial times of the year he pisseth twelve times, viz,
every hour, also as often in the night Gesner on Beasts, page 10. Whence the
Egyptians (as Cornelius Agrippa and others, Lib. 1. cap. 23. de Occult. Philos.
relate) did use to engrave them on their Fountains.

Moreover the Egyptians did use to preserve them amongst their hollowed
things; for that by them they knew the time of the Conjunction of Sol and Luna,
(see Gesner of Beasts page 10.) for after the aforesaid Conjunction, the Male
Baboon will neither look up nor eat, but goes still dejected, as it were
lamenting the ravishment of the Moon, with this disdainful passion; in like
manner the Female at that time sends forth blood out of her womb of
Conception; for which cause the Egyptians signify by a Baboon the Moon, and
her rising by his standing upright, holding his hands up toward heaven.

Weather.
He causes Weather according to the Season, etc. of the which more hereafter.

Places.
Princes Palaces, Courts, Houses, all magnificent Buildings, Halls,
Dining-rooms, Parlers, etc.

Winds.
He loves and delights in the East part of the World, and Eastern Winds.

Signs.
Of the Celestial signs, he rules for his house only Leo.

Triplicity.
He rules by day the fiery Triplicity, viz. Aries, Leo, and Sagittary.

He is exalted in Aries the 19. degree. Exaltation.


He suffers Detriment in Aquaries. Detriment.


And Fall in Libra. Fall.


Age.
The strength of years.

His Angel is Michael. Angel.


Friends.
His Friends are, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Luna.

His Enemy Saturn only. Enemies.


Day of the week.
He rules Sunday of the days of the week, and of the nights that which we call
Wednesday night.

He rules the fourth Climate, Italy, Bohemia, Sicilia, Caldea, Regions.
the Roman Empire.

Orb.
Is 15. degrees before and after any Aspect.

Conception.
In conception he rules the fourth month.

His greatest years are 1640. Years.
Yet Bonatus, and some others say, but 461. His greater years are 120. His mean
years are 69. His least years are 19.
Iourneys.
In journeys he gives good success.

Diseases.
He signifies hot and dry Diseases, palpitation of the heart, infirmities of
the eyes, cramps, soundings, giddiness in the head, diseases and infirmities of
the mouth and brain, Catharrs, rotten Fevers, etc.

The Sun is never Stationary. Stationary.


Retrograde.
He moves always direct in the Ecliptic, and is never Retrograde.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature and Significations of VENUS.
The nature and complexion of.
I Come now to Venus, who is next under Sol; she is the lesser Fortune,
transparent, bright and shining; she is very well known by the Country people
by the name of the Evening Star, when she sets after the Sun; and she is
sometimes by them called the morning Star when she rises before the Sun,
Feminine and Nocturnal.

And again, by some she is called the Shepherds Star.

The globe of.
She is to our sight the biggest of all the Stars and Planets, except Sol, and
Luna; yet according to Tycho, she is less then the earth six times: Ptolomy,
Albotegnius and Alfraganus say 36. times, etc.

Distant from the earth.
She is distant from the earth, according to the same Ptolomie, Albotegnins and
Alfraganus, 618. semidiameters of the earth, but Tycho and Copernicus say 1150.

Her mean motion is 59. m. 8. sec.

Mean and diurnal motion.
Her diurnal motion is sometimes 62. m. 64. m. 65. m. 66. m. 70. m. 74. m. or
76. m. but she never exceeds 82. m.

She finisheth her course through the twelve signs of the Zodiac in the same
time the Sun does, Revolution.
or thereabouts.

When well fortified.
When she is Lady of the year in any Revolution, and essentially dignified, the
year will be advantageous unto women, who shall generally be free from
infirmities and mischiefs; they shall love and delight in the society of their
Husbands, shall be fruitful, easily conceive and bring forth; the people shall
also generally thrive and be prosperous, shall delight themselves in
recreations, sports, feastings, mirth and jollities, and all pleasure
whatsoever; also in fine apparel; but if she be weak, When ill placed.
judge the contrary.

Quality of men when well placed.
Musicians in general, Gamesters, and what Game soever it be, Embroyderers,
Jewellers, Linnen-Drapers, Perfumers, Picture-Drawers, Ingravers, Mercers,
Silk-men, and all such Occupations as serve to the adorning of women, etc.
Women, Wives, Mothers, Virgins, etc.

When ill placed or weak.
Fiddlers, Pipers, ordinary Painters, Seamsters, Glovers, Womens-Taylors,
Upholsterers, etc.

She is author of voluptuousness and pleasure.

Corporature or shape of body.
A light brown hair, smooth, and much of it, a mean stature, a fair complexion,
tending to blackness; lovely black eyes, a round face, having a Love-dimple in
the chin, a lovely mouth, cherry lips, extraordinary lovely and delightful, a
pleasant taking countenance, an exceeding well-shaped body throughout, loving
neatness, spruceness, trimming and the like; lovely in all his gestures,
speaking softly and sweetly, studious and solid in his deportment; in all
exercises of the body light and nimble.

When oriental.
When she is Oriental, she gives a taller stature, upright and straight, not
corpulent, but decently composed.

Occidental.
When Occidental, not so tall, yet very comely and well-favoured.

North latitude.
Her greatest North latitude is 9. degrees. 2. min.

South latitude.
Her South latitude, at the most, is no more.

Savours.
Delightful, pleasant, toothsom, sweet favors.

Colors.
Blew, tending to white, or white, etc.

In man.
The Reins, Backbone, Seed, and the Vessels of Seed, the Privy-parts both of
man and woman.

Herbs and spice.
All such herbs and plants as are odoriferous, pleasant, sweet and delectable,
and such as invite to Venery, viz. the Satyrian, Daffidel, Cucko-Pintle,
Maidenhair, the Violet, Valerian, Vervin, Time, the Rose, Lilly, etc. All such
Spices as are fragrant and sweet, etc.

Trees and perfumes.
The Fig Tree. Pomegranate, the Cypres, sweet Apple Tree, Pear Tree, the
Mirtle-tree, Walnut, Almond-tree, Peach, Apricoks, the Raison-tree or Vine,
Turpentine-tree, the wild Ash-tree, etc. And of Perfumes, Amber-greese, Musk,
Civet, the Gum Ladanum, and all such sweet Perfumes, Frankinsense, etc.

Birds.
The Swan, Water-wag-tail, Swallow, Pelican, Nightingal, Pigeon, Sparrow,
Turtle-Dove, Stock-Dove, Crow, the Burgander, the Eagle; because as the
Egyptians report, it will come to the Male (if called) after she has been trod
thirteen times in a day, the Partridge, Thrush, Blackbird, Pie, Wren, etc.

Stones.
The Beril, Chrysolite, Emrauld, Saphyr, Green Jasper, Corneola, Aetites, the
Lazul, Coral, Alabaster, Marble.

Minerals.
Copper, Brass, and sometimes Silver, etc.

Fishes.
The Pylchard, Gilthead, the Whiting, Crab, Tithymallus, Dolphin.

Beasts.
All such Animals as are of a strong love, delicious or luxurious; the Dog,
Cony, Sheep, Goat, Bull, Calf, Panther and Heart.

Weather.
Weather, she denotes gentle showers in Winter, and temperate heat in Summer.

Wind.
The South wind.

Places
Beds and Bed-chambers, Dining-rooms, Dancing-schools, Gardens, Fountains,
Wardrobes, Banqueting-houses, Play Houses, and Bawdy-houses.

Signs.
Of the Celestial signs, she rules, and has for her houses Taurus and Libra.

Triplicity.
She rules the Earthy Triplicity by day, viz. Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn.

She has Exaltation in the 27. degrees. of Pisces. Exaltation.


She suffers Detriment in Aries and Scorpio. Detriment.


She is in her Fall in the 27. degrees. of Virgo. Fall.


Age.
From 14. to 22.

Anael. Angel.


Saturn only. Enemy.


Friends are Jupiter, Friends.
Mars, Sol, Mercury and Luna.

Day of the week.
She has Friday assigned to her Dominion, and that night we call Monday night.

Arabia, Regions.
Austria, Campania, Polonia, Cyprus, Vienna, Parthia, Turin, and the sixth
Climate.

Orb.
Her Orb is 7. degrees. before and after any Aspect.

Her greatest years are 151. Years.
Her greater years are 82. Her mean years are 45. Her least years are 15.
Journeys.
In Journeys, she causes good success, mirth, and sport by the way.

Diseases.
Cold and moist Diseases, such as happen in the members of generation, veins,
bladder, back, belly, navel, matrix, the Running of the reins, Gonorrea, Pox,
both French and Neapolitan, Priapism, Surfets, the Pissing Disease; weakness in
the reins and members of generation, all strains by over much excess of Lust.

Stationary.
She is two days Stationary before Retrogradation, and two days before
Direction.

Retrograde.
She is 42. days Retrograde.

CHAP. VI. Of the Nature and Significations of MERCVRY.
Complexion of, his place. Bigness to the eye.
AFter Venus, or next under her, and above Luna, is located Mercury, of whom by
Gods blessing we are come now to Treat; he is of a silver-colour, but duskish;
seldom seen by us, by reason of his proximity to the Sun, he being never
distant from him above 27. degrees to our sight: he is the least of all the
Planets to our sight, except Saturn; but according to Tycho, Globe of.
he is less then the earth 19. times; Albategnius says 19000. time, and
Alfraganus 22000. times.

And by the opinion of Tycho, he is distant from the earth 1150. Distant from
the earth.
semidiameters of the earth; Albotegnius and Alfraganus say but 115.
semidiameter; of the earth.

Nature of.
He is like an Hermophridite, participating of both sex; he is Masculine when
joined by Conjunction or Aspect to a Masculine Planet, Feminine when with a
Feminine; good and fortunate when joined with the Fortunes; bad and mischievous
when joined to or with the Malevolents.

Motion mean.
His mean motion is 59. m. 8. sec. and sometimes 40. m. never more.

Diurnal.
His Diurnal motion is never above 100. m. in a day, sometimes 86. m. 80. m. 70.
m. 68. m. and 66. m.

Annual motion.
He finisheth his course through the 12. signs of the Zodiac, much about the
time that Venus does, yet he is the swifter of the two by somewhat.

when well fortified.
When Mercury is strong and Lord of the year, he signifies, Merchants,
Tradesmen, and all such as give their minds to learning Arts and Sciences,
shall have a successful year; but if he be weak, judge the contrary.

Quality of men when well dignified.
Astrologers, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Secretaries, Diviners, Merchants,
Sculptors, Poets, Advocates, Schoolmasters, Orators, Ambassadors,
Commissioners, Atturneys, Ingenious Artificers, etc. and all learned men in
general.

When ill placed and wear.
Scriveners, Accomptants, Clerks, Sollicitors, Thieves, Carriers, Messengers,
Footmen, Usurers, Petty-foggers, etc.

Nature.
He is Author of Wit, Fancy, Ingenuity, and Invention.

Corporature.
Not much color in his face, nor much abounding in white nor duskish, but a
kind of a Sun-burnt-colour, long visage, a high forehead, long nose, thin lips;
his eyes of a saddish gray, not altogether black; a dark brown hair, long hands
and fingers, and of a tall, upright, straight, spare body.

Oriental.
When he is Oriental, he is not very high, but big-boned, of a honey-coloured
complexion, small eyes, and in disposition one altogether self-ended, but well
shaped.

Occidental.
When Occidental, of a thin spare body, swarthy visage, hollow-eyed, of a dry
constitution, etc.

North latitude.
His greatest North latitude is 3. d. 33. m.

South latitude.
His greatest South latitude is 3. d. 35. m.

Savours.
Sowrish, and sharp savours.

Colors.
A mixed Galimaufry of colors, purple, etc.

In man.
The brain, tongue, and left ear.

Herbs, and Drugs.
The herb Mercury, Five-leaved grass, Fumitory, Marjorum, Parsley, Pimpernel, and
such as are of diverse colors, and mixed natures; they have chiefly relation to
the brain and tongue, to dispel wind, to comfort the spirits, and open
obstructions; Adderstongue, Lungwort, Dragonwort, Cubabs, and all such herbs as
are beneficial to the Muses and Divination, as Vervin, Hiera, Treacle, Diambra.

Trees.
The Walnut-tree, Filbert-tree, Hazel, etc.

Birds.
Those Birds that are Naturally witty, melodious and inconstant, as the Linet,
Nightingal, Blackbird, Thrush, the Bird Ibis, the Bird Porphyrio, Parret,
Swallow, Popinjay, Cockatoo, Crane the Jack-Daw, Lark, the Bird Calandra.

Serpents.
Serpents and Adders.

Stones.
The Emrald, Agates, Red marble, Topaz, and such as are of diverse colors,
Millstone, Marchasite.

Minerals.
Quicksilver, Tin and Silver Marchasite.

Fishes.
The Trochius, the Fox-fish, the Mullet, the Pourcontrell, the Fork-fish.

Beasts.
Of Beasts, the Dog, and such as are of quick sense, ingenious, inconstant,
swift, and such as are easily acquainted with man, Apes, Foxes, Weesles, the
Heart and Mule, the Hare, Civet-cat, Squirrel, Spider, Pismire, the Hyaena, etc.

Weather.
He must principally be observed, the sign he is in, and season of the year;
but usually he causes rain, hail-storms, sometimes thunder and lightning,
according to the nature of the Planets in configuration with him, of the which
more hereafter.

Winds.
He delights in the Northern Quarter of Heaven, yet commonly he causes such
winds as are signified by the Planet to which he applies.

Places.
Schools, Common-hals, Tennis-Courts, Fairs, Ordinaries, Markets,
Bowling-Allies, Tradesmens-shops; in a gentlemans-house, his Hall, etc.
Studies, Libraries.

Signs.
Of the Celestial signs, he has for his houses which he rules, Gemini and
Virgo.

Triplicity.
He rules the Aerie Triplicity by night, viz. Gemini, Libra, and Aquaries.

He is exalted in Virgo the 15. degree. Exaltation.


He suffers Detriment in Sagittary and Pisces. Detriment.


His Fall is in the 15. degrees. of Pisces. Fall.


Age.
From 7. to 14.

Raphael. Angel.


His Enemies are Mars, Sol, and Luna. Enemies.


His Friends are Jupiter, Friends.
Venus, and Saturn.

He rules Wednesday, Day of the week
and that night we call Saturday night.

Flanders, Graecia, Egypt, Regions.
and Indies both East and West.

Orb.
His Orb is seven degrees before and after any Aspect.

In conception.
He rules the sixth month.

His greatest years are 450. Years.
His greater years are 76. His mean years are 48. His least years are 20.
Journeys.
In Journeys, he is according as he placed and in Aspect with the other Planets.

Diseases.
Vertigo's, Lethargies, Madness, Frensies, Diseases of the brain, Ptisick,
Stammerings, Defects in the memory, Hoarsness, Dry-cough, the Hand and
Feet-gout, all imperfections in the Fancy.

Stationary.
He is Stationary one day before Retrogradation, and one day before direction.

Retrograde.
He is Retrograde 24. days.

CHAP. VII. Of the Nature and Significations of the MOON.
MY Intentions are now to treat of the lowermost of all the Planets, and next
unto the earth, which is the Moon; she is Feminine and Nocturnal; The nature
and complexion of.
her color is so vulgarly known, that it were superfluous or needless here to
relate, since our intentions and scope of our writings are to inform the
ignorant and illiterate of what they as yet are ignorant of; she is the biggest
of Planets to our outward sight, except the Sun; nay and it is hardly
discernable externally, which of the two is the greater; but this is by reason
of their nearness unto our sight, whence in Genesis she is called one of the
two great lights (which is to be understood as in relation to our sight.) But
according to Tycho, Globe of
is 42. times less then the earth. Ptolomie says 39. times, and Copernicus 43.
times.

And according to Tycho, she is less then Sol 5848. times; Comparison of.
Ptolomie says 6348. times, and Copernicus 7000. times.

Distant from the earth.
And distant from the earth, according to Tycho, 60. semidiameters at her
greatest elongation; in her least elongation but 52. semidiameters; Ptolomie
says 64. semidiameters; her least 34. and her mean 49. Copernicus says, her
greatest 68. her least 52. and her mean 60.

Nature of
She is neither fortunate nor unfortunate, but as she is placed and in
configuration with either the Fortunes or Malevolents; she is most powerful in
operation of all the other Planets, on Elementary bodies, by reason of their
proximity to us, and her swiftness, by which she transfers the light and
influence of all the Superiors to us, by her configuration with them.

Mean motion.
Her mean motion is 13. degrees. 10. min. 36. sec.

Diurnal.
She never exceeds 15. degrees. 2. minutes in one day.

Revolution.
She finisheth her course through the 12. signs of the Zodiac in 27. days,
hours and 45. minutes or thereabouts.

Moon Lady of the year, and strong in any Revolution, When well placed.
denotes there shall be no want of rain in its due season, both former and
latter; men shall be general healthy, fortunate, safe and punctual in all
their actions and promises, especially if she be in reception with her
dispositor or good Aspect therewith, etc. but if she be then weak and
unfortunate, you are to judge the contrary. When ill placed.


One of a palish, whitish color, round face, gray-eyes, yet having a kind of a
lowering or cloudish eye-brow, very hairy, fleshie and plump, of a large
stature, corpulent, and well set.

Oriental.
When Oriental, she inclines more to fatness.

Occidental.
When Occidental, not so well set.

Her greatest North latitude is, 5. degrees. 17. sec. or near upon. North latitude.
Her greatest South latitude, is, 5. degrees. 12. sec. or near upon.
Quality of men
She signifies common people.

Savours.
Fresh watrish tastes, or such as one can hardly say what taste it is of.

Colors.
Silver-colour, white, a pale-green, and a pale yellow.

In man.
She rules the Phlegmatic humor, the brain, all watrish and excrementitious
humors; the left eye, and the right eye of a woman, her menstrues, etc.

Sea tangle, Lunaria or the Moon-herb, Hysope, Rosemary Agnus-castus, Herbs.
the herb Chinosta, Pompion, Melon, Muskmelon, Gourd, Cucumber, Colwort,
Cabbidge, Endive, Mushrooms, Poppy, Lintseed, Rapeseed, and all such herbs as
turn toward the Moon, and increased and decrease as she does.

Trees and Plants.
The Plam-tree, for that it sends forth a twig every time the Moon rises, and
all such trees and plants as participate or sympathize with her, and are juicy
and full of sap.

Birds.
Goose, Swan, Duck, Divedapper, Moor-hen, and all Fowl using the water,
Night-owl, Night-raven, Bat, etc.

Stones.
All stones that are white and green, the Marchasite, the Crystal, the
Senenite, and soft stones.

Minerals.
Silver.

Aelurus, Fishes.
whose eyes increase aand decrease according to the course of the Moon, all
fish of the like nature; the Tortoise, the Echeneis, Crab, Oister, Lobster,
Cockle, Muscle, and all shel-fish, also the Eele, etc.

Beasts.
Such Beasts as use and delight in water, as the Otter, etc. and such as
sympathize any wise with the Moon, as the Camelion, Dog, Hog, Frog, Hind, Goat,
Baboon, Panther, Cat, the Civet Cat, all monstrous Beasts, Mice, Rats, etc. Of
the Baboons passions I forbear here to speak, since you have had it related in
the 4. chapter, being caused by the secret influence of Sol and Luna.

Places.
Fountains, Fields, Seaports, Highways, Rivers. Deserts, Pools, Fish Ponds,
Bogs, Brooks, Docks, Springs, Common-shores, Wharffs, etc.

Weather.
According to her configuration with the other Planets, viz with Saturn, cold,
moist and clowdy weather, with Jupiter heart and temperate air; with Mars wind
and clouds; with the Sun according to the time of the year; with Venus showers;
with Mercury wind and rain.

Wind.
She usually causes that wind signified by the Planet she applies unto.

Signs.
Of the Celestial signs she has but one for her house, viz. Cancer.

Triplicity.
Her Triplicity is the earthy Triplicity, which she rules by night, viz.
Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn.

Her Exaltation is in Taurus the 3. degree. Exaltation.


She suffers detriment in Capricorn. Detriment.


Fall in Scorpio 3. degree. Fall.


Age.
Infancy till seven years of Age.

Gabriel. Angel.


Her Enemies are Saturn and Mars. Enemies.


Her Friends are Jupiter, Friends.
Sol, Venus and Mercury.

Day of the week
Of the days of the week, she rules Monday and that night we commonly call
Thursday night.

Denmark, Regions.
Holland, Zealand, Flanders, Norinberge.

Orb.
Her Orb is twelve degrees before and after any Aspect.

Years.
Her greatest years are 320.

Her greater years are 108.

Her mean years are 66.

Her least years are 25.

In conception.
In conception she rules the seventh month.

Journeys.
According as she is strong or weak, strengthened or debilitated.

Diseases.
Megrims, Frenzies, Apoplexies, Vertigoes, Wind-Cholick, Diseases in the
bladder, Testicles and left-side, and in the liver of women, and members of
Generation, Menstrues, Fluxes, cold Rhumes, Belchings, cold stomach, hurts in
the left eyes of men, and right of women, Sciatica, Surfets, Coughs,
Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Aposthumes, small Pox, Measles, and the
King's Evil.

Stationary.
She is never stationary.

Retrograde.
Nor Retrograde, but when she goes less then 13. degrees. in 24. hours, she is
accounted equivalent to a Planet retrograde; but in her own proper motion she
ever moves direct forward.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Essential Dignities of the Planets.
I Have already showed the Natures and Significations of the Planets; I am come
now to show their essential Dignities, without the which there can no part of
this Art be understood, or indeed by any wise beneficial; wherefore it is
necessary that all the Students herein, warily observe their Fortitudes and
Debilities in any part of their works; to which end they must be exceeding well
skilled herein; which, that they may diligently study to do, I will (God
inabling me) cordially and sincerely to the full here relate.

When a Planet is essentially dignified or fortified.
A Planet then is said to be essentially strong, or in essential Dignities, when
he is in his own House, Exaltation, Triplicity, Term, or Face. How these are
assigned to every Planet, you may see by this Table following, though there
has been much dissension therein amongst the Ancients; with the which if thou
agree not, I hope thou art not hurt hereby, since thou have liberty to follow
what Authors thou please.

A Table of the essential Dignities of the Planets according to Ptolomie.
Signs. Houses of the Planets Exalations. Triplicities. D. N. The terms of the
Planets. The Faces of the Planets. Detriment. Fall. D 19 6 14 21 26 30 10 20 30
N 3 ^ 8 15 22 26 30 10 20 30 D 3 7 14 21 25 30 10 20 30 N D 15 6 13 20 27 30 10
20 30 N D 6 13 19 25 30 10 20 30 N 15 7 13 18 24 30 10 20 30 D 21 6 11 19 24 30
10 20 30 N 6 14 21 27 30 10 20 30 D 3 8 14 19 25 30 10 20 30 N 28 6 12 19 25 30
10 20 30 D 6 12 20 25 30 10 20 30 N 27 8 14 20 25 30 10 20 30

The Use of the Table.
IN the first Column you have,,, etc. under each other to the end of the signs;
over them is written, signs, intimating all these beneath are the Characters of
the signs.

In the next Column to signs, you have written the Houses of the Planets, under
which you see. D. over against it on the left hand is; and under. D. you have.
N. and over against her on the left hand,. intimating no more but this, that is
his day house, signified by D. and is her night house, signified by N. and so
all along underneath you have declared what sign properly belongs to every
Planet.

In the next column you see written Exaltations; under it and over against, you
find 19. and under him, over against, you see 3. which is, in the 19. degree
of is in the very point of his exaltation, and in the 3. degree of; and so of
the rest.

In the next column you see Triplicities, and under is D. N. and under D. N.
you have. under D. and under N. and over against; so also over against in the
same column you see, and again over against; which shows no more but that the
has triplicity in the Day, signified by D. in these three fiery signs or
Triplicity; and in the night signified by N. so you may see and rule the earthy
Triplicity, by day, by night; and the aerie; the watery only; wherefore you find
both under D. and N. showing that both night and day he rules the watery Trygon.

In the next column and over against, you see 6. and in the next column 14. and
next unto her over against still you find 21. etc. and over their heads you
have written The terms of the Planets; the meaning whereof is, that in the
first 6. degrees of has terms, from 6. to 14. has terms, from 14. to 21. has
terms, etc. and so in order of the rest.

In the tenth column over against, you find 10. 20. and 30. over their heads,
The faces of the Planets, which is, in the first 10. degrees of has a face,
from 10. to 20. degrees, and from 20. to 30. degrees: mark this all along in
the rest.

In the thirteenth column, you find over against, and under her over against,
next over against, and over all, written Detriment, intimating in, in, in, are
in detriment, viz. in houses that are opposite to their own, whereby they are
debilitated or suffer detriment or damage, and so you may see of all the rest
of the Planets.

In the last column you find over against,; over against,; over against,, and
over all, written Fall, showing that in, in, in, etc. are in their Falls, viz.
in the signs opposite to their exaltations.

To know the strengths and debilities of the Planets in any figure.
But, that you may fully examine the strengths and debilities of the Planets, in
the judging of any part of this Science, and to know how many dignities
essential a Planet has; when in Exaltation, what in house, how many in
Triplicity, term or face; nay and accidental dignities, as being in Aspect or
Conjunction with the Fortunes, and located in good houses, etc. or debilities
essential or accidental, have special regard to this following Table.

A Table, showing the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets.
Essential Dignities. Debilities. A Planet in his own house, or mutual
reception by house shall have dignities. 5 In Detriment. 5 In exaltation, or
reception by exaltation. 4 In Fall. 4 In Triplicity. 3 Peregrine. 5 In Term. 2
In decanet or face. 1 Accidental Fortitudes. Accidental Debilities. In Medium
Coeli, or ascendant. 5 In the 12. house. 5 In the 7.4. or 11. houses. 4 In the
8. or 6. 2 In the 2. or 5. 3 Retrograde. 5 In the 9. 2 Slow in motion. 2 In the
3. 1, and occidental. 2 Direct. 4 and oriental. 2 Swift in motion. 2 decreasing
in light. 2,, or oriental. 2 Combust of. 5 and occidental. 2 Under beams. 4
occidental, or increasing. 2 Partil with or. 5 Free from combustion and beams.
5 Partil with. 4 In Cazemi. 5 Besieged of or. 5 In Partil with and. 5 Partil of
or. 4 In Partil with. 4 Partil of or. 3 In Partil with or. 4 In Conjunction
with Caput Algol in 20 degrees of Taurus. 5 In Partil with or. 3 In with Cor in
24. degrees. of. 6 In with Spica in 18. degrees.. 5

CHAP. IX. Showing the Use of these former dignities, etc.
What a Planet in his own house signifies.
USE: The use that is to be made of all this, is no more but this; if you find
a Planet in his own house, and he significator, he shows a good state of the
person or thing he signifies in any scheam whatsoever. As if in the Revolution
of the year of the World, he be significator of the King, People, etc. he
signifies thus much, That their condition is, and shall be during the time of
his being essentially strong, in great esteem, prosperity, health, plenty, etc.

What a Planet signifies in his Exaltation.
If a Planet be in his Exaltation, he shows a man of a high and majestical
carriage and disposition, very high-minded, lofty and proud, taking more upon
him then befitteth.

In Triplicity.
If a Planet be in his Triplicity, it shows a man meanly endued with the goods
of this life, not meanly, nor very well descended; yet his present condition to
be good.

In Term.
If a Planet be in his Terms, it shows a man rather participating of the temper
and shape of the Planet, then of the wealth, power or dignity signified by the
nature of that Planet.

In Face.
In face, a Planet no otherwise fortified, then but being in face, and
significator of any one, shows him signified to be, as it were, at the last
shift, or as we say, at the last gasp, not knowing how to bestow himself, nor
what course to take; and so judge of any thing signified, to be either in a
good or bad condition, according to the strength of the significator.

Chap. X. Of the Houses of the Planets, and wherefore they were so distributed.
DIligently note this Chapter. The Reasons why the signs are (as abovesaid) in
that manner attributed and assigned to the dominion of the Planets, I thought
good here to relate, that the Students in this Noble Art may not want grounds
and reasons for their Rules; as also that they may be able to give an answer to
the proudest Antagonist. We will then, according to our method begin with the
Luminaries, Of the Luminaries and their houses.
viz. Sol and Luna, who have Cancer and Leo assigned them by reason of their
heat, which is caused through their nearness to our Zenith or Cardinal point;
the Sun has allotted him Leo, for that it is most agreeable unto his nature:
besides, we see that the Sun being naturally hot and dry, does show its effects
more forcibly in this sign then in any other; for though Aries Sagittary be
also fiery signs, yet is he not so hot, powerful nor efficacious therein, as
in Leo.

The Moon has Cancer for the same reason allotted to her government, it being
most agreeable to her temper: for Cancer is the first sign of all the rest that
are moveable and watery, and so more agreeable with her temper and quality then
any of the rest.

Oh and his houses.
Saturn because he is naturally cold, and an enemy to heat, and the highest and
most remote from the Luminaries of all the Planets, has therefore assigned him
Capricorn and Aquaries, which are the opposite signs to Cancer and Leo,
wherefore they are cold and moist; and by reason of this their Opposition,
Saturn is reputed hurtful, and the most obnoxious and malevolent of all the
Planets, by reason he thus opposes the Luminaries that are the Lamps of light,
life and nutrition.

And because Jupiter is placed under Saturn, Of.
he has allotted him those two signs that go before and after Capricorn and
Aquaries, viz. Sagittary and Pisces, which are in a Trine to the houses of the
Luminaries; Pisces his night-house to Cancer the house of the Nocturnal
Luminary; and Sagittary his day house to Leo the house of the Diurnal Luminary:
wherefore they are temperate, and by reason of this their Amical Aspect he is
concluded assistant, temperate and good; fortunate and benevolent to mankind,
and the greatest Fortune of all the Planets.

Mars in order follows Jupiter, Of.
whom you have heard is immediately placed after him; and therefore those signs
which go before and after the houses of Jupiter are given to him, viz. Scorpio
and Aries, which are in a Square to the house of the Luminaries, viz. Aries his
day-house to Cancer, and Scorpio his night-house to Leo: wherefore by reason a
Square is an Aspect of enmity, he is accounted hurtful and unfortunate, (yet
not so bad as Saturr, who beholds them (as has been said) with an Opposition)
and is the lesser infortune.

Venus by reason of her temperate constitution, Of..
challenges those houses which go before and after the houses of Mars, viz.
Libra and Taurus, which are in a Sextile to the houses of the Luminaries, which
is an Aspect of love and amity, causing generation and multiplication; and by
reason Sextile is not so perfect an Aspect as a Trine, she is truly accounted
the lesser Fortune.

And because Mercury is carried below the rest of the Stars, Of.
the two remaining signs are given him, viz. Gemini and Virgo, preceding and
following the houses of the Luminaries; and because he is on neither side, and
never distant from the Sun above one sign, he inclines naturally neither to
good nor bad, but is adjudged to be participating of the nature of the Planet
to which he is joined.

CHAP. XI. Of the Exaltations and Fall of the Planets, and wherefore they were
so constituted.
ENter we shall here (as in the preceding Chapter) with the Luminaries, and
first with the Sur, as being the chief light, and Fons vitae, the Fountain of
life; the Sun then is said to be in the point of his Exaltation when he is in
the 19. degree of Aries, he being then in the highest Northern point of the
Ecliptic, Of the exaltation of.
by which all things are made to spring and flourish, the heat of weather and
the length of days being increased; therefore for the same reason contrary is
he said to be in his Fall in Libra, it being the opposite sign in the heavens
to Aries, in the which he declineth Southward, by the which the shortness of
the days and cold is increased, to the hinderance of the fertility of the earth.

The Sun in Aries then being the cause and original of all things; Of the
and because the Moon has her light from him, she being in conjunction with
him in Aries, shows her self first unto us in Taurus, the first sign in which
she has Triplicity; and therefore for these causes she is said to be in
exaltation in Taurus, in which she is also increased in light; and in Scorpio
she is in Fall (for that it is the sign opposite to Taurus) sign to the Suns
exaltation when she is in her Fall, being in her Fall, being in Conjunction in
Aries, or receiving there her first light.

And because as you have heard before, Saturn is most remote from the Sun, Of.
contrary in houses, and author of cold, as the Sun is of heat; therefore is he
exalted in that sign in which heat is diminished, and cold increased, viz.
Libra; and in his fall where cold is diminished and heat increased, viz. Aries,
quite contrary to the Sun.

Jupiter is exalted in Cancer, and in fall in Capricorn, Of.
for that Jupiter delights in the Northern part of Heaven, stirring up
Northern winds, which causes fertility, and makes things to grow, and his
greatest declination Northward is in Cancer, wherefore he is therein exalted,
and by reason of the contrary, is he in Fall in Capricorn.

Mars is naturally hot and dry, Of.
and because he shows his effects more powerfully in Capricorn (it being a
Southern sign, where the Sun is most hot, viz. about noon) is he said to be
exalted therein, and in fall in Cancer, quite contrary to Jupiter, Mars being
violent, Jupiter temperate.

And because Venus is naturally moist, and chiefly in Pisces, Of.
by which the Spring is moistened and increased in strength, is she said to be
exalted in Pisces, she being the cause of generation and procreation: wherefore
Autumn when all things wither, and fade, viz. in Virgo, is she in fall.

Mercury, for that he is dry and contrary unto Venus, is exalted in Virgo, Of.
and in fall in Pisces, Virgo being both his house and joy.

CHAP. XII. Of the Triplicities of the Planets, and the Reasons why they were
so appointed.
What a Triplicity is. How many. How nominated. Of what signs they consist.
THus then first you must know, that a Triplicity is no more then three signs of
the Zodiac, all of one nature, making a perfect triangle; and of these
Triplicities, amongst the signs there are four, viz. the Fiery-Triplicity, the
Aery-Triplicity, the Watry-Triplicity, and the Earth-Triplicity. The
Fiery-Triplicity, consists of Aries, Leo and Sagittary: the Aerie, of Gemini,
Libra and Aquaries: the Watery, of Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces: the Earthy, of
Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn; and these signs behold one another with a Trine;
as a Planet in a fiery sign beholds another Planet in another fiery sign (being
in equal number of degrees) with a Trine; as also a Planet in an Aerie sign,
another Planet in An Aerie sign; one in a Watery sign, another in a Watery sign:
in an Earthy sign, a Planet in an Earthy sign. And this Trine Aspect, consists
of an hundred and twenty degrees, etc.

and Rule the Fiery-Triplicity.
The Sun and Jupiter have dominion in in the Fiery-Triplicity, the Sun by day,
and Jupiter by night: the Sun, for that he is not and fiery, of the nature of
these signs; and Jupiter, for that he is temperate; and to moderate the
extremity thereof, therefore he rules this Triplicity in the night: yet some
of the Ancients have added in government with the Saturn, that by his cold
nature, he may temperate the excess of heat. This is the Eastern Triplicity.

and the Aerie.
Saturn and Mercury have dominion in the Aery-Triplicity, which is Western,
Mercury by night, and Saturn by day; Libra is his Exaltation (and you have
heard for what reasons) Aquaries is his house and sign wherein he most does
joy; Gemini is Mercurys house; wherefore Saturn has chief Dominion in this
Triplicity; yet some have joined Jupiter in signification with them, by reason
of his temperancy.

only the watery.
Mars both night and day, has assigned him chief Dominion of the Watery
Triplicity; this Triplicity is Northern: certainly the reason why Mars was
assigned chief Rule of the Water, was to cool his courage and abate his heat;
for we see he is more powerful to work his mischievous pranks in Leo then in
Cancer; for he having dominion and rule in Cancer, he works not altogether so
much mischief (yet is he in Fall in Cancer, but Peregrine in Leo) wherefore a
Planet Peregrine is worse then a Planet in Fall, if he be but in a term: yet
some of the Ancients have joined Venus and the Moon with Mars, by reason Cancer
is the Moons house, and Pisces the Exaltation of Venus.

and the Earthy.
Venus and Luna are appointed chief Governesses of the Earthy-Triplicity, which
is Feminine and Southern, cold and moist, causing South-east winds, cold and
moist Air; and therefore assigned to these Feminine Planets.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Terms of the Planets, wherefore so called, and so assigned
to every of the five Planets.
What a term is
HEre now you must know the Sun and Moon have no terms; A Term is a certain
number of degrees, which in each sign (whether it be exaltation or house) every
of these five Planets, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, have a
priority; which by long study and experience was at the last (by Gods
assistance) found out by the Ancients.

Wherefore so called.
The are called Terms, Ends or Bounds, for that the Planets have their
proportion so allotted them, at the end of so many degrees, begin the bounds,
term or ends of another Planet: As for example, from the first degree of Aries
to the sixth, is the term, end, or bounds of Jupiter; from the 6. to the 14. is
the term of Venus, etc.

To know the greater years of the Planets by the Terms.
Ptolomie, Albumazer and Bonatus show that the greater years of the Planets are
found out by their several terms, through the Zodiac, which is no more but
this; look what number of degrees every Planet has assigned him in every sign,
and add them together, and the make the just number of the great years, as you
have the before; as for example more plainly.

Signs Terms 4 6 5 8 7 2 7 6 8 7 4 6 6 7 7 3 7 6 7 7 6 6 5 6 7 6 5 6 6 7 6 8 6
5 5 3 8 6 7 6 6 8 5 6 5 6 7 5 6 6 6 5 5 8 6 5 6 5 8 6 Greater years 57 79 66 82
76

These being added together; make just 360. degrees.

But the reason why the Planets are after this manner divided into terms, is
briefly this. The Sages and Philosophers in former Ages followed this rule; The
reason why the terms are so attributed to the Planets.
first, to observe what Planet had most dignities in a sign; whether by
Exaltation and House, Triplicity and House; or House, Exaltation or Triplicity
only; and to that Planet that had two or more Dignities, they assigned the
first term, whether he were a Fortune or Infortune; and if an Infortune have
not two dignities in a sign, they placed them last, and gave them the last term
of the sign, and the first term to the Lord of the Exaltation, to the Lord of
the Triplicity, or the Lord of the House; ever preferring him who has two
dignities, before those or him that had but one, except only in Cancer and Leo;
for because Cancer is the opposite sign to the exaltation of Mars, viz.
Capricorn; therefore is the first term of Cancer assigned to Mars; and because
Leo is the opposite sign to the house and joy of Saturn, is the first term of
Leo given to him; to the Infortunes are given still the last of all the signs,
except of Leo; the last term is given to Jupiter; the quantity of the terms are
thus divided; when Jupiter and Venus have not two of the aforesaid dignities in
the same sign, nor in the second, third, nor fourth, they have seven degrees
allotted them for their term: Saturn and Mars, because they are infortunes
(except in their own houses) but five; sometimes four, three, and two; Mercury,
for that he is of a mixed nature, and naturally neither good nor bad, has six
degrees allotted him. In like manner, when a Planet has the aforesaid
dignities, he has assigned him one more, as Venus in the first term of Taurus
has assigned her eight degrees; and Saturn in the first term of Aquaries has
six degrees allotted him; and where Venus has eight, you see Saturn has but
two in Taurus, being so much diminished, he being very weak in Taurus: so also
in Sagittary, you see Jupiter is increased one, being he is there strong; and
Mercury being weak, is diminished one; Jupiter has eight, Mercury but five;
but why they are so divided throughout the signs, I find no Author give
sufficient reasons; I mean for this Table, according to Ptolomie, which, he
says, he found in an old rotten worm-eaten book, which was half consumed with
worms and age, in which, he says, there was a long story of the utility and
reasons of the terms: but by reason of the so much decay of the Book it could
not be legible, so that he could not transcribe it; and so leaves the Reader
still in doubt concerning this point, the clearing whereof requires much time
and study, which shall not be wanting hereafter in me to bestow (God granting
me life and health) for the benefit both of the Art and Students therein. In
the interim be content with what I have now delivered.

CHAP. XIV. Showing the use which is to be made of the Terms.
REmember that a Planet in his own Term is strong, and that the more dignities
he has there, the stronger he is; for Jupiter in the first term of Sagittary,
is stronger and more powerful then in the first term of Aries; yet they are
both his terms; the reason is, because Sagittary is both his House and
Triplicity; Aries is but his Triplicity only; wherefore you see in Sagittary he
has the first eight degrees for his term, in Aries but six; and so observe the
nearer a Planet is in nature to the place of his term, the stronger is the
Planet therein; for Jupiter being hot and moist, has but five degrees for his
term in Virgo, which is cold and dry; yet in Gemini, which is hot and moist, he
has six, it agreeing with his temper; yet in Cancer, which is cold and moist
(you will perhaps say) he has seven, which agrees not so near to his nature;
but the reason thereof is, Cancer is his house of Exaltation, and so has
allotted him one for that, as you have heard before; for you must know the more
dignities a Planet has in a sign, the stronger he is, and has the greater
term allotted him.

In like manner, if a Planet that is cold and dry, be in a term so likewise
qualified, viz. cold and dry also, his cold and dryness is the more increased,
and will work the more forcibly on the Inferiors he is significator of:
observe the same rule in all the rest of the qualities and humors, still
remembering that a Planet is so much the more increased in strength, by how much
the more he is located in the places of his own temper and nature.

Moreover a Planet that is hot and dry, is lessened of his vigor in a term
that is cold and moist; so likewise is he augmented in heat if he be naturally
cold and moist, and in a term that is hot and dry.

In like manner note, that if a fortunate Planet be in a fortunate term (I say
note in general) his goodness is the more increased and augmented, having more
power and strength to operate in any thing whatsoever he is significator of; as
if he have signification of good, he is then so much the better; and on the
contrary an evil or malevolent Planet in a malevolent sign and term is the more
mischievous.

The Lord of a Termwhen he is in that Term, let it be what sign it will, has
more power therein then the Lord of that sign or the Planet that has that sign
for his Exaltation, if he be Peregrine anywhere, which is as much to say,
Possession is eleven points of the Law, when there is but twelve. And if the
Lord of any term be in his term, and the Lord of the sign in another sign in
any Aspect with him, the Lord of the term shall have more power in the sign
where he is, then the Lord of the sign, and shall be principal significator;
and if the Lord of the term be in his own term and sign, his strength and power
is so much the more increased.

What ever Planet be weak in a sign, that Planets debility is lessened, when or
by his being in that part of the sign he be where he has any term; and if he
be in term and sign both of his own nature, he is very strong and fortunate, as
aforesaid.

CHAP. XV. Demonstrating the Use, Nature and Reasons of the Faces of the
Planets.
AGain, the Reasons of the Virtues of each Planet through the 12. signs of the
Zodiac in their proper Faces is very rare, and a great mystery, which every
capacity cannot reach unto; neither is it to be attained by any but who are
great and profound searchers of the hidden mysteries of nature, and of great
experience; for as water quenches fire, and as fire dries up water; so one
Planet over-ruleth another, and again is contradicted by the same; a term
divides a face; a face divides a sign; a sign a triplicity; a triplicity the
Zodiac, etc.

Wherefore the Faces are called Faces.
Know therefore that in every sign there are three Faces, consisting of 10.
degrees a piece: they are called faces for that they are equivalent to signs,
forms or shapes, by reason they show the nature and inclination of the Planets
in them, as in their own houses, as it were, as anon shall appear, being
borrowed from the practice of those that did use to foretell the Accidents,
Nature, Disposition and inclination by the face of the Planet.

To know the proper Faces then of the Planets, you must begin with Mars, and
give him the first face of Aries, viz. the first 10. degrees, because Aries is
his house: the second face to the Sun because he follows Mars in course, and
is located under him in the Heavens: the third to Venus, who successively
follows the Sun: to Mercury you must after the same Rule give the first face
of Taurus, who successively follows Venus; the second to the Moon, being
under Mercury; the third to Saturn, being the first of the Planets; and
therefore in order to be reckoned after Luna, which is the last. The first face
of Gemini to Jupiter; the second to Mars, and so round about the Zodiac; for
following this method, you will soon come to the exact knowledge of every Face,
and the true Lord thereof.

The significations of the first face of. Of the second.
Mars then has the first face of Aries assigned unto him; and this is the face
of boldness, strength magnanimity, unshamefastness, resoluteness and confidence.

The Sun has the second face of Aries, which is the face of nobleness, might,
majesty, power, renown and authority; and in this face he is in his exaltation.

Of the third.
Venus has the third face of Aries, which is effeminate, mild, joyful,
merry, full of sport and play.

Mercury has the first face of Taurus, Of the 1. face of.
which is the face of Ploughing and Tilling, Sowing, Building, giving of Laws,
Precepts and Learning.

The Moon has the second face of Taurus, which is a face of power, dignity and
authority, Of the second.
depopulating Towns and Castles, and constraining the People.

Saturn has the third face of Taurus, which is a face of misery, servitude,
poverty, necessity and cruelty. Of the third.


Jupiter has the first face of Gemini, Of the 1. face of.
complete in all things, and it is a face of writing, casting of accounts, of
giving and receiving of Petitions and Writings of no profit or utility.

Mars has the second face of Gemini, Of the second.
which is a face of labor, trouble and study in what is painful, and
indishonest actions.

Sol has the third face of Gemini, Of the third.
which is a face of forgetfulness, disdain, jearing, scoffing and boldness.

Venus has the first face of Cancer, which is a face of strength,
understanding, wit and power, Of the 1. face of.
desiring favor of all men.

Mercury has the second face of Cancer, which is a face of sport, mirth,
women, Of the second.
riches, fertility and abundance.

The Moon has the third face of Cancer, Of the third.
which is a face of hunting, pursuing of Runaways, gaining by strength and
arms, and opposing of men.

Saturn has the first face of Leo, Of the 1. face of.
handsome in shape; it is a face of cruelty, mischief, and violence; of enduring
labor and toil; of boldness and lust.

Jupiter has the second face of Leo, Of the second.
which is a face of quarrels and of mischief, causing Wars and strife.

Mars has the third face of Leo, Of the third.
which is a face of love and friendship, and easily leaving his goods and abode
for the fear of War or Commotions.

Sol has the first face of Virgo, Of the 1. face of.
which is a face of Ploughing and Sowing, Tilling; of gathering wealth and
riches.

Venus has the second face of Virgo, Of the second.
which is a face of gaining, and growing rich, of coveteousness, entreating and
desiring the help of others.

Mercury has the third face of Virgo, Of the third.
which is a face of age, weakness, and decrepedness; of destroying people, and
pulling up trees by the root.

The Moon has the first face of Libra, Of the 1. face of.
which is a face of Justice, Right and Truth, helping the weak and needy,
complete and handsome in shape.

Saturn has the second face of Libra, Of the second.
which is a face of quiet, profit and happy life.

Jupiter has the third face of Libra, Of the third.
which is a face of gluttony, lechery, revelling and following ill courses.

Mars has the first face of Scorpio, Of the 1. face of.
which is a face of quarrelling, fighting, mischief, slaughter, robbing and
sacking.

Sol has the second face of Scorpio, Of the second.
which is a face of contentions, strife, theft, of sowing mischief and debate
amongst men, and of deceit.

Venus has the third face of Scorpio, Of the third.
which is a face of Wars, violence, drunkenness, of rapes and fornications.

Mercury has the first face of Sagittary, Of the 1. face of.
which is a face of boldness, freeness and strength.

The Moon has the second face of Sagittary, Of the second.
which is a face of trouble in mind, fear, mistrust, etc.

Saturn has the third face of Sagittary, Of the third.
which is a face of obstinacy and wilfulness, sticking to his own whimsical
conceits, neither will he by any means be beat out of them; mischievous,
quarrelsom, and apt in, and delighting in odious, abhorred and vilde actions.

Jupiter has the first face of Capricorn, Of the 1. face of.
which is a face of handsome form and shape, loving to ramble, to be merry and
sport.

Mars has the second face of Capricorn, Of the second.
which is a face of seeking things that cannot be attained, nor brought to
perfection.

Sol has the third face of Capricorn, Of the third.
which is a face of a coveteous desire to rule and govern or have riches at his
disposal, suspecting and mistrusting himself.

Venus has the first face of Aquaries, Of the 1. face of.
which is a face of continual trouble for money and profit, never at rest, ever
in labor and toil, yet poor and indigent.

Mercury has the second face of Aquaries, Of the second.
which is a face of comeliness and beauty, of understanding, modesty, mildness,
clemency, of good behavior, and of a handsome composed shape.

Luna has the third face of Aquaries, Of the third.
which is a face of contentions, repinings and strife.

Saturn has the first face of Pisces, Of the first face of.
which is a face that is not sad, pensive nor dejected in his undertakings, of
a good nature and handsome, of many thoughts and cogitative, flitting from one
place to another for the procuring himself a name and riches.

Jupiter has the second face of Pisces, which is a face of haughtiness, Of the
second.
and a high disposition, seeking after great and high things.

Mars has the third face of Pisces, which is a face of concupiscence and lust,
Of the third.
and delight with women, yet loving rest and quietness.

The Use of all this is no more, but if you find the cuspe of the Ascendent in
the Nativity of any one, in any of these faces, you may judge the Native to be
qualified as you here find; your judgment will be the more certain, if you
find the Lord of the Ascendent, the Moon, Planet beholding the ascendent, or
Planet beholding the Lord of the ascendent or the Moon, or both, in the same
face or faces of the same nature; to dwell longer here were but vain, since
this is so clear and plain.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Joys of the Planets.
MOreover, the Planets are said to be in their joys when they are in those
houses where they are most strong and powerful, as, Joyeth in Joyeth in Joyeth
in Joyeth in Joyeth in Joyeth in Joyeth in


The reason why these are their joys, is this. Saturn joyeth in Aquaries, and
not in Capricorn, although both are his houses, because in Aquaries he has
both house and triplicity by day; in Capricorn he has only house; so likewise
Jupiter joyeth in Sagittary, and not in Pisces, because he has in Sagittary
both house and triplicity, in Pisces but only house: and so of all the rest
except Luna, who although she has not triplicity in Cancer, yet is it a sign
of her own nature and complexion: The use that is to be made hereof, is only
this; Saturn is more powerful in Aquaries then Capricorn, and Jupiter in
Sagittary then Pisces; Mars in Scorpio then Aries; Venus in Taurus then Libra;
Mercury in Virgo then Gemini, etc. Of which may many good Uses be made in the
practice of this Art; as beneath in their due places will appear.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Head and Tail of the Dragon.
EVer remember, that the head and tail of the Dragon are not signs nor Planets,
neither any Constellations; only Nodes and Places of the Ecliptic which the
Moon cutteth, they have no Aspect to any Planet; but they may be, and are
aspected by them; as touching their motion, it is according to the motion of
the Moon.

Their Nature is various according as they may be placed and aspected; some of
the Ancients have maintained that the head is good and fortunate; the tail bad
and unfortunate naturally, without any exception; others are of a contrary
opinion, and say the Head is good when well placed and fortunately aspected by
the benevolents and fortunate Planets; but when afflicted and aspected by the
malevolents it is bad: Also that the Tail is good with the good Planets, viz.
being joined with them, or in aspect therewith, and bad with the bad; and some
again will have the Head when joined with the Malevolents to be good, and with
the Benevolents bad: also the Tail when joined, or in configuration with the
Fortunes, they say is bad, and with the Infortunes good; for my part, I have
still (by that little observation I have made) found the Head to be good, and
the Tail bad and unfortunate, as is the nature of Saturn and Mars naturally,
but accidentally they may also sometimes be both good and bad, I mean contrary
to what they are generally reputed; thou may follow which thou please;
experience will be thy best rule when thou have done all; therefore let that
together with reason be thy guide, till thou can inform thy self in what is
not fully comprehended by thee.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Antiscions and Contrantiscions of the Planets.
The force of an Antiscion.
SOme of the learned in this Art do hold that the Antiscions of the Planets be
equivalent unto a Sextile or a Trine-aspect, especially if they were beneficial
Planets; and their Contrantiscions to be of the nature of Quadrate or
Opposition. How to know the Antiscions is no more but thus; first, know the
Antiscions of the signs, How to know the Antiscions of the Planets.
which is no more but a sign being equally distant with another from Cancer and
Capricorn the two Tropicks; as Gemini has its Antiscion in Cancer, Taurus in
Leo, Aries in Virgo, Pisces in Libra, Aquaries in Scorpio, and Capricorn in
Sagittary; for when the Sun is in the 1. degree of Gemini, he is as far from
the Tropic point of Cancer, as when he is in 29. degrees of Cancer; and in the
5 degree of Taurus, as when in the 55. degree of Leo, etc. Having the true
knowledge of the Antiscions of the signs, the Antiscions of the Planets then is
easily known; viz. look in what sign and degrees your Planet is whose Antiscion
you would know, and substract the degrees and minutes he is in from 30. degrees
or a whole sign, and in what degree and minute remains is his Antiscion and
then knowing in what sign he is, and his Antiscion must be in what answers
thereunto as abovesaid; as if he be in Virgo, his Antiscion is in Aries etc.
The Contrantiscion is known thus; look in what sign, degree and minute your
Antiscion falls, To know the Contrantiscion of the Planets.
and your contrantiscion will be in the same degree and minute of the opposite
sign to your Antiscion: as for example, I admit your Antiscion of Saturn,
Jupiter or Mars, or any Planet be in the 16. degree, 24. minutes of Leo, then
your Contrantiscion falls in the 16. degree, 24. minutes of Aquaries, etc. But
these are things now (by Gods blessing) vulgarly known; it is not our business
therefore here to dwell, only since in such a work as this, it is necessary to
say somewhat of the Planets, their dignities, signs, aspects and natures, the
whole Art consisting thereon, as the chief rock on which this most incomparable
glorious Fabric, viz. Astrology is founded and built; and having by the
blessed assistance of my glorious Maker waded through the beginning, that the
work might be full, I thought to give some small hint of the Antiscions, and so
proceed; for our intentions in these our undertakings are not to insist on what
is already made manifest (further then to make the work the easier to the
weaker sort and students therein) but what remains in the Art (as yet
unrevealed and not made to speak our language) which we conceive the present
times capable of receiving; it being my hearty desire to have knowledge
increase upon the face of the earth, and ignorance abolished, since the more
knowledge a man has, the nearer he is to the Divine Essence, and further from
the sottish stupidity of the World.

CHAP. XIX. Showing the Reasons of the names of the seven Planets and their
Characters.
ENter we shall in order, according to their stations and places in the Heaven,
with the highest first, viz. Saturn.

Why is called Saturn.
And the reason why he was called Saturn is this (though I must confess for
several reasons (which would be too tedious and superfluous here to relate) he
was otherwise called) he is called I say Saturn (for because this is his vulgar
name amongst us; I give you the reason and cause thereof) a saturo to fill or
give in abundance, quasi saturavit omnia, it being thought amongst the learned
that where he gives, it is in full plenty and in abundance.

Jupiter, is so called a Juvando, quasi est Iuvans pater, from helping, Why.
or being beneficial to mankind, he being naturally temperate, inclining by
his sweet influence the dispositions of men to sobriety, moderation and
goodness.

Mars, quasi Mavors, quia magna verteret, turning great things, Why.
and acting high exploits.

Sol, quasi solus Lucens, as only shining, being the Eye, Candle, Why.
and soul of the World.

Venus, a veneror, so called, to honor, and as it were giving due reverene to
beauty, Why.
she being the cause thereof.

Mercury, quasi Merces, a merendo, signifying wages and mercature, Why.
being the cause and Author thereof.

Luna, quia aliena luce lucet, shining with a borrowed light. Why.


Saturn is thus Charactered, representing a Sith or a Cross, for that he is
author of mischief and old Age. Jupiter has this Character, Why the Planets
are so charactered.
representing one with a Mace or Scepter on his shoulder or in his hand, as
deserving a Kingdom for his temperate good nature, and inclination. Mars is
made thus, pointed like a Dart or Engine of War, for that he excites to such
mischief. The Sun is so charactered, as being a full light of himself, not
borrowing in the least from others, or I may say he is made round, having a
prick in the middle, as being the Center of the whole Universe, as some have
maintained he is. Venus is thus charactered, resembling a beautiful Lady, with
a lovely round visage. Mercury is made in this manner, for that he is the
Ambassador and Messenger of the gods, with a pair of wings as it were on his
head. The Moon you know either in her wane or prime is horned: wherefore she is
still charactered thus, as best resembling her form.

CHAP. XX. Of the number of the Heavens and Spears, their places, order and
motions.
The number of the Heavens.
YOU are to know we are now about to speak of the signs of the Zodiac, as also
of the Zodiac it self; it is necessary here therefore (having done with the
Planets) that so this Art may be thoroughly understood by the lovers thereof,
first to speak a word of the spears, and number of the Heavens, which by most
Philosophers, especially Hermes Trismegistus and Ptolomy are held to be in
number nine, which indeed are plainly to be demonstrated and proved by reason;
and this is the opinion not only of the Ancient Philosophers, but of all
Astronomers and Mathematicians, who will better and more at large instruct you;
wherefore I refer you for satisfaction in what you farther doubt of then what I
shall here deliver, to their volumes; only for the satisfaction of my Reader,
since it comes in my way, I thought good to say somewhat. Wherefore these are
briefly thus distinguished.

The order of the heavens.
First, know then, that about this Elementary World (as being the center) they
all move one above another in their several spears, as the Moon first above
the earth in her sphere; Mercury above the Moon; Venus above Mercury; the Sun
above Venus; Mars above the Sun; Jupiter above Mars; Saturn above Jupiter; the
starry heaven or eighth heaven, above Saturn; and in this heaven are located
all the fixed stars which never move but as their sphere moves and carries
them, they being never the one farther or nearer to another, but are firm and
fixed in their places; for which cause was this eighth heaven called the
firmament; Being firm and fixed.
and lastly is this firmament or starry heaven enclosed by the first mover or
Chrystaline heaven, which is the guide (as I may say) of the heavens (not being
at all under the rule of any of the other heavens, but governed only by that
intelligence that rules it, Wherefore it is called the first mover.
or the express commandment of God) but carries them all violently about with
it self (of whose motions you shall here more anon) yet there is another higher
then the ninth heaven, which does enclose and comprehend them all; and this by
some is held to be the habitation of God, the Elect and Angels; others hold
that Jupiter is the place of the Elect; and likewise that Mars is the local
place of Hell for the damned, others hold Saturn to be Hell, etc. But we leave
these opinions, it being no part of our Discourse; and return to show you the
motions of the spears and heavens.

The motions of the Heavens.
You have heard already of the quickness of the motion of the sphere of Saturn
in the first chapter of this Treatise, where we speak of the significations,
nature and shape of Saturn; as also of the sphere of Jupiter in the second
chapter, where we treat of Jupiter, and so of all the rest of the Planets; viz.
Saturn finisheth his motion, or he in his sphere in 29. years, some months and
days; Jupiter in 12. years, etc. Their motion, notwithstanding they are carried
violently and accidentally once a day about the earth by the force and power of
the first mover, is quite contrary thereunto, viz. from West to East, and so
likewise is the motion of the starry heaven from West to East also, whose
Revolution is not finished in less then 36000. years, The Revolution of the
eighth Heaven or starry firmament.
whence it is held conclusively by some, that the World must last millions of
years before the subversion and dissolution thereof, or at least, till it has
made its Revolution once: from whence Plato was of opinion that after the
Revolution of these years, all things should be as at the first Creation; and
as the years came about again, so should things happen again as at first, viz.
that after so many years there should be another deluge, and Noah and his
company only saved; and that when the same years came about again in which he
himself lived, he should again flourish as at that time, and be teaching his
Scholars at Athens; and so in like manner that all things should be renewed
again as at first. But as these are points that would spend much time and
labor to handle, and since the holy Writ testifyeth unto us that the Angels in
Heaven, nay and Christ himself (as he was man) knew not when should be the last
day; Matthew. 24 36.
we hold it convenient to pass by such curious matters in silence, and hasten
to say something of the Circles of Heaven, The Zodiac and the divisions
thereof.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Circles of Heaven, the Zodiac, and the divisions thereof.
WE come now unto the Circles of Heaven. You are to know there are some greater
then other, some less, some movable, and also some immovable; as concerning
the greater circles, they are those that have the same Center with the Heavens;
the lesser Circles have their Centers out of that of the sphere; but these are
so plainly treated of by ancient Astronomers, that to insist hereon were but
vain: wherefore let us to our business, and say somewhat of the Zodiac and its
divisions.

Of the Equator, and wherefore so called.
Know then, that in the sphere of the World there are two chief Circles, the one
called the Equator or Equinoctial, the other the Zodiac or Ecliptic; it is
called the Equator from the nature thereof, being a line of equality; for the
Sun being under the same, causes the equality of the day and night through the
whole World; it is called the Equinoctial for the same reason, it causing
equal nights, etc. Of the Ecliptic or Oblique Circle; and wherefore so called.
The Zodiac is called the Ecliptic, because the Sun and the Moon are never
Eclipsed but in it; it is also called the oblique Circle, for that it is
situated oblique in respect of the Equator, etc. This Equator divides the
whole sphere into two parts, being placed directly betwixt the Poles of the
World, viz. Artick and Ant-artick, which is also divided by the Zodiac into
two equal parts; and those points where the Zodiac cutteth the Equator are
called Equinoctial points; and the points of the Zodiac which are the means
between these Equinoctials are called Tropicks or Solsteads, viz. the stays or
stations of the Sun, etc. From these divisions, are the four quarters of the
year, viz. Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter; Spring beginning at the
Equinoctial point, the Sun enclining toward the Vertical point: Summer
beginning at the Solstead after; The heavens divided into twelve parts. The
division of the Zodiac.
Autumn at the other Equinoctial, and Winter at the second Solstead. Now you
must know also that these several quarters are divided into three equal parts,
as answering to beginning, middle and end, and so consequently the whole
Zodiac into 12. equal parts, which are called signs and houses (the reasons
why they are so called you shall have anon) and every Every sign consists of
20 miles, and 40. furlongs, or 642. furlongs.
sign is divided into 30. degrees; every degree into 60. minutes, and every
minute into 60. seconds, and every second into 60. thirds, and so ad infinitum.
But now as touching the Reasons, why these divisions (as I said before) are
called signs, and because they seem to define and signify unto us the most
notable alterations and mutations of the Air, and these inferior Elements.

Now as you have heard of the two principal Circles moveable, so it is
requisite also you hear somewhat of the two immovable Circles, the Horizon and
Meridian; we leave the Colures, Tropicks, Zones, Vertical, Parallel, and Polary
Circles, etc. to be taught by those that have writ whole volumes thereof; for
our intentions are but cursorily to speak somewhat, that our scope may the
better be understood; our intentions being to lay open that part of the Art
which is not manifest in our tongue.

Of the Horizon.
The Horizon then is that Circle dividing the Hemisphere of any place under it,
from that which is above it, to which one of the Poles is always the Vertical
point, and the other Pole the opposite; according therefore to the height of
the point of each place, does the Horizon of each place differ; for look how
many places there are, so many Horizons are there; wherefore the Horizon of
those places which have the vertical or perpendicular point under the
Equinoctial, is called the right Horizon; for that it passes by the Poles of
the World, and equally divides the Equinoctial at right Angles; so likewise it
is called a right sphere; for that it seems to be rightly placed in respect
of that Horizon, and the stars to make their motion directly by the universal
motion of the sphere.

Now the Horizon of those places whose Zenith is out of the Equinoctial toward
either of the Poles, is called oblique; for that that Pole which the Vertical
point is next to, is elevated above the said Horizon, and the other is so much
depressed; which therefore does divide the Equinoctial at oblique angles,
unequal one to another; for which cause also, the sphere is said to be oblique;
being in comparison of the Horizon placed obliquely; and the stars turn
obliquely in their universal motion. Wherefore it is clear, that all direct
Horizons are of one disposition; but among the oblique there are as many
differences as are distances between the Vertical point and the Equinoctial, or
as the elevation of the Pole is diverse above them.

Of the Meridian.
As touching the Meridian, it is a great immovable Circle, passing by the Poles
of the World, and that point of the Heavens which is perpendicular in what
place soever it be; and divides both the Equinoctial and Horizon of right
angles, parting the East part of the Heavens from the West; whose Poles are the
intersections of the Horizon and Equator: Wherefore so called.
and for that it divides the Natural day and the Artificial into two even
parts, it is called the Meridian or mid-day-circle; for when the Sun comes to
this Circle above the Horizon, it is high noon, and the opposite point under
the Horizon or earth is midnight: all places then according as they are more
Oriental or Occidental, have their proper Meridian; and they which lie alike
East or West. Know then, that every Meridian is a right Horizon to some places,
and every right Horizon a Meridian.

CHAP. XXII. Of the twelve Celestial Signs, and their manifold divisions.
I Have showed you the Heavens are divided into twelve equal parts, called
Signs, and the Reasons why they are so called: it rests therefore now, I show
what they are called, with their several Characters* and why just the number of
twelve, and called by those names, and why they begin at Aries, and not at
Taurus, Gemini or Cancer, or any other sign, and so placed; as also of their
Natures and significations. But first, let us speak of their divisions, and the
several manners thereof, and then proceed.

Know then that the 12. signs are thus named and charactered, Aries, Taurus,
The names and characters of the signs.
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittary, Capricorn, Aquaries,
and Pisces. Of these signs, there are some of a fiery nature, some of an
earthy, others of an aerie, and some of a watery.

What fiery, earthy, aerie, and watery.
Fiery signs are Aries, Leo and Sagittary; Earthy signs are Taurus, Virgo and
Capricorn; Aerie signs are Gemini, Libra and Aquaries; Watery signs are Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces.

What masculine, what feminine
There are also some Masculine, and some Feminine; the Masculine are Aries,
Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittary, Aquaries; Feminine are Taurus, Cancer, Virgo,
Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces. Ever remember the fiery and aerie signs are
masculine; earthy and watery, feminine. There are also some moveable, others
fixed, and some common; moveable signs are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn,
Equinoctial and Tropic signs.
of which two are Equinoctial, two Tropical; Equinoctial signs are Aries and
Libra; Tropic signs Cancer and Capricorn; and these signs as the masculine
signs, are so called for that they are hot and dry, and diurnal; the feminine
for that they are cold, moist, and nocturnal.

What are moveable, and why called moveable. What fixed, and why termed fixed.
So are these called moveable, because when the Sun enters into any of these
signs, the weather and season of the year is moved or changed.

Fixed signs are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquaries; and they are so called, for
that the Weather, he being therein, is more permanent (either to heat or cold
according to the season of the year) and fixed. Common signs being between
moveable and fixed both in place and nature, are therefore so called; and they
are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittary and Pisces. Note that there is among the moveable
signs one fiery, one earthy, one aerie and one watery; and so likewise have the
fixed and common, for which cause also they are divided into four parts, as
answering to the four seasons and quarters of the year; viz. Aries, Taurus, and
Gemini are the Spring quarter, Signs answering to the seasons of the year.
for that when the Sun is in these three, it is the Spring Season; when he is
in Cancer, Leo and Virgo, it is the Summer Quarter; in Libra, Scorpio and
Sagittary Autumn; in Capricorn, Aquaries and Pisces Winter; which is the reason
why the year begins in March when the Sun enters Aries, which is the first sign
(so likewise are all the months in order attributed to the government of the
Celestial signs) It is the opinion therefore amongst the learned that the Sun
was in the first point or minute of Aries when the World began, whence they
judge the general accidents of the World, as the fates and affairs of any
Kingdom or place, etc. by the Sun his Revolution to the first point of Aries.

What signs are northern, and southern, and why so called.
There are also some signs Austral or Southern, others Boreal or Northern:
Southern signs are Libra, Scorpio, Sagittary, Capricorn, Aquaries and Pisces;
these are called Southern, for that they decline Southward from the
Equinoctial: Northern signs are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo:
and these are so called for that they decline from the Equinoctial Northward.

Bicorporeal signs.
Bicorporeal signs are Gemini, Pisces and the first part of Sagittary being
double-bodied as twins, etc.

What signs are fruitful, barren, humane, feral and mute.
There are also fruitful, barren, humane, feral and mute signs; fruitful signs
are Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces; barren signs are Gemini, Leo, and Virgo; humane
or courteous signs are Gemini, Virgo, Libra and Aquaries: feral signs are Leo,
and the last part of Sagittary; and mute signs or flow of speech are Cancer,
Scorpio and Pisces, especially if Mercury be in any of them in Conjunction,
Quadrat or Opposition of Saturn; he causes also an ill utterance in any sign
in the aforesaid aspects of Saturn.

What are commanding, obeying, of long and short ascension.
There are also in the divisions of the signs, signs commanding and obeying;
signs of long ascension, and signs of short ascension: signs commanding are
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo; signs obeying are Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittary, Capricorn, Aquaries and Sagittary: Signs of short or oblique
ascentions are Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and Sagittary: Signs of short
or oblique ascentions are Capricorn, Aquaries, Pisces, Aries, Taurus and Gemini.

There are also some signs that are whole and entire, others broken; some
fortunate, others unfortunate; some sweet; others bitter; whole, are Libra,
Aquaries, Gemini, Virgo: broken, are Leo, Pisces: fortunate, are Aries, Gemini,
Leo, Libra, Sagittary, Aquaries: unfortunate, are Taurus, Cancer, Virgo,
Scorpio, Capricorn, Pisces: sweet signs are, Gemini, Libra, Aquaries: bitter,
Aries, Leo, Sagittary.

There are also weak signs and strong; weak signs are, Aries, Sagittary and
Capricorn: strong are, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquaries.

Note also that by the several places of the Heavens some signs have contrary
operations, in diverse places; as Taurus in the East quarter of Heaven, is
inclining to heat, or lukewarm; in the West cold. Gemini in the East is hot
and dry, in the West cold and moist. Cancer in the East is hot and dry, in the
West cold and moist. Leo in the East is hot and dry, in the West cold and
moist. Virgo in the East is hot and warm, in the West cold and moist. Sagittary
in the East cold and moist, in the West hot and dry. Capricorn in the East is
cold and dry, in the West cold and moist. Aquaries in both East and West is
cold and moist. Pisces also cold and moist both in East and West. This will be
necessary for the judging of weather.

CHAP. XXIII. Showing the use which is to be made of the former Chapter.
LEarn now the use which is to be made of all this; if in any scheam or figure
of Heaven you find a masculine sign ascending, and the Lord of the ascendant in
a masculine sign, or beheld of a masculine Planet in a masculine sign, then is
the nature and actions of the thing in question, or signified, masculine; if in
feminine signs, the contrary, being more effeminate.

So likewise if the Ascendant, his Lord and the Planets beholding them be in
movable signs, the thing denoted by the Ascendant is fickle, unconstant, and
wavering in all particulars: if the abovesaid testimonies be through fixed
signs, the contrary; if in common signs, neither perfectly constant nor fickle,
yet both, sometimes the one way, and sometimes the other.

Also, if the aforesaid testimonies be in feral signs, the thing signified is
of the nature and temper of that beast represented by the sign, as if Leo be
the sign ascending, it is then bold, strong, courageous, stately, hot and dry,
etc. If Taurus, it is solid, staid and resolved, yet of a slow muddy condition,
cold and earthy.

Likewise if in any figure of the Heavens the sign ascending be a fruitful
sign, and the sign of the fifth house a fruitful sign also, and the Lords of
the ascendant and fifth and the Moon be in fruitful signs, it denotes
fruitfulness.

So, if the sign ascending be a humane sign, and the Lord of the Ascendant and
the Moon in humane signs, accordingly does it signify, as hereafter will more
largely be shown; so likewise of all the rest, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Demonstrating the Reasons of the names of the twelve signs; and
why there are just twelve, and neither more nor less.
LEt us now descend to the several divisions of the signs: it rests now you
know why they are so called, and wherefore there are no more nor less then
twelve, which according to Albumazer and Bonatus, is for these Reasons: First,
as all things are made of the four Elements, which are subject to the signs,
every sign through the whole Circle of Heaven ruling one element or other: now
there are four elements, every sign-being over them; and they divided into
three parts, as having relation to beginning, middle and end, as there is in
all works, make just the number of 12. Besides the number 12. is so complete a
number, as none is to compare with it; it having more particular divisions then
any other number, there being therein three fours, and four threes; two sixes
and six twoes: besides they are so constituted from the division of the Heaven
(as you have heard already) divided into twelve parts, every part being a sign;
the first called Aries, the second Taurus, the third Gemini, etc.

The reason why Aries is called by that name.
The reason why they are called by these names, are briefly thus; the first sign
is called Aries (signifying a Ram,) because when the Sun is therein, he
approaches to his highest point; heat thereby being increased, yet being mixed
with the humidity of the preceding Winter, makes the temperature of the air hot
and moist, which is according to the complexion of the Ram: but there are some
of the Ancients say that the stars in the signs being particularly observed,
and as it were measured with a line the one from the other, they resemble each
the thing they are nominated.

The second sign is called Taurus (signifying a Bull) because the Sun being
therein, Why.
the heat is more fixed and fortified, and the moisture consumed or expelled;
the temperature of the air tending rather to dryness, which resembles the
nature of a Bull.

The third sign is named Gemini (signifying Twins) because the Sun therein
causes a reduplication of heat; and all Creatures couple and engender, Why.
every thing delighting in its mate.

The fourth sign is called Cancer (signifying a Crab) because the Sun being
therein, Why.
goes, as it were, backward, (after the nature of the Crab) retiring toward
the Equinoctial from whence he came, declining contrary to that of the Twins.

The fifth sign is called Leo (signifying a Lion) because the Sun being
therein, Why.
the heat is increased in great strength and dryness, after the nature of the
Lion, which is of a strong, hot and dry nature.

The fifth sign is called Virgo (signifying a maid) because the Sun therein
has his heat diminished, and dryness rules, so that things cease to increase,
Why.
and the earth becomes barren; being of the nature of a Virgin, who is
naturally tending to cold rather then heat, and is of her self barren.

The seventh sign is called Libra (signifying Balance) for that the Sun being
therein, both the length of the days and nights, as also the temper of the air,
Why.
are in balance, as it were neither inclining one way nor other; the days and
nights being of an equal length through the whole World; and the temperature of
the air between the decayed heat of Summer, and the approaching cold of winter,
is neither tending one way or other, but as it were in a balance.

The eighth is called Scorpio (signifying a Scorpion) because when the Sun is
therein, cold and dryness is predominate, which are obnoxious to nature, Why.
and by reason the natural temper of the air is hot and moist; the air is
thereby corrupted, so that dangerous diseases are engendered thereby, as
pestilential Fevers, Plagues and the like.

The ninth sign is called Sagittarius (signifying an Archer or one using to
cast darts) because the Sun being therein, Why.
the heat is overcome by cold, whereupon ensue Fogs and Frosts, and such like,
being (for the nature of the mischief and hurt they do) as obnoxious, or
equivalent to venomous Arrows or Darts.

The tenth sign is named Capricornus (signifying a Goat) because the Sun being
therein is farthest from the vertical point: Why.
so that by reason of the cold mixed with dryness, and the want of heat, which
at that time is, the nature and disposition of the air is melancholy, after the
nature of the Goat.

The eleventh sign is called Aquaries (signifying a Waterman, Why.
or one pouring water) because when the Sun is in this sign, dryness is
overcome by moisture beginning, yet the cold remaining, which causes the
temper of the air to be cold and moist, after the nature of water.

The twelfth sign is named Pisces (signifying ^^shes) for that when the Sun is
therein, Why.
the air is inclined to cold and moisture, yet ^^^ng some small heat, after the
nature of Fishes who are cold and moist by reason (...) ^^eir Element the
water, yet they retain some little natural h^^^ so the air is then for what
participating of some small quantity of heat, by re^^^ (...) Suns approach to
(...) equinoctial point.

And thus much concerning (...) of the names of the ^welve Celestial signs; we
come now to show the Reason (...) reckoned from Aries, and so in order to
Pisces, and not from Taurus (...) sign; as also the Reasons why they are not
placed according to the order o^ (...) ^^^ents, viz. F^^e Air, Water and Earth,
but first a fiery sign, next an (...) ^hen an aerie, and lastly a watery, etc.

CHAP. XXV. Showing the Reasons why the signs are reckoned from Aries, and not
from any other sign; as also why they are not placed according to the order of
the four Elements.
I Have said before, my intention in all these my Writings, is not to treat of
any thing that has been already delivered to the Students of this noble Art by
the wel-willers thereof, in a plain manner, and our vulgar tongue, farther then
to give me occasion for what is my drift, viz. to render to my loving
Countrymen and wel-willers of this Science, the reasons and grounds of the
Art, according to the most rational of the Ancients, that they may be both
confirmed in their way, as also the better able to answer the weak Arguments,
or rather cavils of their puny Antagonists, I mean the vainglorious ignorant
praters and scriblers against this Heavenly Science. I come therefore now, God
enabling me, to show you the Reasons of the Ancients why the signs are still
reckoned from Aries, and so forward, since the Zodiac as well as the Heavens
is round; and what is round has no beginning, and what has no beginning must
needs have no ending; and what wants beginning and ending, must needs have no
middle: yet the twelve Celestial signs are said to begin at Aries, which is
called the first, and so forward to Taurus, which is the second, to Pisces
which is the twelfth and last, for these reasons.

Why we reckon from, and not from any other sign.
First, because the Equator cutteth and divides the Circle of the Zodiac in
the beginning of Aries, and also the opposite sign Libra; so that six signs are
Northern, and six Southern; but the reason why the beginning is from Aries, and
not from Libra, is for that that part which is Northern is stronger and of more
force, efficacy and power, and is more noble then that which is Southern; and
Aries is the first Northern sign, and so are all to the latter end of Virgo;
the rest are Southern, or declining Southward; wherefore since by all in
general, the Northern signs are accounted stronger, and more noble then the
Southern, did the Ancients appoint Aries the first of the signs, it being the
first of them.

Other reasons.
Secondly, the Ancients began to number the signs from Aries, for that when the
Sun enters into Aries, all things increase and multiply; the days increase in
length, the Trees flourish, the earth brings forth fruit, and all things are as
it were revived or raised from ^^^th, being to outward appearance (as it were)
by the preceding Winter barren an^ ^ead; also when Sol enters Aries, it is the
beginning or chief principium of the (...), causing every thing to receive
vigor and strength, resembling youth, which is ^^^^^me and most pleasant time,
and beginning of life, etc. which are the reasons wh^^ Ancient have named Aries
the first of the signs. Aries is a fiery sign, and (...) unto him they have
placed Taurus which is an earthy sign; after him Gemini a (...) aerie, ^^d then
Cancer which is a watery sign; and then again beginning with a (...) sign, t^en
an earthy one, after an aerie, and lastly a watery, and so following t^^ (...)
orde^ ^hroughout the twelve signs, and not according to the order of the for
^^^en^s, ^iz. Fire, Air, Water and Earth; but the reasons hereof are briefly
the (...) we ^ill hasten to conclude this our first Treatise, being merely an
In^^^^^y ^^^course before we come to peruse the following Tracts.

Yet if you find any be^^^ (...) by, I shall be very glad, and esteem my pains
well bestowed; for my (...) to benefit young Students, that they may give
reasons and grounds for (...) ^^^rt, as I said before; I write not to the
learned, but to such as these, for (...) I ^ook these pains, knowing they may
happily (by some ignorant Antagon^^ and enemy to the Art) be questioned
wherefore such and such things are held by them, etc.

Why the signs are not placed according to the order of the four Elements.
But let us proceed; the Ancients then (as abovesaid) have placed first a fiery
sign, then an earthy sign, after an aerie, and lastly a watery sign for diverse
good Reasons; first then, for that the four Elements receive an alteration and
corruption one with the other by the incessant motion of the Celestial signs,
of which corruption and alteration there are generated four special qualities
incident to elementary bodies, viz. Generation, Conservation, Corruption and
Destruction. Now for that Generation is the chief and more noble quality, they
began with that sign which is the author of Generation; viz. a fiery; Next unto
which quality is conservation, fixation, durability or continuance, which is
caused by those signs by which nature is moved to constancy or duration, as
corruptible things receive permanency and fixation, and they are earthy; After
which is corruption the more inferior quality; wherefore they placed in the
third place that sign which is author thereof (according to that of Aristotle,
Aer vita est vivorum, destruction mortuorum: Air is the life of every living
thing, but the death or corruption of every dead thing) viz. an Aerie sign.
Lastly, the most ignoble and rejected is destruction, which is caused by the
watery signs, wherefore they placed in the fourth place a watery sign.

Secondly, they have placed the signs in this manner, for that heat and cold
are active: Drought and moisture passive; and heat being strong and more noble
then cold, signifying or causing generation, as most deserving, is placed
first, viz. a fiery sign; so likewise for that dryness is the stronger of the
Patients* it is put first of them, and next after heat, being an earthy sign,
cause of durability, and therefore placed next to generation; and because
corruption goes before, destruction is an aerie sign placed before the watery;
and because generation is the first beginning of any living thing, and
therefore first placed, so is destruction being the last, placed last;
continuation and corruption in the middle, etc.

They have also thus appointed the order of the signs, and placed a fiery sign
first, for that heat rules in fire, by which all things are quickened and
vivifyed, and therefore being the more noble quality (as abovesaid) they place
it first; and next unto it an earthy sign, by reason of the nearness of its
quality with heat, it being a dry substance: after it they place an aerie sign,
and preceding the watery, as participating with the humidity thereof; and
lastly, is the watery sign placed last, as the fiery is first, being contrary
thereunto in nature and quality; the passives being placed in the middle
between the actives, which are placed in the extremes. There are several other
reasons may be produced for this order of the signs, but one or two may suffice
to put to silence any caviller against this most noble Art: let us therefore
now look into the natures and significations of the signs.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Nature, Signification and Equality of the Signs; and first
of Aries.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
ARies then is an Equinoctial, Cardinal, Diurnal, Moveable, Fiery, Choleric,
Hot and Dry, Bestial, Luxurious, Violent Sign; Eastern, and of the fiery
Triplicity.

Diseases.
A dry body, of middle stature, lean and spare, big bones, strong, thick
shoulders, a long neck, long visage, and a swarthish complexion.

Pimples and heat in the face, hare-lips, ring-worms, smallpox, and all
infirmities and diseases incident to the face; Headache, Toothache, Apoplexy,
Megrims, Baldness and Falling Sickness, and all diseases of the head.

Malchidael. Angel. Colors. Places.


White mixed with red.

Sandy, dry, hilly grounds, and all places where small cattle use to feed; the
seiling in houses, new ploughed lands, brick and lime kills, and unfrequented
places.

England, Regions.
France, Bastarnea, Syria, Palestina, the upper Burgandy, Germany, Swetheland,
the upper Silesia, the lesser Poland, Denmark, Judea.

Naples, Cities.
Capua, Ancova, Imola, Ferraria, Florenea, Verona, Lindavia, Brunswick,
Cracovia, Massilia, Seragosse, Berganum, Caesaria, Padua, Augusta, Vtrecht.

In man.
The head and face.

To divide here every Region of the World, according to the division of the
Heavens into four parts answering to the four Triplicities, would but spend
time and Paper, and hinder me from hasting to what I rather drive at: Wherefore
since to every sign you have declared the Regions and Cities subject to the
same; I pass by the other in this place, and refer my Reader to the perusal of
the second and third Chapters of the second Book of Ptolomies Quadripartite, to
be therein instructed.

Of Taurus.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Taurus, is an earthy, cold, dry, melancholy, domestic, feminine, fixed,
nocturnal, bestial sign; Southern, and of the earthy Triplicity.

A strong, short, well-set body, a full face, broad forehead, big eyes, a large
mouth, thick lips, a short big hand, black hair, and it curling or crisping.

Diseases.
All infirmities in the neck and throat, King's Evil, Wens, sore throats,
Quinsies, Imposthumes and Rhumes in the throat or neck, etc.

Asmodel.

Angel. Colors. Places.
White mixed with Citrin.

Stables, Cow or Ox-houses, and such places where their Furniture or Harnesses
are laid or kept; Pastures, plain grounds, and such places as are made level
and plain, either on purpose, or by digging up Trees and Shrubs; Cornfieldsd,
and such fields as 07 are far from houses, and in houses cellars and low ground
rooms.

Persia, Media, Parthia, Cyprus, the Islands of Archipelages, the lesser Asia,
Regions.
white Russia, the greater Poland, Ireland, Lorain, Helvetia, Rhetia,
Franoamia, Switzerland.

Mantua, Bononia, Parma, Senas, Tarentum, Burgus a Castle in Spain, Cities.
Panoruma, the head of Histria, Brixia, Tigurum, Lucerna, Vanceium, Metis,
Herbipolis, Carolastadium, Liepsia, Nants, Posua, Guesma, Novogardi.

In man.
The neck and throat.

Of Gemini.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Gemini is an aerie, hot, moist, sanguine, common, double-bodied, masculine,
diurnal, Western sign, and of the aerie triplicity.

It denotes a tall strait body, a sanguine complexion, but somewhat swarthy, a
dark brown hair or almost black, one of a wanton hazel eye, active in body, and
of a judicious understanding spirit, but somewhat worldly-minded.

Diseases.
All infirmities in the arms or shoulders, also those of the hands, frenzies,
distempers, corruption of blood, wind in the veins, etc.

Ambriel.

Angel. Color. Places.
White mixed with red.

Halls, Wainscot-rooms, Plaistring and Walls of Houses, Barns or Storehouses
for Corn, Coffers and Chests, Hills and Mountains, upper rooms or high places;
also such places where play is used.

The West and Southwest of England, Brabant, Flanders, Armenia, Regions.
Lombardy, etc.

London, Mentz, Corduba, Bruges, Hasford, Cesena, Norrinberg, Lovain, Cities.
Bamberg, etc.

In man.
The arms, hands and shoulders.

Of Cancer.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Cancer is a watery, moist, cold, foeminine, phlegmatic, Northern, moveable,
mute fruitful, Nocturnal and Solstice sign, of the watery triplicity.

It generally denotes one of a low and short stature, the upper parts more big
then the lower, sad brown hair, little eyes and those gray, of a sickly, pale,
whitely complexion, a round visage.

Diseases.
It signifies imperfections all over the body, or in the breast and stomach
and paps, weak digestion, Tysicks, rotten coughs, Cancers in the breasts, salt
phlegm, Imposthumations in the stomach, and Dropical Humors.

Muriel. Angel. Colors. Places.


Green or russet.

The Sea, great and large Rivers, places near Rivers, marshy grounds, Ponds,
Lakes, Wells, Springs, Brooks, Ditches and Sea-banks, all watery places,
Trenches, Cisterns, Wash houses and Cellars.

Regions and Cities.
Scotland, Holland, Zealand, Constantinople, York, St. Andrews, Venice, Algier,
Genoa, Amsterdam, Tunis, Magdenberg, Prousia, Millan, Wittenberg, St. Cadiz,
and St. Lucas.

In man.
Cancer Rules in man the breast and stomach.

Of Leo.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Leo is a fiery, hot, dry, masculine, diurnal, Eastern, choleric, barren,
commanding, bestial sign, of the fiery triplicity.

Leo denotes one of a full and large body in the beginning of the sign; the
latter part gives a more spare and lean body, and a black or dark hair; the
first part gives a flaxen or yellowish hair, big eyes, a fierce countenance or
sprightly look, quicksighted, valiant and active in body, of an oval visage,
ruddy or sanguine complexion, yet somewhat mixed with obscurity.

Diseases.
All infirmities of the back, ribs and sides, as pains in the back,
Convulsions, Plurisies, etc. also passions and tremblings of the heart, violent
and burning Fevers, Yellow-Jaundies, the Plague or Pestilence, and sore eyes.

Verchiel. Angel. Colors. Places.


Red or Green.

All Place where wild beasts frequent, as Woods, Deserts, Fens, Forests,
Rocky places, and hard stony or gravelly ways, Castles, Forts, Parks, Kings
Palaces; all such places where fire is, or has been kept, as Chimneys, Stoves,
Furnaces, Ovens, and the like.

Italy, Regions.
the Alps, Sicilia, Bohemia, Phoenicia, Chaldea, Aemilia, part of Turkey,
Sabina, Togata, Orichemia.

Damascus, Cities.
Rome, Revenna, Cremona, Confluentia, Prague, Linzinus, Cremisium, Croton and
Bristol.

In man.
The heart, back, sides and ribs.

Of Virgo.
The quality and property of. Description signify by.
Virgo is an earthy, cold, dry, barren, foeminine, Southern, nocturnal,
melancholy sign, of the earthy triplicity.

A slender body, somewhat above the middle stature, decently and handsomely
composed, a ruddy brown complexion, black or dark brown hair, an handsome and
lovely person, but of no great beauty; witty, discreet, ingenious and judicious
in worldly affairs; and if it be free from the malevolent aspects of Saturn,
and its body, as also Mercury, the Native will be a good Orator; but the body
or aspect of Saturn to Mercury, or the Ascendant, hinders good utterance; it
denotes also one studious, of an excellent understanding, yet somewhat
unstable, a long or oval visage, and the hair long, and not curling, but
smooth, etc.

Diseases.
All infirmities of the belly, wind-cholick, worms, obstructions in the
meseraick veins, and in the bowels, infirmness in the stones, croking of the
guts.

Hamaliel. Angel. Colors. Places.


Black speckled with blew.

A study where Books are, Closets, Dayrie-houses, Cornfieldsd, Malt-houses,
Storehouses for Corn, Hay, Barley, Pease or Wheat Ricks.

Babylon, Regions.
Mesopotamia, Assyria, Achaia, Greece, Croatia, Corinthia, Athesina, Creet, the
Duchy of Athens, part of Gallia Comata, part of Rhenus, and the lower Silesia.

Jerusalem, Cities.
Corinth, Novaria, Rhodes, Arethium, Cumas, Brundusium, Padua, Tolosa,
Lugdunum, Paris, Basil, Cratislavia, Heidelburg, Sigina, Erphordia.

In man.
The Belly and Intrals.

Of Libra.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Libra is an aerie, sanguine, hot and moist, equinoctial, cardinal, moveable,
masculine, western, diurnal and humane sign; and of the aerie triplicity.

One of a tall, straight, well framed body, usually more slender then gross,
especially in youth; of a round, lovely and beautiful visage, a fine sanguine
complexion in youth, but in age commonly pimples or a very high color in the
face, the hair yellowish, or somewhat tending to flaxen, but it long and
smooth, and gray eyes.

All infirmities in the reins, as the gravel, stone in the reins, back,
kidneys, heats and diseases in the loins, impostumes or ulcers in the reins,
bladder, or kidneys, corruption of blood, and weakness in the back.

Zuriel. Angel. Colors. Places.


Black, dark crimson, or tawny color.

Ground near Wind-mils, Barns, and Outhouses, Saw-pits, such places as there
is any Wood cut in, tops of Mountains and Hills, grounds where hawking or
hunting is used, sandy and gravelly places, the upper rooms in houses, one
chamber within another, Garrets, Lofts, etc.

Bastriana, Caspia, Seres, Oasis, Aethiopia, Sabandia, Alsatia, Sundgavia,
Regions.
Livonia, Austria, Pannonia, Portugal, the Dukedom of Savoy.

Olysiponis, Arefatum, Caieta, Lauda, Suessa, Placentia, Friburgia, Argentina,
Cities.
Veldkirchium, Spira, Francofordia, Halafrisinga, Heilprima, Mosbachium,
Landshuta, Vienna of Austria.

In man.
The reins, kidneys and bladder.

Of Scorpio.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Scorpio is a watery, cold, phlegmatic, feminine, nocturnal, fixed, northern
sign, of the watery Trigon.

A strong able corpulent body, not exceeding in height, a good broad visage,
but the complexion somewhat obscure, a sad brown hair, and it crisping or
curling, an hairy body, short necked, and a strong set body every way, but
commonly bowelegged.

Diseases.
All infirmities in the Privities and Bladder, as the gravel, stone, priapism,
ruptures, Fistulaes, the Pyles, Defects in the Matrix, and running of the reins
or Gonorrhea.

Baraluel. Angel. Colors. Places.


Brown.

All such places as creeping and venomous beasts use, Gardens, Orchards,
Vineyards, muddy moorish grounds, stinking Lakes, and Quagmires and sinks in
houses, ruinous houses, and such places where rubbish uses to lie, the
wash-houses, Kitchen or Larder.

Matragonitida, Commagena, Cappadocia, Iudaea, Idumaea, Mauritania, Regions.
Getulia, Catalonia, Norwegia, the Western Swecia, and the upper Bavaria, the
kingdom of Fez.

Algera, Valentia of Spain, Trapizuntius, Vrbinum, Aquileia, Pistoria, Cities.
Camerinum, Petavium, Messana, Viena of the Allobroges, Gedamun, Crema,
Ariminum, Forum Julii.

The privy parts or members of generation.

Of Sagittarius.
The quality and property of Description signified by.
Sagittarius is a fiery, hot, dry, masculine, choleric, diurnal, Eastern,
common, Bicorporial sign; of the fiery Trigon.

It represents one of a well composed strong body, somewhat above the middle
size, a handsome comely countenance, somewhat longish visage, a ruddy sanguine
complexion, a chestnut colored hair.

Diseases.
All infirmities in the thighs and buttocks, as Ruptures and Fistulaes in those
parts: also over-heating of the blood, Pestilential Fevers, intemperateness in
recreations, falls from horses, etc.

Advachiel. Angel. Color. Places.


Yellow or green tending somewhat to red.

A Stable of War-horses, Ox-houses, the highest places in Land, Hills, Stony
places, and places where fire is or has been frequently kept, the upper rooms
in houses.

Arabia Felix, Tyrrhenia, Celtica, Hyspania, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Hungaria,
Moravia, Regions.
Misnia, Provincia, Lyguria where Genua is, Lunesana.

Toletum, Cities.
Volaterrae, Mutina, Narbona, Avininion, Colonia, Agrippina, Stutgardia,
Rotemburgus, Tuberinum, Indemburgus, Buda, Astum, Firmum.

In man.
The thighs and buttocks.

Of Capricornus.
The quality and property of Description signified by.
Capricorn is an earthy, cold, dry, melancholy, feminine, nocturnal, movable,
cardinal, solsticial, domestic, southern, fourfooted sign; of the earthy
triplicity.

One of a mean stature, of a dry constitution, and usually one of a long thin
and lean visage; a thin beard, black hair, a narrow breast, long small neck,
narrow chin.

Diseases.
All diseases incident to the knees, either by strains, fractures or otherways,
the leprosy, itch and scab.

Hanael. Angel.


Color.
Black or russet or a dark obscure brown.

Places.
Ox or Cow-houses, and such places, as the Implements of Cattle are put in;
also where sails for ships, or old wood is laid, sheep-pens, grounds where
sheep and other Cattle feed, Fallow ground, barren and thorny grounds,
dung-hills, low rooms in houses, dark places near the ground, etc.

India, Regions.
Ariana, Macedonia, Illyria, Thracia, Bosnia, Albania, Bulgaria, Grecia,
Massovia, Lithvania, Saxony, Morea, the Orcades, Stiria, Romandiola, the south
west part of Saxony, Marchia, Hassia, Turingia.

Juliacum, Cities.
Chevonia, Berga, Meclinia, Gaudanum, Vilna, Oxford in England, Brandenburg,
Angusta, Constantia, Derrhona, Faventia, Tortona, Pratum.

In man.
The knees.

Of Aquaries.
The quality and property of
Aquaries is an aerie, hot, moist, rational, fixed, humane, diurnal, sanguine,
masculine, Western sign; of the aerie triplicity.

Description signified by.
It shows one of a tall well-set thick corporature, of a strong body, of a long
visage, sanguine complexion; if Saturn be therein, he gives black hair;
otherwise commonly the party signified thereby, is of a fair flaxen hair, and
of a paler whiter countenance.

Diseases.
All infirmities in the legs or ancles, as Gouts, Cramps, and all melancholy
wind in the veins or blood.

Cambiel. Angel. Color. Places.


A skie-colour or blew.

Hilly and uneven places, places newly dig'd, Stone-quarries, Mines broken up,
roofs of houses, or the upper parts thereof, vineyards, etc.

Oxiana, Sogdiana, the Desert of Arabia Paetrea, Azania, Sarmatia, Regions.
Great Tartary, Walachia, red Russia, Dania, the South part of Swecia,
Westphalia, Mosselani, Pedemontium, part of Bavaria, Croacia, Germany, Muscovia.

Hamburgum, Breva, Monsferatus, Pisaurum in Italy, Salisburgus, Ingolstadius,
Cities. In man.
Forum Sempronium, Trent.

The legs and ancles.

Of Pisces.
The quality and property of. Description signified by.
Pisces is a watery, cold, moist, feminine, phlegmatic, nocturnal, common,
Bicorporeal, Northern, effeminate, idle, sickly, fruitful sign, and of the
watery Trigon.

One of a short stature, not very decent; yet I have known those that have had
Pisces ascending in their Nativities of a tall stature, and somewhat handsomely
shaped; but it has been when there was a Planet in the ascendent of that power
and signification: Pisces commonly gives a good large face, and a palish
complexion, the body fleshy, etc.

Diseases.
All diseases in the feet, as Aches, Lameness, Gout, Salt-flegm, Scabs. Itch,
Botches and Boils, Breakings out and Ulcers, proceeding from blood putrified,
also cold and moist diseases.

Barchiel. Angel. Color. Places.


A white glittering color.

It signifies grounds full of water, Springs, Fish Ponds, Rivers, places where
Hermitages have been, Water-mils, Moats about houses, Wells, Pomps, Conduits,
Cisterns, and those places in houses where water is most frequent.

Phazonia, Nazomonitidis, Garamatis, Lydid, Pamphilia, Cilicia, Calabria,
Portugal, Regions.
Normandia, Galitia, Lusitania, Egupta.

Alexandria, Sibilia or Hyspalis, Compostella, Parantium, Rhotomagum, Normatia,
Cities.
Ratisporia, Worms.

In man.
The feet.

Thus much of the nature, qualities and significations of the signs; we come
now to the Aspects of the Planets, and to say somewhat of them, and so proceed.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Aspects of the Planets and Signs, their Names, Characters
and Natures, and wherefore they were so named and charactered.
MAny new Aspects there are which we shall here omit, and here treat only of
those Aspects of the Planets and signs which are most usual and necessary. And
they are thus called and charactered, Sextile, Quartile, Trine, and Opposition:
We omit here to speak of Keplers new Aspects, since these are the most
necessary in the practice of this study. There is also a Conjunction thus
Charactered, Of a.
which is not properly termed an Aspect, since a Planet is then said to be in
Conjunction with another when he is in the self same degree and minute of one
and the same sign the other is in, and therefore cannot properly be said to
behold or Aspect him, Its nature.
but is in with him: this is of nature neither good nor bad, but according to
the significators and their dispositions and places is both, viz. sometimes
good, and some times bad.

A Sextile is so called, Of a.
for that it is the sixth part of the Zodiac, and is therefore charactered in
this manner with six strokes; it consists of 60. degrees. in length; as a Planet
in the first degree of Aries, beholds another in the first degree of Gemini
with a Aspect. Also if a Planet be in the first degree of Aries, he beholds
another in the fifth degree of Gemini, Of a Platick aspect.
with a; and this is called a Platick Aspect, admitting of the Orbs of the
Planets in Aspect; as Saturn in the 15. degree of Aries, and Jupiter in the 23:
degrees. of Gemini; Jupiter is in a of Saturn by reason he is not fully elongated 9
degrees. which the half orb of Saturn and Jupiter makes, as Saturns half orb being
4. degrees. and a half, and Jupiters 4. d. and a half, added together make just
nine degrees. and here you see them but 8. degrees. separated from a Partile aspect, Of
a Partil aspect.
which is when they are both in one and the same number of degrees and minutes
as abovesaid. The use thereof is only thus; if in any scheme or judgment
whatsoever you find the Significators in a Sextile Platick, you may be
confident (if your light or Planet be applying) your business signified by
those Significators shall be accomplished when they come to the Partil aspect,
especially if the more weighty Planet be retrograde or in reception by house or
exaltation with the more light; if they are separating and without reception,
the contrary; for by how much they are separated from the Partil aspect, by so
much the more unlikely is the business signified by the significators so
separating to come to a conclusion; but look when they are fully separated by
the mediety of their Orbs, and about that time shall the business be fully
broken of, except one of the Significators be just then Stationary, and then
immediately apply again, for then it hangs in some suspense, and after a while
begins afresh, The reason why and are good, and bad.
etc. But you must note that application by or is good, for they are Aspects of
love, amity and Friendship; yet the is more forcible and better, for that a
Planet in with another is out of houses of the one and the same nature, as fire
with fire, earth with earth, water with water, and air with air. A is by a
fiery with an aerie, or earthy with watery, and therefore is not altogether so
good as a, for that these agree not in every point; for fire is hot and dry,
air hot and moist, agreeing partly, viz. in heat: so likewise earth and water;
the earth is cold and dry, the water cold and moist, agreeing in coldness; for
which reason a is accounted indifferent good, and so likewise note that a and
are naught, and of enmity and discord, quite contrary to the other, yet the is
the worse, etc.

A Quartile is so called, Of a.
for that it is the fourth part of the Zodiac, and is charactered four square;
it consists of 90 degrees. in length, and four times 90 degrees. is 360. degrees. you
must know a Partil and Platick by the same rule you know a, and so of all the
rest, viz., and But note that a business brought to pass by the or of the
significators, causes much discontent and sadness, so that the business had
better never been done, etc.

A Trine is the third part of the Zodiac; Of a.
and is therefore charactered three square and triangled; consisting of 120.
degrees. and three times 120. degrees. makes just 360. degrees.

An Opposition, is that aspect which divides the Zodiac in two equal parts,
Of an.
and is therefore charactered with a line between two round o's intimating the
direct opposition of the Orbs of two Planets; and it consists of 180. degrees.
etc.

Of Dexter and sinister aspects.
There is also an aspect which the Ancients called Dexter and Sinister; a
Dexter aspect is contrary to the succession of the signs; a Sinister is
according to the succession of the signs; as a Planet in Aries beholding
another in Leo, is a aspect Sinister; a Planet in Aries beholding another in
Sagittary is a {water} Dexter; the Dexter is not so good as the Sinister. Here
I may also give you some other reasons why one aspect is better then another
(which I had almost forgot) which is in respect of the Luminaries; for as the
Sun is Fons vitae, the fountain of life; Other reasons for the goodness and
badness of the aspects.
so is the Moon of main power and efficacy by her forcible influence on
inferior bodies, bringing the light and influence of all the other Planets to
us. I say in respect of them are the aspects termed good or evil: for Saturns
houses behold the houses of the Luminaries with an, which is the worst of
Aspects by reason he is the worst of Planets: In like manner a aspect is the
most fortunate and best, for that the houses of the best and most temperate
Planet Jupiter, beholds the houses of the Luminaries with a Trine aspect,
even as Capricorn is opposite to Cancer, and Aquaries to Leo; so is Pisces in
Trine to Cancer, and Sagittary to Leo: and so is a Quartile the lesser
malevolent aspect, for that the houses of the lesser fortune, viz. Mars, behold
the houses of the Luminaries with a Quartile, viz. Aries is in Quartile to
Cancer, and Scorpio to Leo; neither is this aspect so bad as is an Opposition,
for that Scorpio one of his houses is in Trine to Cancer the house of Luna:
Likewise a Sextile being from the houses of the lesser Fortune Venus, is of
less force then a Trine, etc. and so much for the aspects of the Planets and
Signs.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the fixed Stars in the Zodiac; wherefore they are called
fixed, their number, particular names, natures, magnitudes, latitudes and
longitudes; and first of those in Aries, as they are delivered by the most
learned in this Art.
I Come here to say somewhat of the fixed stars, since without the true
knowledge thereof our works will be imperfect, I mean our Judgments; as also
these our labors without them would be but lame and imperfect. I shall but
speak of some of the stars chiefly, viz. the most notable, and those of the
first, second, third and fourth magnitude, except here and there of some more
obscure. I shall refer my Reader, if he be curious herein, to the perusal of
Copernicus, Tycho, Lucas Gauricus, Stadius and Sconerus, and what others treat
of in this Nature; yet what I here set down may suffice for any judgment
whatsoever in the Art of Astrology, of what part thereof soever it be. The
method I follow, is briefly first to declare unto you the number, names,
nature, magnitude, latitude and longitude of the most notable fixed stars in
the Zodiac, of the first, second, third and fourth magnitude: as also those
(of the same magnitude) both on the North and South part, and these will serve
for ever, and in all Regions and places through the whole Globe of the Earth,
except their longitudes, which will vary somewhat in respect of the
Equinoctial; wherefore I shall only give you the degrees of their longitudes.

We will begin with Aries being the first sign (as you have already heard) and
so forward; but before we begin, I think meet first to let you know, wherefore
these stars are called fixed stars, that there may be nothing in the Art which
the Student (if occasion serve) may not give a reason for; for it is my desire
to have knowledge increase, and ignorance and envy perpetually put to silence:
The reason then why they are called fixed stars, is, for that they are indeed
fixed and immovable, never stirring, but they are violently carried about with
the Heavens by the first mover (as abovesaid) not having any peculiar motion of
their own as the Planets have, etc.

But let us now come to the fixed stars, their number, natures, names,
magnitudes and latitudes; and first of Aries: in Aries there are twenty five
notable fixed stars.

Their number. The names of the Stars. Their Nature. magnitude Their latitude
Longitude In. D M D 1 Algenib, the end of the right wing of Pegasus. or 2 12 B
30 3 2 Alderaimim, the right shoulder of Cephus. 3 29 00 8 3 The foremost of the
3. bright stars in the band of the fishes. P 4 2 15 8 4 Alpheraoz, the Navel of
Pegasus, the head of Andromeda. 2 26 00 9 5 The hindermost in the tail of the
VVhale. 3 15 M 20 11 6 The middlmost of the 3. bright stars in the band of the
fishes. P 4 1 B 10 12 7 The middlemost of the 3. in the body of the Whale. 3 25
M 20 13 8 The last of the 3. bright stars in the band of the fishes. P 4 1 20
14 9 Baten Kaiton, the belly of the VVhale. 2 20 0 16 10 Of Andromeda the left
shoulder blade Sheder. 3 24 B 33 16 11 Of Andromeda the small of the left arm.
3 15 30 17 12 The first middlmost. of the stars after the bowing of the B. of
fishes. P 4 2 M 20 18 13 The first middlmost. of the stars after the bowing of
the B. of fishes. P 4 2 40 20 * 14 Acarnar, the bright star of the River
Eridanus. 1 53 30 21 15 The latter of the 3. after the bowing of the ban. of
the fishes. P 4 7 45 22 16 The middlemost star of the girdle of Andromeda. 3 30
B 00 23 17 The northermost of the girdle of Andromeda. 3 32 00 23 18 The knot
of the band of the fishes, or pole of the VVhale. 3 8 M 30 24 19 Mirach, the
furthermost star of the girdle of Andromeda. 3 26 B 20 25 20 Angetenar, the
turning of the River Eridanus. 4 34 M 50 27 21 The foremost star in the right
horn of the Ram. 3 7 B 20 28 22 The southermost of the 2. hindermost stars in
the breast of the Whale. 3 27 M 30 28 23 The foremost in the neck of the Whale.
4 4 10 29 24 The latter star in the right horn of the Ram. 3 8 B 20 29 25 The
middle of the chair of Cassiopea. 3 51 40 29

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Fixed-stars in Taurus, their number, names, nature,
magnitude, latitude, and longitude.
Unto the fixed stars in Taurus we now descend, as they succeed one another in
longitude, which are in number thirty five, as follows.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars Their Nature. magnit. Their
latitude. Longit. In. D M 1 The foremost in the Jowl of the Whale. 3 14 M 00 2
0 2 Schedar the breast of Cassiopea. 3 46 B 45 2 3 The point of the Triangle. 3
19 00 2 4 The Peruck of the Whale. 4 6 M 20 3 5 The first bright star after the
space of the River. 3 23 10 3 6 The middle of the mouth of the Whale. 3 11 30 4
7 The left hinder foot of the Ram. 4 5 15 6 8 The foremost star in the bottom
of the Triangle. 3 20 B 40 7 9 The star on the seat or buttock of Cassiopea. 3
49 00 8 10 The hindermost star in the bottom of the Triangle. 3 19 B 00 8 11
Alamac, the left foot of Andromeda. 3 23 00 8 12 The second great star after
the space of the River Nilus. 3 25 M 30 8 13 Menkar, the end of the Jaw of the
VVhale. 3 11 20 9 14 The left knee of Cassiopea. 3 45 B 30 11 15 The third
great star after the space of the River Nilus. 3 28 M 00 13 16 The first star
of the tail of the Ram. 4 1 B 40 15 17 The fourth great star after the space of
the River Nilus. 3 28 M 50 15 18 The foremost (without form) from the head of
Medusa. obs 20 B 40 16 19 The middlemost star of the tail of the Ram. 4 2 30 16
20 The second northermost star of the four in the partition. P 4 7 M 15 17 21
The second northermost of the Bull. 4 6 00 17 22 The last star of the tail of
the Ram. 4 1 B 50 18 23 The last great star after the space of the River Nilus.
3 32 M 50 18 24 The right hand of Perseus. clow 40 B 30 19 25 The head of
Argol, Gorgon or Medusa. 2 23 00 20 26 Of the Pleiades Virgiliae, Athoray, or
Atarage Northermost. and vel and 5 4 30 23 27 Of the Pleiades Virgiliae,
Athoray, or Atarage Southermost. 5 4 40 24 28 Of the Pleiades Virgiliae,
Athoray, or Atarage Little star. 5 3 00 24 29 Of the Pleiades Virgiliae,
Athoray, or Atarage Narrow end. 5 5 20 25 30 The breast of the Bull. 3 8 M 00 25
31 The left heel or wing of Perseus. 3l 12 B 00 25 32 Alchenib, a star in the
right side of Perseus. 2 30 00 26 33 The ancle of the left foot of Perseus. 3g
11 00 27 34 The third star of the right side of Perseus. 3 27 30 29 35 The
shank of the left leg of Perseus. 3 14 45 29

CHAP. XXX. Of the Fixed-Stars in Gemini, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
DEscend we next unto the most notable fixed stars in Gemini, which are in
number thirty six: we will here still follow the same method, to set them down
as they follow or succeed each other in longitude.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars Their Nature. magnit. Their
latitude. Longit. In II. D M II 1 The left knee of Perseus. 3 19 50 0 18 2 Of
Hyades, Lampades, or Suculae The Nostrils of the Bull. 3 l 5 M 45 0 18 3 Of
Hyades, Lampades, or Suculae Under the North eye of the Bull. 3 l 4 15 1 4 Of
Hyades, Lampades, or Suculae Under the South eye of the Bull. 3 l 5 50 2 5 Of
Hyades, Lampades, or Suculae In the North eye of the Bull. 3 3 00 3 *6 The eye
In the South eye 1 5 10 4 7 The Sixth of the shield of Orion, 3 11 50 6 8 The
Seventh of the shield of Orion, 3 17 10 6 9 The Eighth of the shield of Orion,
3 20 20 6 10 The Last and Southermost of the shield of Orion, 3 21 30 7 11 The
Star between the South horn and the ear of the Bull. P 4 4 00 8 * 12 Algenze,
Algebar, Rigel, or the left foot of Orion. 1 31 30 10 13 Elgeuze, Bellatrix, or
the left shoulder of Orion. 2g 17 30 11 14 The most Southerly star in the South
horn of the Bull. P 4 5 00 11 15 The foremost of the elbow of Auriga. 3g 18 B 00
13 16 The hindermost of the elbow of Auriga, 4g 18 00 13 17 The star in the
belly of the Hare. 3 44 M 20 16 18 The first star of the girdle of Orion. 2 24
10 16 19 The star in the middle of the body of the Hare. 3 41 30 17 *20 Hircus
the goat or the left shoulder of Auriga. 1 22 B 30 17 21 The right foot of
Auriga, the end of the nor. horn of the Bull. P 3g 5 00 17 22 The beginning or
root of the south horn of the Bull. 4 4 M 00 17 23 The foremost of the bright
stars by the form of the Dog. 2 57 40 17 24 The middlemost of the sword of
Orion. 3 29 30 18 25 The Southermost of the sword of Orion. 3 29 50 18 26 The
end of the South horn of the Bull. P 3 2 30 18 27 The middlemost star of the
girdle of Orion. 2 24 50 18 28 The second bright star by the form of the Dog. 2
59 40 20 29 The last of the girdle of Orion. 2 25 30 20 30 The Pole Star
Alrucaba, the tail of Cynosura. P 3 66 B 00 21 31 The Right knee of Orion. 3 33
M 30 21 * 32 The Right shoulder Orion. 1 17 00 23 33 The right shoulder of
Auriga. 2 20 B 00 24 34 The foremost over the foot of Castor without form. 4 00
M 40 25 35 Bright one before the knee of Castor without form. 4g 5 B 50 28 36
The foremost of the left foot of Castor. without form. 4 1 M 30 28

CHAP. XXXI. Of the fixed Stars in Cancer, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
ENter we now on the fourth sign of the Zodiac to treat of the fixed Stars
therein, which are in number just Thirty, as follows.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars. Their nature. Magni. Their
Latitud. Longit. In. D. M. 1 The hindermost of the left foot of Castor. P 4 1
15 0 18 2 The ancle of the right foot of Castor. 4 3 30 1 3 The star at the end
of the left forefoot of the Dog. 3 41 20 2 4 The right instep of Pollux or
Hercules. P 3 7 30 3 5 The left knee of Castor. 3 1 B 30 4 *6 Argos. 1 75 M 00
8 *7 Canis major, or the mouth of the great Dog. P 1 39 10 9 8 The left knee of
Pollux. 3 2 M 30 9 9 The left arm of Castor. 4 7 B 20 10 10 The right ham of
Pollux. 3 00 M 40 12 11 The left buttock of Pollux. 3 00 30 13 12 The right
shoulder blade of Castor. 4 5 B 30 13 13 The left side of Pollux. 3 3 00 14 14
The head of Castor or Ras Algeuse. 2 9 40 14 15 The right thigh of the great
Dog. 3 51 M 30 15 16 The right shoulder of Castor. 4 4 B 50 15 17 The star
between the thighs of the great Dog. 3 48 M 45 18 18 The left shoulder of
Pollux. 4 1 B 40 18 19 The head of Hercules or Pollux. 2 6 15 18 *20 Procyon,
Canis minor, Algomeisa the little Dog. P 1 16 M 10 20 21 The bright star
besides the form of the Twin. 4 2 M 40 22 22 The end of the tail of the great
Dog. 3 50 30 23 23 The hindermost north leg of the Crab. P 3 1 B 00 24 24 The
most southerly star of the right foot before of Helice. 3 28 30 26 25 The star
in the left knee before of Helice. 3 35 00 27 26 The buckler of the ship, or
Markeb. 4 47 M 15 27 27 The most northerly star in the right forefoot of
Helice. 3 29 B 20 28 28 The hindermost south leg of the Crab. P 4g 7 M 30 28 29
The northermost of the forepart of the of the Crab. 4l. 1 B 15 29 30 The
southermost of the forepart of the of the Crab. 4l 1 M 10 29

CHAP. XXXII. Of the fixed Stars in Leo, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
THe fixed Stars in Leo, are in order next to be treated on, and they are in
number Thirty one as follows.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars. Their nature. Magni. Their
Latitud. Longit. In. D. M. d 1 The cratch or breast of the Crab. cl. 0 B 40 2 2
The Northermost of the two Asses. 4 2 40 2 3 The first of the obscure stars by
the form of Helice. obs. 23 15 2 4 The southermost of the two Asses. 4g 00 M 10
3 5 The second of the obscure stars by Helice. obs. 22 B 45 3 6 A star without
form near the head of Hydra. 3 23 M 15 4 7 The hindermost of the two in the end
of the poop of the ship. 3 43 20 6 8 The third of the obscure stars by the form
of Helice. bs. 20 B 00 7 9 The south arm of the Crab. 4 5 M 30 8 10 The fourth
obscure star near Helice or Vrsa Major. obs. 22 B 15 8 11 The southermost star
in the left shoulder called Cynosura. 2 37 50 9 12 The star without form near
the Crab. 4 2 M 40 11 13 The fourth wheel of the wagon, called Doubly. The
shoulder of Helice. 2 49 B 00 12 14 The mouth of the Lion. 4 7 30 12 15 The
greatest star in the Mast of the ship of Jason. 2 58 M 20 12 16 A star near the
Claws of the Crab. 4.l 5 40 13 17 The flank of Helice being the third wheel of
the wain. 2 44 B 30 13 18 The Southermost star in the head of the Lion. 3 9 30
15 19 The Northermost star in the head of the Lion. 3 12 00 16 20 The
northermost in the left shoulder, called Cynosura. 2 74 50 17 21 The right
foreknee of the Lion. P 5 00 00 18 22 The bright star near the Hull of the
ship. 2 63 M 50 21 23 Alphard the bright star of Hydra. 2 8 30 21 24 The
Northermost of the 3. stars of the neck of the Lion. 3 11 B 00 21 25 The
Southermost of the 3. stars of the neck of the Lion. 3 4 30 22 26 The
Middlemost of the 3. stars of the neck of the Lion. P 2 8 30 23 *27 The Heart
of the Lion, Kalbeleced, Regulus, Basiliscus. 1 00 10 24 28 The Left fore-paw
of the Lion. P 4 4 M 15 24 29 The rump of Helice, or second wheel of the Wagon.
3 51 B 00 24 30 The southermost in the breast of the Lion. P 4 1 M 50 25 31 The
left thigh of the great Bear, or the 1 wheel of the Wagon 3 46 B 30 25

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the fixed Stars in Virgo, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
HEard you have already the Nature of the Stars in Leo, it rests therefore we
in order now speak also of the stars in Virgo succeeding, and they are in
number Twenty six, as follows.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars. Their nature. Magni. Their
Latitud. Longit. In. D. M. 1 The southermost bright star in the Keel of the
ship Argos. 2 69 M 40 0 8 2 The left arm pit of the Lion. P 4 00 M 10 0 48 3
The left foreknee of the Lion. 4 4 10 0 48 4 The Northermost of the right
hinder foot of Helice. 3 25 B 50 1 5 The Southermost of the right hinder foot
of Helice. 3 25 00 2 6 A star without form by the neck of Hydra. 3 26 M 00 2 7
Alioth the 3. horse of the wain, or the 5. star of the tail of Helice. 2 53 B
30 3 8 The last star on the back of the Lion. P 2 13 40 5 9 A star in the Deck
or Shrowds of the Ship. P 2. l 54 M 30 5 10 A star in the Hull or Bottom of the
Ship. 2 65 40 6 11 The southermost star in the hanch of the Lion. 3 9 B 40 7 12
The foremost of the three under the belly of the Lion. 4.l 1 10 8 13 A star
covering the ship Argos, or on the section of the deck. P 2 51 M 15 9 14 The
middlemost star in the tail of Helice, or the 2d. horse.. 2 55 B 40 9 15 The
left side of the Hanch of the Lion. P 3 5 50 11 16 The hallow of the left thigh
of the Lion. 4 1 15 13 17 The joint next under the left thigh of the Lion. 4 00
M 50 13 *18 Deneb Eleced, the tail of the Lion. P 1 11 B 50 16 19 Trica the
hair of Berenice. obs. 30 00 16 20 The last of the great stars in the bottom of
the Ship. P 2 67 M 20 17 21 Crater the bottom of the Pitcher. P 4 23 00 18 22 A
star toward the south, from the great Bear. 2 39 B 45 19 23 The latter of the
two southermost stars of the hair of Berenice. obs. 25 30 20 24 The pinion of
the left south wing of Virgo. P 3 00 10 20 25 The 1. horse in the wa^n, the
last in the tail of Helice, called Benan Elkered, Benenaz. 2 54 00 21 26 The
foremost of the four in the left wing of Virgo. P 3 1 10 29

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the fixed Stars in Libra, their Names, Number, Nature,
Magnitude, Longitude and Latitude.
REmember Libra follows Virgo; we have done with the Stars in Virgo; wherefore
we are to come now to the Constellations in Libra, and to speak in order of
them as of the rest aforegoing, and they are in number Twenty five; as
follows.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars. Their nature. Magni. Their
Latitud. Longit. In. D. M. 1 Praevindimiatrix the grape gatherer in the rig. or
nor. w. of or 3 15 10 3 2 The second in the left or south wing of the Virgin. 3
2 50 4 3 That in the right side under the girdle of the Virgin. P 3 8 30 5 4
The Bill, and that star is common to Hydra of the Crow. or 3 21 M 30 6 5 The
foremost of the left wing of the Crow. 3 12 30 8 6 Algareb, the star in the
right wing of the Crow. 3 14 50 9 7 The left shoulder of Boots. 3 49 B 00 11 8
The left foot of the Crow or Raven common to Hydra. or 3 18 M 10 11 9 The last
of the 4. stars in the left wing of the Virgin. P 4 1 B 40 12 10 The
northermost star in the left thigh of Boots. 3 28 00 12 11 The star in the
right hip or apron of the Virgin. P 3 8 40 16 12 The northermo^t in the
foreside of the of the Virgin. 5 2 20 17 *13 Spica virginis, Arista, Azimech,
the ear of corn in the left hand of. P 1 2 M 00 18 *14 Arcturus, Alramech, in
the constellation of Boots. 1 31 B 30 18 15 The southermost of the foreside of
the in the thigh of the Virgin. P or. 6 00 20 18 16 The southermost of the
latter side of the in the thigh of the Virgin. 5 00 20 19 17 The latter of the
two northe^rmost of the in the thigh of the Virgin. 4 1 30 21 18 The left knee
of the Virgin 6 1 30 23 19 The foremost of the two joined stars in the right
thigh of Centaurus. 2 46 M 10 24 20 The calf of the right leg of Boots. 3 28 B
00 26 21 The Spear-staff Incalurus of Boots. 4 53 35 27 22 The latter of the
three in the loins of Centaurus. 3 40 M 00 27 23 The star in the left shoulder
of the humane shape of Centaurus. 3 25 40 27 24 The middlemost star in the hem
of the vesture Of the Virgin. or and P 4 7 B 34 28 25 The southermost star in
the hem of the vesture Of the Virgin. 4 2 40 28

CHAP. XXXV. Of the fixed Stars in Scorpio, their Number, Names, Natures,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
ANd thus we are come to the fixed Stars in Scorpio, which are in Number Thirty
five as follows since we are now in order to speak of them, and then let us
proceed to the rest.

Numb. The Names of the Fixed Stars. Their nature Mag. Their Latitude Long. In.
D. M. 1 The Star under the heel of the left foot of the Virgin. or and P. 4 00
30 1 2 The ham of the right hinder leg of the Centaur. 2 51 M 10 1 3 The
Postern of the left leg behind of the Centaur. 2 55 20 2 4 Apheta, Gnosa, the
bright Star of the Crown. 2g. 44 B 30 6 5 Postern of the right leg of the
Centaur. 2 51 M 40 6 6 Right shoulder of the humane shape of the Centaur. 3 22
30 7 7 The foremost of the two in the belly of the Centaur. 2 43 00 8 8 The
bright Star in the humane body of the Centaur. or 3 33 30 9 9 The brightest
star of the South balance. p. 2g 00 B 40 9 10 The middlemost star of the South
balance. 4 1 15 12 11 The first Star of the folding of the neck of the Serpent
Ophiucus. 3 29 15 13 12 The first Star at the beginning of the neck of the
Serpent Ophiucus. 3 34 15 13 13 The bright Star of the North balance. 2 8 30
13 14 The small of the right arm of the Centaur. or 3 25 B 15 14 15 The
foremost of the 3 southern stars under The South balla p 3 7 30 14 16 The later
of the 2. in the middle of The South balla 4 1 B 40 15 17 The left knee of the
horse shape of Centaurus. 2 45 M 20 15 18 The temples of the head of the
serpent Ophiuchus. 3 35 B 00 15 19 The middlemost of the folding of the neck of
the Serpent Ophiucus. 3 25 20 15 20 The Southernm. of the folding of the neck
of the Serpent Ophiucus. 3 24 00 17 21 The middlemost star in the north
balance. p. 4 3 45 19 22 The northernm. of the 2. hindermost before the north
balance. 4 2 00 21 23 The right Arm of Hercules or Engonasin. 3 40 10 23 24
The last of the 2 bright stars in the North balance. 4 4 30 24 25 The
southermost of the two latter aars without from on the North part of the North
balance. P. 4 6 40 25 26 The right shoulder of Engonasin or Hercules. 3 43 00
25 27 The foremost star in the palm of the left hand of Ophiucus. 3 17 00 26 28
Of the 3 bright stars in the forehead of the middlemost. P. 3 1 M 40 27 29 the
Scorpion. the southernmost. 3 5 00 27 30 The hindermost star in the palm of the
left hand of Opiucus. P. 3 12 B 30 27 31 A star in the south arm or fore leg
of the Scorp. 3 7 M 50 27 32 The northernmost of the 3 bright ones in the
forehead of the Scorp. P. 3 1 B 20 27 33 The northernmost of the 2 conjoined
stars of the body. of the Scorp. 4 1 40 28 34 The southernmost of the 2
conjoined stars of the body. of the Scorp. 4 00 30 28 * 35 The hoof of the
right forefoot of Centaurus. 1 41 M 10 29

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the fixed Stars in Sagittary, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
MY intentions now are to treat of the Stars in the sign Sagittarius, that we
may say somewhat of the Stars therein, as we have already of the preceding
signs; and know they are in number Thirty, as follows.

Numb. The Names of the Fixed Stars. Their nature Mag. Their Latitude Long. In.
D. M. 1. A Star in the hollow of the left foot of Ophiuchus. P. 4 00 B 45 2 2
The forem. of the 3 bright stars in the middle of the Scorpion. P. 3 3 M 45 2 3
The left Knee of Ophinchus. P. 3 11 B 50 3 4 Cor Scorpii, Alatrab, Col,
Antares, the heart of the Scorpion. P. 2g. 4 M 00 4 5 The Eye of Iunonius, or
the Dragon. 3 75 B 40 4 6 The hind. of the 3 bright stars in the middle of the
Scorpion. P. 3 5 M 30 6 7 The left shoulder of Hercules or Engonasin. 3 48 B 00
8 8 Ras Alget; the head of Hercules or Engonasin. 3 37 30 9 9 The first joint
next the body of the Scorpion. 3 11 M 00 10 10 The Southernmost of the 2 in the
3d joint of the Scorpion. P. 3 18 00 11 11 The flame of the Altar. 3 34 00 12
12 The right knee. of Ophiuchus. P. 3 7 B 20 12 13 the foremost above the ancle
of the right foot of Ophiuchus. 4g 2 15 14 14 The fourth joint nere the tail of
the Scorpion. 3 19 30 14 15 The right leg P. 3g 2 B 15 15 16 The 2 of the 4 in
the right foot of Ophiuchus, Serpentarius, or Aesculap^us. 4g 1 30 15 17 Ras
Alangue the head of Ophiuchus, Serpentarius, or Aesculap^us. 3 36 00 16 18 The
3d of the 4 in the right foot of Ophiuchus, Serpentarius, or Aesculap^us. 4g 00
20 16 19 Of the 2 stars of the north part of the sting of the Scorpion without
form Northernmost. 5 1 M 10 17 20 Of the 2 stars of the north part of the sting
of the Scorpion without form Southernmost. 5 6 10 17 21 The star in the tail or
sting of the Scorpion. 3 13 20 19 22 The star in the fifth joint of the
Scorpion. P. 3 18 50 19 23 The star in the 7 joint next the sting of the
Scorpion. 3 15 10 20 24 Ras Aben, the head of Junenius or the Dragon. P. 3 75 B
30 21 25 The sixth joint of the tail of the Scorpion. P. 3 16 M 40 22 26 The
dim star without form following the sting of the Scorpion. obs. 13 15 22 27 The
head or sharp point of the arrow of the Archer or Sagittarius. 3 6 30 26 28
North end of the Bow of the Archer or Sagittarius. 4 2 B 50 28 29 The left hand
that holds the Bow of the Archer or Sagittarius. 3 6 M 30 29 30 South part of
the Bow of the Archer or Sagittarius. 3 10 50 29

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the fixed Stars in Capricornus, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
ENter we in the next place on the fixed Stars in Capricorn, which are but
twenty four, as follows.

Their number. The Names of the Fixed Stars Their nature Magni. Their Latitude
Long. In. D. M. 1 The Southernm. in the north part of the bow of the Archer, or
Sagittarius. 3 1 30 0;9 2 The Arrow or shaft of the Archer, or Sagittarius. 4 3
50 4 3 Duble clowdy star of the Eye of the Archer, or Sagittarius. obs. 00 B 45
6 4 The left shoulder of the Archer, or Sagittarius. 3 3 M 10 6 5 The foremost
of the three in the Head of Sagittarius. 4 2 B 10 7 6 The star under the Armpit
of Sagittarius. 3 6 M 45 7 7 The left Knee of the Fore-leg of Sagittarius. 2 18
00 8 * 8 Wega. Fidicula. The shining Harp, the falling Vulture 1 62 B 10 8 9
The left Hoof before of Sagittarius. 2 23 M 00 9 10 The middlem. star of the
third in the head of Sagittarius. 4g 1 B 30 9 11 The latter in the head of
Sagittarius. 4 2 00 10 12 The first star of Antinous, by the Eagle. 3 18 10 12
13 Of Sagittarius the middlemost In the northernmost trail behind the head. 4g
4 30 13 14 Of Sagittarius the northernm. In the northernmost trail behind the
head. 4 6 30 14 15 Of Sagittarius the Right hoof behind 3 20 M 10 18 16 Of
Sagittarius the Left thigh of the hinder leg. 3 13 30 18 17 The foremost of the
two in the back of the Eagle. 3 31 B 30 24 * 18 Alkair. The Eagle or flying
Vulture, the latter of them. 2g 29 10 25 19 Albirto the mouth of the Swan, or
bill of the Hen. 3 49 20 26 20 The next to the bright star in the back of the
shoulder of the Eagle. 3 l 30 00 26 21 The foremost in the Neck of the Eagle. 3
27 10 26 22 Of the Goat, the Northernmost star in the left horn. P. 3 7 30 28
23 Of the Goat, the Southernmost star in the left horn. 3 5 00 28 24 The 1 of
the bright stars without form before the South fish. 3 22 M 20 29

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the fixed Stars in Aquaries, their Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude.
SO much of the Stars in Capricorn, come we now to those in Aquaries, which are
briefly as follows, and in number Thirty nine.

Their Num^er The Names of the Fixed Stars Their nature Mag. Their Latitude
Long. In. D. M. 1 The head of Antinous, the foremost southward from the head of
the Edgle 3 21 B. 40 0 18 2 The foremost of the 3 stars in the Jaw of the Goat.
P. 6 1 45 0 18 3 The middlemost of the 3 stars in the Jaw of the Goat. 6 1 30 0
28 4 The last and southernmost of the 3 stars in the Jaw of the Goat. 6 00 45 0
38 5 The star betw. the head and shaft of the arrow of Hercules. 4 39 20 1 6
The right knee of the Goat. 4 6 M. 30 2 7 The middlemost of the bright stars,
without form, before the south or great fish called Notius. 3 22 10 2 8 The
next after of the bright stars, without form, before the south or great fish
called Notius. 3 21 20 5 9 The foremost of the 3 in the garment on the left
hand of Aquarius. 3 8 B. 30 6 10 Of the said three stars, on the back Side of
the same hand. 3 5 30 8 11 The southern. of the 3 in the mid. of the body of
the goat 5 4 M. 00 8 12 The northern. of the 3 in the mid. of the body of the
goat 5 2 50 8 13 The foremost star on the back of the goat. 4 00 00 8 14 In the
tail of the Dolphin. 3 l. 29 B. 10 9 15 (...) the southernmost star of the fore
side of the Rhomboydes or of the Dolphin. 3 32 00 10 16 The brightest of the 3.
in the middle of the body of the goat. 5 4 M. 15 10 17 The pinion of the right
wing of the swan or Hen. 3 64 B 40 10 18 The northernm. of the foreside of
Rhomboydes of the Dolph. 3 l 33 50 11 19 The foremost of the conjoined stars
under the belly of the Goat. 4 6 M. 50 11 20 The hindermost of the conjoined
stars under the belly of the Goat. 5 6 00 11 21 The hindermost of the two on
the back of the goat. 4 00 50 12 22 The southernm. of the latter side of the
long diamond square or Rhomboydes of the Dolphin. 3 32 B. 00 12 23 The
northernm. of the latter side of the long diamond square or Rhomboydes of the
Dolphin. 3 l 33 10 14 24 The foremost Denek Alchedi in the flank or doubling of
the tail of the Goat. 4 4 M. 45 14 25 The foremost Denek Alchedi on the bowing
of the back or doubling of the tail of the Goat. 3 2 10 16 26 The hinderm. in
the flank or doubling of the tail of the Goat. 4 4 30 16 27 The hinderm. on the
bowing of the back or doubling of the tail of the Goat. 3 2 00 17 28 Of the
lesser horse foremost in the head obs. 20 B. 30 17 29 Of the lesser horse
foremost in the mouth 25 30 17 30 The left shoulder of Aquarius. 3 8 50 18 31
The foremost star after the doubling of the tail of the goat. 4 2 M. 20 18 32
Of the lesser horse, the hindermost in the Mouth obs. 25 00 19 33 Of the lesser
horse, the hindermost in the Head 20 40 19 34 The breast of the Swan or Hen. 3
56 20 20 35 The southernmost star in the left buttock of Aquarius. P. 6 1 M. 40
23 36 Enif Alpheracz, the yawning of Pegasus v 3g 21 B. 30 26 37 The forem. of
the 2 in the right side of the pitcher of Aquarius. P. 4 3 B. 00 27 38 The
brighter star in the right shoulder of Aquarius. 3 11 00 27 *39 The mouth of
the south fish, and end of the water of Aquarius. 1 23 M. 00 28

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Fixed stars in Pisces, their nature, number, names,
magnitude, latitude and longitude.
EVen as we have proceeded in the other signs, let us here conclude with Pisces
which is the last: the number then of the stars therein are twenty nine, as
follows.

Their number. The names of the Stars. Their Nature. magnitude Their latitude
Longit. In. D M 1 The star in the right buttock of Aquarius. P 4 00 50 0 18 2
Arided, Deneb Adigege, the tail of the Swan or Hen. 2 60 B 00 0 48 3 The
Northermost of the two in the head of Pegasus. v 3 16 50 0 58 4 The right arm
of Aquarius. 3 8 48 1 5 The Northermost star in the right hand of Aquarius. 3
10 45 1 6 The first star of the stream next the Pitcher of Aquarius. P 4 2 00 1
7 The Northermost in the right leg. of Aquarius. P 4 5 M 00 2 8 The Southermost
in the right leg. of Aquarius. 3 7 30 3 9 The Foremost of the southermost of
Aquarius. 3 9 M 00 3 10 The Hindermost stars in the right hand of Aquarius. 3 8
30 4 11 Of Aquarius the The next Southermost of the Pitcher of the stream. P 4
00 10 6 12 Of Aquarius the Star in the forepart of the bowing of the stream. 4
1 M 10 9 13 Of Aquarius the Northermost in the bowing of the stream. 4 3 20 10
14 Of Aquarius the Southermost in the bowing of the stream. 4 4 10 11 15 Of
Aquarius the Next after the foremost in the bowing of the stream. 4 00 30 11 16
Of Aquarius the Southermost next after the bowing of the stream. 4 1 40 12 17
The Sothermost in the neck of the foremost of the 2. Fishes P 4g 7 30 15 18 The
Foremost of the belly of the foremost of the 2. Fishes 4 4 B 30 17 19 Markab.
Alpharacz. The pinion of Pegasus his wing. v 2 l 1 40 18 20 The latter in the
belly of the foremost of the 2. Fishes. 4 2 30 21 21 The latter on the back of
the foremost of the 2. Fishes. 4 7 30 22 22 Foremost on the South side of the
square without form. P 4 5 50 22 23 Foremost on the North side of the square
without form. 4 2 40 22 24 Scheat. Alparaiz. The right shoulder of Pegasus. v 2
l 31 00 23 25 The hindermost on South side of the Square besides or under the
form of the Fishes. P 4 5 M 20 23 26 The hindermost on North side of the Square
besides or under the form of the Fishes. 4 2 30 24 27 Of the VVhale, the star
at the North end of the tail. 3 9 30 25 28 Of the VVhale, the star at the South
end of the tail. 3 20 20 27 29 The tail of the foremost of the two Fishes. P 4
6 B 20 27

CHAP. XL. Showing the use of all the former Tables.
YOU see in the foregoing page, in the 1. column 1, 2, 3. and so forward,
intimating the number of the stars in the sign Pisces, as you have specified by
the word number, on the head of the column.

In the second column you have their several names, signified by this
inscription on the head thereof, The names of the fixed stars in Pisces.

Upon the head of the third column you have their Natures, intimating that
underneath it, and over against every star is set the Character of the Planet
of whose nature it participates; as for example, over against the right
shoulder of Pegasus, we find,, v., intimating that the star on the right
shoulder of Pegasus is of the nature of,, or, v. signifying vel, in English or:
again we see over against the two subsequent stars P, signifying they are of
the nature of Jupiter, and partly of Venus P. standing for partly, etc.

On the head of the fourth column you find magnitude, intimating that by the
Figures underneath, and over against each star is shown the magnitude of each
star; as over against the right shoulder of Pegasus, you find 2 l. intimating
it to be of the second magnitude signified by 2. and somewhat less, signified
by l. and note that in the same column where you find g. it signifies greater
in any of the Tables.

In the fifth column you see their latitude, showing that by the figures
underneath, over against each star is declared their latitude, and that either
North or South, signified by M and B. M showing South latitude, B North, etc.

In the sixth and last column you find the inscription Longitude, and this is
in like manner demonstrated by the figures underneath, as, the shoulder of
Pegasus (as abovesaid) has 31. d. 00. m. or 31. degrees, 00. minutes Latitude,
and 23. d. or 23. degrees longtitude; or in 23. degrees of Pisces: and so
observe and understand of all the foregoing and subsequent star, etc. D.
standing for degrees, and M. for minutes.

The total sum of these stars here expressed is 366. being the most material.

CHAP. XLI. Of the significations of the 12 Houses of Heaven, and wherefore
they have such signification.
Endeavor to be perfect in this chapter, which is to demonstrate the reasons of
some things which have not as yet been divulged in our vulgar tongue to the
Students of this noble Art, and thou will much advantage thy self, it being my
desire not to let ought slip for which thou may not (if need require) give
sufficient ground and reasons, etc.

You are sufficiently instructed by other Authors of the Nature and
signification of the houses; their several divisions you heard already in the
25. chapter of this second Book; it rests therefore we now proceed to show
the reasons why the houses are so ordained, as the angle of the East to be the
first house, and succedent to it the second, etc. and so of the rest; as also
why the Ancients assigned them those several significations which we commonly
attribute unto them; for such has been their curiosity therein, that there is
no one thing appertaining to the life of man or affairs or accidents therein,
which has not signification from one house or other, etc.

Of the first house, why it is so, and wherefore of such and such
significations.
The first house then is that house which is the East Angle or corner of the
Heavens, or the Ascendent; It is called an Angle for that it represents one of
the Cardinal points, as the seventh may the other: and the tenth and fourth the
Tropicks, etc. It is called the Ascendent because the Sun does there ascend in
our Horizon; Also in what ever Climate it be that house where the Sun ascends
or rises is the Ascendent of that place; and it is called the first house for
that it is the first that does represent itself unto us upon the birth of any
Infant, Revolution, or any work; so that what Sign at that time is ascending or
on the point or cusp of this house, is Significator (together with the Planet
that is Lord thereof, the Planet locally therein present, or in aspect thereof,
And so of any thing or Enterprise, etc.
or the Lord thereof) of the Native (as say the Ancients) For the Sign shall
show the complexion, form and shape of the body of the Native having relation
to the Planets in aspect therewith or near in presence; And the Lord thereof
shall declare his disposition, quality and inclination, having also respect to
those Planets in conjunction or configuration with him, etc. It has
signification of the life of the Native, for that it is the first house, as
life is the first and chief beginning of any one, and first esteemed or
preferred before any other enjoyment under the Sun; for what pleasure can there
be in any thing when in the enjoying thereof the life is taken away? Certainly,
though it be never so much to be desired upon this consideration, it will be
altogether left unattempted.

Why the Ascendant has signification of the Life and disposition of the
Native, or any thing or work began.
It has signification of the life of the Native also, and the beginning of any
work, for that the Infant is unrevealed or known till it is borne: so is this
first house or Ascendent unseen, and is in obscurity (as unto us) till it does
arise in our Horizon, etc. In Revolutions, Eclipses, and great Conjunctions and
the like it has signification of the common People of any place where these
happen.

Of the second house.
The Second house which is the succedent to the Ascendent, is so called for
that it succeeds the Ascendent, and ascends after it, and is therefore also
called the second house; it has signification of the Riches and Substance of
the Native or Querent, as also their assistance; for that next unto a man's
life, is his wealth or livelihood to be regarded, and as wealth is an
assistance and aid in all matters or businesses of or in the affairs ordinary
of man's life, has it also signification of assistance, etc.

The Third house is so called for that it in order follows the succedent of
the Ascendent; it has signification of Brethren, Kindred, Neighbors and
Alliance, for that it is in * of the Ascendent, subterranean: it has also
signification of short jornyes, Of the third house.
being the house opposite to the Ninth, signifying long journeys, the reason of
which you shall have hereafter in its place.

Of the fourth house.
The Fourth house or Angle of the Earth, or Northern, is so called for that it
in order follows the third; it has signification of immovable goods for
that it is an Angle, and that of the Earth which is fixed; also heritages,
lands and houses, for that it is a terranean and earthy Angle; also it has
signification of hidden treasures and the like, for that it is subterranean and
not visible in our Horizon; it signifies also the father of the Native or
Querent, for that he is the first cause of generation, as the earthy Chaos was
the first original of Adam, etc.

Of the fifth house.
The Fifth house is the succedent of the Angle of the Earth, and therefore is so
called. It has signification of mirth and jollity, it being in to the
Ascendent; also private pleasure and delight, it being subterranean and in with
the Ascendent, and for the same reason has signification of all manner of
pastime and recreation, as drinking, revelling, sporting, gaming and all kind
of recreation pleasing the fancies and tempers of men.

Of the ninth house.
The Sixth house is the Cadent from the North Angle, and is in order the sixth
house from the Ascendent: it beholds not the Ascendent; it has therefore
signification of sicknesses, of what kind soever it be; it has also
signification of Servants, Bondmen and women and Slaves; and of Cattle of the
smaller sort for the same reason, as having no loving familiarity or
correspondency with the Ascendent in friendship, etc.

Of the seventh house.
The seventh house is the angle of the West, and by reason it in order follows
the sixth, is the seventh from the Ascendent; it has signification of open
enemies, for that it is the opposite house to the Ascendent; and for the same
reason has signification of theft, or the thing lost; adversaries in
Lawsuits, and the like; it has in like manner signification of women in
general, of marriages. I could never find the reason why the ancients have
ordained the seventh or opposite house to the Ascendent, to signify the wife
of the Native, and women in general, except for that they are so contrary to
the disposition of men, the one being for the most part solid and resolved, the
other sickle and unstable as their mother the Moon; as also that they often
prove the destruction of men rather then assistants and comforters, (for which
they are made) as Eve was the destruction of Adam, Dalilah of Samson; and many
the like examples I could here relate both out of the Holy Writ, and other
writings; but since the subject is so vile and mean it is not worthy the pains,
wherefore that very example of Solomon, the wisest of Mortals, may suffice, who
notwithstanding he had so large a portion of the spirit of God, was by this
Sex, drawn to Idolatry and many other sins against the living God; insomuch
that it has staggered the learned Writers in Divinity, and put them to a non
plus to imagine (by any conclusion) whether he was saved or no: but lets return
to our business, since I may thus conclude of them that they prove either the
greatest comforts or the worst of afflictions to men.

Of the eighth house.
The eighth house, being the succedent of the angle of the West, is so called;
it is a house which beholds not the Ascendent, and is above the earth, and is
the aid and assistance of the open enemy, as the second is of the Native, it
being in opposition thereunto; wherefore it has signification of mortality,
death, poison, destruction and mischief which is to happen the Native in his
life.

Of the ninth house.
The ninth house is so called for that it follows next after the succedent of
the angle of the West, and is called Cadent; it is in a Trine of the Ascendent,
and above the earth; wherefore it has signification of all goodness, as
Religion, learning, revelation by Dreams; as also of all religious men and
orders, as Divines, Hermites, Monks, Friars, etc. Also all manner of Students,
as Astrologers, Physicians, Lawyers, and all Students of other good learning
whatsoever.

Of the tenth house.
The tenth house or the south angle in order follows next after, and therefore
is the tenth house; this has signification of the mother of the Native, for
that it is the opposite house to the fourth signifying the father; it
signifies also dignity, preferment and honor of the Native, for that it is
the vertical point of the Heavens, or the highest pitch thereof, and also for
the same reason, signifies Emperors, Kings, Princes, Noblemen and great men,
or the Grandees of the earth, and such as are in authority must be understood
if there be no King, etc.

Of the eleventh h^use.
The eleventh House being the succedent of the angle of the south is so called;
and for that it is in Sextitle of the Ascendent, and above the earth it has
signification of friendship and amity, hope, faith, etc.

Of the twelfth house.
The twelfth house, being the Cadent of the angle of the South following in
order the succedent thereof, is therefore the 12. house; it is above the earth
not beholding the Ascendent, and therefore has signification of private and
occult enemies, imprisonment, poverty, misery, and disgrace, Witchcraft and
Sorceries; it has also signification of great cattle, as the 6. the opposite
house had of small. And so much concerning the reasons of the significations of
the twelve houses or mansions of Heaven.

Note this well.
Yet note here, as the second house from the Ascendent, signifies the aid,
assistance and wealth or substance of the Native: the third, his kindred,
brethren, neighbors, etc. the fourth, his father, lands, houses, and the like:
the fifth, his children, etc. so you must know that the substance of the
brother, neighbor, kinsman, and the like, is signified by the fourth, being
the second from the third, the fifth does signify his brethren, the sixth his
father, the seventh his children, and so round the whole Heaven, according to
the signification aforesaid: still remembering that the house signifying any
party of whom the question is, is his Ascendent; The second from it is
substance; the third his kindred; as the fifth house in the Natives figure has
signification of the wealth or substance of the father: the sixth, his kindred
and brethren, also the Uncle or Ant of the Querent by the fathers side: the
seventh his Father and the Querents Grandfather or Natives; and so you must
understand of the rest of the Houses, still varying your rules according to
discretion; for much does the thorow-knowledge of the signification of every
house conduce to the perfection of the Student in this Art. I think good here
(notwithstanding in the 21. chapter of this first Treatise you have heard
already somewhat as touching the divisions of the Heavens) to give you the
division thereof more plainly in this following chapter.

CHAP. XLII. Of the division of the Houses into twelve equal parts.
NOw then you are first to know that the Horizon cutteth or divides the
Heavens into two Hemispheres, the upper and the lower, parting six of the
houses into one Hemisphere, and six into the other, viz. the upper has 12, 11,
10, 9, 8, and 7th. houses, the lower the 6, 4, 5, 3. the 2d. and first house.

And as the Heavens are divided into two Hemispheres by the Horizon, so are
they also cut by the Meridian into two equal parts, so that by these two
Circles the Heavens are divided into four equal parts, and every of the parts
by sections and points of other Circles are divided into three parts, so that
the whole Heavens are cut into 12. equal parts; which the most learned in this
Art have called Mansions or houses.

The division which the Meridian makes, is to divide the Heavens into the
Oriental and Occidental parts, six houses being Oriental, six Occidental, or so
inclining: Oriental are the third, second, first, twelfth, eleventh and tenth;
Occidental ninth, eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth and fourth.

Now you must know that the four equal parts abovesaid are called (by the
learned in this Science) quadrants, because each part is the quarter or fourth
part of the Heaven.

The first Quadrant is that part of the Heaven which lies between the middle
of the Heaven and the Ascendent or Horoscope; and this is the Oriental,
Ascending, Infant, Masculine, Sanguine and vernal Quarter, and it has the
twelfth, eleventh, and tenth houses.

The second Quadrant is those three houses, or that part lying between the
points of the tenth and seventh, and this is the Youthful, Feminine,
Meridional, Choleric, Summer Quarter, containing the ninth, eighth and seventh
houses.

The third Quadrant is from the point of the seventh house to the Imum Coeli or
point of the fourth, and is called the Occidental, Manly, Masculine, Melancholy
and Autumnal Quarter, including the sixth, fifth and fourth houses.

The fourth Quadrant is from the Imum Coeli to the point of the Horoscope or
Ascendent, and is the Septentrional, Feminine, Phlegmatic, old Age, and Winter
Quarter.

The Angles are the most powerful houses; for a Planet therein has more power
and efficacy then another (in any other house) that is but equally dignified:
but know that the houses are in strength as follows, yet Ptolomie prefers
the mid-heaven, etc.

1, 10, 7, 4, 11, 9, 5, 2, 3, 8, 6, 12.

So that the meaning thereof is no more but thus; A Planet in the 1. and
another in the 10. equally dignified, that has more power which is in the
Ascendent; and likewise that in the 10. precedeth that in the 7. and so know of
the rest. And so much of the divisions of the twelve houses.

Chap. XLIII. Containing some Terms of Art very necessary to be known: as also
Instructions how to erect a Figure of Heaven.
AMongst the Planets here are several things to be known of all that study this
Science, and they are in number which are most material 23. therefore I would
have thee diligently observe this Chapter.

Direction, Retrogradation, Stationary, Application, Separation, Prohibition,
Refrenation, Translation, Reception, Frustration, Peregrination, Combustion,
Cazimi, under the Sun beams, void of Course, besieging, Oriental, Occidental,
Superior, Inferior, Athazer, Almuten and Haiz.

Direction.
A Planet is said to be direct when he moves in his Natural motion, directly
forward as Saturn in the first degree of Aries, goes into the 2, 3, and so
forward; this is direction.

Retrogradation, Retrogradation.
or a Planet is said to be Retrograde when he goes backward or contrary to the
succession of the signs, as Saturn in the first degree of Aries, going into the
30, 29, and 28 degrees of Pisces, etc. is Retrograde, or goes backward.

Stationary is, Stationary
when a Planet stands still, or moves neither backward nor forward, as the
Superiors do sometimes four days together, etc. as you have heard before, and
this happens both before direction and retrogradation.

Application is, Application.
when two Planets (it mattereth not which) draw near the rays or bodies of each
other by Conjunction or Aspect; and this may be done three ways; yet you are to
know that a more weighty Planet, or that which is superior cannot apply unto
the lighter or inferior, except when he is retrograde.

The first manner of Application is when two Planets are direct, the weightier
in more degrees, and the lighter in fewer; as if Saturn be in five degrees of
Aries, and Jupiter in three, here Jupiter applies unto Saturn by Conjunction,
and this is a direct Application.

The second when both are Retrograde, as Jupiter in three degrees of Aries, and
in the first, here Jupiter applies unto the Conjunction of Saturn by a
Retrograde motion.

The third is when the one is Retrograde and in more degrees of a sign, and the
other direct and in less, as if Jupiter were in four degrees of Aries direct,
and Saturn in seven Retrograde, here Saturn applies to the Conjunction of
Jupiter, and Jupiter to him, and this is a mutual Conjunction; understand the
same when they apply by Aspect.

Separation is, Separation.
where two Planets have been either in Partile Conjunction or aspect, and are
going from it; as if Saturn be in 8. degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in 9. here
Jupiter is separated one degree from the Partile Conjunction, yet he shall not
be said to be rotally separated till he be the full half orb of Jupiter, and
his own half orb distant from him; for every Planet both in Conjunction and
Aspect is admitted his half orb and the half orb of the other Planet joined
unto him; as the half orb of Saturn you have heard is 4. degrees 30. minutes,
and so likewise Jupiters, the which being added together make 9. whole degrees;
and therefore till Jupiter be thus many degrees elongated or separated from
Saturn, he shall not be said to be fully separated, neither shall their
signification be inffectual for that time; understand the same of an aspect
still admitting or allowing the half orbs of both Planets, etc.

Prohibition is, Prohibition.
when two Planets are applying to Conjunction or Aspect, and before they come
to join themselves another comes to Conjunction or aspect of the Planet applied
to; as if Saturn were in 10. degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in five applying to
the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in four degrees of Aries; here Mars being
swifter then Jupiter, comes first to the Conjunction of Saturn, and prohibites
Jupiter, etc. the same observe in an Aspect.

Refrenation is, when a Planet is applying to another, Refrenation.
either by Conjunction or Aspect, and before he comes to be joined he becomes
Retrograde: as if Saturn be in seven degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in three,
here Jupiter applies (they being both direct) to a Partile Conjunction of
Saturn; but before he can attain thereunto Jupiter becomes Retrograde, and so
refrains by going backwards to come to the Conjunction of Saturn, who goes
direct forward.

Translation of light and nature is, Translation.
when a light Planet separateth from a more weighty one and presently applies
to another more heavy; as Saturn in 16 degrees of Aries and Jupiter in 9. and
Mars in 10. here Mars separateth from the Conjunction of Jupiter, and
translateth the light and nature of Jupiter to Saturn, to whom he next applies;
and this is in the like manner done by Aspect.

Reception is, when two Planets are in each others dignities; for then they are
said to receive one the other; Reception.
and this may be accomplished as many ways as there are dignities of a Planet;
as Saturn in Aries, and Mars in Capricorn; here is reception between Saturn and
Mars by house, Aries being the house of Mars, and Capricorn the house of
Saturn; so also Jupiter in Capricorn, and Mars in Cancer is reception by
exaltation, Capricorn being the exaltation of Mars, and Cancer of Jupiter; In
like manner Saturn in Aries, and Sol in Gemini, is reception by triplicitie;
the fiery triplicity being the Suns by day, and the aerie Saturns, etc. in like
manner of term and face.

Frustration is, Frustration.
when a lighter Planet would come to Conjunction with another more heavy, and
before it does accomplish it, the more weighty Planet is joined unto another;
as Saturn in 20 degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in 19, and Mars in 15, here Mars
applies to the Conjunction of Jupiter; but before he can attain thereunto, he
is frustrated or disappointed by Jupiter, who comes first to the Conjunction of
Saturn.

Peregrination is, when a Planet is in a sign wherein he is a stranger, as it
were, Peregrination.
by being neither in his own house, exaltation, triplicity, term or face, and
therefore then he is very weak, as Saturn in the first 26 degrees of Aries.

Combustion is, Conbustion.
when any Planet is not distant from the Sun eight degrees and thirty minutes
either before or after his body; as Saturn in the first degree of Aries, and
the Sun in 8. and Jupiter in 16. here both Saturn and Jupiter are combust of
the Sun; but you shall say Jupiter is most afflicted; for that Planet to whom
the Sun approaches is more daminified then that from which he separateth; Under
the Sun beams.
and you must know that a Planet still remains under the Sun beams till he is
fully elongated 17 degrees.

Cazimi or a Planet in the heart of the Sun, Cazimi.
is when he is not distant from the Sun 17. minutes; as if Saturn be in 3.
degrees 15. minutes of Aries, and the Sun in three degrees and 30. minutes of
Aries.

Void of Course is, when a Planet is separated from another, Void of course.
and does not during the time of its continuance in that sign, apply again to
any other.

Besieging is, Besieging.
when any Planet is placed between the bodies of the two Malevolents Saturn and
Mars, as if Saturn be in 5. degrees of Aries, and Mars in 15. and Jupiter in
10. here Jupiter is besieged.

Oriental is, when a Planet rises before the Sun. Oriental.


Occidental is nothing else but when a Planet sets after the Sun, Occidental.
and is seen above the Horizon after him.

Those Planets that are placed above the Globe of the Sun, are called
Superior, Superior.
and they are Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars.

Those are inferior that are placed under him, viz. Venus, Mercury and the
Moon. Inferior.
] Athazer is, when the Moon is in one degree and minute with the Sun, Athazer.
and when she is 12. degrees distant from him, or 45. or 90. or 155. or 168. or
180. or 192, or 215. or 270. or 348. any of these are Athazer, etc.

Almuten is that Planet that bears chief Rule of any sign, or in any figures;
Almuten.
as Saturn in Libra is Almuten, or is Almuter of Libra, because he has both
exaltation and triplicity therein, and Venus has only house, so that Saturn
bearing chief rule, is of this sign Almuten.

Haiz is, when a masculine and diurnal Planet in the day time is above the
earth, Haiz.
or a feminine nocturnal Planet in the night time under the earth.

How to erect a Figure of Heaven.
Now to erect a figure of Heaven, or Scheme at any time, hour or minute of any
year for the judging of future events (I mean by Revolutions of the years of
the World, Eclipses, Comers, or great Conjunctions) you are to do no more then
this.

Have regard to the place of the Sun at noon (according as you will find in
any Ephemeris) for that day wherein your figure is to be made, and see in what
degrees and minutes you find him; for if he be in any degree or minute under
30. you must then look for the same degree he is in, in your Table of houses (
viz. in that page wherein you find Sol in Aries, Sol in Taurus, etc. If the
Sun be then in any of these signs or any other, you must still look for your
number ( viz. the degree or place of the Sun) in that page where you find the
Sun in the same sign in the Table of houses that you find him in you
Ephemeris) etc. But if he be in more then 30 minutes, you must look for the
next greater degree; as if he be in 1. degree of Aries and 29. minutes, you are
to look in your Table of houses in the page where you f^nde Sol in Aries for 1.
degree; but if he were in one degree 30 minutes or 31. minutes, and so to the
end, you are to look for 2 degrees in the aforesaid page, in that Column where
you find over the head thereof Dom. X. signifying the tenth house.

Having thus found out your number or place of the Sun at Noon; see what number
you find over against it in the left hand column, which is tituled time from
noon in the same line, and add that number, viz. the degrees and minutes you
find there to the hour and minute of the day, for the which you would erect
your Scheme.

And if they make not above 24 hours, look in your table of houses for the
number they make in the aforesaid column of time from noon; but if they make
more then 24 hours, cast away 24 hours, and enter with the remainder, and where
your number falls there is your figure.

For first, you are to look in the same line what is over against your number
in the column of the tenth house, where you find Dom. X. and what number you
find there you are to place upon the cusp of the tenth house in your Scheme;
and then in the next colum where you find Dom. XI. in the same line what
degrees and minutes you find, you are to place on the eleventh house in your
figure, and so observe in the rest, viz. the twelfth, first, second, and third
houses, placing as has been said the degrees and minutes in every one which
you find in the same line over against your number on the cusps of every of
these houses in your draught of the Heavens, and then fill up the other points
of the Heavens thus.

First, know what houses are opposite.

Secondly, what signs of the Zodiac.

Then place the signs, degrees and minutes opposite to these places you have
filled upon the other vacant points.

The houses opposite are the first and seventh, the second and eighth, the
third and ninth, the fourth and tenth, the fifth and eleventh, the sixth and
twelfth, and therefore for our more ready apprehension we place them thus.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,

Which shows the first is opposite to the seventh, and the seventh to the
first, the second to the eighth, and the eighth to the second, the third to the
ninth, and the ninth to the third, etc.

Signs opposite are to, to, to, to, to, and, to, which may also be thus ranked.

,,,,,,,,,,,,

So that it is clear, is opposite to to; to to, etc.

Wherefore we shall suppose in our Scheme we have the 1. degrees. of, and the
second min. upon the ascendent or first house: why then because the 7th. is
opposite unto the first, and to, we are to place the 1. degrees. 2. min. of upon
the seventh.

Also it upon the 2d. there were the 3d. degrees. of Taurus, and the 4th min. we
are to place the 3. degrees. and 4th. min. of upon the 8th. house, because the 8th.
is opposite to the second, and to, and so of the rest; remember still to place
the opposite sign, and the same degrees and minutes on the opposite house, and
you cannot err; and thus much shall suffice at this time.

FINIS.
AN INTRODVCTION TO ELECTIONS, Fully comprehending The RULES of the ANCIENTS IN
Electing a Time for any manner of Work: Never before made public in our
Mother Tongue.

But now (by the Blessing of GOD) for the benefit of all true Lovers of
knowledge sent abroad,

By WILLIAM RAMESEY, Gent. Student in Astrology, Physic, and the most
Heavenly and Sublime Sciences.

Eccles. 3.1. To every thing there is a season; and a time to every purpose
under the Heaven.

Sapiens Dominabitur astris.

LONDON, Printed for R. VV. 1653.

HONORATISSIMO AT QUE ILLVSTRISSIMO DOMINO, DOMINO HENRICO PERREPOINT,
MARCHIONI DE DORCHESTER, COMITI DE KINGSTON APVD HVLL, PROCOMITI NEVVARK, ET
DOMINO PERREPOINT DE HOLMES PERREPOINT, Salutem, Pacem and Felicitatem
Perpetuam.

DOMINO SUO CLEMENTISSIMO HANC SUAM IN ELECTIONIBVS INTRODVCTIONEM SUBMISSE
DEDICAT

Wilhelmus Rameseus.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Henry Perrepoint, Marquess of DORCHESTER, Earl of
KINGSTONE upon HVLL, Vicount NEW ARK and Lord PERREPOINT of HOLMES PERREPOINT,
Health and life here, and Eternal happiness hereafter.
MY LORD,
WHen Your Honor shall consider the reason of this my bold Dedication, I know
(were not Your Honor of a more Noble Spirit then to judge of things by the
first sight or glimpse thereof) I should have little or no cause to hope of
acceptance at Your Honors hands, but should rather justly be induced to expect
(since it is my unhappiness to be a stranger to Your Honor) Your frown rather
then favor, and reprehension for this my boldness: But as it was nothing but
really Your Honors Virtues, (which (according to the Philosopher) are the
only Badges of Honor) and love to Learning that was the occasion of this my
transgression, I humbly presume (through them) my fault will be venial, since
the blame is Your Honors and that my self, and this my small Present shall
find access into Your Honors favor and Protection. The subject of this piece
is that part of Astrology or NATURAL PHILOSOPHY which treats of Elections,
teaching by the powerful Influence of the Superior and Celestial bodies, how
to frame a fit and proper time for any manner of work belonging to the life of
Man in a Natural way, there being (according to that most elegant expression of
the chief of Philosophers, and sagest of Mortals SOLOMON, Eccles. 3.1.) A
season for every thing, and a time for every purpose under the Sun. And truly
it is a piece of that sublime Learning, that I fear it will pass the bounds of
not only the common and ordinaryest, but the indifferent capacities of most
men, and in some measure put even the most Judicious to seek, unless they are
true sons [or Contemplators] of Nature, and its mysteries and secrets; this for
the generality: Yet what conduces to the administration of Physic and
Phlebotomy (which according to Hippocrates and Galen (as I have sufficiently
shown in the 10 Chap. of the first Book of this Volume and the 1. Chapter of
the 7. Sect. of this very third Treatise) can never be rightly administered
without the help of this Art) is more easily to be comprehended, as also what
tends to the use of Navigation and husbandry. Wherefore since this my fabric
of THE RESTORATION OF ASTROLOGY or the true Natural Philosophy which is four
square is finished now after my great pains and care, and brought to light, it
imploreth Your Patronage, and especially this Corner, least the unworthyness of
the Author may be a means of its fall to the ground without the least notice
taken thereof, or hope of recovery, unless Your Honors Nobility, Virtues and
Learning be a gracious support thereunto, the which if Your Honor be
Munificently pleased to grant, it will be a perpetual rock unto it, and an
inexpressible fame unto him whose highth of ambition is to be

My LORD, Your HONORS Servant, Whilst he is William Ramesey.

To the Reader.
READER,
THou art here presented with the whole Art of Elections, which may be very
beneficial unto ^ee in many things, especially in the administration of
Physic, using of Husbandry and Navigation, for which considerations I have
undertaken to divulge the whole Body thereof; for herein are the rules
infallible, yet in others (by reason they are to depend on several other
considerations which we place as ground-works, viz. the Revolutions of the
Years of the World, Eclipses, great Conjunctions, and in some measure
Nativities) they are very intricate and doubful; and truly I may say they
seldom or never prove true, by reason few that undertake the practice thereof
understand the fundamentals and ground-works, and how to order and dispose of
them, or will take the pains to consider every particular which is requisite to
be seriously pondered and weighed before Election can be made on any particular
thing.

The Authors admonition to the Students in Elections.
Wherefore let him that presents this Book unto thee advise thee as thou
tendrest the propagation of the Art and thy own Reputation, not to dare to put
any part thereof in practice, unless it be (I say) so much as thou find tend
to the administration of Physic, Phlebotomy, or using of Husbandry and
Navigation, till thou art very well acquainted with Nature, and can prove
thou know the fundamentals and reasons of every particular point of this
Science, lest thou become ridiculous and odious to the Ignorant and the rural
of the World, by thy frequent failings which thou can never avoid if thou
know no more then what is here verbally delivered, or if thou trustest
barely to the writings of any man whatsoever; for the illiterate by this thy
weakness (being no wise capable of the mysteries of these knowledges) will
sooner condemn the Art as imperfect or faulty, then thee or thy judgment,
which art rather worthy reprehension; for by the right knowledge of the divine
practice thereof thou may attain to admirable speculations and rare things.

For it was far from my intentions in the penning thereof to have it thus
abused, which thou may soon do, by basely putting it openly in practice, as
some have the resolution of Questions, and so not only become an occasion of
derision to thy self with them, but also an ill requiter of my pains and care
toward thee, and bring this part of the Art, (if not all under the notion
thereof) into the contempt of the World, the which in it self is good and pure
though sublime; for there is nothing more certain, then that there is a proper
time and season for every thing under the Sun; A time to be born, and a time to
dye; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up; a time to kill, and a time to
heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up; a time to weep, and time to
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance; a time to embrace and a time to
refrain; nay even to the thrownig away of stones and gathering them again there
is a time; and to be short to every thing there is a season and a time to every
purpose under the Sun, Eccles. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. and that all inferior
things are ruled and ordered by the superior, I have here no more to say then
only refer thee to the first Epistle and first Treatise; for what man is there
that will deny that the subtle soul and life of the World quickneth and
disposes of all things therein, or that all terrestrial things have their
dependency on the motion and influence of the Stars and Planets, and their
Configurations; occasioning the like sympathy as is between the Loadstone and
Iron, there being nothing exempted from their power that is composed of the
four Elements which they order, dispose, and govern; nay even the hardest
stones we see have a sympathetical quality therewith, and are wrought upon by
their penetrative power and virtue, which still before rain (especially if it
be of continuance, even when the Heavens but incline to moisture) sweat drops
of water, and become as wet as if they had been rained on, or washed over by
some hand; many such like arguments I could produce for the proof hereof; but
since the subject of almost the whole first Book tends hereunto, I shall say
no more, but again advise thee not to put any part of this Book in practice
till the grounds thereof be well apprehended by thee, that so thou may not
violate his intentions that has left it thee, and desires to have no occasion
to write himself other then

Thy Loving Friend William Ramesey.

The Contents of every Section and Chapter contained in the Third Book of this
Treatise, being an INTRODUCTION TO ELECTIONS.
SECT. I. COmprehending an Introduction to Elections or necessary Instructions
for the electing of any manner of Work by the secret Operations of the Heavens,
by the nature of the Signs, Planets and Aspects of the Moon, etc. Fol. 121
CHAP. I. Containing some necessary instructions to the judgment of Elections.
Fol. 122 Chap. 2. Of the signs, and their significations in Elections, and of
the hindrances of the Moon being a farther instruction to the judging of
Elections. Fol. 126 Chap. 3. Showing Elections by the Aspects of the Moon to
the other six Planets, and by her Mansions. Fol. 128

SECT. II. Containing Rules for Electing such matters as appertain to the
signification of the first house of Heaven. Fol. 132 CHAP. I. Containing
necessary rules for putting children to nurse, to school and to a trade. Idem
Chap. 2. Of the rules of Elections for the cutting of hair. Fol. 133 Chap. 3.
Of cutting of nails of the hands or feet, also corns. Fol. 134

SECT. III. Of Rules for electing matters appertaining to the second House.
Idem CHAP. I. Of receiving and borrowing of money. Idem Chap. 2. Containing
other rules concerning borrowing and lending. Fol. 135 Chap. 3. Of buying to
profit again by the sale thereof. Fol. 136 Chap. 4. Of selling to advantage.
Fol. 137 Chap. 5. Being a farther instruction touching buying and selling in an
ordinary way of the world. Idem. Chap. 6. Of buying of clothing, or putting on
of apparel. Idem. Chap. 7. Of flitting or removing from one place to another.
Fol. 138 Chap. 8. Containing rules for electing any work in the Art of
Distillation or Alchimy. Fol. 139

SECT. IV. Comprehending rules in Electing such matters as appertain to the
signification of the third House. Fol. 140 CHAP. I. Of short journeys and their
Elections. Fol. Idem Chap. 2. Of making friendship between brethren, or any two
at variance. Idem Chap. 3. Of applying the mind or study to Divine matters or
contemplations. Fol. 141

SECT. V. Containing rules of Elections appertaining to the signification of
the Fourth House. Fol. 142 CHAP. I. Of building of Houses. Idem Chap. 2. Of
building of Castles and Cities. Fol. 143 Chap. 3 Of building of Churches. Fol.
145 Chap. 4. Of building or erecting of Mils. Idem Chap. 5. Of pulling down or
destroying of Houses or any Fabric whatsoever. Idem Chap. 6. Containing rules
of elections in buying of land, houses or heritages. Fol. 146 Chap. 7. Of
buying of land for husbandry, and not to build upon. Fol. 147 Chap. 8. Of
bringing of water to a house either by Conduit, Pipe, Pump; and of diging of
Wels. 148 Chap. 9. Of tillage or manuring of the ground. Idem Chap. 10. Of
renting, hireing, and letting of houses, land or fruit, or any other thing to
be let or hired. Fol. 149 Chap. 11. Of planting of trees or graffing. Fol. 150
Chap. 12. Of sowing of seeds in the ground. Fol. 151 Chap. 13. Of ridding
houses or places from evil spirits. Idem

SECT. VI. Containing rules for electing a time for any work or thing
appertaining to the fifth House. Fol. 152 CHAP. I. Showing a fit time for the
procreation of boys or girls. Idem Chap. 2. Of delivering a dead child. Fol.
153 Chap. 3. Of christening or circumcising of children. Fol. 154 Chap. 4. Of
giving and receiving of gifts or presents. Fol. 155 Chap. 5. Containing rules
for electing a time for putting on of apparel. Idem Chap. 6. Of feasting or
eating of meat. Fol. 156 Chap. 7. Of drinking of wine and other drinks. Fol.
157 Chap. 8. Of writing of letters or any thing else of ingenuity. Fol. 158
Chap. 9. Of making odoriferous smells and unguents. Idem Chap. 10. Of sending
Ambassadors or messengers. Fol. 159

SECT. VII. Of Elections appertaining to the sixth House. Fol. 160 CHAP. I. Of
the true knowledge of the Crisis, or critical and judicial days, very useful
for those that study Physic. Idem Chap. 2. Of applying medicines generally to
all the parts of the body of man. Fol. 162 Chap. 3. Of administering medicines
to the diseases of the head. Fol. 163 Chap. 4. Of applying remedies to the
eyes, and preparatives in general. Idem Chap. 5. Of applying remedies to the
nose. Fol. 164 Chap. 6. Of injecting clysters, and stopping of rheumes or
fluxes. Idem Chap. 7. Of the administraction of gargarisms, or sneezings, and
such like. Fol. 165 Chap. 8. Of giving of vomits. Idem Chap. 9. Of administering
purges and physic laxative. Fol. 166 Chap. 10. Of bathing and electing a time
therefore. Fol. 169 Chap. 11. Of electing a time for using Surgery. Idem
Chap. 12. Of electing a time for phlebotomy or blood-letting also for applying
ventosies. Fol. 170 Chap. 13. Of the Physicians going to the Patient. Fol. 171
Chap. 14. Of hireing of servants. Fol. 172 Chap. 15. Of buying of birds and
letting them fly to return again. Idem Chap. 16. Of buying four-footed beasts.
Fol. 173 Chap. 17. Of bringing up dogs or tameing of small cattle. Fol. 174

SECT. VIII. Containing Elections appertaining to the Seventh House. Fol. 175
CHAP. I. Of the elections apertaining to the signification of the seventh
House, and touching marriage. Idem Chap. 2. Of Venereal sports. Fol. 178 Chap.
3. Of partnership or agreements, or things between two. Idem Chap. 4. Of going
to war, or beginning of differencies and duels, quarrels, lawsuits,
controversies and the like. Fol. 179 Chap. 5. Of making of peace, suppressing
or encountering of rebels, and storming of castles and towns. Fol. 182 Chap. 6.
Of buying of arms and preparing of instruments of war, and ships or galleys.
Fol. 184 Chap. 7. Of seeking of fugitives and examining of thieves and
malefactors. Idem Chap. 8. To know the subject and score of the whisperings or
clandestine practices of any two, and at playing at Chess (or any other sitting
game) to win. Fol. 185 Chap. 9. Of hunting, fowling and fishing. Fol. 187

SECT. IX. Containing Elections appertaining to the signification of the eight
House. Fol. 189 CHAP. I. Of making of wills. Idem Chap. 2. Of the heritages of
the dead. Fol. 190

SECT. X. Containing the Elections of the ninth House of Heaven. Fol. Idem
CHAP. I. Of the returning of such as are absent, and of going of journeys and
entering into any place. Idem Chap. 2. Of building of ships and galleys, and of
Lantching them, and of voyaging by Sea. Fol. 194 Chap. 3. Of learning of
sciences, and of singing, and music. Fol. 195

SECT. XI. Containing Elections appertaining to the signification of the tenth
House, Fol. 196 CHAP. I. Of electing Kings and Governors, and of their
enstanling and beginning their rule or government. Idem Chap. 2. Of obtaining
favor of Kings and Great men, justice on enemies and pardons, also of going of
progresses with the King or any other Grande. Fol. 197 Chap. 3. Of learning any
Art or Occupation. Fol. 198

SECT. XII. Containing such Elections as are under the signification of the
Eleventh House of Heaven. Fol. 199 CHAP. I. Of accomplishing any thing hoped
for, and of gaining a good repute, and the love of friends. Idem Chap. 2 Of
obtaining of promises and requests. Fol. 200

SECTION. XIII. Comprehending the Elections of the Twelfth House. Fol. 201
CHAP. I. Of freeing of prisoners and Captives. Idem Chap. 2. Of buying and
riding of horses, etc. Idem

FINIS.
LIBER III. DE IVDICIIS ASTRORVM IN ELECTIONIBVS, OR AN Introduction to
Elections, Fully comprehending the RULES of the Ancients in Electing a time for
any manner of WORK.
SECTION. I. Comprehending an Introduction to Elections, or necessary
Instructions for electing any manner of work, by the secret operations of the
Heavens, by the nature of the Signs, Planets, and Aspects of the Moon, etc.
WE have found most of the Ancients to be very curious in this manner of
Judicature, but some more excellent then others; wherefore since the knowledge
thereof is not only delectable and rare, but also very useful and profitable,
both for eschewing evil, and choosing the good; as also for that the verity
thereof is wonderful, if the Rules of Art be diligently observed, and with
care and discretion practiced; as also for that I earnestly desire the Students
in this noble Art may daily more and more increase in knowledge (as I have
said) I have thought good here to give you without either fraud or deceit, the
most Judicious and Rational Rules of the Ancients, concerning the electing or
choosing a time for any Work incident to the affairs of mankind, whether
particularly appertaining to a man's own particular person, or his estate,
friends, or enemies, etc.

CHAP. I. Containing some necessary Instructions to the judging of Elections.
The groundwork of Elections according to some of the Ancients.
IN all Authors that ever I yet met with, I find there can be no time elected
(in this our Astrological way of electing) advantageous to any one whose
nativity or time of birth is not exactly known; for according unto it must you
frame your election, together with respect to the revolution of the year; and
Zahel, Bonatus, Messahalla and Dariot say that in case the nativity of a man
cannot be attained, respect must be had to the time of the question; the reason
is (as I conceive) for that (if the question be radical) the Querent shall have
the same significator or one of the same nature in the question as he has in
his Nativity; The Reasons.
and this I have ever found true in all that ever I met with that could produce
their Nativities; wherefore it is that the Ancients conclude (as well indeed
they may) that GOD the omnipotent and omiscient Creator of the Heavens and the
Earth, A harmony and concordancy between the superior and inferior bodies.
and all things therein, has made the earth of the four Elements, but the
Heavens being the quintessence of them, he has made to surround and enclose
it, that by the secret working of the Anima Mundi, or soul of the World, which
Zahel calls Rem subtilem, the which (says he) sciunt sapientes a subtle or
spiritual quality which is known to the wise, which occasioneth such a sympathy
as between the Iron and Lodestone, as that all Inferior things and actions
have their dependency and government from the superior.

But although this be the Judgment of the Ancients who say, Look to the
ascendent of the Nativity or Question and make your Election accordingly: viz.
If the chief significator of any business be unfortunate in the radix, there
can be no time Elected to prevent the mischief threatened; for whom the Lord
has ordained to destruction or punishment, he causes one thing or other to be
incident unto that party so ordained to punishment, either by inclination or
casualty (according to his Divine will and preordination and the harmonious
concordancy of Astrology with Divinity etc.) that it might come to pass; (and
so on the contrary for a man's happiness, but this comes to pass through
repentance) for I have ever found men in this condition either to go on still
in their ways without reproof, or being reproved, will take so small notice
thereof, as that they will hardly believe it, or have an inclination to study
amendment or prevention of the evil; wherefore these particular things in
Elections ought to have their dependency on the general fates.

But as I have but now said, the figure of the Revolution of the world for that
year ought to be regarded and concluded the radix or groundwork of all your
Elections; for according to the nature of the significator therein must your
Election be framed, Diverse events happen to men on the election of one and the
same hour and minute.
or your shall never be perfect in this Art. Hence it is that often we shall
find some kind of men and occupations thrive and prosper some years more then
in others; and again on the contrary, do all what they can, their business
still and endeavors go backward; The reason is, their significator is more
fortified or debilitated in the Radix; and we see that such shall in an
Election by Saturn and Mars have a good and prosperous day, The reason thereof.
and upon the square or opposition of the Moon to Saturn or Mars, although on a
mischievous day; because these malevolents were chief rulers or significators
of the business in hand, things or persons, etc. in the Radix. Consider also
the places of any Eclipse or Great conjunction in every year. So that when your
true significator is known, and his essential and accidental fortitudes and
debilities, you cannot err, the following Rules being diligently and warily
observed, there being an harmony and such a concordancy betwixt the Celestial
Creatures, and our Terrestrial affairs, according to that excellent saying of
Hermes, there is nothing here beneath that is not governed and ruled by what is
above.

Celestial influences are not effectual but to such as are of their own nature.
Know then that in judging of the stars in Elections, special care must be had
unto the business in hand; for according unto the nature thereof must your
business be ordered, and your time chosen; as for earthy businesses, as
planting and sowing and the like, an earthy sign is to be chosen or placed in
the ascendent; if appertaining to fire, a fiery sign; if to the water, a watery
one, etc. As for example, if you would elect a time to plant, you must prefer
Virgo before any other of the signs, because she is an earthy sign, and such an
one too as is participating more of the nature of the fruits of the earth then
any other, viz. Taurus or Capricorn; and so understand of any business; be sure
you still elect a sign proper for your business, and agreeable to the nature
thereof.

For the continuance or dispatch of business.
And for the speedy dispatch of any business, let a moveable sign be chosen; if
for permanency you would elect any time, take a fixed sign; if you be
indifferent, or desire your business shall neither be of long or short
continuance, prefer a common sign, etc.

Chief Significators to be fortifyed. The Moon, The Sun.
But still look to the fundamental grounds of Elections, viz. to fortify your
chief significators, and chiefly the Moon, because she has a general
signification in all things, in journeys, times places and all businesses
whatsoever; also the Sun, he being as it were chief Ruler or King amongst the
other Planets; but more particularly the Planet signifying the business in
hand: as if your Election be concerning war or fireworks, you must fortify
Mars; if to speak to the King, the Sun; to gain money, Jupiter; if concerning
marriage or love-matters, Venus; because these significations these Planets are
generally of; and so understand of any business whatsoever; still have a care
to fortify the Planet signifying your business, in general as well as
particular, if you can.

The Sign agreeing generally with the business to be fortifyed.
In like manner you must choose and fortify the Sign signifying your business in
general (for as I have said, as is the nature of your business, such must the
Sign be you choose and fortify) as if you would go by water as to Sea, etc.
you must fortify a watery Sign, and more especially Cancer, for that she is the
house of the Moon; if by land, as a journey, etc. an earthy Sign, etc. viz.
free from misfortune or affliction of the malevolent aspects of the Infortunes,
and place it in the Ascendent of your Election, or the Lord of the Ascendent
therein, or the Moon,

The sign and house signifying your busines^ in your radix, is also to be
observed in Elections. A general rule worth the noting.
The sign also and house signifying your business in your Radix ought to be
regarded and well dignifyed; also fortify the house and sign signifying the
business in your Election; as if you would elect a time for profit, you must
fortify (in the figure of your Election) the second house in the Radix, its
sign and the Lord thereof, as well as the second in your Election, etc. In all
Elections, remember to fortify the Ascendent, its Lord and Disposer of him, and
the fourth, and the Lord of the fourth and also his Dispositor; for by
fortifying the Ascendent, the Lord thereof and his Dispositor, the health and
safety of the Parties body electing is promised: by fortifying the fourth, its
Lord and his Dispositor, a good and safe conclusion and end of the business.
But note (as aforesaid) that if a malevolent Planet be significator in any
thing in the Radix, you must fortify it, and not think the making a fortune:
viz. Jupiter or Venus (which are but generally so) significators, will be
beneficial: for it will often prove contrary: Jupiter and Venus may sometimes
be malevolent Planets and not fortunes. Saturn and Mars may also sometimes be
fortunes and not infortunes.
for all men are not ruled by Jupiter and Venus; neither (as I say) are they
always fortunes: for accidentally they may be infortunes: and when they are
Lords of the eighth, twelfth and sixth, they are occasions of sickness,
poverty, imprisonment, mischief and death as effectually as Saturn or Mars: for
every Planet must do the office whereunto it is ordained: and so by the same
rule may Saturn and Mars be fortunes, and so they are to those they chiefly
rule, and to such things as are properly under their dominion either naturally
or accidentally; wherefore the true knowledge of your significator (in
Elections) of the business intended is of great value, and worthy serious
consideration.

Also in electing any work, have especial care to fortify the part of fortune,
the Lord thereof and its Dispositor, so that they be either in body or aspect
helped by the fortunes, and free from the configurations of the Malevolents.
Let not the Lord of your Ascendent by any means be retrograde,

Rules general for the electing the beginning of any work.
In the beginning of any work also see that the Dragons tail be not with either
of the Luminaries when they are in conjunction or opposition, or in the
Ascendent, or house signifying the business in hand; but place in those places
some fortunate Planet, or in the house of the business in Election, or in the
Angles of the Figure at the time of Election. But have a special care in all
Elections you put not the Moon in the Ascendent; Sun; for he therein dissolves
and undoes what is accomplished and done. And let not an Infortune be placed in
the Ascendent, nor in any of the Angles, especially if he have dominion in the
sixth, eighth or twelfth; also look that in a diurnal Election you have a
diurnal sign ascending; in a nocturnal, a nocturnal sign: and if you can, that
the Luminaries be in the same signs (I mean of the same nature) especially that
of the time.

Avoid Elections at such time as the Moon separates from the Conjunction or
Opposition of the Sun, Conjunction or Opposition be unfortunate, the business
then began shall come to no good end or conclusion; but if the place of the
Conjunction or Opposition be fortunate, it shows that the beginning of the
business then in agitation shall be good, but it shall ill succeed in the end.

But if the Moon separate from Conjunction or Opposition, and apply to a
fortune, and the place of the Conjunction or Opposition be unfortunate, it
signifies that the beginning of the business shall be bad, and the end thereof
good; and when the place of the Conjunction or Opposition is fortunate, and the
Moon applies immediately to a fortune, it denotes that both the beginning and
the end of the work then began shall come to good or be fortunate. And so on
the contrary, if she apply to an infortune when the places of the Conjunction
or Opposition are unfortunate: when the place of the Conjunction or Opposition,
or their Lord or Disposer of them, be in a succedent house, it signifies that
the profit and good to be expected by the business shall be in the end
accomplished, though with some trouble and pains; but if they be in a Cadent
house, viz. Cadent from the ascendent of the beginning of the thing or
business, or from the ascendent of the Election, or Radix, it shall be broken
off, and come to naught.

Albumazer a most learned Arabian in this Art,

When the place of the Conjunction or Opposition, and their Dispositors be well
dignified and placed, the business then began or done shall be firm and of
continuance and fortunate. Also accomplishment and good success of the business
is signified when the Dispositor or Lord of the house of the Conjunction or
Opposition before the beginning of the work or business, is oriental in the
hour of the beginning of the thing, and be in his own house beholding those
places with a Sextile or Trine; but if he do not behold the aforesaid places of
the Conjunction or Opposition, he profits not.

Other Rules for electing the beginning of any work.
You may also make your Elections for the beginning of any work from the Lord of
the Triplicity of the Moon at the time of the Conjunction or Opposition; for
they have power in the beginning of businesses; for when they are received and
fortunate at the time of the beginning of any work, it signifies good; but
that which does the more confirm it, is, that the ascendent of the Election be
a sign in which he or they be well dignified, or have dominion in the
revolution of the year, and that the fortunes be in Angles, and chiefly in the
ascendent and mid-heaven, also in succedent, and in the place of the thing, or
business intended, or in agitation.

Per quick dispatch or long continuance of your business.
In the beginning of any work (also) when the Luminaries behold each other with
a good aspect, it signifies success in any business then began; the business
[also know] in hand is foreshewed by the Moon, her being in the daytime under
the earth, and in the night above: and in an Election wherein a speedy dispatch
of any business is required, fortify not the Moon, but put Jupiter or Venus in
the ascendent or in the mid heaven; but have regard unto the Moon in things of
long continuance, as Marriage, Building and the like; and when she is
impedited, put her in an Angle or succedent, but let her not behold the
ascendent nor its Lord, nor the Lord of the house of the thing, or his
Dispositor, nor the Planet which has signification of the thing either
generally or particularly; but if you cannot observe exactly all these, look
that you observe as many of them as you can.

A short rule in electing the beginning of any work.
Some Authors hold it more necessary to fortify the Lord of the Ascendent then
the Moon, others to fortify the Lord of the house signifying the business, and
others the general significators, etc. For my part, I hold it most necessary to
fortify the significators of the business, the house and also if possible the
Moon, rather then the Ascendent or its Lord, except they be proper
significators.

Caveats general in Elections.
When the Moon is slow in motion, viz. not exceeding 12. degrees in 24. hours
she signifies slowness and tediousness in the business in hand; but if your
business require haste, and the Moon apply to an infortune, make your infortune
Lord of your Ascendent, and if then he be free from misfortune it will be the
better, but if infornate and afflicted and receive the Moon out of the
ascendent it is much better. But still look that your chief significators be
free from misfortune and the Quartile and Opposition of the malevolents, as
also of the Sun, and of combustion, and that they be not under the Sun beams; a
Planet is under the Sun beams when he is not fully elongated from the body of
the Sun 17. degrees; he is in combustion when he is within 8. degrees 30. min.
of his body, etc. as you have already heard in the 43. chapter of the second
Book of this Volumn.

Have regard also unto your ascendent, that there be no infortune therein, and
that it be not unfortunate in the Revolution of the years of the World for that
year, which you have bin taught is the Radix of your Work: have also a special
care that you bring not your Radix backward, viz. from the ascendent to the
second, but rather forward, viz. to the twelfth: and see that the Lord of your
ascendent be not Occidental, especially if the Moon be joined with him.

Of the significations of Saturn with the Sun or Moon in the ascendent in
Elections.
Know also, that the Sun in the ascendent is not good (as has been said) except
he be in Leo or Aries; the Sun in the ascendent with Saturn hinders the
business in Election, and causes an end with much labor and difficulty:
Saturn with the Moon in the ascendent signifies much sadness, long and tedious
diseases, mischief and death, evil from Kings and great men, loss of substance
and kindred, friends and companions.

Jupiter with the Sun in the ascendent, signifies sadness, grief and little
good, and change out of one place into another; with the Moon he signifies
many waters, Of Jupiter,
and young children, concubines, marriage and honors.

Mars with the Sun in the ascendent signifies also much grief and damage by
enemies, small friendship from friends, destruction and sudden death by iron or
fire; Of M^^^.
with the Moon, he denotes power and strength for mischief and deceit.

Venus with the Sun in the ascendent signifies much pain and travel, Of Venus.
discords and accusations by friends and alliance; also the appurtinances of
women; with the Moon she denotes health and safety of the body, gain also and
profit by women, etc.

Mercury in the Ascendent with the Sun also signifies grief and sadness; Of
Mercury.
with the Moon he signifies many employments and occasions, and that often
with friends and alliance.

The Moon in the ascendent with the Sun signifies destruction, Of the Moon.
mischief, grief and trouble, instability also, and griefs in the eyes, etc.
but the knowledge of these is more for curiosity then practice or use in my
opinion.

Also have a care in businesses of continuance, of movable signs; in such as
require haste, of fixed; and in such as are indifferent, prefer common signs,
as has been said, still remembering that according to the business in hand and
agitation a sign must accordingly ( viz. of its nature) be chosen; and thus
much shall suffice for the first chapter being introductory; therefore let us
now proceed.

CHAP. II. Of the signs, and their significations in Elections, and of the
hindrances of the Moon, being a farther instruction to the judging of
Elections.
LIke as I have promised, I shall for the better instruction of the Students
herein, be in this Chapter somewhat more large in delivering the significations
of the signs* and how they are to be chosen in electing any manner of work.

Of the signification of the moveable signs in elections.
Know then, that movable signs, as are Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn,
signify and denote mutation and alteration of things, and that they shall be
of short continuance; wherefore in Planting, Sowing, Graffing, and in buying
and selling, they are to be chosen; and if any one fall sick in these signs,
viz. when they are in the ascendent, or bearing rule otherways, the sick party
shall either soon die or soon recover; and whosoever flies or takes a journey at
such a time, shall be soon taken or return; and the promise made or any other
thing then began, shall soon come to an end, and be speedily performed; news or
reports are at this time uncertain, and most commonly false.

Of the signification of the fixed signs in Elections.
Then look that you begin not any work you would have continue at such a time,
but in such affairs elect the fixed signs which are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and
Aquaries; for in all things these make a continuance and prolong time;
wherefore in building it is good to elect these signs, also marriages, or any
such thing as you would have continue; if voyages or journies be taken in them,
they cannot be good, except there be many testimonies of the Fortunes; and if
any one be at such time taken prisoner, his enlargement shall be protracted;
and this I can testify upon my own knowledge; and who so shall incur the anger
and displeasure of any one, shall never be more in that parties favor.

Of the signification of the common signs in Elections.
The common signs such as are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittary, and Pisces, are to be
preferred in such businesses as you would have of no long continuance, nor yet
soon at an end; for they are neither movable nor fixed, but common between
both; wherefore that house founded, or what ever it be that is then began,
shall not long continue; wherefore in such it is good to purify gold and
silver, or to put children to School or any other learning, and it advantageth
in all such businesses as do admit of a medium or indifferency, etc.

But note the Moon does never good in the ascendent unless when well fortified,
and in good aspec^ or upheld by the fortunes.
But to elect any business beforementioned, or any other in the like nature, put
the Moon in the ascendent in a convenient sign, viz. both agreeing to your
business in nature and continuance, and make her apply to a fortune with
reception in a sign also of the same nature if possible; if it be in the day,
see that your signs be diurnal or the day-houses of the Planets; and so on the
contrary, if it be in the night time; for so much the better will your business
succeed.

To insist longer hereon were but vain, wherefore let us proceed, etc.

In this manner of work, viz. Electing a good and fitting time for the acting
or doing of any business you must have a special regard to the Moon, Moon may
be impedited; wherefore since it is a thing so necessary, I shall here plainly
insert them.

The ten imp^ditions of the Moon.
First then, the Moon may be impedited by being in combustion of the Sun, and
even when she is twelve degrees distant from his body, either before or after;
or more plainly applying to or separating from him; but you must note she is
not so much afflicted when she is separated, as when she is applying.

In the next place the Moon may be impedited when she is in the degree of her
fall, viz. in the third degree of Scorpio.

Note still that your infortunes are the impediting ^an^rs as in relation to
your business, not Saturn and Mars, as you have heard in the first chapter.
Thirdly, she may and is impedited when she is in Opposition of the Sun.

Fourthly, when joined with infortunes or in Quartile, or Opposition of them.

Fifthly, the Moon is impedited when she is within twelve degrees of the head
or tail of the Dragon, which is the term or place of an Eclipse.

Sixthly, when she is in the latter degrees of a sign wherein there is an
infortune.

Seventhly, when she is cadent from angles or in via combusta the burnt way,
which is in the last 15. degrees of Libra, and the first 15. degrees of
Scorpio; and this is the worst Impedition the Moon can have, especially in
Marriages, and in all matters belonging to women, also in selling, buying, and
in traveling or going a journey.

Eighthly, the Moon is impedited when she is in detriment, viz. in Capricorn or
in Quartile, with her own house, or not beholding her house with Sextile or
Trine.

Ninethly, when he is slow in motion, viz. when she moves in four and twenty
hours less then is her mean motion (understand the same in all the Planets) The
mean motion of the Moon (according to the most learned in this art) is 13. degrees.
10. min. 36. Sec.

Tenthly, and lastly, the Moon is impedited when she is void of course, which
is when she is in any sign, and beholds not any Planet till she enter another
sign, etc.

Understand not the fortunes to be only Jupiter and Venus, and infortunes
Saturn and Mars, as in the sust chapter.
Let therefore (in all manner of Elections for good) the Moon be strong and well
dignified, and in good aspect of the fortunes, and free from the Configurations
of the Malevolents, and that she be not in the Ascendent; yet if she be beheld
by the Fortunes, and be in the Ascendent, it is good to buy and sell; and make
the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendent (in your affairs of electing) behold the
Ascendent; for when a Planet beholds not his own house, it is like a man that
is not able to benefit his house nor remove the evil Impending; but when a
Planet beholds his own house, it is like a man that is strong in his
habitation, that is able to protect and defend those that are under his power
and tuition, and to repel and keep off those enemies that are without; and
note further, that when the Lord of the Ascendent is unfortunate, This is in
case of necessity, and when you cannot defer time for a better election.
you must place him so as that he behold the Ascendent with a Trine or Sextile;
and if the Moon he impedited, let her by no means be in an Angle, but place the
Fortunes therein, or the Moon, when she is beheld of the Fortunes out of an
Angle: Let not Part of Fortune be cadent in the beginning of any work or
question from the Aspect of the Moon, or her Conjunction; it mattereth not for
the Dispositor of the Part of Fortune, neither mattereth it whether Part of
Fortune be cadent from the ascendent; but put the Lord of the ascendent with
Part of Fortune, because it is most profitable for gain; but let not the Moon
be placed in the second, sixth, eighth or twelfth from Part of Fortune because
it causes ill success.

Rules more for the beginning of works.
And in all beginnings of works whatsoever, let the ascendent and the Moon be in
signs of right ascensions as are Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and
Sagittary, because it denotes good success and speedy dispatch in the
business; but the signs of oblique ascension, as are Capricorn, Aquaries,
Pisces, Aries, Taurus and Gemini, cause a hindrance therein, and much
tediousness; wherefore let not the ascendent or the Moon be in signs of oblique
ascentions: And if the Moon be impedited, and your business is in such haste as
that you must elect your business at such a time, let not her have any relation
to the ascendent either by body or aspect, but let her be cadent from the
ascendent, and place a fortune in the ascendent, or in good aspect therewith,
and fortify the cusp of the ascendent, and its Lord and the Lord of the hour.

The method of the subse quent discourse.
Thus have you as brief as can be the general way of judging of Elections: let
us therefore now descend to particulars; wherefore the Method we shall take or
follow herein, shall be to proceed according to the several demands belonging
to every house of Heaven, since there is no one thing or business incident in
the affairs and life of man but it is signified by one or other of them:
wherefore we will begin with the businesses appertaining to the first house;
and then in order we shall proceed to the second and third, and so to the rest,
etc. But first let me give you these two following Tables; the one of Elections
according to the aspects of the Moon to the other six Planets; and the other of
the Mansions of the Moon and elections thereby; since they have been thought
worthy of note by the most learned of the Ancients in this most noble and
heavenly Science.

CHAP. III. Showing Elections by the Aspects of the Moon to the other six
Planets, and by her Mansions.
LIkely some people have not the capacity to understand or judge of the Rules
of Art, so as to elect a fitting time for their work or business in hand, or
cannot perhaps admit of so much time as to make an Election; wherefore for
brevitie sake, since I have met with these following Tables in the books of the
learned, not to leave these my labors lame, I thought good to insert them,
that I might not leave my Reader to seek in any thing of this nature that has
come to my hand; yet know that there is not much credit to be given unto them,
since they are general Rules, and therefore cannot hold at all times, nor in
every bodies affairs; for as has been abovesaid, Jupiter and Venus may
accidentally be malevolents and infortunes to some men; and Saturn and Mars may
prove Fortunes and Assistors; wherefore then in those men's affairs that have
Saturn or Mars their chief significator, and strong in their Nativities, the
Quartile or Opposition of the Moon. I mean such days as she is thus aspected,
may prove rather advantageous then prejudicial; and to whom Jupiter or Venus
are Rulers of the sixth, eighth, or twelfth in their Nativities, a Sextile or a
Trine or the Moon to them may not a whit advantage; however I thought good to
give you them as they are here beneath represented to you by my Author.

A TABLE of Elections according to the Aspects of the Moon to the other six
Planets.
An unfortunate say, take no journey, speak not to Princes nor old men, avoid
the company of husbandmen. Converse with old men and husband men, build, and
plant trees, graft, but seek not the love of Women. Confer not with old men,
nor sue to Princes, take no Physic, or journey, defer thy desire. Converse
with old men and husbandmen, repair what is ruinous and manure ground. Hire no
servants* seek not after thy gain, take nothing in hand being not began before.
A fortunate day, go to noble men, Judges, and Prelates, and sue for thy right,
and take council. Converse with Lawyers, and Ecclesiastical persons, read the
Laws. Apply thy study to Philosophy, and take Counsel. Begin any good work,
make your journey to Kings and great men, Prelates and Judges. Go thy journey,
and go to Prelates and Judges. An unfortunate day, take no journey, avoid the
company of Soldiers, etc. Buy weapons of War, or horses, hire Champions, and
kindle the fire for Alchymle. A day full of fear, avoid contentions, make no
league or new friendship. Dispose of all things for War, buy cattle, or beasts.
Take no journey, fly company, friendships, and love of women. Begin nothing
but that thou would have hidden and secret. Take in hand the affairs of
Kings and Princes, and sue for preferments under them. A day to be eschewed in
all things, deal not with company of great men. Offer presents to Princes, and
your suit will be heard of them. Sue for judgment from great men, but avoid
rich men. A day for pleasures and delights, put on new garments, seek the love
of women. A day fit for amorous sports, contract Marriage, seek for all kind
of ornaments; it is a prosperous day. Hire servants or workmen, make sports,
sing or play, and marry. Seek the love of women, and put on new clothes if the
Moon be not in Leo. It is good to hire men or maid servants, to take recreation
and contract marriage. Begin writings and accounts, chaffer, send messengers or
carriers. Apply to thy study, make accounts, chaffer, take charges, send youths
to school, and accompany with Sages. It is good to send Ambassadors, Orators,
and Carriers, take your journey, buy and sell. Compose verses which require a
good invention, use exercise, and send children to School. Repair to Scribes
and Chancellors, send messengers, take thy journey, use Merchandise, follow thy
study.

The Use of the TABLE.
You see here in the first column; and in the five other columns several
matters; over the first also you see, over the next, over the third: and upon
the fourth, and over the head of the last, which intimates no more then this,
viz. That they are the Moons aspects to the aforenamed Planets; As in the first
column you have these words, An unfortunate day, take no Journey etc. in the
same line and on the left hand you have placed, and over the head of these
words, showing that the in with, is an unfortunate day to begin any business,
or to go a journey, etc. In the next column, and over against you see these
words, Converse with old men and husbandmen, etc. and over the head thereof,
intimating that the in with is good for such business; and so understand of the
rest of the columns and aspects over against; and know also that those aspects
on the head serve for all the other Planets; and what you find written over
against any Planet, appertains to the signification of that Planet; as for
example, in the third column and over against, you see this written, Apply thy
study to Philosophy, and over the head thereor ^; so that when the is in a of,
it is good to apply ones study that way; and so you may (following this rule)
understand all the rest.

A Table of the Mansions of the Moon.
Mansions Sig D. M. Qualities. Elections. 1 20 6 Temperate. Take thy Journey
and Physic Laxative. 2 2 57 Dry. Take thy Journey by water, buy Cattle, plant.
3 15 49 Moist. Chaffer, or buy and sell, but go not by Sea. 4 28 40 Moist and
cold, More cold. Plant and sow, marry not, nor journey by water. 5 11 32 Dry.
Use Merchandise, Voyage; join Wedlock, and take Physic. 6 24 23 Temper. War,
sow not, nor take in hand any good. 7 7 5 Moist. Plough, Sow, Travel not
either by Sea or Land. 8 20 6 Cloudy and tem^^ ^^u^^s. Journey, and take
Physic. 9 5 57 Dry. Navigate. 10 15 49 Moist. Plant, Build, Marry, but make no
voyage. 11 28 40 Temperate and cold. Sow, Plant, Deliver prisoners, but take
no purgation. 12 11 31 Moist. Plant, Marry, but Navigate not. 13 24 23 Temper.
Journey, Navigate, Sow, Plough, Marry, and send messengers. 14 7 15 Temper.
Sow, Plant, take Physic, neither travel nor marry. 15 20 6 Moist. Delve and
Dig, but neither marry nor travel. 16 2 57 Cold and moist. Unfortunate for any
thing. 17 15 49 Moist. Buy cattle, but Navigate not. 18 28 40 Dry. Build, Sow,
Plant, Navigate, but Wed not. 19 11 32 Moist. War, Plant, Sow, and Voyage. 20
24 23 Temper. Buy cattle, use hunting, but Wed not. 21 7 25 Temper. Build,
Repair to a Magistrate for favor, but marry not. 22 20 6 Moist. Take Physic,
Navigate and put on new apparel. 23 2 56 Temper. Take Physic, Voyage, but
neither Marry nor lend. 24 25 49 Temper. Lead an Army, Marry, Sow, take
Physic. 25 28 40 Dry. Build, Marry, seek friendship, take thy journey. 26 11
32 Dry. It is in all things unfortunate, save in taking of Physic. 27 24 23
Moist. Plant, Sow, Chaffer, Marry, but Navigate not. 28 24 15 Temper. Use
Merchandise, Marry, take Physic, but lend not, neither enterprise any voyage.

The Use of the Table.
In the first Column, you have the number of the Mansions of the Moon, and on
the head thereof this word Mansions: In the second Column you have the Signs
Characters, and over the head thereof Sig. intimating signs: you see first,
and,,, over against, on the left hand Column you see the Figure 1. over against
the first, the figure 2. and the figure 3. against the second, 4. against the
third, all which speaks no more then thus, that the first Mansion of the Moon
is in Aries; the second, third, and fourth in Taurus, etc. In the third Column
over against the figure 1. and, you find 20.6. and over the head D. M.
signifying degrees and minutes, which shows that the first Mansion of the Moon
begins at the 20th. degree and 6th. minute of Aries, and ends at the second
degree, and 57th. minute of Taurus, at which begins the second Mansion, and
so understand of all the rest; As for the Qualities of every Mansion in the
next Column in the same line, with each Mansion, you have its quality or
nature, over the head of which Column you have this word Qualities: As for
example, over against, you see Temperate, intimating the first Mansion to be so
qualified; and over against the figure 2. being the second Mansion, you have
dry, and so observe of all the rest; this being understood, you may also (over
against each Mansion in the fifth and last Column) find the several elections
which are then to be enterprised; as over against the first Mansion, you have
these words in the same Line, Take thy journey and Physic laxative: and over
against the second Mansion, Take thy journey by water, buy Cattle, plant, etc.
And thus by the same way you find the several Elections for every particular
Mansion, as you see over the head of them written Elections. And thus much
shall suffice for the Explanation of this Table, and the scope of this Chapter:
let us therefore now proceed; yet if thou do but well understand and
apprehend what has been already said, thou have sufficient to lead thee
through the whole Art of Elections without any more words.

SECTION. II. Containing Rules for Electing such matters as appertain to the
signification of the first House of Heaven.
CHAP. I. Containing necessary Rules for putting Children to Nurse, to School,
or to a Trade, and of Weaning of Children.
IT has been the curiosity of the Ancients to deliver instructions for
electing a time for putting out children to Nurse; wherefore least I should
detract from the Art, especially writing for the edification of all such
ingenious spirits as shall apply their Study to Astrology, I thought good to
be so careful, as not to let slip the least matter (so near as I can) that
has been delivered unto us by those learned Rabbis, I mean, as are found in
such Authors as are with us extant.

An election for sending children to nurse.
Wherefore then in setting children to Nurse, let the Moon when the Nurse first
begins to give the child suck, be in Conjunction of Venus, but if that be not,
let her be in a Sextile or Trine of her, with reception out of Taurus or Libra,
and if Venus be descending in her excentrix or epecicle, it is the better; also
fortify the Moon and Venus in the radix and the ascendent and other
significators; but if you cannot fortify all these, strengthen as many as you
can, but be sure you put them in Conjunction, or at least in Sextile or Trine,
as is said before.

To School.
And to send Youths to School, let the Moon be in Conjunction of Mercury, or in
Sextile or Trine, with reception out of Virgo or Gemini, fortify also the
ascendent and its Lord, and the ninth house and its Lord, and the ascendent and
ninth in the radix and their Lords, or as many as you can; but be sure you
fortify Mercury, the Moon and the Lord of the ninth in the radix, and your
time wherein you make your Election.

To a Trade.
And if you send any child or youth to Apprentice, fortify the Moon, and the
Lord of the tenth, and sign of the tenth, also the sign of the tenth and Lord
of the tenth in the radix of the Youths Nativity; and see what Planet the Trade
he is to be bound to does properly belong, and fortify him both in your Radix
and time; as if the trade, profession or occupation be a Currier, Potter,
Plummer, Brick-maker, Maltster, Chandler, Gardner, or a Worker in Mines, etc.
fortify Saturn.

If thou make the child a Clothier, or Wollen-draper, or a Lawyer, Divine,
or of any Ecclesiastical calling, fortify Jupiter.

If a Physician, Soldier, Apothecary, Alchimist, Surgeon, Watch-maker,
Cutler, Butcher, Smith, Baker, Barber, Dyer, Cook, Tanner or Carpenter,
fortify Mars.

If a Goldsmith, Minter of money, Coppersmith, Brasier or Pewterer, fortify
the Sun.

If a Silk-man, Musician, Mercer, Linnin-draper, Limner, Painter, Lapidar,
Jeweller, Player, Embroiderer, Perfumer, Graver, Seamster, Glover or
Vpholsterer, etc. fortify Venus.

If an Astrologer, Mathematician, Philosopher, Merchant, Scrivener, Sculptor,
Poet, Schoolmaster, Printer, Stationer, Attorney, Clerk, Solicitor or Tailor,
etc. fortify Mercury.

If a Saylor, Fisherman, Fishmonger, Vintner, Brewer, Huntsman, Miller,
Maltster, etc. fortify the Moon, as you have been taught in the second Book.

Of weaning or taking children from Nurse.
Bonatus, Haly, and others have been so curious in their Elections of all
works, that they have given directions for weaning of children, which though of
no great concernment, I thought fit notwithstanding to deliver here their
opinions; wherefore then in weaning of children, let the Moon be remote from
the Sun, and in none of the houses of Venus, thus Bonatus: and others say, if
the Moon be in her 12th. Mansion, or in Libra, when you wean the child, it
will never more care for the breast: Again, some of the Ancients hold, that if
the Moon be in any of the earthy signs, as are Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn, the
child will affect the eating of herbs or roots; if in Leo, to eat flesh; if in
Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, fish; and if in any of the other signs, it will eat
whatever you give it. These are the opinions of some learned; but there is no
doubt if the child be separated from the breast of the Nurse when the Moon is
in Scorpio or Aries, remote from the Sun, and in Square or Opposition of Venus,
it will do the feat; a little experience and trial of these Rules will put the
matter out of doubt; these are not things of much value or regard; but since it
has been the curiosity of the Ancients to write thereof, I have mentioned them
(as I have said) wherefore if thy curiosity be desirous to make trial of these
Rules, thou may follow which thou think most agreeable to reason and
truth, etc.

CHAP. II. Containing the Rules of Elections in the cutting of Hair.
ALways place the Moon in common signs, well dignifyed, but especially in
earthy signs; this is the opinion of some: and others again do contradict this,
and say Virgo is not to be chosen; I conceive the reason was, because it is a
barren sign: and therefore in cutting of hair, That hair may not soon grow.
that you would not have to grow suddenly, place the Moon in either Virgo,
Gemini or Leo, decreasing in light and motion, and afflicted by Saturn. But if
you desire your hair to grow speedily, let the ascendent be one of the fruitful
signs, as also Moon, That hair ma grow speedily.
viz. in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces; but let the Moon be increasing in light
and motion, and let her be in Sextile or Trine of the Lord of the ascendent of
the parties Nativity, but have special regard the Moon be free from the
malevolent impedition of Saturn or Mars, for they will cause much scurff and
dandriff at the roots of the hair. But if you desire it should be thick, let
the Moon be in Opposition of the Sun, That it grow thick.
and the ascendent and the Moon free from the aspects of the malevolents.

CHAP. III. Of cutting the Nails of the hands or feet, as also Corns.
Rules in cutting of the nails of the hands.
MAke then the Moon in cutting of the Nails of the hands be in no cadent house,
but in a succedent, and if not in a succedent, in an Angle increasing in light
and motion; The angles of a figure are, the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth;
The succedents are the second, fifth, eighth and eleventh; the Cadents, are the
third, sixth, ninth, and the twelfth, as you have already in the preceding
Treatise heard; and have a special care also that the Moon be not in Gemini,
especially if she be beheld of Saturn or Mars, by a Square or Opposition; for
if beheld of Saturn, it is to be feared they grow not again; and if they grow,
they grow ilfavoured and thin; and if Mars behold her by any of these
malevolent Aspects and placed as aforesaid, they will grow into the flesh,
which will cause much pain, and perhaps endanger the loss of the joint, if not
the whole hand.

Haly says, in cutting the nails, let not the Moon be in Gemini or Sagittary,
nor beheld of their Lords, viz. Jupiter and Mercury; but put her in Aries,
Taurus, Cancer, Leo, or Libra, free from infortune or any impedition; and let
her not be in Via combusta (which is in the first 15. degrees of Scorpio, and
the last 15. degrees of Libra, as you have already heard) but the first 15
degrees of Libra you may adventure on.

Of the feet.
In cutting the nails of the feet put not the Moon in Gemini, or Pisces, or in
Via combusta, or in any other impediment or affliction.

In cutting of Corns that they may not grow speedily.
And in cutting of corns observe the same rules; and that they might not soon
grow again, let the Moon be in Gemini, Leo, or Virgo, decreasing in light and
motion, but not afflicted by the malevolents, for that may prove obnoxious and
hurtful; and if you can, let the Moon be in a cadent house of Heaven.

SECTION III. Of Rules for Electing matters appertaining to the second House.
CHAP. I. Of receiving and borrowing of Money.
To borrow or receive money.
IN things of this Nature, you must be very careful to fortify the Lord of the
second, the Lord of the sign in which he is, the cusp of the second in your
time of borrowing or receiving, and the cusp of the second in your Radix, the
Lord of the second, and the Lord also of the house in which he is, if you can;
Jupiter also ought to be fortified, for that he is a general significator of
wealth, etc.

Let the Moon be also decreasing in light, and in Leo, Scorpio, Sagittary,
Aquaries or Pisces; and let Jupiter or Venus behold the ascendent, or the Moon,
and if you can both; yet look that the Moon be not impedited of any of the
Infortunes, nor Mercury, especially by Conjunction or Square; neither let the
Fortunes be cadent; for the Moon by Mars afflicted causes much solicitation,
pains and labor, also much difficulty in the procuring, and perhaps anger; If
by Saturn, it causes much protraction and delays, and oftentimes after much
pains and travel, causes the business to come to no good, or frustrateth the
borrowers expectation.

Neither borrow nor lend.
Take this for an approved Rule, that when the Moon is in the first degree of
Gemini, Leo, or Sagittary, or they on the cusp of the ascendent, it is not safe
either to borrow or lend, for that much inconveniency will come thereof.

That none may know of thy borrowing of money*
And if you would borrow money privately that it might not be known or divulged,
let the Moon (when you borrow it or receive it) be under the Sun beams, and
going to Conjunction of the Fortunes when she is separate from the Sun, or some
other good aspect of the Fortunes no ways impedited; this causes the business
to be kept private and close: But if the Moon be joined, or apply by any aspect
to Mars when she separates from the Sun his beams, the business will be
divulged abroad, and known by many, and those too that you desire should be
ignorant thereof; look also that the Moon be free from Via Combusta, or the
conjunction of Dragons Head, and and Dragons Tail.

CHAP. II. Containing other Rules concerning borrowing and lending of money.
UNless you know the true significators, you can herein do nothing.

The Ascendent and its Lord, are the significators of the Borrower or
Petitioner: the seventh and his Lord, are significators of the Lender; Mercury
and the Moon signify the Thing to be lent. When therefore you find the Lord
of the Ascendent and the Lord of the seventh in any good Aspect of each other,
or in reception, or the Lord of the seventh in any good Aspect of each other,
or in reception, or the Lord of the seventh in the ascendent, or Mercury, or
Mercury joined to the Lord of the Ascendent by body or aspect, or in reception
of each other, the business shall be accomplished: The money to be borrowed
shall be had.
But if the Moon be under the Sun beams, the Sun shall signify the thing
demanded in stead of the Moon.

And Haly says, If the Moon be in Via Combusta, or in the ascendent at noon,
or in the first degrees of Gemini, Leo, or Sagittary, or if they be in the
degree or cusp of the ascendent, it signifies no good to the Lender; but to
the Borrower; this is Halies opinion; you have but just now heard it is neither
good for the Borrower or Lender at such a time; you may follow which you
please, and in your curiosity try them both, and follow which you find most
true; a little experience will soon clear the doubt: however it is no ways good
to lend any thing in the hour of Saturn.

That the borrowed money may long last.
But if you desire that the received money remain long with you, not desiring
any ways to employ it; let the ascendent at the time of the receipt thereof be a
fixed sign, and the Lord of the ascendent, the Moon and the Lord of the second
in fixed signs, free from misfortune or impediment, as also the angles of your
figure.

But if (for some occasions you have) you would speedily disburse, turn, and
wind your money (which perhaps may be advantageous) let the ascendent be a
movable sign, or a common: but a movable in such a case is much better; Of
laying out money to advantage.
let also the Lord of the ascendent, the Moon, and the Lord of the second in
your Radix, and at the time (if you can) of the receipt of the money be a
movable sign free from impediment, as also the Angles of your Figures; and
remember that in all Elections you fortify (if possible) your chief
significators; as also in your Radix, as well as at the time of the Election.

Furthermore if you desire to keep what you get or receive, that it may be
employed by you to your best advantage, fortify the ascendent and its Lord at
the time of the receipt of the money; fortify also Jupiter, and let not Mars
behold the Moon, Ascendent, Part of substance, or part of Fortune, or their
houses, or any of their Lords, especially of the Moon or Ascendent; how to take
part of substance, or any other part you shall have hereafter, as I have
leisure.

CHAP. III. Of buying to profit again by the sale thereof.
Do not thou know there are many men make a Trade of buying Commodities, and
selling them again to their best advantage? yet there are many again confess
they have often sold their Wares at disadvantage; the reason was, they bought
them at hap-hazard, without respect to any peculiar or particular time (as our
ignorant Physicians prescribe Vomits, Purges and Phlebotomie, at any time, A
great error in the generality of our Physicians.
procuring thereby much mischief to their Patients (as I have by several known)
so that they had need again (the remedy being or proving (by the ignorance of
the prescriber) worse then the disease) to take Physic to expel that Physic
they have already taken; and this sometimes cannot but endanger the Patients
life; for that nature being far spent before, must needs by this rash act of
the unskilful Physician (who is rather (as Galen and Hippocrates say) to be
termed a Fool, then to be honored with that noble term of Physician) in
prescribing their remedies at such improper times that they work contrary
effects (as Purges vomet, Ignorance the author of mischief.
and Vomets purge) be more weakened and prejudiced; nay and it does often fall
out so, that nature together with the life is wholly extinguished; wherefore
anon in its due place more shall be said hereon, and the true and real times
for administering of physic be cordially delivered unto you; but to the business
in hand) wherefore let them observe what follows.

Of buying to profit again by the sale thereof.
In buying therefore any thing to make advantage or gain of the sail thereof,
fortify the Moon especially, for that she has most power of any of the
Planets in the ordinary course of the life of man; Fortify also Mercury who
has also much influence in such matters; also the Lord of the second, and (if
possible) the Lord of the Ascendent: let the Moon also be joined to Mercury by
body or a benevolent aspect, free from impediment, either accidental or
essential, as also from the affliction of Mars as much as you can.

But if you cannot fortify Mercury, fortify the Moon, the eleventh house and
the Lord thereof; but yet let Mercury be free from the body or Aspect of Mars;
and if you can by any means, let him be in Conjunction or good aspect of Venus,
or the Lord of the eleventh or both. Now be sure you observe these rules well;
for by how much the more you fortify Mercury (next to the Moon being to be
regarded) by so much the more may you be confident and assured of benefit and
profit; for Mercury, the Moon, the second and the eleventh are chief
significators herein, and they still cause gain, if well dignified or disposed;
but then be sure they be free from the body or aspect good or bad of Mars.

CHAP. IV. Of selling to advantage.
Of selling to advantage.
EVen thus must you do if you would Elect a time to sell thy commodity at any
high rate. Let the Moon be in Taurus, Cancer, Virgo or Pisces, free from
misfortune and separating from the Conjunction or aspect of the fortunes and
applying to the aspect, not Conjunction, of the infortunes; for this is good
for the Seller, but the clean contrary for the Buyer.

CHAP. V. Father concerning Buying and Selling in the ordinary course of the
World.
Advantage to the buyer.
THus in the daily and ordinary way of trade must you do, fortify and place it
in one of the houses of Jupiter, and let Jupiter or some other of the fortunes
behold it with a good aspect; for this will be advantageous to the Buyer, but
not to the Seller; Also if the Moon be in signs of short or oblique ascentions,
decreasing in light, it is good for the Buyer.

But if she be in signs of right or long ascentions, increasing in light,
number or motion, and joined with the fortunes, it shall be more advantageous
for the Seller and it shall seldom be, but at such a time the Buyer shall lose
by the bargain.

But note, that in all this, the Moon and Mercury be free from the body or
aspect of Mars, for that he ever hinders buying and selling, and causes discord
and wrangling; also see they be free from the presence of, for he is little
worse then it.

To know the significators of buyer and seller the thing to be bought and the
price.
Some of the Ancients have delivered these Rules for buying and selling; but
others have taught that the Ascendent and its Lord are for the Seller, the
seventh and the Lord thereof for the Buyer, and the Moon for the thing to be
bought and sold; Althabarus [from whom I cannot descent herein] says, that
when the Buyer is the first propounder or mover of the business, or does first
speak to the Seller concerning the thing he would buy, the Ascendent and its
Lord is for the Seller; the seventh and the Lord thereof for the Buyer: And if
the Seller be the first mover of the business to the Buyer, the contrary is to
be understood: The mid-heaven and its Lord is to signify the price of the
thing; the fourth and its Lord the thing to be sold; and also the Planet from
whom the Moon last separated is given to signify the Seller; the Planet to
whom she next applies, the Buyer; and the the thing to be bought and sold.

Some hold that the Moon in the Ascendent, either in buying or selling is good,
yet in a Note.
journey is very bad. But note that in selling it will not be amiss for thee to
place the Moon in her exaltation or triplicity separated from the Fortunes, and
beholding the Infortunes, but not joined to them by body.

CHAP. VI. Of buying clothing, or putting on of Apparel.
HEar now what is observable in putting on or buying of Apparel; fortify the
Ascendent and its Lord, and the Moon and let the Ascendent and the sign wherein
the Lord of the ascendent is, be movable; and if possible, let the Moon be in
Aries, except the seventh degree; or in Cancer, excepting the first six
degrees; or in Libra, or the first eighteen degrees of Virgo, or in the first
nineteen degrees of Sagittary, or the twenty first degrees of Pisces; and by
all means avoid fixed signs, except the first twenty degrees of Taurus; for
that there (it being the house of Venus and exaltation of the Moon) it
signifies great joy and delight; but by all means let her not be in Leo or
Scorpio, Leo especially, etc. And if possible, let the Moon be in Sextile or
Trine of the Sun, for it will be then so much the better; but if in thy
Election thou can not observe all this, place the Moon out of Leo, Scorpio
and Capricorn, and Via Combusta, and look that she be no wise impedited or
beheld of the Malevolents.

Fortify also the cusp of the second house and its Lord, especially in buying
of Habit, and let the Moon be increasing in light; however if thou can not in
every particular remember, or be able to follow every particular of this that
has been said, in putting on of new garments, fortify the Moon, and place the
Sun in the tenth house, or place the Moon in the mid-heaven free from all
misfortune; but of putting on of apparel, more anon in the Elections
appertaining to the fifth house.

CHAP. VII. Of flitting, or removing from one place to another.
REmember this election (I mean its scope and nature) does more properly belong
to the third house, it being the house of journeys or short removes; but the
ancient Arabians most skillful and learned in this Art, have placed this
election in this house, as most agreeing or belonging to it; but the reason
thereof I suppose was, because seldom any remove their habitation but for their
own gain or profit in one kind or other; and for that the second house has
signification thereof (as you may see in the second Treatise) they have placed
this election in this house; wherefore since it is and has been so ordered by
them, I shall (as becomes a good disciple) follow as near as I can (especially
in such things as are indifferent) my Masters directions and documents.

Wherefore then in electing a fit time for such a matter, know that if the
house be your own, the Ascendent at that time must be a fixed sign, and the
Moon in a fixed sign; but if it be a hired house, let the Ascendent be a common
sign, and the Moon in a common sign.

Fortify the Ascendent, the Moon, the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of
the place of the Moon, the second house and its Lord, the fourth and its Lord,
and Part of Fortune and its Lord, the Ascendent and its Lord, and the Moon and
its Dispositor to receive or have good and civil entertainment; but to
increase in substance and to augment what is gotten in a thriving way, fortify
the cusp of the second, its Lord, and Part of Fortune and its Lord; and also it
will be the better if you can then also place Jupiter in the second house, free
from impediment or affliction; but however it advantageth much if Jupiter be so
placed.

And for a good success and end (as in all other undertakings) fortify the
sign and cusp of the fourth and its Lord; and if possible let Taurus or Leo be
on the cusp of the fourth; for that denotes the goodness of the place, and
that the house or place shall be clean and sweet, free from venomous and
obnoxious beasts and vermin: but Scorpio on the cusp of the fourth, causes
multiplicity and increase of such animals, and so much the more if it be any
wise beheld of Saturn; also be careful that the aforenamed places and
significators be free from the Aspects of the Malevolents, and, if possible not
only so, but in configuration of the Fortunes.

However see that you fortify your chiefest significators, and your business
order according to the intentions of the party removing or flitting his
habitation, and thou shall not err.

CHAP. VIII. Containing Rules for Electing any Work in the Art of Distillation,
or Alchymie.
A Man shall, if he have regard to the writings of the Ancients, find, that
there has ever been in former Ages some, and indeed most of the more learned
sort of men, who have applied their study to this heavenly mystery: and truly
it cannot be by me believed, that ever there was an Age since the World had its
first original that was so stupid and void of understanding, as not to have
some sons of the Hermetick Art produced therein; and as by the more learned and
refined spirits of all Ages it has been ever in great esteem and practice; so
is it still in this we live, and by very many both studied and cherished, it
being notwithstanding by the muckworms and sottish Asinego's of the World
slighted and contemned, and no more valued then a Diamond is with Hogs, both
slighting that unspeakable and never to be enough valued and esteemed
knowledge, and the Students or Searchers thereof, insomuch that they account
nothing more ridiculous, then that which they vulgarly call THE PHILOSOPHERS
STONE, thus giving way to folly to condemn and not esteem that great blessing
they are in no wise thought worthy of; nay not so much as worthy the honor to
be accounted in the number of those that believe there is such a thing in
Nature: but it mattereth not what such stupid Dolts conceive out of their
shallow and conceited brains, that can admit of nothing but ignorance;
wherefore let it be still unto them a STONE and rock of offense; both it, and
all those heavenly souls, the Lovers thereof, shall by me be ever in great
esteem, and be more dear unto me then any worldly felicity: but I fear I
transgress, let us therefore to our matter in hand.

Since then, I say, there are many in this our Age who apply themselves to the
study of this most heavenly revelation, and they subject to miss of their
intentions, Why so many miss of their hopes in this study of the Blessed Elixer.
and be (as many have) frustrated of their expectation, let them observe what
follows; and though some have erred through ignorance and want of a through
understanding of what they have sought, and others for want of proportionating
the matter; and again others for want of governing it in working according to
Art; some through one defect, and some through another, yet most must needs
fail of their desires, for want of a through intellect and right use of
Electing a position of the Heavens fit for the same; for as the Elements and
all thereof composed are [without dispute] regulated and disposed by the
influence and virtue of the Celestial Planets and Stars; it must necessarily
follow then, that all Metals and Minerals whatsoever, have their dependency and
efficacy from the superior configurations of those bodies: wherefore it cannot
but be very efficacious in all such works as tend to Alchymie (as well as the
temporal affairs otherways of men) and the great Hermetick Work.

Wherefore when thou beginnest any work of this nature, place the Moon in a
common sign, free from all manner of impediment and misfortune; also the Lord
of the Ascendent; and let the sign ascending be a common sign; fortify also
that Planet which rules the matter you work upon; as, if it be Lead, fortify
Saturn; if Tin, Jupiter; if Iron, Mars; if Gold, the Sun; if Brass or Copper,
Venus; if Quicksilver, Mercury; if Silver, the Moon, etc. still remember to
dispose of them ( viz. your significators) according to this rule, and that in
the beginning of your Work, etc.

SECTION IV. Comprehending Rules, in Electing such matters as appertain to the
signification of the third House.
CHAP. I. Of short Iourneys, and their Elections.
MAny men are not acquainted with this Language; wherefore I shall more plainly
declare, that by short journeys we are to understand such as can be finished
within a day or two, or less; wherefore then in such an Election, fortify the
Ascendent and its Lord, the Moon and its dispositor, Part of Fortune also, and
its dispositor, and the Planet to whom the Moon is joined or in configuration
with; the sign of the third house and its Lord, the Lord of the hour, and the
Lord of the thing, or the Planet signifying the thing or business for which the
Party takes his journey (if it be related unto you) as also its dispositor.

But if all these thou can not possibly observe, neither (your occasions
being such) can you defer them till such a time; then I say fortify the Moon
and the Lord of the hour; and if you cannot fortify the Moon, yet be sure your
Lord of the hour be no ways impedited or weak, and make the Moon fall from the
Ascendent, and if possible from the Lord thereof; But more of this in the ninth
house when we come to treat of Elections concerning long journeys.

CHAP. II. Of making of Friendship between Brethren, or any two at variance.
If thy brother or Kinsman be thy better. Thy equal. Thy Inferior.
EVer have an especial care in this manner of judgment in Electing a fit time
to make friendship between brethren at variance whether the brother or kinsman
be your better, equal or inferior; for if he be your major or better, you must
observe this general Rule to have regard unto Saturn; if he be your equal, to
Mars; if thy inferior, to Mercury: but first fortify the Ascendent and its
Lord, the Moon and its dispositor, the Lord of the third, and the sign and cusp
of the third it self, by fitting it to your business, and let the Lord of the
third be in Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine of the Lord of the Ascendent with
reception out of houses, if possible, or out of exaltation or triplicity and
term; for look how strong and better your reception is, so much the sooner will
the parties at variance agree, and continue the longer in friendship: and if
possible, let the Lord of the Ascendent behold the sign or cusp of the third
with a Sextile or Trine, and the Lord of the third, the Ascendents cusp, etc.
Or let the Lord of the first be in the tenth or eleventh, and the Moon
beholding lovingly both significators or either or them.

But note, if the reconciliation be with women, as before you had respect unto
Saturn, you must regard Venus, Mutatis mutandis; so likewise a servant, by
fitly disposing the Lord of the sixth; and a child, by so ordering the Lord of
the fifth: a wife, by the Lord of the seventh; or an open or known enemy; and
so understand of any person whatsoever, still remembering to know exactly and
truly your significators, and then you cannot fail following your Rules.

CHAP. III. Of applying the mind or study to Divine matters or contemplations.
The signification of the ninth house.
SUch has been the industry of former Writers, that they have plainly
delivered unto us the signification of every house as you have heard in the
first Book, where you know the Ancients have assigned the ninth house to
signify the Religion and Divine inclination of any one whatsoever, and some
have been so curious, that they have assigned it to signify and denote the
highest pitch of such inclinations, and the men studying thereof; as Popes,
Cardinals, Archbishops, Abbots, Deans, Prebends, Religious Hermites, Of the
third.
etc. but the third to have signification of ordinary Priests, or those that
have not attained to that height of dignity, etc. also any man of what calling
soever that is religiously inclined.

Wherefore if thou would know a fit time whereby thy inclination may be
furthered in thy devotion, and thou the better able to continue therein;
fortify the ascendent and its Lord, the Moon and its dispositor, the Lord of
the third, and third it self, and Jupiter who is a general significator of
Religion and good inclinations, also the Sun, and if possible, let the
Luminaries be in the houses of Jupiter, and either Sagittary or Pisces
ascending, etc.

And if thou would be an exquisite and cunning searcher in Divine matters;
fortify Mercury, mutatis mutandis; but if thou can not observe all this,
follow as much thereof as you can possibly, the more the better.

SECTION V. Containing Rules of Elections, appertaining to the fourth House.
CHAP. I. Of building Houses.
Endeavor therefore at the beginning of thy work to fortify the Lord of the
Ascendent and cusp of the Ascendent it self, the Moon and its dispositor, and
the Planet to which she is joined by body or Aspect; also the fourth house and
its Lord, the second and its Lord, and the tenth and its Lord, and so much the
rather if you intend the house to be high; and in such a case be sure your
significators be not under the earth, for that causes slow progress in the
fabric, and that it shall never be brought to that height and shape it was
first intended to be of; yet if the Moon be in the fifth or third, benevolently
aspecting any significator, or a fortune above the earth, it hinders not much:
place also Part of Fortune in an angle, and fortify it and its Dispositor, and
place Dragons Tail in the twelfth; fortify also Mercury and its Lord, and let
not Mars behold these significators which have been named, neither let him have
any power when thou beginnest thy work; but if it fall out so that thou can
not help it, but that he will have some power in thy figure, place Venus
fortunate in the place of Mars, or more plainly, let Venus have great power and
dignity in the degree and sign wherein Mars is located, and let her be in a
Sextile or Trine of him: Let Saturn also be in no configuration of Venus, as
near as you can, and make the Moon increasing in light and motion and joined to
Jupiter; for this causes the fabric to be beautiful and fair, and have a
special care the Moon be not with Saturn or Dragons tail, Saturn in the
Ascendent or fourth, for this will impedite the work and cause delays therein,
and perhaps hinder the finishing thereof; and if it be finished, yet perhaps it
will stand long empty; and if inhabited, yet will the inhabitants find no good
therein, but much vexation, troubles, fears, infirmities and many tribulations,
and the fabric shall soon be subject to decay and fall down; and if the
Affliction be by Mars, and the Ascendent be a sign of short ascentions, it
causes fires therein; wherefore let (in such a positure) the Moon be
increasing in light and motion, The Landlord shall not inhabit the house built.
and the Lord of the house of the Moon in aspect therewith, and the Lord of the
Ascendent beholding the Ascendent, and these free from all impeditions; for if
they behold not their own house, the Landlord of the Fabric shall not live
therein.

Let Dragons tail be by no means in the Ascendent, second or fourth, but
especially in the second; for it causes profuseness, but you may safely place
Dragons head in any of those places, etc.

But if all these thou can not possibly at thy time place, according as thou
have heard; yet fortify the Ascendent and its Lord, the Moon also, the second
and fourth, and their Lords, or at least the second, and let the Moon be in
good configuration, or Conjunction with Jupiter, and if possible let Jupiter be
in the second; fortify also the Planet that has exaltation in that sign
wherein the Moon is, if you can; however fortify and many as may be, if not
all, and especially your chiefest significators.

CHAP. II. Of Building of Castles and Cities.
YOu have heard already the time of electing the building of houses; it rests
now we know at what time it will be most advantageous to build Castles and
Cities; know then that in such a work you must fortify the Ascendent and its
Lord; also the Moon and the Lord of the sign she is in, and Part of Fortune and
its Lord, and place in the Ascendent at time of your first beginning to build
some fixed Stars of the nature of Jupiter, Sol, Venus, Mercury, or Saturn if he
be well placed; for that signifies the durability and continuance of the Castle
or City; or such stars as are of the nature of the Moon or Lord of the
Ascendent. And note here, that although in building of houses we refuse the
assistance of Saturn, Haly says, In aedificatione Civitatum, fac Saturnum
habere firmam portionem in medio Coeli, and in ascendente in principio
fundamenti Civitatis. In building of Cities, let Saturn have firm power or
authority in the mid-heaven, and in the Ascendent at the time of the foundation
of the City, or when the foundation is laid; let the Ascendent also, if you
can, be one of the houses of Jupiter; but if you cannot, however let it be free
from the Configurations of Mars; let Mars also be in no aspect or bodily
presence of, or with the Moon, or the Ascendent or the Lord of the term of the
Ascendent, or Lord of the hour at the laying of the foundation or the first
stone toward it; let also the Lord of the degree of the Ascendent be
fortunate, direct and swift in motion, and the Lord of the Ascendent in his
exaltation or joy no ways afflicted or retrograde; and the Sun in a sign of
right Ascentions, also Part of Fortune and its Lord in fortunate houses and
lovingly beheld by the Moon; for by the strength of Part of Fortune, The
significators of the fortune and good in any City.
and its Dispositor and the aspect of the Moon thereunto, is the fertility, the
goods and riches of the Inhabitants, the profit and what ever else there is of
good in the City known and judged.

Let not Mars by any means behold Part of Fortune, for it causes scarcity and
poverty; and fortify Saturn as much as you can; for when he has power in the
mid-heaven or Ascendent as has been said, and in good aspect of Jupiter, it
denotes the City shall continue for a long time, and that there shall be an
innumerable multitude of Inhabitants therein, who shall live in peace and
concord with each other, and that it shall not be depopulated.

But the fertility of the City is chiefly known from the position of Jupiter,
and the Sun and the Moon, etc. but remember, Mars in all foundations of Cities;
let him not by any means have any configuration with the Lord of the place of
the foundation, or indeed with any significator; for if he have ought to do in
the figure at the time you begin your work, it signifies much mischief and
impediment to the Inhabitants, and that they shall be environed and surrounded
with mischiefs. Place therefore Mars in a cadent house, very weak and
impedited; otherwise he will be cause of much mischief, discord and extortion
amongst the Citizens; but they shall on the contrary assuredly be free from
these evils, if Jupiter be fortunately placed and elevated above Mars; also the
Luminaries and Part of Fortune, but especially the Moon, above all your
significators, ought to be well placed;

Further know that in laying the foundation of Cities, it will be most
advantageous if the Moon be free from misfortunes, and neither in Conjunction,
Opposition, or combustion of the Sun, or in via Combusta, void of course, or in
meridional Latitude descending; in the latter degrees of a sign, or in the
beginning of a sign, in her fall, or the Lord of the house in which she is not
beholding it, or in the sixth or twelfth houses, or with Dragons head or
Dragons tail: but let her be increasing in light and motion, and have
Septentrional latitude ascending, in her exaltation, or exaltation of Jupiter,
and Jupiter or Venus direct and in an angle with her, but chiefly in the
ascendent, or mid-heaven.

It advantageth greatly also, if the Ascendent and the Moon be in earthy signs,
and chiefly Taurus and Virgo; also in Capricorn when she is placed with Jupiter
in the Ascendent, and the light of the time in the mid-heaven; for this
signifies the City shall continue a long time, and the Inhabitants thereof
shall profit therein and have a good end; also if the Ascendent be a common
sign, it signifies there shall be many Inhabitants and multiplicity of
strangers and several sorts of people, especially if many Planets behold the
Ascendent and the Moon.

Know also that in building or laying the foundation of Cities, if Saturn be
joined with Dragons tail, there shall be much mischief and trouble to old men
and servants in that City. If Jupiter be joined with Dragons tail, much
mischief will be incident to the Nobles of the City or the Aldermen, etc. If
Mars, there will be evil by fire, discord and debate, and perhaps the Magazine
will be blown up often, or be in danger thereof, or the Militia will be
damnified. If the Sun, evil is threatened to the chief Ruler of the City or
Mayor. If Venus, it will fall on the Women of the City. If Mercury be joined
with Dragons tail, there shall be much deceit and many lies, and cozening
deceitful tricks used. If the Moon, the common sort of people shall be
afflicted. So on the contrary judge the good success, of those signified by
those Planets free from impediment, and in a fortified condition, at the time
you laid the first stone of your foundation; if the Planets are all strong,
judge fortune and good success in general, etc.

To know the signification of any thing or casualty, incident to, or in any
City and how to judge thereof.
Moreover know, that the Ascendent of a City has signification of the life of
the Inhabitants: the second house of its riches, strength and power: the third,
of the Laws thereof; the fourth, of the end of the Inhabitants causes, as also
the end of the City, and the secret places therein, as hidden treasures and the
like; the fifth, of the children of the Inhabitants: the sixth, of the servants
and infirmities and maladies incident to the inhabitants; the seventh, of the
Marriages of the Citizens; the eighth, of their great houses; the ninth, of
their manners, customs and Voyages: the tenth, their habitations, Masterie and
occupations, also their honor, power and dignity; the eleventh, their friends
and assistants; the twelfth, their great Cattle, Plots, and secret Enemies,
also imprisonments and poverty.

So that from hence you may judge methodically, and particularly of every
particular quality of any City; for in what houses you find the Malevolents,
and such houses as you see are afflicted and impedited, you may judge the ill
success and misfortune (according to the strength of your afflicting Planets)
to those things signified by the house afflicted and impedited, etc. So
likewise of the good state and condition of those things signified by those
houses you find assisted by the Benevolents and well fortified.

When Saturn is in any of the angels alone, and not assisted by the Fortunes,
it signifies delays and slowness in those things signified by the angle he is
in, and in the actions and undertakings of the Citizens in general; if Mars be
there he denotes many mischiefs, damages, robberies, and corrupt or over hot
air.

But if at the beginning of the building, or laying of a Cities foundation, and
behold each other with a good aspect, and be in angles and other good places of
Heaven, strong and well dignified, it denotes the City shall be of long
continuance, and increase in glory and plenty a long time.

Observe warily what I have already said, and it will be needless for me longer
to insist on this point. Let us therefore proceed.

CHAP. III. Of Building of Churches.
WE shall find this Election (since in this our age we build more Serralias
then Churches) to be in a manner needless, yet since by the most Learned and
well-minded Ancients it has been mentioned, I shall for the benefit of
Posterity, which I hope will exceed us in Religion and goodness, deliver the
Rules of Astrology in such an operation, etc.

At the time then the first stone of the Foundation is laid let the Ascendent
be fortunate, as also its Lord, the Moon and its Lord, the Part of Fortune and
its Lord, the ninth house and its Lord, the Planets in any of these Places,
also the Planet in configuration with the Moon, and let Jupiter be in the
Ascendent, and if possible in Sagittary or Pisces, or if you cannot do so, let
him be in Sextile or Trine of the Ascendent, especially in Trine, and out of
his own houses, and good places of Heaven: but let the Lord of the Exaltation
of the Ascendent be well placed, the tenth and its Lord, the ninth and its
Lord, the Moon and its Dispositor; and Jupiter, if you cannot observe all the
rest, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of Building or Erecting of Mills.
IN building of Mills be sure you place the Moon in Aries in the Ascendent or
Libra, or the latter part of Virgo, and by no means let her be in Cancer or
Capricorn, but in the aforesaid signs, as also the Lord of the Ascendent, or in
Sextile and Trine thereunto; free from the Malevolent Aspects of the
Infortunes: Observe also this time in beginning any work belonging to Mills,
etc.

CHAP. V. Of pulling down or destroying of Houses, or any Fabric whatsoever.
LIke as the wisest of Mortals very well once said, There is a time to build,
and a time to pull down what has been built (there being a time for all things
under the Sun) having given you the time of building, it rests you know also
the time of pulling down what has been built; for there is nothing sublunary
permanent, or that is not subject both to change and destruction, etc.

Haly says, when you would pull down or spoil any building, place the
significators contrary to what you have in building.

Put the Moon in a fiery sign, and its Lord; let the Ascendent also be a fiery
sign, and the Lord thereof in a fiery sign or an aerie: but Athabarus a learned
Author says, let the Ascendent be a sign of right Ascentions, and the Lord
thereof Occidental, slow in motion, going also to a sign in which he is
afflicted in Fall or Detriment, let him also be Retrograde, and falling from an
angle; and let also the Moon be decreasing in light and motion, cadent from
angles, and joined to Planets very weak and unfortunate, and if possible, let
her be in Scorpio, or Capricorn, and under the earth, or in configuration with
a Planet under the Earth, Meridional descending, and joined to retrograde
Planets, and let her be in the last Square with the Sun: Let the Lord of the
fourth, and sign thereof be weak and afflicted; as also all the other
significators, and the Planets to whom they are joined or in Aspect with; but
chiefly in this work debilitate Mars, if you cannot all what you have heard;
for as he is against building, so is he also against pulling down what is built.

But if it be so that you care not much whether the destroyed place or house be
rebuilt or no, let the Moon be separated from the Malevolents, and joined to
the Fortunes or in reception of them, and this will cause the Fabric so
destroyed to be the easier rebuilt, if ever taken in hand.

CHAP. VI. Containing rules of Elections in buying of Land, Houses or Heritages.
The significators of the Buyer.
LOok in every Election or Work, you have a special care you exactly know which
are your true significators; wherefore in this matter the Ascendent, its Lord,
and Planet from whom the Moon last separated, are the true significators of the
Buyer.

Of the Seller.
The Lord of the seventh house, and the seventh house it self, and the Planet
the Moon applies to, of the Seller; Also the Seeds and Plants sown or growing
on the ground.

The fourth house, its Lord, and Planets therein placed, and the Moon are
significators of the house land or heritage to be bought and sold.

The price of the land or house.
The tenth, the Lord thereof, and Planets therein located, signify the price,
viz. whether it will be cheap or dear; it signifies also the wood or timber on
the ground.

Having thus rightly understood the ground of your Work, you will be the better
able to go through with the same; wherefore then in buying or purchasing
houses, land and heritages, fortify chiefly the fourth House and Lord thereof;
also the Moon and its Dispositor and Part of Fortune, and its Lord and those
Planets therein placed, let them be no wise impedited, or Retrograde in Fall or
Detriment, or in any Aspect of the Malevolents, especially of Mars, for these
cause the house or land so purchased to be soon lost, and of no continuance
with your Posterity.

That the Land may be purchased by the Buyer, and that at a good rate, or to
his advantage.
But in making your Bargain, or that your Bargain may be good and to your
advantage, also that you may assuredly have the Land or thing to be purchased,
if you please; fortify the Ascendent, its Lord, the Planet from whom the Moon
last separated, also the Moon her self, and her Dispositor; the fourth, its
Lord and Planets therein, and Part of Fortune and its Dispositor, also place
the Moon in Cancer or Taurus, if possible, and let her behold the Lord of the
Ascendent or sign ascending with a Sextile or Trine, and be in good houses of
Heaven, and the Lord of the seventh applying to the Lord of the Ascendent, or
disposed of by the Lord of the Ascendent or in reception therewith; let the
fourth house also be in Taurus, Leo, or Aquaries, and the Lord of the Angles
Oriental and free from combustion.

Let also the Fortunes (in purchasing Lands or Heritages) have chief power in
the Angles, if not in all the Angles, yet in the first and fourth; and in the
other two, place the Luminaries beholding the Ascendent and fourth or one of
them, especially the Ascendent, with a Sextile or Trine; and see that the Lords
of the Angles be not Retrograde, nor a Retrograde Planet placed in any of them;
nor in the eleventh, or ninth, nor the Lord of the fourth of a fiery nature,
nor any of that nature therein placed, especially if they are not beheld by the
Benevolent Aspects of the Fortunes.

And note that if the Lord of the fourth be of a watery nature, or of a cold and
moist temper; let not Saturn behold him or it, and let not the Lord of the
tenth be unfortunate.

The Land is good and pleasant.
Fortunes or Planets essentially dignified in the fourth, or the Lord of the
fourth, and the sign of the fourth fortunate, denote the goodness and
pleasantness of the Land, House or Heritage; also that it is a fertile and good
soil, and the seeds already sown or to be sown therein shall be fruitful, etc.

The Plants are good and fruitful.
Such in the seventh, and the sign and the Lord thereof so disposed; show the
Herbs, Sets and Plants, and the culture thereon are pleasant, good and
fruitful.

The Timber is good and high or tall.
In the tenth, the Trees are tall, sound, fruitful, and good, that there is
much timber, or what is there, is excellent good and commodious.

Know also that the Infortunes or weak Planets in these places cause mischief
and impediment, according to the nature of the Planets and the places in which
they are; therefore look that these Angles be free from them, and especially
the seventh house; for the Malevolents there, cause mischief, malice and deceit
of the Husbandmen or Tenants of the ground or houses; Saturn therein placed,
shows their cozening and lying; Mars denotes them liars, unconstant and thieves.

CHAP. VII. Of Buying of Land, or ground for Husbandry, and not to build on.
IN buying of Land then not to build on, but for to manure and husband for thy
profit and advantage, fortify the Ascendent and its Lord, the Moon and its
dispositor, Part of Fortune also and its Lord, also Saturn, and if it be
possible, put him in Libra, or if the Land be to be bought in the day time,
place him in Capricorn or Aquaries; but if in the night, put him in Aries, Leo
or Sagittary, or Libra; let him also be in a Trine of Jupiter, or in a Sextile
with him, or the fourth house; but by all means see that Mars behold them not
by any Aspect, and let the Moon be in the increase of her light, viz. in the
first Square or Quarter, beholding Saturn with a Sextile or Trine, or that
Planet that beholds him.

Many laborers in the land; it shall be fruitful, etc.
And if the Moon behold Jupiter, it signifies that the land shall have
laborers enough, that there shall be many fruitful Trees and Plants, and that
the land shall be very fertile; the same understand if he be in configuration
with Saturn, etc.

But if Saturn cannot be made to be beheld of Jupiter, yet let Venus behold
him, and fortify the watery signs, for the Fortunes shall be stronger in them
then in the aerie; let the Moon be in the tenth in Taurus, beholding the lord of
the Ascendent with a benevolent Aspect, and let the Moon and the sign ascending
be free from all manner of misfortune.

CHAP. VIII. Of bringing of Water to a house, either by Conduit, Pipe or Pump;
and of digging of Wells.
AS in the foregoing Elections, so in this it is necessary you fortify the
Ascendent, and let it be one of the watery signs as also its Lord, and let him
be oriental and free from all manner of Impediment, and in an Angle in his own
dignities essential; Let Saturn also be oriental and free from misfortune, and
in the eleventh house, but look that the Moon be not in Conjunction with them.

Fortify also Jupiter, and let there be no Infortune or malevolent planet in
the tenth house, for that it will cause rather discension then ascension of the
water.

Let the Moon also and its dispositor be well dignified, and in the third or
fifth houses of Heaven in an Earthy sign; but if she will needs be above the
earth, place her in the ninth, tenth, or eleventh; Alkindus advises to place
the Moon, Ascendent, or any other Angle free from all manner of misfortune or
impedition; and let her be in her first Quarter, or from her Conjunction to the
first Square of the Sun increasing in light and motion: But know, that if the
Moon be in any house under the earth, you must fortify her well, and place her
in configuration of a benovolent Planet in the tenth, if possible; or however
of one above the earth: and if she be above the earth, let her by no means
behold any Planet below the earth, except with reception by house or exaltation
and in essential dignities.

It is necessary also you have regard to Part of Fortune and the Lord of the
Conjunction of the Luminaries praeventional or before your Election, and
fortify them both, essentially.

But if you cannot observe all this, yet as much as you can; but chiefly
fortify the Moon, the Lord of the Ascendent and Mid-heaven, and the cusps
thereof, especially the cusp of the tenth.

CHAP. IX. Of Tillage, or Manuring of the Ground.
MArk the first hour thou beginnest to Till, or Manure the ground; and fortify
the Ascendent, the Lord thereof, and the Moon, and the Planet who is the
Dispositor of the Moon, so that they be received of the Fortunes, or such
Planets as are free from misfortune and well dignified, and that out of Angles,
or succedent houses at least.

But if all this cannot exactly be followed, yet let the Moon be fortunately
received, and that out of an angle by a Fortune; and if possible, place those
Planets you can most fortify, in the second house; also fortify Part of
Fortune, and the Lord of the praeventional Conjunction of the Luminaries, and
place him an angle, etc.

CHAP. X. Of Renting or Hiring, and Letting of Houses, Land or Fruit, or any
other thing to be Let or Hired.
IN this, the Ascendent and its Lord are Significators of the Hirer or Farmer;
the seventh and its Lord of the Letter or owner of the House, Land, or thing to
be hired or Let; the mid-heaven, of the price; the fourth house, of the end of
the business.

Fortify therefore the ascendent, its Lord, the Moon and her dispositor, for
the ascendent or its Lord being so constituted, denotes the hirer or farmer to
be just, good and honest, and willingly and readily performing what he has
promised to the letter or owner; If he be weak and afflicted, as also the cusp
of the ascendent, Judge the contrary; after the same manner understand of the
significators of the Owner or Letter.

Wherefore let both significators be well fortified, and the Lord of the
seventh applying to the Lord of the ascendent if you would have the Owner or
Letter be reasonable or desirous to deal with the Farmer or Hirer at a
reasonable rate, and to cause him to have a good penyworth (as we call it) but
if you would that it succed or fall out to the advantage of the Letter ot
Owner, let the Lord of the ascendent apply to the Lord of the seventh.

Some Authors (and that with good reason) have assigned the ascendent, its Lord
and planet from whom the Moon is separating, to signify or be significators of
the Farmer or Hirer; if he be the first mover or desirer to traffic or deal
in the Farming the Land or house; The seventh, the planet Lord thereof, and the
planet the Moon next applys unto, of the Letter or Owner: But if the Owner be
the first mover of the business, Judge the contrary.

And as the fourth house has signification of the end of the thing, so also
has the Moon and the sign wherein she is.

Know then that in Electing a time for this business, it will not be amiss to
fortify Jupiter and Saturn, beholding each other with a benevolent aspect, for
this causes both the Renter and Letter to be faithful in keeping their
promises and bargain with each other.

However observe in this matter chiefly to fortify the Moon and its
dispositor; the ascendent, seventh and their Lords, the Lord of the tenth and
fourth, as also their houses and let the significators apply to each other as
you have heard according to the intent and purpose of your Election; and
remember that the application of the planets the Moon separates from and
applies to, have the same significations as you have heard the Lords of the
seventh and ascendent have.

CHAP. XI. of Planting of Trees or Graffing.
Fixed signs are to be chosen, and chiefly Taurus.
USually in this work these Rules are to be observed. Let the Moon be in Taurus,
Aquaries, Leo, Pisces or Virgo, but especially in Taurus, and in Sextile or
Trine of Venus; but if it be so you can not place her in Taurus, let her be in
Aquaries for that it is next of these abovenamed signs to be chosen; And if you
can not place her in Aquaries, let her be in Leo beheld of a benevolent planet
out of a watery sign; let her also be well dignified, I mean free from the ill
aspects of the Malevolents; Let Saturn be also direct and in the ascendent,
eleventh, fifth, or second, in his own essential dignities.

And if you cannot place Saturn in the Ascendent, let Jupiter be there, and in
Sextile or Trine of Saturn; however let Saturn be in what place of the figure
you please, he ought to be well aspected by Jupiter, and let him be in a place
where he has essential dignities.

But if neither of these be placed in the Ascendent, let the Moon be there, or
in the tenth, eleventh, fifth, or third, free from all impediment; for you must
have a special care that in all Plantings and Sowings, the Moon be chiefly free
from misfortune, and not only so, but well dignified essentially, and upheld by
the other Planets, viz. the Fortunes and their benevolent rays.

In all Plantings and Sowings (as you have heard already in buildings) see that
you debilitate Mars, Moon also be in no configuration of him, neither let him
be in the Ascendent, tenth, eleventh, fifth, second or third, or in any aspect
to either of them, or their Lords, if possible; for he is destructive; let also
Part of Fortune, its Dispositor and the Dispositor of the Moon be free from his
mischievous beams or aspect, good or bad; and fortify also the Lord of the
Ascendent, and the Lord of its exaltation.

Let the Dispositor of the Moon (says Alchaiat an ancient Author) behold her
out of a watery sign; and if the Ascendent be not a fixed sign, let the Moon and
Lord of the Ascendent be Oriental of the Sun and ascending, or at least one of
them; for this causes such Trees or Graffs, as shall be then set or graffed to
grow quickly and be fruitful; but if they be ascending and not oriental, the
Trees shall soon grow, but not so soon fructify; but this in such Trees as are
not fruitful, or bearing no fruit, as Willows, Ash, Elms, etc. hurts not
much; but if you place them occidental and decreasing in light and number, and
descending, judge the contrary to what you have heard.

Know moreover, if you cannot make your Ascendent a fixed sign, let it be a
common one, and the significators in common signs, and fortify them, as you
have already heard, etc.

But if thou can not dispose and fit all thy significators in so full a
manner as you have already heard, order as many thereof as you can; and chiefly
the Moon, who ought to be in Taurus, or in the last part of Sagittary, free
from all misfortune or impediment; let her also be in Conjunction, if possible,
of Jupiter, or in Sextile, or Trine of him, and let Jupiter be no wise
impedited, and be in the ascendent, tenth, eleventh, fifth or fourth, and if
possible, also let Part of Fortune be free from the Malevolent coufigurations
of the afflicting Planets, and in one of the aforesaid houses.

CHAP. XII. Of Sowing of Seeds in the ground.
DO thou be sure in Sowing of seeds (because it is a thing in which speedy gain
is expected) thy ascendent be a movable sign, and the Lord thereof in a movable
sign, as also the Moon, and the Lords or Dispositors of the Lord of the
ascendent and the Moon beholding them out of movable signs, or if this cannot
be, common may be chosen; but fixed by no means.

Place the Moon in an earthy or watery sign of the movable signs, viz. Cancer or
Capricorn; but if she be in Aries, let some Planet behold her out of some watery
sign, especially out of Cancer, least the herbs or seed dry and wither.

That Seeds sown may prosper and come to good.
Let the Lord of the Ascendent be free from misfortune, and in good aspect to
the Ascendent, and let the Ascendent be also free from the configurations of
the malevolents: Let the Moon also be free from the Sun beams, and in essential
or accidental dignities, increasing in light and motion; for if the Moon be
decreasing in light and number or motion and under the Sun beams, the Seeds
sown will not come to good: But know, that in Sowing of Pease, Moon must be
decreasing in light and motion, especially in light, for otherwise they will
never leave blooming, etc.

And if the Seeds be seeds of Trees, or such as engender or produce Trees, let
the Moon be in Taurus, as you have already heard, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Of ridding Houses or places from evil Spirits.
EVil spirits and the way of commanding them or ridding houses of them, is best
known to such as practice and make use thereof, it being no part of the study
of an Astrologian; however since often times mischief is done in such actions
for want of understanding, I thought good here to set down a fit time for such
businesses, it being otherwise very dangerous.

There have been several instructions for this matter given to us by the
Ancients; but most, and those most authentic too, say as follows.

See that the Moon be not in the Ascendent, and that neither the Ascendent or
the Moon be in Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, or Aquaries, but in some other signs, and
let the Moon separate from the Malevolents, and apply to the Fortunes, etc.

And thus much concerning Elections appertaining to the fourth house; it
rests now we proceed according to our promise next to the fifth house, etc.

SECTION VI. Containing Rules for Electing a time for any Work, or thing
appertaining to the fifth House.
THere are many curious Spirits I know which will not be a little taken with
the Elections appertaining to this House, they being indeed all so necessary in
the ordinary course of a man's life; I shall not in the delivering thereof in
the least be covetous or desirous to keep to my self the least thing that may
advantage posterity herein; for since the cause of these my undertakings was
for the benefit and instruction of the illiterate in these matters, I shall be
free and liberal therein according to that small Talent of knowledge God has
given me; wherefore since the getting of children is the chiefest thing
appertaining to this house, I will begin with it.

CHAP. I. Showing a fit time for getting of Boys or Girls.
To engender a Boy or manchilde.
HAve regard first to the sign ascending, the sign of the fifth, the Lords
thereof, and the Moon and its Dispositor that they be in Masculine signs, and
let the Moon be free from impediment, as also the Lords of the Ascendent and
the fifth, and the Dispositor of the Moon; this for boys.

But in getting of Girls, let the aforesaid significators and places be in
feminine signs.

A Boy is conceived. A Girl.
And if you cannot observe all this, let your significators be (the major part
of them) masculine for a Boy, and so the contrary for a Girl; but if the
significators be equal, you must have regard to the Lord of the hour and the
Planet to whom the Moon applies, and judge by the major part, viz. if most
Masculine Planets, a Male may be expected; if feminine, a female; but if it so
happen that yet notwithstanding the significators are equal, viz. that there is
the same equal number of masculine Planets and signs that there is feminine,
the conceived Infant will be an Hermophrodite; An Hermophrodite. Twins.
or if the Moon, the fifth and Ascendent, be in signs of double bodies, perhaps
there will be Twins conceived.

To get boys.
But moreover know, that in Electing a time for getting of Men-children it is
necessary you place a fixed sign in the Ascendent and the rest of the Angles,
also the Fortunes free from all impediment or affliction, let the Ascendent
also be a masculine sign, and a sign of right Ascensions free from the
malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes; but see that there be in no ways an
Infortune in an angle or a Feminine Planet, and let the Lord of the Ascendent
be fortunate, both in the seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth months after the
Conception, for that sometimes the Birth falls out in these months as well as
in the ninth; Let the Luminaries also be fortunate or free from impediment, and
let the Moon be in Sextile or Trine of the Sun.

Conception is hindered.
Chiefly have respect to and the that they be essentially dignified, or at least
free from misfortune; for if be afflicted and weak, the place of Conception or
the receptacle for the seed will be deficient and weak to perform its office;
and if the Moon be impedited and weak, it debilitates the seed: Some of the
Ancients also have advised that this should be done in odd or uneven hours, as
are the first, third, fifth, seventh, ninth and eleventh, for the getting of
Boys, they being accounted masculine hours; but for a Girl in even, as the
second, fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth, and twelfth, they being feminine.

To cause conception.
Let your Ascendent be Libra, and place the Moon therein, and Cancer on the
tenth, being a fruitful sign; but place the rest of the Significators in
masculine signs, and this causes conception, and that of a Male child; but it
is to be understood then, that the woman be sound in health and nature, and of
capacity for such matters: Your Significators in feminine signs cause a Girl.

All these Rules it may be are too tedious, or difficult to observe, yet at
least at the time of copulation, let the Ascendent and the Moon be strong, and
Jupiter upon the cusp of the mid-heaven fortunate; for this signifies the
woman shall conceive at the first bout, except she be a maid before, and then
the first goes to another use but at the second it will not fail, provided the
party be capable and sufficient in such an exercise: If your Ascendent be a
Masculine sign, and the Moon and Jupiter in masculine signs, or the major part,
it is a Boy that is conceived; if feminine, a Girl.

But if thou can not place Jupiter on the cusp of the tenth, let him be on
the cusp of the eleventh, or fifth, or in such a degree as that he may behold
the Ascendent its Lord, or the Moon with a Sextil, or Trine, or place the Moon
or Lord of the Ascendent in the fifth, within five degrees of the cusp thereof
in good Aspect to the Ascendent, for this signifies the woman then made much
of shall conceive.

CHAP. II. Of Delivering a dead Child.
RArely, yet sometimes does it happen, that the child dies in the mothers
womb, which without speedy help will also endanger the life of the mother: it
is necessary therefore before we go any further, to elect you a fit time for
applying remedies for this accident: I might here set some remedies down, but I
conceive it belonging no wise to our work in hand, it will be in a manner
needless; and I am confident of small benefit to the Students in such matters,
for that they will never be acquainted with any such thing, little expecting to
find such matters in a discourse of this nature, Astrology useful for all the
parts of Physic.
though I must confess to all parts of Physic this Art is a great help, and
ought especially therefore to be studied by the Students of Physic; Look Chap.
1. Sect. 6. of my Lux Veritatis.
otherwise it is impossible for them to be thoroughly masters of their Art:
Therefore, I say, since in the Volumns of the learned in Physic, such remedies
are frequently to be rancountred, I shall here pass it by, and show you only a
fit and convenient time according to the influence of the superiors to apply
your remedy, etc.

To expel the dead child.
Wherefore then see that you apply your medicine when the Ascendent is a
feminine sign of right ascentions, and let the Moon be decreasing in light and
descending in your schem; viz. at the least six or eight degrees past the
mid-heaven, and declining toward the seventh, and let her be in Sextil or
Trine, if possible of the fortunes, whether she be received or no: or if she be
beheld of Mars by these Aspects, so it be with reception it advantageth;
neither is it amiss, if it be not with reception, provided the Moon be in a
feminine sign, and the Ascendant in a feminine sign of right ascentions, as
has been said: Moreover, have a special care that the Ascendent, its Lord, the
Moon, and its Dispositor be not in signs of oblique ascentions; place also, if
possible, the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Dispositor of the Moon declining
toward the seventh, as you have heard of the Moon; or beholding some Planets
in that part of heaven with reception.

CHAP. III. Of Christening or Circumcising of Children.
ARabians and others have delivered rules for electing such a time, especially
for that oftentimes through negligence or ignorance the child has been almost
spoiled, in that the place sometimes did gangreen or fester, etc. but since we
have that Ceremony in no use, it being abolished by the death of our Lord
JESUS, it may seem here to be needless; but since the rules may (if observed)
tend to some other benefit; and for that I would not willingly omit any thing
that might be beneficial to posterity in these my weak endeavors, I thought I
would however spare one side of Paper for them.

Of Circumcision.
See then that Venus be exalted above Mars, and applying to the benevolent
Aspect of Jupiter; also let the Ascendent, its Lord and Venus, and the Moon be
free from the Aspect of Saturn, for that he causes putrefication and
corruption to the generating of a Gangreen, and perhaps the indangering of the
life of the child.

Let the Lord of the Ascendent also be ascending in latitude, and the Moon and
its Dispositor in septentrional signs and in succedent houses of heaven, and
look that the Moon be not in Scorpio, nor Mars in the Ascendent or any other
Angle.

The Arabians and Ancient Authors, not using christenings, were deficient in
those elections.
These rules might serve also for Christening; but since the Ancients were not
so well acquainted with the use of Christening as we in this latter age, they
have been herein somewhat deficient, and have not delivered the rules of
Astrology thereon as is requisite; many, nay most of them, wholly omitting it;
wherefore (though Astrology medleth not with Divine matters, nor causes or
procures grace (this Ceremony being a sign and seal of our admittance into the
Church of Christ, and number of the Elect, if we live accordingly) yet they act
and incline, though not compel or force) I will give you here some directions
concerning this matter.

Of Christenings.
Know then that your Ascendent, and its Lord, the Moon also and its Dispositor,
ought to be fortunate, and if possible, let the Ascendent be a fixed sign, and
Jupiter herein well dignified, or in the ninth, or in good configuration with
the Planets therein, or with the cusps of those houses: and let the Planets
either in the Ascendent or ninth be fortunes, or at the least well dignified;
but let Saturn and Mars be in no wise either therein placed, or in
configuration with them, or their Lords, or the Planets therein placed; and let
the sign of the ninth be fortunate, as also its Lord, and place Venus and the
Moon in a good Aspect of Jupiter; and if possible, with reception, or let them
be all in conjunction in the ninth or ascendent.

But if you cannot fully follow all these directions yet let the ascendent, the
ninth house, the Planets therein posited, the Moon, its Dispositor, and the
Lords of the Ascendent and ninth, be well dignified, and in Sextil or Trine of
Jupiter or Mercury.

And thus much of Christenings and Circumcisions; let us now proceed to
electing a fit time for giving of Gifts or Presents.

CHAP. IV. Of giving and receiving of Gifts or Presents.
MY intentions are now to treat of the rules of the Ancients for electing a fit
time for giving and receiving of Gifts or Presents: We have here already
treated of some Elections which might seem needless; but truly this of all we
have hitherto mentioned, I may say is most properly to be termed superfluous or
needless, Hospitality and Charity being things so different to the tempers and
natures of most men of this age we live in: But since we write not barely to
this age, but also to Posterity, I shall soon resolve upon the business; for
since I have better hopes of their goodness, I shall by no means omit this
Election, but deliver plainly the words of the most approved Authors hereon.

That the gift may prove advantageous.
Know then first, in receiving of Gifts you are to fortify the Ascendent, the
second House and their Lords, also the Moon and its dispositor, for this
causes gain to come unto thee by this Gift or Present; I mean it shall be
advantageous to the receiver, and he shall thereby much benefit himself.

For confirmation hereof.
But to make this the more certain, you must fortify Part of Fortune and its
Lord, viz. the Planet who is disposer thereof, which is more plainly that
Planet that is Lord of the sign wherein Part of Fortune is, fortify also
Jupiter, for that he is a general significator of wealth and riches: this
confirms the former rule, and makes it the more certain.

Of sending of presents.
But know that in sending of Presents or Gifts you are to fortify the fifth
House and its Lord, as also Jupiter; and let Mars both in receiving and giving
be in no configuration with the Ascendent, the second, their Lords, the Moon,
its dispositor, Part of Fortune, its Lord, Part of Substance, Jupiter, the
fifth House or their Lords: and if possible let the Ascendent and fifth House
be in common signs; and know that Sagittary and Pisces are to be preferred
before Gemini or Virgo, yet Virgo is before Gemini; You must understand this is
meant of the first fifteen degrees of Sagittary.

You are not only to beware of Mars, but also of Saturn, that he be not either
bodily present or in configuration with the Moon, the Ascendent or its Lord,
Part of Fortune, Part of Substance, or any of the aforesaid significators or
places without reception; and let the Lord of the Ascendent be elevated above
the Lord of the seventh.

Nota been.
But if thou can not observe all this, fortify the Moon, Jupiter and Lord of
the second House and the cuspe thereof in receiving Presents.

In giving, the Moon, the fifth, its Lord, Jupiter and Part of Fortune and its
dispositor. And thus much for this.

CHAP. V. Containing Rules for electing a time for putting on of Apparel.
EVen in this Chapter are we now to show you the rules of the Learned in former
ages in electing a time proper thereunto, I shall (as in all the other) give
you the marrow or quintessence of their Writings; a Volume five times as large
as is this, is not able to contain them all verbatim; but in what one is
deficient. I shall help you with another, and so with a third, that however
thou shall not be to seek in any Election as well as this, so thou be able
to understand the reasons of the rules, otherwise thou shall be still ignorant
had thou all the Volumes that were ever penned since the Creation; Look Chap.
6. Sect. 3. of this Treatise.
somewhat you have heard already of putting on of Apparel, but not so fully as
here in this place I intend; we will begin therefore with it, and then in order
of what remains, and so proceed.

Putting on of Apparel.
Herein you must have regard to the Ascendent, its Lord, the Moon, the Lord of
the sign wherein she is, the fifth House and Lord thereof, and let them be in
moveable signs, and let the Moon if possible be in Aries, excepting the seven
degrees after the eighth, viz. from the eighth to the end of the fifteenth, and
the 22 and 23 degrees of the same sign; or let her be in Cancer, excepting the
first six and last three degrees thereof, or in the first fifteen degrees of
Libra, or the first eighteen degrees of Virgo, or the first nineteen degrees of
Sagittary, or the first twenty degrees of Pisces.

Fixed signs are to be shunned in putting on of Apparel, wherefore see that
none of the aforesaid significators be in them, Taurus which may be made use of
in this business, it being the House of the lesser fortune and exaltation of
the Moon; but Leo of all the fixed signs is to be refused, for it causes
danger; therefore in no wise let the Moon be in Leo, except she be in Sextile
or Trine of the Sun with reception, and then it is not to be feared so much:
however Ptolomy, Centilo. 22. says, Vestem nec primum induas, ubi Luna fuerit
in Leone collocata; est autem pejus, si eadem male affecta fuerit. Idem ait
Hermes, Centilo. 82. Put not on new Apparel when the Moon is in Leo; and it is
so much the worse if she be there afflicted.

Of putting on new Apparel.
Yet if all this thou can not observe, be sure thou place not the Moon in the
Ascendent or fifth House, neither their Lords in Leo, Scorpio or Capricorn,
especially Leo, or in via combusta, and see also they be free from all manner
of misfortune: or place the Moon or the Sun in the mid-heaven free from
misfortune, and if possible in Sextile or Trine of Jupiter or Venus with
reception, and fortify the second House and its Lord, etc. If thou warily
observest what has been said, thou need no further instructions herein;
wherefore let us descend to what remains unresolved, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of Feasting or eating of meat.
Of feasting or eating of superfluities.
SInce this Election is needless in the ordinary course of diet, such as eating
at due times moderately, and the like, you are to understand we mean or
signify such eating as is in excess, as at Feasts and such superfluous
vanities, etc. Let us observe what follows.

In this manner of exercise you must chiefly have respect to the place and
motion of the Moon; for if she be in Taurus applying to Venus especially by a
good Aspect, you may safely eat Beef, either boiled, roasted, stewed, or any
otherwise dressed.

Also if she be in Pisces in good configuration of Jupiter, you may eat of
Fish, either fresh or salt.

And if in Libra or Aquaries received, Milk or any thing made therewith, as
Custards, Fools, and such like Quelk-choses.

If in Virgo in any malevolent aspect of Mars, it is not safe to eat of Herbs,
as Salads, or roots and stalks, as Colly-flowers, Coleworts, Artichokes,
Cabbage, Parsnips, Turnips, Carrats, etc. neither of Fruit, as Apricocks,
Peaches, or any other Plumb or Fruit, as Cherries, etc.

But if she apply to the Sun or Mars by a Trine, you may safely eat of
varieties and diverse sorts of Meats, etc. Understand the same if she apply to
Venus.

If she apply to Saturn, have a care of stale meats, or such as have been kept
long in salt.

If she be in Aries or Capricorn, applying to Jupiter, you may eat of variety
of gelded Cattle, etc.

But it is no wise safe to eat of what dyed of it self, if she be in a Square
of Saturn* or in Conjunction or Opposition of him; neither is it good to eat
Venison when she is in Leo, nor when she applies to Mars out of Virgo.

But if she be in Gemini or the aerie triplicity applying to Mercury, it is not
safe to eat any Bird of a hot nature or constitution; and if to Mars, all meats
that are califactive or of a hot quality are also to be shunned.

If in Leo applying to Saturn, it is not safe to eat any thing of a cold
operation, etc. Thus much for eating.

CHAP. VII. Of Drinking of Wine and other Drinks.
EVen now thou have been at a Feast, and since so, it is requisite I give thee
also some drink after it, otherwise it will be but a dry one: but since perhaps
thou art a good fellow, or one that loves thy liquor better then thy meat, I
intend to give thee of the best, and that such as comes out of Bacchus his own
Rampant Bucephalus; it is Nectar and Ambrosia, such as will make the wilkin
roar, that will pay all debts when money is short, that will make a Beggar an
Emperor, and an Emperor a Fool; to be short, it will make thee merry when all
thy spirits are at the lowest; it is a remedy against all diseases, and is good
against the simples; and will make a fat fellow lean the soonest of any thing
that is. But I need not say any more, I believe thou art convinced long since
of the virtues thereof, if thou art a lover of the Beast Bacchus; I think thou
desire now rather to taste it then hear of it; I will not promise to make thee
drunk therewith, however I will give thee as much as will countervail what thou
have eaten at my Feast; but if thou at length go away with an appetite, be
not angry; it is to be noted it is a Scholars Feast, not an Epicures. Wherefore

Take this Cup, and know that if the wine be not good, it is the fault of those
that pressed the grapes; for had they observed this rule I will here give thee,
it had been much better; but to be short, the receipt is thus.

A receipt to make good wine.
Recipe Pisces or Taurus, and put the Moon therein in configuration of Venus;
this is all, but this I Will warrant thee will make the wine passing good, and
drink pleasingly and delightfully; but mingle not the beams of the Moon with
Saturn, for that will spoil all the rest of thy Ingrediencies, and will make
thy wine crabbish and harsh to the palate, and no wise delectable or pleasing
to the drinker; and not only so, but very hurtful to the body; avoid also the
beams of Mars, for he will make it heady, and cause the drinkers to quarrel and
fall out with each other, and the vessel you put it in to break or come to some
mischance or other; the beams of Jupiter or Mercury would do very well to
mingle with the Moon, as also the beams of the Sun, provided they be infused by
a Sextile or Trine.

In making of other drinks it is necessary you also follow the same receipt
with the same Ingrediencies, for it will make them both pleasant and good; and
this is worth your learning, when with one receipt you are taught how to make
all manner of drinks.

That one be not offensive or quarrelsom in drink.
Know also that when you would take off your cups merrily without offense to
either your friends or others, let the Ascendent at the time you begin be
fortunate, as also the Lord thereof, the Moon and its dispositor, also the Lord
of the fifth and sign of the fifth, and let them be free from the
configurations of Mars, and in reception with the Lord of the seventh and
eleventh, or with the Lords of those Houses signifying the parties you should
be merry and civil with, etc.

So now since thou have had thy fill of good cheer and drink, let me desire
your pardon that I may go also into my element of writing, and then perhaps
anon I may send my boy to you with some comfortable odours or unguents. Or if
thou have surfetted, and may thereby prove sick, I have a remedy for thee a
little further, which I may send all under one.

CHAP. VIII. Of writing of Letters, or any thing else of Ingenuity.
Of writing of letters, or any other thing.
YOu must in this matter let the Ascendent and its Lord be fortified and free
from the malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes; and if possible let Mercury
behold them or either of them with a Sextile or Trine, and let him be well
dignified, no wise Unfortunate or Retrograde, and let him be beheld of the Moon
by a Sextile or Trine, and if possible with reception.

CHAP. IX. Of making Odoriferous smells and unguents.
Of making odoriferous smells or unguents.
WE know since the fifth House is the House of pleasure and delight; and since
many men are much taken and delighted in such things, this Election does most
properly belong to this House.

Look then that in making of unguents or odoriferous smells, that you place the
Ascendent and the Moon either in Aries, Leo or Sagittary, and Venus in the
Ascendent; and if so, let the Moon be in the mid-heaven, applying by a
benevolent Aspect to Venus; for this signifies the confection is good, and of
a good smell, and that he that makes it will much delight in it.

But if you would make suffumigations apart, see if the Moon be received of
Mars or the Sun; for if so, whatever is then done by the fire shall be good.

Also when you make any sweet smells or odours, and the Moon in Gemini applying
to Mercury, it signifies that it shall be well and neatly performed.

CHAP. X. Of sending Ambassadors or Messengers.
Rules for sending Messengers or Ambassadors.
IN matters of this nature you must know that the Moon is chiefly to be
regarded; join her therefore by body or Aspect to your significator, or Planet
signifying the party to whom you send; as if to a Father, let her be in Sextile
or Trine of the Lord of the fourth; if to a Wife, to the Lord of the seventh;
to a Child, to the Lord of the fifth; to a Brother, to the Lord of the third;
to a Servant, or Fathers brother, to the Lord of the sixth; for that it is the
third from the fourth; to the Mothers brother, to the Lord of the twelfth; to
the Mother or any great man, King or Prince, to the Lord of the tenth, etc. So
understand of any person signified by any House; and if possible, make the
Planet to whom the Moon applies receive the Moon, or at least the Lord of the
Ascendent, etc.

For sending to Kings or great men.
But further know, that in sending to a King or great man, the Moon must be in
configuration (with reception) of the Sun or Lord of the tenth; and let the Sun
and the Lord of the tenth, or that of them that is placed in aspect of the
Moon, be in the Ascendent, tenth or eleventh; but if with convenience thou
can not so place him, let him be in the third, fifth or ninth House; but
these are not so powerful or so good as the aforesaid places.

In going or sending to Kings or great men, Moon be in Gemini or Pisces.

To Churchmen.
Also if you send or go to Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, or any
belonging to the Church, let the Moon be in Sextile or Trine of Jupiter, out of
the aforesaid places; and if possible with reception or in reception with the
Lord of the Ascendent.

To Soldiers.
If your business be with Warriers, as Generals, or any Soldiers whatsoever,
understand the same by Mars, and let him be accordingly placed, but let not the
aspect of the Moon be from Angles, but succedent Houses.

To ancient men and husbandmen. To Women. To Scholars, Secretaries, Scriveners
or young men.
If to Husbandmen or ancient men, understand the same of Saturn.

To Women, let her apply to Venus.

To Mercury let the Moon be joined or have aspect, if you send to young men of
no alliance or relation to you; or to Scriveners, Secretaries or Scholars, etc.
but let Mercury be free from misfortune and impediment; and understand the same
of the foregoing Planets, if your business be with such as are signified by
them. And thus much for the Elections appertaining to the fifth House.

SECTION VII. Of Elections appertaining to the sixth House.
CHAP. I. Of the true Knowledge of the Crisis or Critical and Judicial Days,
very useful for those that study Physic.
The error of most Physicians.
LIke as we read in the holy Writ, The Physician is honorable, so indeed he is;
but being ignorant in his Art, he rendereth himself despicable and ridiculous:
and the way to make him perfect is to know NATURE, and her secret operations,
and that by the influence of the Superiors and Rulers of all Inferiors; viz.
The Stars: It is not his looking in an Urinal of water, or feeling the pulse of
the party, or questioning with him how he feels himself, and in what places
of his body he is most afflicted, that can give a through understanding of his
malady; the water is Meretrix, the pulse is Fallax, the patient himself is
Ignorans: These, I say are not sufficient grounds for him to work on; and
without a good foundation, the fabric is not likely to be well built, or at
least to stand long; they are indigent and insufficient, and the patient
perhaps so overcome with torment, or desire of relief, that he cannot well
define his own misery.

The cause of a disease is to be first known before a cure be undertaken
And since it is so, a Physician (or rather a Pretender thereunto (I may justly
call him) for as Galen and Hippocrates say, They are rather to be termed fools
then Physicians) must be better versed in his Art before he can do any thing;
for as he is, he can do nothing with certainty: A blind man may catch a hare,
but it is very unlikely: The cause of a disease must first be known before it
be endeavored to be removed; and the cause being taken away, the effect will
soon cease: but they are ignorant of the cause; ergo, not able to perform what
they undertake.

And again, the nature and temper of the Patient is to be regarded; and this
can never be certainly and thoroughly discerned by looking in his Urine, nor by
feeling of his pulse: That which causes his Constitution to be either
Sanguine, The nature and temper of the patient is to be regarded, or known also.
Phlegmatic, Choleric or Melancholy, is to be regarded; it is not any
inferior thing that causes it, it is the influence of the superiors; ergo,
Physicians ignorant therein, are not able to perform with certainty, any Cure
whatsoever: For what will cure a Phlegmatic man of a Fever, will not a
Choleric; and then the pretended Physician seeing his Medicine does not work
the like operation as formerly, supposes the malady to be somewhat else, and
himself mistaken, and falls another way to work, and so kills the patient with
a great many Thanks and Gratuities both of Money and Gifts, for (as the
ignorant about him suppose) doing his endeavor to save the sick, The
simplicity of the vulgar.
especially if he can but talk of this rare cure, and that excellent remedy he
has formerly given, and preach himself up, and others (a thousand times more
knowing then himself) down, and now and then use some Latin in his Discourse,
and flourish it over with hard words to the ignorant: I say, he carries it
then, whether he save or kill, and that with a great deal of credit: but of all
murderers, these we see seldomest hanged, yet none more deserving it.

The nature of the Medicine ought to be known, before physic is to be
administered. The nature of medicinal things found out and known by the stars.
Again, the nature and quality of every medicinal thing ought especially to be
known, as Herbs, Drugs or Minerals; otherwise the pretending Physician does
what he does not understand; and if we will believe GALEN, he tells us, They
are only to be known and judged by the stars: So also Fernelius and Ficinus,
two learned Physicians confess, also HIPPOCRATES, PARACELSUS, and CORNELIUS
AGRIPPA, who was Physician to the Emperor Charles the fifth; and not only
these, but all the more rational of the Ancient Physicians and Studiers of
Nature (which were only Physicians indeed) have acknowledged the same, whose
names if I should here record, it would be be too tedious both for my self and
thee, and in a manner superfluous or needless in so clear a case, since it is
most certain, that Hippocrates and Galen, the two pillars of the Art of
Physic, found out the use of Vegetables and their natures, as also of all
their Physical things by the Stars, who are the Governors and Disposers of them
all, and causes of their several virtues, according to the several
Constellations they are under.

A Physician ignorant in- Astrologic can not safely administer physic.
Hippocrates and Galen further say, that a Physician cannot safely give physic
that is ignorant in the knowledge of the Stars and Superior bodies, not knowing
indeed when to give purges, or vomits, or let blood, without much mischief
doing, nor in what quantity; which ignorance often times indangers the life of
the Patient, when as these that know not the influence of the heavenly bodies,
give vomits at such times as cause a purge; and purges when they become vomits,
which in laxative diseases or fluxes prove very dangerous, if not deadly or
totally destructive; and at other times when the physic never works at all;
The cunning of the ignorant physicians to color their ignorance
yet you shall never find the ignorant without an excuse for their rashness;
as when they administer a purge, if it cause vomiting, then say they, the party
is of a weak constitution, and cannot retain the Physic, when physic is not
given to be retained, it is either to work downwards or upwards immediately,
and then the next day perhaps (as it has been often known) gives the patient a
stronger potion, The danger a patient is in by being in the hands of unskilful
Physicians.
and then then the heavens otherwise disposed (which they understand not) work
so violently, that nature is both weakened and overcome, which should have been
only helped; and also the disease increases, which should have been diminished:
and so on the contrary, when a vomit is given at an unfit time, causes
purging, then they conclude the patient strong, when perhaps he requires
strength, and is very weak; for it is not nature that then works, it is an
influence of the Superiors that orders the matter, which without a skilful
Artist, you see is most obnoxious, which caused Galen to admonish men not to
trust themselves with that Physician ( or rather Pretender) which is not
skilled in Astrology. Galens admonition to the vulgar. The ignorance of
Chyrurgions in letting of blood.


So likewise blood letting if the heavens be not duly observed, is of no
efficacy; and sometimes hinders phlebetomie, which the ignorant Chyrurgion
colors with saying, The party is faint-hearted, or has much wind in his
veins, or with some such like ridiculous whimsie.

Astrology, and it only shows the cause of Critical days, and the danger
coming by the not knowing thereof.
This is not all; critical days also are known by Astrology, and no otherways,
without the due knowledge whereof, the Patient suffers much by the Physicians
applying contrary remedies very dangerous. I might here give you the discourse
of Duret hereon, but that it belongs not to the work in hand, being
elections; yet I shall here give you some instructions how to know the true
Crisis, or Critical day, and Judicial days, though it be at this time out of my
way, and then proceed to the clearing of what has been said; viz. to show you
the rules of the more learned in electing a time for administering Physic and
Phlebotomie.

Let us then (since it will not be amiss) step a little out of our way, and say
somewhat of the Critical days; when we come into our road again, we will make
the more haste to our journeys end.

Learning and all good Arts whatsoever, I ever greatly desired should be
nourished and refined from their dross, and that knowledge may still increase
upon the earth; wherefore since the understanding of this matter conduces much
to the skill of the Physician, and welfare of the patient, as does the want of
it oftentimes through the ignoronce of the Physician, prove very dangerous to
the patient, I shall desire thee to observe what follows.

It is generally taken for granted (amongst the unskilful) that the seventh and
fourteenth days are Critical, and that these are the first and second Crisis;
but it is no wise true as to build on, but the true Crisis is thus known.

How to know the true Crisis.
Look at the time of the parties first falling sick, what sign, degree and
minute of the Zodiac the Moon is, and when she comes to the Square thereof,
that is the first Crisis; when she comes to the Opposition or opposite place
thereof, it is the second Crisis: The next Square is the third Crisis, and the
same place where she was at the first falling sick, is the fourth Crises; and
so go round again. The judicial days are the middle between the two Crisis, To
know the judicial days.
and as the Crisis is the sudden motion of the disease, either toward health
or death, whereby the Physician may clearly discern which way the disease will
tend: so are the judicial days sician may clearly discern which way the disease
will tend: so are the judicial days such times as the Crisis may be judged of,
or known whether it will be good or bad; for as the Moon is disposed at the
time of the Crisis, whether fortunate or in good aspect of the Fortunes and
Assisting Planets, or the Malevolents and Intersilient Planets, which commonly
are the Lords of the fourth and eighth, especially the eighth, or in
configuration with the Lord of the sixth, so may you judge of the Crisis good
or bad.

Note, that the operation of the Moon, in causing of a Crisis, is enough to
convince any that deny the influence of the stars to have power over our
bodies. None can perfectly know the true Crisis that is ignorant in Astrology.
Good, if fortunate and upheld by the Fortunes; bad, if the contrary; as if
afflicted by the Malevolents or Lord of the sixth, the disease increases; if by
the Lord of the eighth, death is to be feared.

Also, when the Moon transits the cusp of the twelfth, eighth or sixth,
according to its strength, it proves good or dangerous, etc.

In like manner understand in a judicial day, if the Moon be well dignified and
assisted, a good Crisis may be expected; if weak or afflicted, judge the
contrary.

Now by reason the Moon is sometimes swift, and at other times slower of
motion, never retaining a constant course, it must needs follow, such as are
ignorant therein, must needs be ignorant in knowing or finding out the true
Crisis, and whether it will be good or bad, that is not acquainted with the
stars.

But note, that you may the better understand, the reason thereof, it is this;
sometimes by her flowness of motion, she comes to the Crisis as the sixth day
after the beginning of the disease, and again sometime (by her swiftness) at
the eighth or ninth day; wherefore they must needs fail, that conclude it to be
always at the seventh day; and so accordingly in the other Crisis, As our
vulgar Physicians do.
she comes sooner or later very often.

So then you see the error and ignorance of most of our pretending Physicians,
and the reason of the Crisis and uses thereof; it rests therefore now we
proceed and hasten into our road again, etc.

CHAP. II. Of Applying Medicines generally to all the parts of the body of Man.
LIke as I have already given you the error of the vulgar Physicians, and the
excellent uses of Astrology in the administation of physic, it rests
therefore now I begin to show you the rules of Astrology herein, that thou
may be thoroughly convinced and satisfied of the verity of what has been
said: And first of administering of Medicines generally to all the parts of the
body, and then proceed.

Of administering Physic to any part of the body singly.
Know then that in giving of Physic, you ought to look in what part of the body
the disease is, and let the Ascendent be that sign which signifies the
diseased part free from misfortune: fortify also the Moon, and let her by no
means be in Opposition of the Lord of the sixth, eighth or twelf, at the time
of the parties first falling sick, or at the time of your election, or in the
radix of the patients nativity; and if so be you cannot avoid it, but the Moon
must needs be in aspect of them, let it be by Sextile or Trine, and if
possible, with reception; but let not the Moon be in Conjunction of any of
them, nor descending.

Note, that the Moon must by no means be in the sign signifying the member
diseased,

Of giving physic, when the infirmity is over all the body. When the medicine
or remedy is to be administered.
If the infirmity be over all the body, let the Ascendent be a humane sign, of
the which Libra is the best for this use; and let the Lord of the Ascendent and
the Moon be also in humane signs, free from impediment, especially of the
aforesaid Significators.

But if thou disirest to give the medicine to cure or remove any infirmity, let
the Ascendent be Libra or Scorpio, and the Moon therein joined, or in
confirguration with the fortunes, and free from the Malevolents aspects of the
Infortunes; but if you cannot make her avoid the Aspects of the Malevolents,
let the Aspects be by Sextile or Trine, and let her not be aspected by two
Malevolents, or going to combustion; but however, chiefly see that thou do
fortify the Moon, for otherwise the Physic will torment and afflict the
patient, according as she is afflicted, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the Administration of Remedies to the Diseases of the Head.
When remedies for diseases of the head are to be prescribed.
IN electing a fit time for applying or taking of remedies or medicines for the
head, either universally or particularly, as Rheums, distilling humors, and the
like, whether by Vomit, Gargarisms, or such like, let the Ascendent be Aries
well fortified, if possible by the Benevolents, and freed from the Aspects of
the Infortunes; place also Moon therein, or in Taurus, decreasing in light, and
joined to the Fortunes, or configuration with them, and free from any
affliction or impediment. If thy medicine be to take away the hair, or the
like, To take away hair.
let the Ascendent and the Moon be in feminine signs, and the Lord of the
Ascendent, and let him also, and also the Moon, be descending from the mid
heaven toward the fourth house, etc.

And have a special care that the Sun behold not the Moon, or the Ascendent by
any Aspect, when they are in Aries, especially by Square or Opposition, because
of the great heat of the Sun.

CHAP. IV. Of Applying remedies to the eyes, and preparatives in general.
When medicines for the eyes are to be applied.
ALl mists, pearls, films, or dimness of the eyes, or any other infirmities
belonging to them, if thou would remove or know a fit time to apply thy
remedy thereunto, etc. let the Moon be increasing in light and motion,
fortunate and in configuration with the Benevolents.

Let the Moon be free from all the Configurations or Aspects of Mars, when she
is thus increasing in light and motion, and let Jupiter be in the Ascendent, or
some other house above the earth; however let him be in Sextile or Trine of the
Ascendent, or with a Square, if no other can be, provided he be not impedited
or afflicted.

See also that the Ascendent nor the Moon be in earthy signs, and if so be you
cannot avoid the aspect of Mars to the Moon, be in earthy signs, and if so be
you till she is past the aspect and separating.

Remember that in all elections where there is any inscissions or
scarifications to be made, Moon be in the sign signifying the member to be
inscissioned, nor in a moveable or common sign, or in Square or Opposition of
Saturn or Mars, for that then she causes the wound to fester or ganger. Look
whether Ptolomy in his twenty Centilo. does not say the same, Membrum ferro ne
percutito, cum Luna signum tenuerit, quod membro illi dominatur.

Let this be diligently observed which has been said, especially when the Moon
is near her Conjunction with the Sun, or till she be fully separated twelve
degrees at least.

When to give Preparatives.
And in administering Preparatives, let the Moon be in Gemini, Libra or Aquaries.

CHAP. V. Of Applying remedies to the Noses.
Of applying remedies for infirmities of the nose.
MArk now; if thou would apply any remedy for the infirmities of the Nose, as
unguents, suffumigations or sneesing-powders, or such like, etc. let the
ascendent be Cancer, Leo, or Virgo, and the Moon in the ascendent in
configuration with a fortune, and free from all manner of affliction, or the
configurations of the Malevolents, and let her not be in combustion, nor joined
to a Planet that is weak or retrograde, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of injecting of Clisters, etc. and Stopping of Rheums or Fluxes.
Of injecting Clysters.
IN giving of Clysters, remember to make thy ascendent Aries, Libra, Scorpio or
Aquaries; however, let the Moon be in one of them, and the Lord of the
ascendent free from the configurations of the Lord of the sixth, and the Moon
applying to Venus; for this will be helpful in such cases or businesses.

Of stopping Rheums or Fluxes.
In Stopping of Rheums, or Fluxes, let the Moon be in Taurus, Virgo or Capricorn.

CHAP. VII. Of the administration of gargarisms, or sneezings, and such like.
Of administering gargarisms and sneezing powders.
USE to make the Ascendent in this manner of work, either Cancer, Leo or Virgo,
and the Moon decreasing in light and motion, and in Taurus descending in
latitude, or in Aries; but be she in what sign she will, let her be applying to
the fortunes; Let also the Ascendent, its Lord, and the Moon, be in signs that
chew the cud, as are Aries, Taurus and Capricorn; yet Alsayat commends
Cancer, Leo and Virgo, as you have heard; see also that you let not the Moon be
in a Square of Jupiter, especially out of Aries.

CHAP. VIII. Of giving of Vomits.
Of giving of vomits.
DO thou be sure in giving of such medicines as provoke Vomits, that thy
Ascendent, its Lord, and the Moon be in signs that chew the cud, as are Aries,
Taurus and Capricorn, of the which Taurus is the best, for that the Moon is
exalted therein; wherefore it will be the better if she be in the first three
degrees thereof, the third degree being the point of her exaltation.

Let the Lord of the Ascendent also be in his exaltation, or in Sextile or
Trine of the degree thereof.

And look that the Moon be by no means in any configuration with any Planet
beneath the earth; for that causes the Physic to work downward, especially if
the Planet so in aspect with her be strong; wherefore let her be joined or in
aspect with a Planet above the earth, which is well dignified, if you can
possibly however let her be strong. For according to Ptolomy, Centilo. 21. Cum
Luna copulata fuerit stellis supra terram constitutis, evomere fecit potionem.

If the Vomit be for the help of an Infirmity in any member or part of the
body, (say some Authors) let the Moon be in the sign signifying the member or
part of the body, well dignified and strong; and let the sign also if possible
be fortunate; In my practice I have followed the former rules with much
success; however thou may take thy choice and please thy self; but let me
give you one Caution more, Let not the Moon or the Lord of the Ascendent be in
watery signs, Scorpio and Cancer, nor the Ascendent; for they are apt to make
the Physic laxative, and work downwards. And so much for administering of
Vomits; it rests now we descend to Purges, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of administering Purges and Physic laxative.
EVer in administering Purges observe three things, viz.

1. The Time. 2. The Age. 3. And manner thereof.
As concerning the Time, thou art to take heed the weather be not extreme hot
or cold; for so says Hippocrates, part. 4. Aphorism 5. Avoid the dog days and
frosty weather; therefore rainy and open weather is good; and in his 46
Aphorism of his 6 part, Winter rather fit for Purges then Summer.
he proves that the Spring and Autumn are more convenient for this purpose
then Summer or Winter; yet he commends Winter more then Summer; for in Summer
the humors boil through extremity of heat, and so faints the spirits and
annoyeth Nature much: He teaches also, that in Summer we are to purge by the
upper parts or by vomit; Vomits fitter for Summer then Purges.
in Winter by the lower, or by purge, if necessity require that Physic must be
given at these times.

Secondly, As touching the Age, Physic by a prudent and wise Physician ought
not to be administered to Infants nor decrepid old age, nor much to youth; for
to the Child it is needless since it cannot duly work its effect, where there
is neither strength nor matter to work on; and in age it works in a manner
the same; but without doubt it must needs debilitate Nature in both; in youth a
little at the Spring and Fall may be advantageous; but to take it often, it
hinders the natural heat and concoction, and so consequently the radical heat
and moisture being hereby abated, the days of the party must needs be shortened.

Lastly, Of the manner of administering Purges and other Medicines, some thou
have had already; but of administering of Purges thou shall have beneath;
wherefore here I shall only give you this note or caution, and so proceed.

A Caution diligently to be noted.
That administer what you will when the Moon is in the first fifteen degrees of
Libra or Aquaries in the Conjunction, Square or the Opposition of Saturn,
Jupiter or Mars, or they in these configurations of one another, it hinders
the operation of the Physic.

Ptolomy in his 56 Centiloquium says, Cum Luna est in primo quadrangulo, hoc
est, ex quo a Solis conjunctione recessit, corporum humiditates ad secundum
usque effluunt, in reliquis autem decrescunt. Neta been.
When the Moon is in her first quarter, viz. from her Conjunction with the Sun
till the first Quartile, the humors of man's body increase or flow from the
inward parts of the body to the outward, in the rest retire or move from the
External parts to the Internal; wherefore in the first quarter it is requisite
that you know it is most fitting to apply then External evacuations, and
afterward Internal; yet I have ever held it safest to defer Internal potions
till after its Opposition with the Sun, or as we vulgarly say, the Full Moon.

Of administering Purges.
Some of the Ancients have approved of Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio and Pisces to be
placed on the Ascendent at the time of giving of Purges; others of Cancer,
Scorpio or Pisces; and again, some of the latter degrees, or more plainly the
last fifteen degrees of Libra, and the first fifteen degrees of Scorpio; also
that the Moon should be in one of these places; so that the Learned in this
most heavenly study have been of several opinions in this matter; there is none
of them but had reasons for their rules, and any of them may be followed
according as the case may stand with the Patient, and the humor to be purged;
wherefore as Ptolomy in his first Aphorism of his Centiloquium says, A te and
a scientia, so must thou warily consider the state of thy Patient, and the
reasons of the Ancients in their practice, which thou will soon know when thou
art well versed in the nature of the Planets and Signs; wherefore I shall here
desire thee to be thoroughly perfect in the second Treatise of this Volume
before thou adventurest too far, and then thou need not fear to go forwards.

The Authors practice in his administering of Purges.
In my practice I have still followed these rules; To place the Ascendent in one
of the watery signs, viz. Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces fortunate, as also the Lord
thereof, and the Moon in one of the aforesaid signs also, and its dispositor;
but especially I have desired if possible to place the Moon in the first 15
degrees of Scorpio, or the last 15 degrees of Libra beholding a Planet under
the earth, and free from the aspects of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars; for that
Saturn by his coldness does thicken and make gross the humors, and closing up
the pores does hinder the effect of the Physic; Jupiter his aspects I have (so
near as I could) still also avoided, for that he being hot and moist, and so
consequently a helper or assister of Nature, the Physic working contrary, must
needs be either hurtful or of no great efficacy; Mars, for that through his
heat and dryness of nature he oftentimes sharpneth the humors to the
extraction of blood if the Physic be strong, or when but moderately strong, if
the Patient be weak.

I have also ever shunned those times wherein the Moon does any-wise behold a
Planet above the earth, or a Planet that is retrograde, and those times I find
her in Aries, Taurus, Capricorn or the last 15 degrees of Sagittary, for that
they rather provoke the Patient to vomiting, although the nature of the Physic
be a purge so ordained to work downwards; and this does often for want of
understanding rather increase the disease then diminish it, when Nature is thus
weakened by this Combustion of the Physic and Nature, which is assisted by the
influence of the superiors, the one working downwards, the other upwards, etc.

The ground of the Authors method in administering Purges. Hermes of
administering Purges.
And this my method I collected from the sayings of Hermes and Ptolomy;
wherefore for thy better satisfaction I will here give thee their words, and
first I will begin with Hermes, for that he is the more ancient, and was
Ptolomies predecessor.

Hermes then in his 74 Aphorism of his Centiloquium says, Luna existente in
signis ruminantibus, vel conjuncta Planetae retrogrado, non est bonum
purgationibus uti: haec enim vomitum inferunt, vel alias laesiones. The Moon in
such signs as chew the Cud, (which you have heard already are Aries, Taurus,
Capricorn, and the last part or 15 degrees of Sagittary) or in Conjunction or
Aspect with a retrograde Planet, it is not safe to administer purges, for they
cause vomiting or some other mischief.

Ptolomy of giving of Purges.
And Ptolomy in his 21 of his Centiloquium says, Cum Luna fuerit in Scorpione
aut Piscibus, Dominusque Ascendentis stellae sub terram pofitae copulabitur,
bonum est purgationibus uti. Si vero copulatur stellae supra terram
constitutae, potionem qui sumpserit evomet. When the Moon is in Scorpio or
Pisces, also the Lord of the Ascendent in configuration or Conjunction with a
Planet under the earth, it is good to give or use purges. But if either of them
be in configuration with a Planet above the earth, the Physic which is given
shall be vomited up again.

Again as touching Jupiter, as I have said, for that I know some will not
condescend with me, Ptolomy in his 19 Centiloquium, says, Vis purgationis
hebetatur, cum Luna Jovi fuerit conjuncta. The strength and efficacy of a purge
is taken away when the Moon is in Conjunction or configuration of Jupiter.

Other rules in administering Purges.
Haly and Alkindus give directions that the Moon be in the last 15 degrees of
Libra, or the first 15 degrees of Scorpio, and that its dispositor or the Lord
of that House she is in be strong or well dignified, oriental and in an angle,
and the Planet in configuration with him (if any there be) be also fortunate,
oriental and in an angle, and that the Lord of the Ascendent be also so
pofited; and the Moon and they free from the aspects of the Malevolents,
especially the Moon, Lord of the Ascendent and the sign scending, and the Moon
applying to Venus rather then Jupiter, for that she will further the Physics
operation, and comfort the spirits of the Patient; but Jupiter will so fortify
Nature, that he will hinder the operation and effect of the potion; and let the
Moon be received by the fortunes; and if its dispositor be weak, let him be
received of the fortunes also by a Sextile or Trine.

And if you would purge any particular member, or if the potion be prepared for
such an use, observe still what has been already said, and place the Fortunes
in that sign signifying the member of the body, For purging any particular
member of the body. For ordering your Potion for all manner of tempers. To
purge Melancholy.
and fortify the sign as much as you can, and the Lord of the fourth House.

But if your potion be prepared to cool, heat, moysten or dry, place the Moon
and the Lord of the Ascendent in one of the signs signifying the temper you
desire or aim at, viz. which is of the nature of the business you intend, and
fortify it; but signs chewing the cud are to be avoided, as you have heard,
etc.

If your purgation be to expel or remove Melancholy, let the Moon be strong and
in a Sextile or Trine of Jupiter; but remember to stick fast to what you have
already heard in this Election and these subsequent rules; only let these
applications of the Moon be particularly and chiefly followed and observed, etc.

As if to purge choler, Choler.
let her apply by a benevolent aspect to Venus.

To purge phlegm, Phlegm.
let her apply to the Sun. Note that these must be by Electuaries.

Of administering Potions.
Know thou that if the medicine be by potion for any of these, Scorpio is
preferred before any of the signs, and to be placed on the Ascendent, or the
Moon to be therein when she so applys.

Of Electuaties. Of Pills. Cautions.
If it be an Electuary, Cancer is to be chosen.

If Pills, Pisces.

Know further, if the Moon be in the Ascendent at the time you take the
Physic, it causes unusual swellings in the body.

Let not the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendent be in the fourth House, nor in
the eighth, for it causes destruction: Observe the same in Phlebotomy.

Still remember to fortify your significators, and make them free from the
configurations of the Malevolents.

Let not the Lord of the eighth, or interficient or killing Planet be in an
angle, nor in configuration with any of the significators. These things if thou
diligently observest, thou shall be an artificial workman, and shall far exceed
the chiefest Physician of thy time that is ignorant herein.

To purge the Spleen.
If you would purge the spleen, let not Saturn be strong in the Heaven; and give
your medicine in the hour of Jupiter, and let him be well dignified and placed
or disposed.

To purge the Liver. The Heart, and of administering Cordial. The Lungs. The
Gall. The members of generation. The Brain. Of preparing Medicines.
If the liver, let it not be in the hour of Jupiter, or when he is strong, but
fortify Saturn, and let it be in his hour.

If the heart, let not the Sun be strong, neither apply your medicine in his
hour; but if he be in the Ascendent, tenth or seventh House, you may safely
administer Cordials; but purge not.

When Mercury is strong, purge not the lungs.

When Mars, purge not the gall.

When Venus, purge not the members, or vessels of generation.

When the Moon, purge not the brain.

In preparing your medicines you may take any hour except the hours of Saturn
and Mars.

Note also that if any of the Infortunes were Lord of the Ascendent of the
Patients Nativity, you may make use thereof; for though it may be hurtful to
another, it will not be to him, as you have sufficiently heard at the beginning
of this third Book.

And thus much concerning the administration of Purges; let us therefore now
hear the Elections touching Bathing, and so of using Chirugery and Phlebotomy,
and then conclude this Section.

CHAP. X. Of Bathing, and Electing a time therefore.
Of Bathing for health.
Thou will here beneath find the most fitting time for Phlebotomie; use the
same also for bathing; yet if thou Bathest for health, and the infirmity be
cold or moist, and requires evacuation, let the Moon be in fiery signs, and in
good aspect of the Sun; but if hot, let the Moon be in watery signs, in good
configuration of Jupiter or Venus.

For cleanliness.
If thou do Bathe for cleanliness, let the Moon be in Libra or Pisces, and in
Sextile or Trine of Venus.

Of Bathing or anointing to remove superfluous hair.
If thou do Bathe or anoint thy self to remove superfluous hair growing on
thy body, let the Moon be in Pisces or Scorpio, in Sextile or Trine of Jupiter,
the Sun or Venus, or Quartile, but not bodily joined in Conjunction with any of
them, nor in configuration of Saturn; and if thou can not put her in those
signs, place her in Cancer or Pisces; but by no means in Taurus, Gemini, Virgo,
Libra, Capricorn or Aquaries: But if the Patient do not anoint himself, let the
Moon be in what sign she will; but if he be anointed, be sure thou place not
the Moon in any sign increasing hair, as Aries, Taurus, Leo, and the last part
of Sagittary and Capricorn.

CHAP. XI. Of Electing a time for using Surgery.
Of using Surgery.
HAve regard in electing a time for using Surgery, that the Moon be
increasing in light and motion, and in Sextile or Trine of Jupiter, or Venus,
and let not Mars be in any aspect with her; and some Authors among the Caldeans
hold, that the Moon is more afflicted by Mars when she is increasing in light
then diminishing, and by Saturn more when she is diminishing or decreasing then
increasing.

Let the Moon be in a fixed sign, but not in the sign (or in configuration
therewith) that has signification of the member, if incission be to be made:
neither let the Lord of the Ascendent be therein, nor the cusp of the
Ascendent, nor the Moon nor Lord of the Ascendent Cadent.

Fortify the sign signifying the member and its Lord, and place the Lord of
the Ascendent in the ascendent or mid-heaven, free from the configurations of
Mars, Moon be free from all manner of impediment; observe these, if thou can
not all the foregoing Rules.

CHAP. XII. Of Electing a time for Phlebotomy or Blood-letting, of applying
also Ventosies.
Four things to be considered in Phlebotomy.
REmember that in Phlebotomie there are four things considerable, viz.

1. The time of the year. 2. The Age of the Patient. 3. The custom of the
Patient. 4. The strength of the Patients body.
Time of the year for Phlebotomie.
First the time of the year is to be regarded, and therefore in very hot or cold
weather Phlebotomy is not to be used, for three Reasons.

First, because that in extreme heat or cold, the body is very loose and open,
and the diminution of blood dissolveth it more.

Secondly, through inflammation of the Spirits and humors, Phlebotomy
inflaming them more.

Thirdly, because the Air as a Bath draws the Humors from the Center to the
circumference, and the effect of Phlebotomy is to draw the humors from the
circumference to the Center, though it for the present extracteth the blood.

The age of those that are to use Phlebotomie.
Secondly, the age is to be regarded; for before the age of fourteen, and after
sixty three, Phlebotomie should not be administered, for that it diminishes
that which is the greatest nourisher both of the decrepid age, and the tender
youth, viz. blood; wherefore in these avoid Phlebotomie, unless the case be
desperate, as in some Hectic Fever or the like, and then draw not much blood
neither, but only open a vein for the cooling of the body.

Thirdly, the custom of the Patient is to be regarded; for as Vsus est secunda
natura, Use is a second nature, as we say, Phlebotomy is not any wise dangerous
to those that are accustomed therewith, but it may prove dangerous to the
unaccustomed; for sometimes it may breed an infirmity; wherefore let such
refrain Phlebotomie, unless necessity very much require.

Fourthly, the strength of the Patients body is to be observed or considered;
for upon every slight occasion, weak constitutions are not to draw blood, but
in a strong constitution, there is not altogether so much danger, etc.

If necessity inforceth, thou need not stand to elect a time (as in
Apoplexies and Squinancies) but for such infirmities as may admit of so much
time, thou may follow these Rules, and if thou art wise thou will not neglect
them, no not if thou were hired thereunto, when thou have made experiment
thereof.

Phlebotomy is hindered.
Let the Lord of the Ascendent, sign of the Ascendent, and the Moon, as also its
Depositor be strong and free from the configurations of Saturn, Mars, or the
Sun; for these hinder Phlebotomie, for the Moon in Conjunction with either of
them hinders Phlebotomy a day before, and a day after the bodily or Partile
Conjunction; in Opposition of them, hinders 12. hours before and after; in a,
6. hours. The Moon also in Conjunction with Venus or Mercury, hinders
blood-letting (especially if they be combust) 12. hours before and after the
Conjunction.

Remember that the Moon be not in that sign of the Zodiac or the Lord of the
Ascendent, Moon in Leo, nor (if you apply Ventosies) let her be in Taurus, etc.

Good blood, letting.
The in, * or D or or if not combust, causes good blood-letting, as also in of
them, so the be in a good sign, etc.

The Moon also in a good sign and free from impediment in * or D of Saturn,
Mars, or the Sun, causes good extraction of blood.

To extract melancholy blood. Choleric.
Extract blood Melancholy when the Moon is in Libra or Aquaries, the reins,
buttocks and legs being excepted.

Choleric, In any member when she is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, the breast,
secrets and feet excepted.

Phlegmatic, the Moon in Aries or Sagittary, Phlegmatic.
the head and thighs excepted.

At what time of the Phlebotomy is to be used for any humou^.
Let blood Sanguine, from the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun to the first
Square. Choleric, from the first Square to the Opposition. Phlegmatic, from
the Opposition to the last Square. Melancholy, from the last Square to the next
Conjunction.


For any age.
Note also, that young men and women ought to Phlebotomize from the Conjunction
of the Moon with the Sun to the first Square; from the first Square or quarter
to the Opposition or Full, Middle age; from the Opposition or Full to the last
Square or Quarter, elder years; from the last Square or Quarter to the
Conjunction or Change, old age, if necessity so require that they must be let
blood.

What has been said of Phlebotomy,

CHAP. XIII. Of the Physicians going to the Patient.
ALways make the Ascendent, the tenth, seventh and fourth, and their Lords as
strong as you can; also place the Fortunes therein; for the Ascendent being
well dignified, and its Lord, and the Fortunes therein, signify that the
Patient shall be bettered by the Physician; the tenth, that the Patient shall
be obedient and ruled by the Physician; the seventh, that the Physician shall
be able to go through with his cure; the fourth, that the Physic shall work
its effect.

If the Infortunes be in any of these places,

That the Physician may gain credit by the Patient.
Fortify also the ninth house and its Lord, also the Moon and its Dispositor;
for if the ninth house, and its Lord be unfortunate, afflicted or weak, though
the Physician be never so deserving, he shall be ill though off, mistrusted,
undervalued, and shall gain no credit by his Patient or endeavors.

And if to obtain a great reward for his pains and labor, let the Moon be
strong and well dignified, and also Jupiter, and let him be in the second
house, or in Sextile or Trine thereof, or with the Lord thereof, the which you
must also fortify, and Part of Fortune, and its Dispositor; and if thou can
not make him aspect all these, let him behold Part of Fortune, and as many as
thou can contrive, etc.

Let it be the hour of Jupiter that thou first feast thy Patient in (if
possible) or take thy journey toward him therein; for so shall thou gain
credit and good repute,

And thus much shall suffice at this time for administering of Physic and
Phlebotomy; let us therefore now proceed to what farther we are to consider in
this house, etc.

CHAP. XIV. Of Hiring of Servants.
MAny things are signified by the 12. houses you have heard in our second
Treatise, wherein you find Servants are signified by the sixth house;
wherefore in this place it rests we speak somewhat of them; the Arabians and
ancient Astrologers in their Volumes have delivered Rules for Electing a time
to buy Servants; for that in their days they were used to be bought and sold
(being slaves) as horses (or any other thing for the use of man) in Markets:
But since in our Age wherein we live we use no such thing being (by the
blessing and mercy of GOD) instructed otherways by his word, and by the bond of
charity tied to be more civil; we shall in this place (it belonging not to us
to practice any such matter) omit their Rules of Buying, and deliver you some
Rules for hiring of Servants, etc. which if thou find not in their Volumes,
ought not therefore to be absolutely slighted; for it follows not that
because they found out many rare things in their study of this most heavenly
and admirable Science, that no body else is able, and so to stand at the same
stay they left us, etc.

Fortify then the ascendent, its Lord, the Moon, its Dispositor, the Part of
Fortune, and its Dispositor, also the sign and Lord of the sixth, and its
Dispositor, and let the Fortunes be above the earth; make also the Lord of the
sixth apply to the Lord of the Ascendent, or make the Lord of the Ascendent
dispose of the Lord of the sixth; this makes thy servant diligent and
respectfull to thee, and loving: But if there be an Infortune in the fourth, or
sixth, the servant will be unfaithful, a fugitive, and no wise constant.

If thou can not observe all this, place the Lord of the sixth in the
Ascendent, or tenth, or in Sextile or Trine therewith; and if thou would
have him advantageous to thee in thy estate; place the Lord of the sixth in the
second, but let him not be essentially dignified yet free from impediment or
affliction of the Malevolents; or if thou can not place him therein, let him
be in Sextile or Trine thereunto, or in reception of the Lord of the second, or
disposed of by him, etc.

CHAP. XV. Of buying of Birds, and letting them fly to return again.
Of buying Hawks or Birds of Prey.
EVer remember, if the Birds you intend to buy are Faulcons or Hawks and the
like, that the Moon be in Gemini, Libra, or Aquaries, or in the first 15.
degrees of Capricorn, and fortify the Ascendent, the sign of the sixth and its
Lord.

Of household or domestic Birds.
If the Birds are Pea-cocks, Turkeys, ordinary Cocks and Hens, etc. or any
household Poultry, let the Ascendent, the sign of the sixth and their Lords be
fortunate, and the Moon in an earthy or fixed sign well dignified; this causes
them to be profitable, good, and to remain with you: but if the Cocks you buy
are for fighting or of the Game, Of Cocks of the Game.
let the Moon, Sun, and Mars be strong, and if possible, in reception of each
other, or of the Lord of the sixth, etc.

Of Pigeons.
If thou intendest to buy Pigeons, or any such Bird for thy pleasure, let the
Ascendent, the sixth, their Lords and the Moon, as has been said, be strong or
under no impediment, and let the Moon be in Sextile or Trine of Venus with
reception, and if possible out of the fifth house; and if you can, let the sign
of the sixth be Taurus or Libra, but Taurus, especially, for that it is the
house of Venus, and exaltation of the Moon, and also fixed, which will conduce
much to their staying with you.

Of letting them abroad to return again.
But if thou would know when thou had best venture to let them first fly,
that they may not wander away or forsake the place, let not the Moon apply to
Conjunction or Aspect with any Planet going to combustion, or to Mars,
especially out of aerie signs, or to Saturn; for all these denote no return, or
that they shall be killed or come to some mischance or other.

Wherefore let the sign ascending, the sign of the sixth, and their Lords, and
also the Moon, be free from all impediment and in good asrect of Jupiter or
Venus, provided they be not combust or going thereunto, and let as many of
these as you can be in fixed signs or beholding them, especialy the Moon, the
Ascendent and the sixth house.

Of Water fowl.
And lastly if thou would buy Water-fowle, as are Swans, Geese and Ducks, let
the aforesaid significators and places be in watery signs, viz Cancer, Scorpio
and Pisces; if to remain or keep from straying, let Scorpio be preferred;
Pisces also in this matter has preheminency before Cancer.

CHAP. XVI. Of buying fourfooted beasts.
Of buying fourfooted beasts.
SEE that in this work thou fortifiest that sign which does represent the beast
to be bought, or that which is nearest to its nature, and fortify it, and the
Moon, the Lord of Ascendent, sign of the sixth and their Lords, and let the
Moon if possible be in reception with the Lord of the sign signifying the
beast, or the Lord of the sixth, and free from impediment, or if not in
reception, yet in Sextile or Trine.

Great cattle.
If the beast to be bought be Bull, Ox, Cow or Horse, or any other great Cattle,
let the Moon be in Taurus, or the last fifteen degrees of Sagittary.

Small Cattle.
If Sheep, in Aries; if Goats, in Capricorn, or in Taurus, if it cannot be
otherwise helped; and if the Beast be a male, place your significators in
masculine signs, if a female, the contrary:

Dogs or hounds.
If Dogs or Hounds for hunting, fortify the Ascendent, the sixth and their
Lords, also the Moon, and let the Ascendent be in the last 15. degrees of Leo
or Sagittary, for this makes them strong and bold; and for swiftness, let the
Moon and your significators be in aerie signs; Race horses.
understand the same in buying Race Horses.

Let the Moon in buying any beast be fortunate, in Sextile or Trine of the
Fortunes, and free from the malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes.

Note well
As for matter of the price, as buying to advantage and cheap, I refer thee to
the 3. chap. of the 3. Sect. of this 3. Book, where is sufficiently of this
matter, which will serve in any thing of this nature Mutatis mutandis, varying
your Rules according to Art, and so thou art to take notice in any other house
where any thing is left out; you must have respect to the foregoing Chapters
for businesses of the same nature, and so frame your business according to
discretion and understanding; for it is not for me to insist on every
particular in every house, for that would swell this Volumn to a bulk as large
again as it is, naturally I abhorring tedious Discourses, especially if it may
be helped; so also in Sect. 4. and 2. Chap. I have given thee sufficient Rules
for electing a time to make any agreement of love between brethren; the like I
might have handled in the fourth house between the Son and the Father: in the
fifth between the Native and his Son; and in this house between him and his
Servants, etc. But since those Rules are sufficient, the significators being
varyed (as I have said) what need is there for me to enlarge my Volumn when it
may be sufficient otherways? for it is but placing the fourth house and its
Lord (as you have heard of the third) for the Father: the fifth, for the Sun;
the sixth, for the servant; the seventh for the wife, Leaman, or open enemy,
etc. and then you are right; and thus much for this, or any other business.

CHAP. XVII. Of bringing up Dogs, or Taming of small Cattle.
Of taming of Cattle.
EVer you are herein to fortify the Ascendent, its Lord, the Moon and her
dispositor, the sign of the sixth and its Lord, and let the Moon be increasing
in light and motion, and in reception with the Lord of the sixth or his
Dispositor, or in good Aspect with them, or either of them, or the Lord of the
Ascendent or its Dispositor in reception or good Aspect with them or either of
them; and if possible, let the Moon, the Lord of the Ascendent, or the Lord of
the sixth be in Sextile or Trine (with reception) with Jupiter or Venus, or in
good Aspect, if not reception; yet if thou can not observe all this, be sure
to observe as much thereof as thou can; but especially fortify the Moon, the
Lord of the Ascendent and the Lord of the sixth, and if possible, let them be
in some benevolent configuration of Jupiter or Venus, and so order your time
according to discretion and your Rules, etc.

SECTION VIII. Containing Elections appertaining to the seventh House.
CHAP. I. Of Elections appertaining to the signification of the seventh house,
and touching Marriage.
YOU see we are now to Treat (according to a regular course) of such things as
come under the signification of the seventh house, having done with the sixth,
and give you the most authentic Rules appertaining to the Elections of any
work having relation thereunto: we shall therefore according to our former
method proceed, and speak first of Marriages, being the chiefest or
principallest matter under its significations; but first I shall here show you
what other Elections are here in this house to be handled, etc.

Elections under the signification of the seventh house, are such as appertain
to Marriage, Wars, Duels, to the making of Instruments for War, Partnership, or
such things as are done between two, to seek Fugitives, to make Thieves,
confess the truth, to hunt, fish or fowl, to buy Arms, to storm Castles and
make Batteries, and to play at any Game, and the like; thus much then of the
Elections in general; let us now descend to particulars, and first (as has
been said) of Marriages.

Know that in this manner of Judgment, it is most requisite to know exactly
your significators; otherways it is impossible ever to frame any sure or solid
judgment.

Wherefore then observe, that the Ascendent, its Lord, the Sun and the Planet
from whom the Moon last separated, are significators of the Man; the seventh
house, its Lord, Venus and the Planet to whom the Moon next applies, of the
woman.

The tenth house, the Lord thereof, and the Planet or Planets therein or in
configuration therewith, or with the Lord thereof, has signification of those
things that shall happen between them, viz. whether good or ill.

The fourth house, its Lord, and the Planet or Planets therein, or in
configuration thereof, or with its Lord, has signification of the event and
end of the Marriage.

Wherefore in this matter when you make any Election, have special regard to
the Moon; for according to her fortitude or debility, thou may judge the
good or bad event of any of these.

Mercury is not to be rejected, for he has signification of the children which
they are to have, so that if at the time of Marriage or contract, he be well
dignified, and in Conjunction or Aspect with the Fortunes, thou may assuredly
say the married couple shall soon have a child. The Ancients have said the
same, he being but in configuration with the Fortunes; but I hold it most true
if he be in his own dignities also at that time, and beholding them out of the
fifth house, and the more assured will this be, if they be in prolifical Signs.

Signs of strife and discord between them.
Let the Moon be increasing in light and motion, at the time of the Marriage,
and see that she be not joined to any Infortune in the Ascendent; for that
signifies that the parties then Married shall be continually in strife and
contention, brawling and discord; so likewise if in either of their Nativities
this position be found, then that party that has this in the Radix shall have
most power and bear greatest This is to be understood of such as live according
to the course of Nature, not of grace. Venus a principal Planet to be fortified.
way; yet note if the Moon upon such a constellation in any ones Nativity be
above the earth, that party that has her so posited shall be inclined
(notwithstanding the strife and contention the party is naturally prone to) to
make peace again, and compose all differences.

But what ever you do, be sure you fortify Venus, and see that she be not
Cadent, Retrograde, Combust, nor in her Fall or Detriment, nor in any
malevolent configuration with the Infortunes; for it is impossible the Marriage
should be good where Venus is impotent or afflicted; neither can it be very bad
if she be strong and well aspected of the Fortunes; for in Marriages she is the
chief significatrix; wherefore, if possible, make Jupiter to be in Sextile or
Trine with Venus, or she in reception with him, and the Moon in the house of
either Jupiter or Venus, or in one of their terms; and, if possible, also in
good aspect with them, or place the Lord of the seventh in Sextile or Trine of
Venus, the Moon, or Lord of the Ascendent; but make the Lord of the seventh
apply or else be disposed of by them either by house, exaltation, triplicity,
term, or face; but by house or exaltation is best, etc.

Let the Moon, Jupiter, and Venus, if possible, be in Sextitle or Trine of each
other, but the Trine is best, and out of the watery triplicity; but be sure then
you let them not be in such signs or parts of signs as are to be avoided: For
the Ancients have taught that the Moon, or indeed (as I hold) any of the
significators, Jupiter, or Venus, is not to be placed in the Ascendent at the
time of Marriage in any of these signs following which are to be avoided or
shunned.

What signs or parts thereof are to be avoided or chosen.
Aries, Cancer, Libra and Aquaries, are to be avoided in Marriage; yet I
conceive (with some of the Ancients) Libra may be chosen for betrothing or
contracting, though not for marrying.

Taurus from the first degree to the twentieth is good, from the twentieth to
the end bad.

The first fifteen degrees of Gemini are good, the last bad.

The whole sign of Leo is good, only it causes the one to deceive the other of
their substance.

Virgo signifies the woman shall soon lose her husband; wherefore it may be
beneficial to her, though pernicious to him, women seldom loving so
affectionately as men.

The first fifteen degrees of Scorpio are good to Marry a Maid or Virgin in,
for that it denotes she will be obedient, good and chaste, also loving to her
husband: but the latter fifteen degrees are altogether to be rejected in that
it causes the Woman to be of disposition quite contrary; viz. lewd, a Brawler,
Perfidious, unconstant, envious, malicious and disobedient, etc.

Sagittary is indifferent, as some of the Ancients hold; I for my part cannot
agree to reject it.

The first ten degrees of Capricorn are to be neglected, yet the other two last
faces are good, and signify the woman shall be loving and tractable to the
will and desire of the man, and they are better in a Widow then a Maid,
excepting they cause but few children.

Note that the Moon in Aquaries at the time of Marriage, causes the woman to
be of a manly spirit and disobedient to her husband.

Pisces is good, in that it denotes the woman to be loving and just; yet it
will also cause her to be addicted to twatling and prating, which will now and
then lessen the man's love toward her.

Understand this, when the Moon is in any of these signs, Venus be therein, yet
their significations will be most manifest, the Moon being therein.

Yet had thou Venus, the Moon, Ascendent, the Sun, and Lord of the Ascendent
fortunate in the Radix, thou need not much to observe these, or if they be
but indifferently well dignified and located: it is but making the
significators in the Woman's This will not hold true on such as live in the feat
of God, and are guided by reason, etc.
Radix (if it could be procured) apply by a benevolent aspect to the
significators in thy own, or let thine dispose of hers, or let hers translate
the light of the benevolents to thine, or be in reception with thine by House
or Exaltation, and out of good Houses, or but indifferent Houses, so they be in
reception; and thou shall assuredly find the match in all respects fortunate
and agreeable to thy desire, if thou desire to live contentedly and lovingly
with her.

If at the time of marriage Jupiter be in a feminine sign, and Venus in a
masculine, Jupiter is be a masculine, and the sign wherein Venus is be a
feminine, judge the contrary.

See that in Marriages you let the Moon be increasing in light and motion,
Square of the Sun.

The Radix of the parties nativities are to be considered. To know the love
between two married, or any other couple.
Have regard also to the Radix of both parties if they can be procured; for if
there be fortunes in the mid-heaven at the time of their Nativities, or such
Planets as are in configuration with the fortunes, the new-married Couple shall
have Issue the first year of their marriage.

If in their Nativities you find in one and the same place fortunate Planets,
they shall assuredly be loving the one to the other: And this is a rule which
will serve in the Nativity of any two.

If in the Radix thou find the Lord of the tenth in the ninth, there shall
be no Conception the first month, as say some of the Learned;

Who shall be Master of the two.
But if thou would know which of the two shall be most Master, or bear
greatest sway, look into both their Nativities, and see (as say some of the
Ancients) if the of eithers Radix be in the twelfth House of the others
Nativity, and that party which has the of the others in his Radix thus
located, shall be predominant.

That party is most subordinate to the others disposition, that has the Lord
of the Ascendent, or the (in the Nativity of the man, and Ascendents Lord, the
Moon and Venus, in the Radix of the Woman) disposed of by the significators in
the others Nativity, or applying to any aspect with them, except there be
strong reception, and that causes a mutual amity. I have observed also, that
that party which had their significators in their Nativity strongest and most
essentially fortified, to have the most respect and bear chiefest rule over the
others inclinations and humors, etc.

A fit time for marriage.
To conclude, Know that it is a fit time (having considered what has been
already said) to marry when the Ascendent is assisted by the benevolent aspects
of the Fortunes, or they therein located; but if it be afflicted by the
Malevolents either by body or aspect, judge the contrary.

The joy not of long continuance.
Note also, that when the and are in moveable signs, the joy and mirth between
those then married will not be of long continuance. And thus much for the
electing a time for marriage; let us therefore now proceed.

CHAP. II. Of Venereall sports.
Quando voluer is cum muliere delectatione sacere.
Would thou be versed in things of this nature, thou must warily then follow
thy rules thus: As, Si pro dilectione muliere jacere vis, let the Moon be in
Aries, Leo, Libra or Capricorn, for that they are of strength and power; and
let her be in benevolent configuration with Mars or Venus, or both; for
applying to she causes multum sperma; to, gaudium quod invicem habebunt, and
rations delectabiles significat. But see that she apply not to, quia taedium,
frigiditatem and fastidium illius facti significat. But to apply to the is
good, for that it signifies magnam dilectionem amborum in illo negotio. See
that the be not in, for that oftentimes Infirmities come thereby; but, or are
not to be rejected, quia significant delectationem and gaudium.

If the be the configuration of, the Woman will refrain, etc.

Vt non concipiat.
Nota quod si volueris muliere jacere ut non concipiat, let the be in, or
applying to, and in no configuration to, and be sure thou place her not in or:
Some of the Ancients say, that si aspexerit Luna Martem, prohibebitur
generatio. But know that in the Ascendent in or, delectationem and gaudium dat.
But in the seventh, in coitu, discordiam inter eos denotat.

Vt concipiat.
Know that in prolifical signs, as also the Ascendentor fifth House denotes the
contrary: Still remember to vary your rules and order them according to
discretion, and you cannot err.

CHAP. III. Of Partnership, or Agreements, or things between two.
The significators are chiefly to be regarded. To know the true significators.
IF in all things you have chief respect to the significators, and that to the
right and true significators of what you undertake (as has been sufficiently
said) you shall always be able to perform any thing in this nature with
certainty.

Wherefore in this manner of Judgment, know that between partners, the
Ascendent, its Lord, the Moon and Planet from whom the Moon last separated, are
significators of that party which begins the business; the seventh, its Lord
and the Planet the Moon next applys unto, of the other: the tenth and its Lord
shall signify what is or shall happen between them; and the fourth, and its
Lord, the end of the business.

How to judge thereof.
Look then whether the Ascendent or seventh House (I mean the cuspe thereof) be
most or more benevolently beheld by the Lord of the tenth, or in which he is
most dignified or has most fortitudes (which thou may know by the Table of
Fortitudes in our second Book of this Volume) and judge that party signified by
the House he is most in favor with, to prosper or be most stable or firm in
the thing.

Rules for disposing the face of Heaven, etc.
Be sure that you place the Moon, the Ascendent and its Lord at the time of the
making the agreement or partnership between tw^ (...) common signs, such as are
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittary and Pisces, as you have heard already in our second
Book; but some of the learned in former ages have not approved of Sagittary or
Pisces, except the Moon be received of Jupiter, yet Leo is to be chosen, for
that it being the house of Sol, and he being advantageous in matters of
society, it has been by the Ancients approved of for a good sign, but other of
the fixed signs in this matter they have disallowed of; as also of all moveable
signs, except Capricorn only: wherefore let neither the Ascendent, its Lord,
the Moon, its Dispositor, Part of Fortune, or its Lord, be in them, but place
them in common signs, and fortify them to thy utmost power, free from both
impediment, and the Malevolent Configurations of the Infortunes, but if
possible place them in aspect of the Fortunes.

Moreover, let the Moon be increasing in light and motion; but if thou can
not observe all this, yet see that thou fortify as many as thou can, and
those chiefly such as are especially to be regarded, as are the Ascendent, its
Lord, the Moon, its Dispositor, the Lord of the seventh, and cusp thereof, as
also, its Dispositor, and the Medium and Imum Coeli, and their Lords; and if
possible, make them behold one another, or at least as many thereof as thou
can, especially the Lord of the Ascendent and seventh, or in reception of
each other, or with the Lords of the tenth and fourth, etc. let discretion and
judgment be your directors, and you cannot fail of your desire, but to obtain
it, you must dive into the reasons and grounds of the Art, as have the Sages in
former times; otherwise neither what they, my self, nor an hundred after me
(should so many endeavor to instruct thee) can well direct thee: but
contrariwise, when thou have searched the depth thereof, thou will soon be able
to write as authentickly and truly as any that has gone before thee, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of going to War, or beginning of Differences and Duels, Quarrels,
Lawsuits, Controversies, and the like.
To know the true Signifitators.
LEarn thou this, that the Ascendent, and its Lord, and the Planet or Planets
therein, or in Conjunction or Configuration with the Lord thereof, or in aspect
with it, are to signify him or them that begin the quarrel or controversy,
the seventh, Lord thereof, and Planet or Planets therein, and in aspect
therewith, or with the Lord thereof, or Conjunction with him, the other, or
contrary party.

Rules in disposing the Ascendent and its Lord, being significators, or all the
significators, either for duels, open wars, or lawsuits, or any other
controversy.
Having thus a true knowledge of your Significators, you may easily frame your
business to the best; as if you would have the party or parties signified by
the Ascendent to overcome, or to have the better, it is good to place the
Ascendent in one of the houses of the Superior Planets. viz. Saturn, Jupiter,
or Mars; but note, that in this matter, Mars is to be preferred before the
rest, and of this house, some of the Sages have said Scorpio, because it is a
fixed sign: I conceive it being a sign of deceit, it may help by policy or
slight to overmatch the contrary party, and therefore to be preferred before
Aries, who though it be a sign fiery, yet is it moveable and unstable; however,
be sure, if possible, at the time of the first onset or beginning of the
quarrel, you make the Ascendents Lord dispose of the Lord of the seventh, or
otherwise be more essentially fortified and dignified, and also elevated above
him in the figure of heaven at that time; for by how much the more your
Significator be strong and well dignified, by so much the more shall he be able
to deal with or overcome his enemy: understand the same by the Lord of the
seventh, if you would have the party or parties thereby signified, to have the
better: And note, that either in single duels, open wars between Armies,
domestic or foreign, or Lawsuits, or any other Controversy, the same rules
will serve, having a special regard to the true Significators.

These rules might sufficiently serve for any business of this nature; but
since the Ancients have hereon been somewhat large, I hold it not fit for me to
bury their sayings in silence; they may very well serve both to confirm thy
judgment, and enable thee to order it according to the most rational rules,
which thou may according to discretion pick out thereof.

Other rule in disposing the Lord of the Ascendent, or chief Significator.
Let then the Lord of the Ascendent (if that party you would have victorious, if
it be your Significator, and so contrariwise the Lord of the seventh, if he be
your Significator) behold the Ascendent being his own house, with a Sextile or
Trine, and also Mars, if he be not Lord thereof, or be in Benevolent
Configuration with the Lord thereof, or place the Lord of the Ascendent, in the
Ascendent, eleventh or tenth (but know the tenth is better then the eleventh)
well dignified, both essentially and accidentally.

But have a special care he be not in the abject part of heaven, viz. the
fourth, or in the seventh, because then he is disposed of by his enemy, or as
it were intrapped or environed by h m; neither let him be in the eighth, or in
combustion, or retrograde, nor cadent, or any otherwise debilitated; neither in
reception or aspect of any Planet thus afflicted, etc.

Of the Lord of the seventh.
And contrariwise, place the Lord of the seventh (if you would have those
signified by it be worsted) in the ascendent or second, and applying to the
Lord of the Ascendent by Sextile or Trine, or if not so, by any other aspect,
for that betokens a desire or inclination to agreement.

Whatever you do, see that you fortify Mars, and let him, if possible, be Lord
of the party you would have victorious (as has been said) and essentially well
dignified and well placed in the heaven, Of placing Mars.
and also free from all manner of Impediment, applying by Sextile or Trine to
the Significator or his house, the Ascendent and its Lord, if they be chief
Significators: the contrary if the seventh, and the Lord thereof be
Significators, etc.

Of the signification of the second house.
You must further know, that the second house has signification in Duels of
the parties second which is signified by the Ascendent; in open wars, of the
Militia, Moneys, or all other assistants and friends; in Lawsuits, the
Coadjutors or Helpers, or the help it self: The eighth house also contrariwise
of the assistants or aid of the enemies or prosecutors, being the second from
the seventh, as you have had abundantly taught you in the second Treatise of
these our labors.

Rules touching the second house and its Lord.
Fortify therefore the second house, and its Lord, as you have heard of the
Lord of the Ascendent, as you have also heard by him; for this shall make
strong your aid and assistance in all respects for the better managing your
business: still remember to fortify the Lord of the second, and the second it
self by essential dignities and aspects of the Benevolents, as you have heard
of the Lord of the Ascendent and Ascendent it self, and you cannot err;
wherefore ponder well the reasons hereof, and you shall be soon able to perform
your work with great facility; otherwise it is impossible ever to instruct thee
in this matter, as I have often said

It is also requisite, you have respect to the Moon, and its Dispositor, that
you fortify them also as much as possibly may be, Of Mercury, the Moon, and
its Dispositor.
as also Mercury, and let them apply to that parties Significators you desire
to be Victorious.

In single Duels or Lawsuits and Controversies between man and man, you would
do well to have regard to the time of their This may I very well put in for few
godly men will use strife or debate.
birth, being the most sure ground of thy work, if they can be procured; for
look who has Mars most essentially fortified in the Radix, and he shall
assuredly be Victor in the Quarrel, Controversy or Lawsuit, and commonly he
that is born in the night (as say some of the Learned) does overcome.

But I hold that Mars in Lawsuits, is not so much to be regarded, as the Lords
of their Ascendents; for to that which is most dignined, I give Victory,
without any regard to Mars at all; only in Duels or Wars Mars ought to be
considered.

The Authors judgment of war between two Kings or Nations.
Yet note, if the war be betwixt two Kings, their Nativities are to be procured
and regarded (as say some of the Ancients) but I hold more proper to have the
time of the beginning of their Monarchies, for the judging thereon, or the
beginning of their stock to be procured; and so consequently if the war be
between any King and State, to have the beginning of his Monarchy, and the time
of the beginning of their being a State or Commonwealth, etc. and from these
times collect your judgment. But more of this anon when we come to treat of
Revolutions of the World; wherefore here we shall pass it by and proceed.

Of part of War, and part of Victory.
Part of war (as some of the ancient Sages have instructed us) ought to be set,
and then you must have a special regard to the placing thereof for advantage of
that party you desire should be victorious; wherefore herein as thou have been
warned of the seventh, fourth and eighth Houses in placing the Lord of your
Ascendent, so understand of placing part of war. How you must take part of war
and other parts taught by the Ancients, we may treat of hereafter, if it be
requisite. Also part of Victory is to be after the same manner regarded and
disposed, etc.

Of the Moon in Taurus.
Know that the Moon in Taurus in any aspect or configuration of Saturn or Mars,
is not good, but very obnoxious to the beginner of the quarrel, war, lawsuit
or controversy.

Of Gemini or Cancer.
If the Moon be in Gemini or Cancer, let her be in Trine of Mars, otherwise she
is but indifferently well placed for the beginners advantage. But if she be
beheld of the Fortunes, there needs no fear.

Of beginning of quarrels, lawsuits, wars or controversies.
Begin no quarrel, war or controversy, neither invade thy enemy, the Moon being
in Virgo or Capricorn; but when the Moon is assisted and aspected by the
Fortunes, and free from the impediments and afflictions of the Malevolents,
thou may invade or begin any quarrel or controversy with assurance of victory
and success; for according to the opinion of the Sages, this Configuration
causes assistance and strength to the beginner, and debility and mischief to
the other.

Many Authors have observed to elect the time of beginning to war, or invade
any place, Nation or Kingdom, in the day and hour of Jupiter, Venus or the Sun,
and to make their Ascendent free from all impediment and affliction, and in one
of the signs of right ascentions; oblique they wholly reject in this matter;
what are oblique signs and signs of right ascentions thou have had already
taught thee in the 22 Chapter of our second Treatise in this work, or,
Introduction to the Judgment of the STARS: but if thou have seriously weighed
the foregoing rules, thou will find this of small or no use or importance.

Of Part of Fortune in wars or quarrels, lawsuits or controversies.
Know that Part of Fortune (if thou desire success to the beginner (as has
been said) or other) ought to be placed in their Confines or Houses
appertaining to them; as if for the beginner, let it be in the Ascendent,
tenth, second or eleventh; if for the other, in the seventh, fourth, eighth or
fifth: Understand the same in Lawsuits, the Ascendent is still for the
Plaintiff, and the seventh for the Defendant; but remember that in any of these
businesses Part of Fortune be free from impediment, especially of the Lords of
the seventh, eighth, fourth or fifth; but if possible, assisted by the Fortunes.

Of the disposer of Part of Fortune.
Observe the same rules in disposing of the Lord of Part of Fortune; for the
Sages have said, that party in whose Confines they are well dignified and
located, shall assuredly be victorious and have the day.

Of moveable signs.
Moveable signs to be in the Ascendent at the time of beginning any controversy,
are to be shunned, especially Aries, Libra and Cancer, and of these Cancer is
the worst, for that she is a watery sign, and the House of the Moon which is the
lowest Planet; and the seventh then must be Capricorn, which is the House of
Saturn, the highest and most superior of the Planets; wherefore Capricorn is
the rather to be chosen of the moveable signs, yet by reason of their
instability and wavering inclination, they are in my opinion to be laid aside
in works of this nature.

CHAP. V. Of making of Peace, suppressing or encountering of Rebels, and
storming of Castles and Towns.
Of making of peace oragreement.
LOok in the fourth Section, and second Chapter of this Treatise, where as
touching agreements and making of friendship between party and party, we have
treated already, and you will find we have sufficiently treated hereof;
wherefore here again to insist, were both superfluous and ridiculous; for those
rules, mutatis mutandis, will serve also for this matter; only remember you
still are rightly informed of your true significators, for then you may be sure
you are right for this matter, etc.

Of suppressing or invading Rebels.
In suppressing also of Rebels, or invading them, you are especially to regard
your significators, remembering always that the Ascendent is for the Rebel or
Rebels. As touching the ordering the matter to your content and desire, follow
the same rules you have heard delivered you in the foregoing Chapter of this
eighth Section.

The Sages have taught that in this manner of Judgment you have special regard
to the place of the Lord of the Ascendent; for if he be in the East-part of
Heaven, place the Moon in the West; and if he be in the Southern part, place
her in the Northern; and so on the contrary if he be in the West, or North part.

Remember to fortify Mars, Mercury and the Moon, as you have already heard,
and you cannot do amiss.

A good time to set out against an Enemy.
Also when thou set out to war, have regard to the three superior Planets,
and see whether they are direct or retrograde; for if they are retrograde, set
out at that very instant they become direct; but if they be direct, let your
time be when they become retrograde; also if they be oriental, when they become
occidental; if occidental, when they become oriental; if combust, when they
become free; if free, when they become combust; or when they are gone out of
the signs they were in when the occasion of the war was given; for when a
Planet changes his sign, he also changes his former property and
signification; but if Mars be received in the hour of the revolution of the
year of the World by house or exaltation of any of the Fortunes, the war
cease for that year, or at least for the time of that revolution, and peace
and tranquillity follows.

To storm or demolish Castles and strong holds.
And if thou would elect a fit time to destroy Castles and strong holds, it is
requisite you know the proper Ascendent of the place at the first building
thereof, and then see to the places of the Planets at that time, and to the
place and strength of the Lord of the Ascendent, and place him in the opposite
sign and part of Heaven, and debilitate him as much as thou can, and if
possible, place him disposed of by the Lord of your Ascendent, or afflicted by
him, and let your Ascendent be a fiery or aerie sign, and the Moon and Lord of
the Ascendent also in signs of the same nature.

Or let the sign ascending be a sign of right ascension, and the Lord of the
Ascendent occidental, and the Planet that arises next after the Ascendent slow
in motion, and applying to a Planet of the same infirmity, and entering his
Fall, and cadent from an Angle; but let him not be retrograde.

Or else let the Moon be oriental and decreasing in light and motion, cadent
and applying also to a Planet that is also slow in motion, cadent and entering
his fall, or the fall of the Moon, viz. Scorpio. Also if the Moon be above the
earth, let her apply to a Planet under the earth, and let not the Lord of the
Ascendent be retrograde.

This is good if it be done in the last quarter of the Moon, and she in no
aspect of the Sun, or her own House, or the Lord of the House wherein she is;
and by this thou may order thy matter at pleasure, considering what has been
said before, the which by varying thy rules thou may accomplish.

Other rules for suppressing of Enemies, or for setting out against them.
Yet as touching invading of Enemies, and suppressing of them, I think good yet
further to enlarge, thus.

In setting out against, or invading of an Enemy, it is not safe whilst the is
strong, for the Ascendent and the are significators of the Rebels: Neither is
it safe for those Rebels to stir when she is weak. Understand the same of the
Lord of the Ascendent.

But it is very necessary to begin against Rebels or an Enemy, when Mars is in
the East part of Heaven, and between the tenth degree of Taurus and the tenth
of Leo, and from the tenth degree of Scorpio to the tenth of Aquaries: This
thou must observe if the Enemy or Rebels are Eastward.

But if they are Westward, begin to invade them when Mars is in the West part
of Heaven, from the tenth degree of Leo to the tenth degree of Scorpio, and
from the tenth degree of Aquaries to the tenth degree of Taurus.

And truly it will be advantageous for both parties; if they are careful of not
beginning their business in evil hours, viz. when the is combust, or joined to
the Sun in one degree and minute, and for the space of twelye hours after, viz.
Combust hours, for these times are to be shunned in the beginning of any good
work, and so likewise at the time of any Athazer: You have heard what Athazer
is, in the second Book, and last Chapter.

What hours are fortunate, and what unfortunate and combust.
It rests therefore for the better understanding and instruction of my Reader,
I declare unto them which are Combust hours and unfortunate, and which are
again to be chosen.

The first twelve hours then after the Conjunction of the Sun and the Moon, or
(more plainly) after the change of the Moon, are Combust and unfortunate hours
to begin any thing, the subsequent seventy two hours are good and fortunate,
and the twelve hours following them are again unfortunate and Combust hours;
but the seventy two following again after, fortunate; and so throughout all the
month thou may judge exactly hereof, by duly observing the number of these
hours night and day: This is so plain, I shall not need to give you any example.

Only know thus much, that you are to reckon your Combust hours from the very
hour and minute of the Conjunction of the Luminaries either day or night; and
so the fortunate hours from the time the Combust hours leave off, allowing
still seventy two hours for their number, and you cannot fail of the exact
performance hereof.

If any war or quarrel be begun in these Combust hours, the beginner shall be
destroyed, or there shall much evil and damage befall his person and his
soldiers and assistants, viz. if it be begun in the first four hours of any of
the twelve Combust hours, the beginner shall be destroyed; in the second four
hours he shall be wounded or damnified in his body or own person; And if it be
begun in the four last hours, his soldiers and assistants shall chiefly suffer.

CHAP. VI. Of buying of Arms, and preparing of Instruments of War, and Ships or
Galleys.
Of buying of Arms defensive or offensive.
IN buying of Arms, War-horses or Instruments of War, either offensive or
defensive, see that the Moon be either in her own House, exaltation or
triplicity joined to Mars in the latter end of the month, and in the beginning
to Saturn; for all the Ancients conclude her infortunated in the beginning of
the month when she is joined to Mars, and in the latter end when to Saturn.

Of preparing Arms.
In preparing of Arms, Armies, or Bands or Instruments of War, let your
Ascendent be fixed, and if possible all the four Angles, and let them be signs
of right ascentions, and place the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendent in an
Angle, especially in the tenth, oriental and essentially strong, and let the
Moon be increasing in light and motion.

Fortify also Mars as much as you can, as also the Lord of the Conjunction or
prevention of the Luminaries before the beginning of your work, and see that
the first application of the Moon after her Conjunction with the Sun, or
prevention, be to a fortunate Planet, and let the Lord of the Ascendent be
entering an angle if you cannot place him therein, and in aspect of the fourth
House, and this is also good for setting out of Ships: but more of this in the
ninth House, where we shall treat of such Elections as conduce to the building
of Ships and Galleys; wherefore I shall in this place referr you thereunto.

CHAP. VII. Of seeking of Fugitives, and examining of Thieves and Malefactors.
To apprehend a Fugitive.
A Fugitive, Runaway, or a man broke out of Prison, or by any other manner
escaped, is thus to be apprehended or found again; place the Moon when you make
inquisition in the same degree as is the Sun, but not within seventeen minutes
of his body; and let the Sun also be weak and afflicted, and in the last
fifteen degrees of Libra, or in the first fifteen degrees of Scorpio, or else
with the head or tail of the Dragon, viz. within 12 degrees before it, or 7
degrees after.

But if you cannot thus place them, let them be in the Ascendent, or else let
the Sun and the Moon be in Quartile or Opposition or in Sextile or Trine
without reception, and weak in those Houses wherein they are; or else let the
time wherein you make inquisition be three days before an Eclipse, or one day
after; but if possible let it be the Eclipse of the Moon; for by how much you
weaken and debilitate the Moon, it is the better in this manner of judgment,
for it confounds the capacity and weakneth the ability of the Fugitive.

But if you would afflict and torment the Fugitive when he is taken, you must
place the Moon in her fall or detriment; but if thou would only imprison
him, let the Moon be in Aspect or Conjunction with one of the Malevolents; but
place her not in the fourth, neither the Malevolent to whom she is joined, and
let the Lord of the Ascendent be in Conjunction or aspect with the Lord of the
seventh, or place the Lord of the Ascendent in the seventh, and the Lord of the
seventh in the Ascendent, and let the Moon by no means be in Conjunction or
aspect with any Planet in the twelfth; for it being the house of secret plots
and deceits, it denotes either that he shall not be taken, or if he be, that he
will get away again.

To cause a Thief or any other Malefactor confess the truth.
Now to cause any Malefactor or Thief to speak and confess truth, Haly says, as
also Albumazar, it is good to place the Moon, and the Planet to whom she
applies in humane signs; but herein Bonatus is rather to be followed, who says
the Moon must be in Libra; and if possible, let the Ascendent be Libra, and the
Planet that is Lord of the seventh also therein, in Conjunction with the Moon;
for Libra being the balance or sign of equality (as you have heard in the
second Book) inclines the Malefactor to speak what is equity, truth and right:
Haly also says, it is good to let the Ascendent be one of the signs of right
ascentions; and truly it will do very well, if Libra cannot be therein placed;
however, be sure you place the Moon, and the Lord of the seventh in Libra.

CHAP. VIII. To know the Subject and scope of the Whisperings or Clandestine
Practices of any two, and of playing at Chesse (or any other sitting Game) to
win.
MAny times it so happens that a man may have occasion of suspicion of some
that he sees secretly laying their heads together or whispering; wherefore to
satisfy thy self of what they Treat, have regard unto the first and seventh
houses and their Lords; for the Ascendent, its Lord and the Planet from whom
the Moon last separated, are significators of him that began the Discourse, and
that set his face toward the South; and the seventh, its Lord and the Planet
to whom the Moon next applies, shall signify the other or him that has his
face toward the North or East; the thing on which they discourse shall be
signified by the tenth house and its Lord; the fourth house, its Lord and the
Dispositor of the Moon, shall show the end of their Discourse or Result, but
you must know the Planet ruling the sign wherein the Moon is, shall have more
power then the Lord of the fourth.

Wherefore if you find that the Lord of the tenth apply, or is rather
inclining to the Ascendent, or be in reception with its Lord, say that the
party signified by the Ascendent shall obtain or prevail with the other in what
they discourse; but if you find the Lord of the tenth, and seventh in the like
manner, then judge the contrary.

See also if the Lord of the Ascendent be a fortunate and good Planet, or evil
and unfortunate; for if it be either Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun, and they free
from the Malevolent aspects of the Infortunes, say the party signified by the
Ascendent shall speak truth and be honest in his dealings and words; but if he
be Saturn, Mars, or Mercury, he shall dissemble, lie and deal treacherously; in
like manner judge of the party signified by the seventh, according to his
significator etc.

Look to what Planet or part of Heaven the significator of lies and treacheries
casts his Square or Opposition and aspect, and say to such men or things
signified by the Planet beheld or the place of Heaven, he intends mischief; In
like manner, judge he intends good if his significator be fortunate, especially
to those men and things signified by the Planet and place of Heaven beheld, etc.

So likewise if you find the Lord of the tenth fortunate, you may judge they
treat of honest, good and lawful things; but if he be unfortunate, of
unlawful and base businesses; Examine the nature of the sign, and the Planet
that is Lord thereof, and you shall soon be acquainted with the nature and
quality thereof.

And if the Lord of the fourth, or the Planet signifying the accomplishment or
end of the business be malevolent and unfortunate, the business in agitation
shall end with mischief, treachery and deceit; but if he be a fortune and well
dignified, judge the contrary.

Of Gaming.
And now as touching gaming, you are to understand that the Ascendent and its
Lord are significators of the party that challenges or begins first; the
seventh house and its Lord, of the other: Fortify therefore the Ascendent and
its Lord (if that side thou favourest) and debilitate the seventh and his Lord;
for then shall the party signified by the Ascendent win; and if thou placest
the Lord of the eighth in the second, or applying thereunto or to its Lord, or
the Lord of the Ascendent, it will be the better; and if thou can not place
him thus, put him in the Ascendent, but let him be in reception with the Lord
of the second or first; but let him not receive the Lord of the second,
especially when they are in play.

Let also the Moon, when they begin, separate from a Fortune and apply unto
another, and let it be above the Earth; place also the face or breast of him you
intend shall win against the Moon, and let her be fortunate and strong, least
she prove more advantageous to the other.

He that challenges or desires another to play, if thou would have him
win, place his face opposite to the Moon, and let her be in the East part of
Heaven; but if thou would have the challenged to be gainer, place the Moon
in the West part of the Heavens, and let him sit in the East part of the room
with his face against her.

If the Ascendent be a movable sign, and the Lord thereof in a movable sign, as
also the Moon when the Game is begun, they will not continue long in play; if
it be fixed, and the Lord thereof and the Moon in fixed signs, judge the
contrary; if common, indifferent, and as soon as they have left off, others
will begin.

If the Moon apply unto a Fortune, he that begins shall win, but if to an
Infortune, he shall lose; if the Moon apply to a Fortune, and then immediately
after to an Infortune, he shall win at first, and lose at last: But if she
apply to an Infortune, and then immediately after to a Fortune, he shall lose at
first and win at last; In like manner if she apply unto a malevolent, the
challenger or he that begins shall lose; and so in the same manner judge of
the other.

In playing at Chess let the Moon apply to Mercury, and afterward to Mars, for
that in this Game there is variety of Play; and if the Moon be in reception
also with them both, it will be the better; and if the sign be common, neither
of the Gamesters will advantage themselves much.

Moreover in playing at Tables, let the Moon apply to Venus, or Mercury, and if
a Fortune be in the Ascendent, the beginner shall win, especially if an
Infortune be in the seventh; in like manner judge on the other side if the
Fortune be in the seventh, and the Malevolent in the Ascendent; also if the
Lord of the Ascendent be in the Mid-heaven, the beginner shall win; and if the
Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of the seventh be in Opposition, they shall
fall out in their play.

When the Lord of the Ascendent is Retrograde, it signifies the beginner shall
cozen; but if both the Lord of the Ascendent and Lord of the seventh be equally
well dignified, in the tenth there shall not be much winning on either side;
also when Mercury and the Moon are in the Ascendent, they shall have many words
and wrangle in their Play, and if Mars be in the Ascendent, they shall tell
many lies, especially the beginner.

But if Saturn be in the Ascendent, there shall be no winning on either side,
but after a tedious dispute they shall leave off and draw stakes; and if
Jupiter be in the Ascendent, they shall part in choler; and if Venus be therein
they shall break off merrily; and if the Moon be there, he that ought to have
it go on his side shall quickly win; you have heard before of Mars and Mercury,
etc.

Note, that when the sign ascending is a common sign at the beginning of any
two playing, it signifies that as soon as they have left off, others shall
begin; and thus much for this; remember what has been said, and you are well
enough; also let the Moon when you go out of your house intending to play be in
your face, and the Lord of the Ascendent applying to the Fortunes, and in the
mid-heaven or in the eleventh house, and how ever, let him be above the earth,
free from combustion, and the affliction of the Malevolents.

CHAP. IX. Of Hunting, Fowling and Fishing.
Of hunting of Beasts, either wild or tame.
IN this manner of Judgment you are to know the sign most proper for the
business (as in all other) is especially to be chosen; for here are three
several elements to rove in: If on the earth you hunt either Hare, Deer, Fox,
or wild Beast, in every of these you are to place your Ascendent accordingly;
as if ordinary Beasts, place a Beastial or fourfooted sign upon your Ascendent,
and place the Moon therein, as Aries, Taurus, or Capricorn; but if you Hunt
feral Beasts, such as are Wolfs, Lions, Bears, Leopards or the wild Boar, let
your Ascendent be Leo, or Sagittary the last 15. degrees; and let your
Ascendent be strong, as also its Lord, the Moon, and the sign of the sixth and
its Lord, and weaken and debilitate the seventh house and its Lord as much as
you can; for the Ascendent, its Lord and the Moon has signification of the
Hunters, and therefore it strengthens them; The sixth and its Lord denote the
Dogs, Nets, or other Instruments of Hunting, and the seventh has signification
of the thing chased; wherefore I rather advise thee to place the sign of the
seventh of the Nature of the thing you would take or Hunt rather then the
Ascendent, and debilitate it, and if possible, place Mars therein, for that
denotes bloodshed, and that you shall take what you seek; but be sure you
fortify the Ascendent, its Lord, the Moon, the sign of the sixth, and the Lord
thereof, and it will be the more certain; but by no means let Saturn be in the
seventh, least you toil and labor to no purpose; for he signifies you shall
not obtain your desire, though you see the beast you aim at; or if you take it,
yet shall it escape again; and these Rules you are Mutatis mutandis to use in
Fowling and Fishing, etc.

Of Fowling or taking of Birds on the land.
As if you are to hunt Birds, or (more properly) to Fowl, and the Birds are such
as are taken by Nets, Setting-dogs, Pinfals or any other device, let your
Ascendent be aerie, and the Lord thereof in an earthy sign well dignified, but
debilitate the seventh house and its Lord, and fortify also the sixth and its
Lord (as you have heard) for it adds vigor to the Springes, Nets, Dogs, etc.
and other instruments appropriate to your work.

In the Air.
But if you aim at such Birds as are usually taken in the air, by Hawk, or
Faulcon, let the Ascendent be an aerie sign, and the Lord thereof also in an
aerie sign, yet let them both be strong, and also the sixth and its Lord, and
debilitate the seventh and its Lord, as you have heard.

In the Water.
And if you hunt Waterfowl, as Duck, Mallard, or the like, let your Ascendent
be an aerie sign, and the Lord thereof strong in a watery; or place the Lord
thereof in an aerie, and the ascendent in a watery or earthy; in like manner do
with the sixth and its Lord, and dispose of the seventh as you have heard.

Of fishing in Sea, Rivers or Pools.
Again, if your sport be fishing, place the Ascendent and its Lord in watery
signs and well dignified; fortify also the sixth and its Lord, and place the
Ascendent if you would catch shel-fish, and are roving in the Sea, in Cancer,
and let Jupiter be in Pisces well dignified, and debilitate the seventh house
and its Lord. For smaller fish, if you angle or fish by any other Instrument in
Rivers or Pools, prefer Pisces, and so according to discretion frame your
business; for since you have had the fundamental Rules of Elections delivered
you at the beginning of this third Book, you must not expect I shall do any
more then hint at any thing we are hereafter to handle in this Book, for if
your own ingenuity will not lead you and enable you to go through with any
election pertaining to the life of man, by what thou have already heard, thou
would never apprehend the mystery thereof, should I enlarge as much as is
possible upon every particular.

Of teaching of Dogs to hunt.
In teaching of Dogs to Hunt, such as are Hounds, Grew-hounds and such like,
place the Moon in Aries in Conjunction of Mars; for this will make them soon
learn, and put vigor and courage in them to slay and bite; but let Jupiter be
also in aspect unto them, for the better preservation of them from danger in
hunting.

In teaching of Setting-dogs, place the Moon in an earthy sign, and the Lord of
the Ascendent in an Aerie in Conjunction with the Moon, and in good aspect of
Mercury, and Venus, that he may be the more docible and gentle.

In teaching of Hawks, Faulcons and such like, let the Moon be in Aquaries
applying to Mars, To teach Hawks and Faulcons.
and let Mars be in Scorpio.

Note, that if the Moon be applying to a Retrograde Planet when any one begins
either to Hunt, Fowl, or Fish, it signifies they shall get nothing but
weariness, pain and trouble; but if it be in the Ascendent, it denotes great
agility in Hunting or in the Sport; and if Mars be in the mid-heaven, it
denotes the same to the Birds or Beasts pursued: And if the Moon be in the
Mid-heaven afflicted by Mars, it signifies the Faulconer, shall lose his Hawk.

But let those that delight much in hawking place the Moon in Aries applying to
Mars in Capricorn, for this denotes good sport both in the air and on the earth.

To be short, in hunting it is most necessary you place the Moon in the
mid-heaven and a moveable sign in the ascendent, and Jupiter therein in good
aspect of the Moon, and Mars in the seventh, and Saturn Cadent, and in no
aspect of the Ascendent, and Venus in the Ascendent or mid-heaven, and the Moon
applying unto her; for thereby shall both man, horse and hounds be elevated and
strengthened to undergo the business cheerfully, and they shall obtain their
desire without much pains, toil, or trouble, neither shall they be much wearied.

SECTION. IX. Containing Elections appertaining to the signification of the
eighth House.
CHAP. 1. Of making of Wills.
UNder the signification of this House, comes the Wills of the dead, and the
heritages left thereby; as touching Wills we are in this place to treat, viz.
what time is best for to make them.

When thou make thy Will, let not the Moon be in a movable sign nor the
Ascendent, nor its Lord if thou intendest it shall stand; for this denotes its
mutability, and that after a short time thou shall alter it again; wherefore
let the Ascendent be fixed, and the Moon and the Lord thereof placed in fixed
signs; for this denotes permanency; this is for such as will be disposed to
such actions before they are visited with sickness; but when once it has
seized on them, it is not to stand upon electing of times, but then you are to
judge of the event by the time, in this manner.

If the Moon be slow in motion, and increasing in light, and in no aspect of
any Planet, in combustion, under the Sun beams or Retrograde, it is good, and
denotes the death of the party quickly, and that his Will shall not be altered,
especially if she be joined to Mars by body, but not by aspect, provided Mars
be not in the Ascendent, nor in aspect therewith, nor its Lord; yet it shall
not be kept, but in a short time it shall be either lost or stolen.

But if Saturn be placed with the Moon or Lord of the Ascendent, as you have
heard of Mars, and in no aspect of the Ascendent, it signifies the sick party
shall yet live, and the Will then made shall continue in force all his life,
and also after his death, for it shall not be altered nor revoked; bur if he
afflict the Ascendent, it shall be altered.

Also if Jupiter and Venus be so posited, the party sick, that has made his
Will, shall again recover; And that some time after he shall revoke the former
Will and make an other, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Heritages of the Dead.
DO thou be sure herein to place one of the houses of either Jupiter or Venus
in the eighth house; or else fortify the cusp of the eighth and the Lord
thereof, and place them in Sextile or Trine of either Jupiter or Venus; or make
the degrees of the cusp of the eighth, and the Lord thereof the terms of
Jupiter or Venus; and make the second and its Lord strong and free from all
manner of impediment, and if possible, in good aspect of the Fortunes: Fortify
also the Moon, and let her lovingly behold the eighth house, or its Lord, and
if possible, fortify also the Ascendent and its Lord, and place the Lord of
the eighth in reception with the Lord of the second or Ascendent; and if you
can, let him be in the second, and the Lord of the second in the eighth, etc.

SECTION X. Containing the Elections of the ninth House of Heaven.
CHAP. 1. Of the returning of such as are absent, and of going of journeys, and
entering into any place.
EVery man has some Fancy or particular way to himself that is not common to
all; some of the Ancients have placed returnings in the tenth House, by reason
it is the next after the ninth that has signification of long journeys and
voyages, which returnings follow; others have placed this matter in the eighth,
making the ninth house to follow it, because a man must journey to return; but
because one cannot return without voyaging or traveling, contrary to both
these, I have placed it in the ninth house it self.

And as I dissent from the Ancients in placing this Election, so do I also much
deviate from them in the matter thereof; yet if thou will follow them thou
may, please but thy self and I am content.

Of returning from any journey.
Fortify therefore in this manner of judgment the ninth house at the time of
your setting forth, the Lord thereof and the Moon, as also the ninth and its
Lord, and the place of the Moon in the Revolution of the year of the World or
Quarter (if it be a year wherein such are admitted) and if possible, let
Jupiter, or Venus or both be in the ninth, or applying thereunto, or to the
Lord thereof, or the Moon in both these Schemes, and let these places however
you do, be free from the malevolent configurations of the Infortunes, and see
that there be no Infortune in the second house in a return, nor in the eighth
when thou set first out; for the second is then in lieu of the eighth,
being the eighth from the seventh which has ever signification of the place
intended or traveled to; and therefore it seems requisite unto me, that you
also fortify the seventh house at the time of the first journey, as also its
Lord, and the place of the Moon at that time. But thou will the better
understand how to make an Election for returning, by knowing how to set out at
first.

Of going of j^urneys or Voyages.
Wherefore you must know the Ascendent is the significator of the City, Town or
place from whence any one Travels; the seventh of the place intended or
journeyed to; the tenth house, has signification of the ways or passages in
the journey, and the fourth of the ways or passages in the return.

Look then how these places are affected, and accordingly judge; for if they
are assisted by the presence or aspects of the Fortunes, good is promised; if
by the Malevolents, evil, according to the Nature of the thing signified by the
house afflicted or assisted; as if the seventh be fortunated, you may judge
success and happiness to the Traveller in the Country or place to which he
goes; if the tenth, he shall have good success in his journey, shall be safe
and merry and in good health; if the fourth, judge the same at his return, etc.

In beginning of any Journey, let the Moon be increasing in light and motion,
free from impediment and affliction of the Infortunes; for an Infortune
afflicting the Moon does more hurt then when it afflicts the Ascendent; and
let her not be in the second, eighth, fourth sixth, nor twelfth, but in the
fifth, and if possible, beheld of the Fortunes; however it causes good
success, and gain in the journey, health of body, and that he shall quickly
return to his own content; and let Mercury be free from combustion and the
malevolent aspects of the Infortunes, as also the Lord of the Ascendent, and
let him be placed in a good place of Heaven; place also a Fortune in the
Ascendent or some Angle, for such an Election denotes safety, agility, joy and
gladness in the journey; and let not the Moon be in the Ascendent neither going
nor returning, for it signifies sickness, and much grief in the journey.

But if thou can not observe all this, let the apply unto the Ascendent, as
also the Lord of the Ascendent, and let them be free from the malevolent
aspects of the Infortunes; also prosperity and good follows if the Moon be
joined to Jupiter or Venus, or be beheld of them by a Sextile or Trine.

But you must know there can no Election be framed without respect to the
Revolution of the World, and the true significator of every man therein,
according to his quality; the which when thou have found, fortify it and its
Lord, the Moon and the sign, and Lord of the Ascendent at the setting out, and
the sign signifying the thing or business occasioning the journey, and the Lord
thereof, and have a special care, the Ascendent be not Cadent; and if the
journey be to the King, let the tenth in the Revolution of the year of the
World be the sign of the Ascendent in the setting forth; and if it be to obtain
a reward at his hands, let the eleventh in the Revolution be your Ascendent,
and so of the rest, according to the signification of the thing desired.

It is good also to place the Moon at the beginning of any journey in the tenth
or fifth beholding her dispositor, free from impediment and the afflictions of
the Infortunes* and in good aspect of the Benevolents, and they also
essentially dignified, and the Moon increasing in light, and Mercury free from
combustion, and free from impediment; and let not the Moon be in the sixth, nor
twelfth, for that signifies impediment and delay in the journey.

But if she be increasing in light and motion, it will be soon accomplished,
and that with safety and quiet; but if the, or Saturn, or both be in the
Ascendent or seventh, or Saturn in the Ascendent, and the Moon in the seventh,
there shall happen in the journey or place to which the Traveller tends, many
grievous infirmities, losses, quarrels or slaughter unto him.

If she be in the 10th. or 11th, it is good; but if she be in the third, fifth,
or ninth, it will not be so well, in the seventh or fourth, worse; but she
denotes mischief most in the Ascendent, second, sixth, eighth or twelfth.

And some of the Ancients have said, that if any set forth in the day time
Aries ascending, they shall meet with Thieves; yet if they set upon the Thieves
they shall overcome them; also if at such a time any go against a Castle or
strong hold, they shall take it; and if the Ascendent be Taurus when the
Traveller sets out, he shall gain and profit by Cattle, as Cows, Oxen and
Bulls and such like; if it be Gemini that does then ascend, he shall profit by
arms or expert servants.

Also if it be Cancer, he shall be safe in health or fortunate in all things he
undertakes; if Leo, he shall overcome, and win, and there shall evil happen to
others for him; if Virgo, he shall be merry, and profit by servants.

Again, if it be Libra, he shall have a mean both of good and evil; in Scorpio,
he shall toil and labor, but shall not obtain his desire, and there shall
happen much sadness unto him, but afterward he shall gain a little; If
Sagittary, he shall obtain his desire, and shall profit by horses and arms, and
shall act something, for which he shall receive a great reward.

Moreover if it be Capricorn, he shall be tired, and the journey shall be
tedious, and his desires shall not be obtained; if it be Aquaries, his hopes
shall be frustrate, and his enemies shall deceive him; but if it be Pisces, he
shall advantage himself by precious stones, shall obtain his desire and shall
have his health.

Note that some of the Ancients have taken that punctum of time wherein the
Traveller steps out of his house onward of his journey, and the degree
ascending then to be his significator, and that degree which ascends when he
is just out of sight of his house to be the significator, together with its
Lord, of the journey.

Some of the Ancients have in this place given us Instructions, if any journey
be to Kings, Great men, Generals of Armies, Judges, Lawyers, Women, Learned
men, Poets, and such like, of what kind soever they be, by making the Moon
apply to the significator of the quality of the person a man intends to go to,
and by placing the significator in a good place of Heaven, viz. in the
Ascendent, tenth, or eleventh, or in the house whereby he is signified, but by
no means in the seventh nor fifth, for that signifies labor and trouble; as
also if he be in the fourth or Occidental; but since I have already given you
the exact significations of the Moon to the other six Planets in a Table in the
third Chapter of the first Section of this same third Book, as also hinted at
the same in the sixth Section and tenth Chapter, I shall not in this place make
any repetition, but proceed.

Of making quick returns.
If thou would soon return from thy journey, place Jupiter in a Quartile of
the Sun, and Venus in his Sextile betwixt both the Fortunes, separating from
one, and applying to the other; or place the Moon in the room of the Sun
increasing in light and motion.

Of going secretly to any place.
And if thou would go secretly to any place, let the Moon be under the Sun
beams, separating from the Sun, and applying to a Fortune, and free from all
other impediment; some of the Ancients have said, if you would do any thing
that you would not have revealed or come to light, begin it when the Moon is in
Scorpio, and under the earth; others have concluded with the former Rule; yet
some have advised to place the Moon and Lord of the Ascendent both under the
Sun beams, but not in combustion, and free from impediment, and that the
Ascendent be not beheld of the Sun, nor Lord thereof; and to make it the more
sure, let the Moon be in the fourth house, or the significator of the thing.

Of walking.
And as touching walking abroad, some of the Ancients have been large; but I
shall omit their Rules as superfluous in such a matter which depends on the
Will of Man; only I shall add thus much, that if the Moon be increasing in
light and motion, and free from impedition, applying to a Fortune, it will be
the better, and the walk will seem more pleasant and delectable then tiresome;
for commonly when she is weak, and in Square or Opposition of Saturn, the time
seems tedious, and the walker will be very sad and pensive; and perhaps be
subject to falls and other casualties, when she is so aspected of Mars.

And take this for an approved rule, that if the walker go to visit any one, or
to look for any thing, if the Lord of the seventh House at the time of his
setting out be in the Ascendent, and the Moon in aspect of any
Retrograde-Planet with reception at the same time, he shall meet the party or
thing he seeks or intends to visit.

Of entering into any place.
Now as touching any Travelers entering into any Place, Town or City, you are to
fortify the sign of the second House, and the Lord thereof, and place him in a
good house above the earth, and the Moon in the third or fifth, or else in the
eleventh, applying to a Planet receiving her, whether it be a fortune or no;
and let your significator never be under the earth, unless your business so
require, or is to be kept secret.

Be sure the Moon be not in the fourth, eighth, sixth or twelfth, but place her
in the second, if possible, strong and free from impediment, and applying to
the Lord of the second, or in reception of him.

And if he that enters into any place would fain stay long there, let the Moon
and the Lord of the second be placed in angles; To stay therein.
and it will not be amiss in this business if he place the Moon in reception
with Saturn by a good aspect, and let the sign of the Ascendent and its Lord at
the first entrance be fixed.

But if he would soon return from thence, let him place the Moon in the third,
in a moveable sign received; To return quickly.
as also let the sign of the Ascendent at the first entrance be moveable, and
the Lord thereof also in a moveable sign, and place the Lord of the second in
the Ascendent, and the Lord of the Ascendent in the second.

To make his Election suitable to his business.
Moreover, if his coming to the place be to require ought of the King or
Grandees, let him have recourse to the mid-heaven and its Lord, and make him
receive his significator by a good reception; and place if possible the Lord of
the tenth in the Ascendent or second, and in the tenth the Lord of the
Ascendent or second; and so understand of any thing else he requires, or for
which his entrance into the place is, still remembering to order his
significators aright.

Wherefore generally in all entrings into any place, be sure the second House
and its Lord be free from impediment and affliction of the Infortunes, as also
Combustion and Fall, neither let him be Cadent; for if the Lord of the second
be combust, it denotes the party so entering shall there dye suddenly; neither
is it good for the Lord of the second to be in the seventh, especially if he be
therein afflicted, because it signifies damage both to his person and goods,
and that he shall be troubled with many dissentions and quarrels, and have much
trouble by and through his acquaintance; also if the Moon be in the fourth
House, he shall dye there before he goes away, especially if the Moon be weak
and afflicted of the Malevolents, or the Lord of the eighth.

But the best Election in this matter is to let Jupiter be Lord of the second,
located in the eleventh House, strong and free from the malevolent aspects of
the Infortunes, or let him be in the second in configuration of the Moon, and
let Part of Fortune be in an angle or in the eleventh or fifth, for it
signifies safety and health of body being so placed, as also increase of
wealth; and it will not be amiss if you make the dispositor of the Moon apply
thereunto, for it will bring things to a good end and conclusion.

CHAP. II. Of building of Ships and Galleys, and of lanching them, and of
voyaging by Sea.
THE first thing we are to provide for any voyage at Sea is a Bark, Gallie,
Ship or such like Vessel; wherefore it seems requisite unto me I here show a
fit time for making of such Commodities, and then we shall come to the time of
Voyaging. Some of the Ancients have placed this Election in the fourth House;
but because Voyages are under the signification of the ninth House, and they
cannot be accomplished without Ships, I thought it more convenient to place it
in this House.

In the composition or building of Ships there are three sorts considerable;
the first are such as serve for War, the second for Traffic or Merchandise,
the third we term Galleys and ordinary Vessels.

Of building of Fleet-ships, or Men of War.
Wherefore in building of Ships for War or swift sailing, fortify the Ascendent
and its Lord, the Moon also and its dispositor, and place them in the
Ascendent, tenth or eleventh, and let the sign ascending be fixed; fortify
also the fourth House and its Lord, which has signification of Ships
naturally, and if possible let all the angles be fixed, but be sure you make
the Moon and the rest of your significators swift in motion.

Let also the Planet from whom the Moon last separated be strong and well
disposed, also swift in motion, or place her dispositor in a watery sign free
from all impediment and affliction; and if you cannot place the Moon nor the
Lord of the Ascendent in the Ascendent, tenth or eleventh, place one of the
Fortunes there, and let him be free from the malevolent aspects of the
Infortunes; and let him be if possible oriental, and make the Lord of the
seventh weak and slow in motion.

Of building of Merchants Ships.
In building of Ships for Traffic observe all that you have already heard in
the other, only add this thereunto, that Mercury must chiefly be fortified
and assisted of the Fortunes, and placed if possible in the tenth, eleventh or
Ascendent; fortify also the Lord of the second, and Part of Fortune and its
dispositor, and let not the Moon be slow in motion, yet it mattereth not much
whether she be very swift, as in the former.

Of building of ordinary Ships and Galleys.
In building of Galleys and other Ships you need not stand so much on the
swiftness of the Moon and your other significators, only let her not be very
slow; yet if thou can conveniently make her and all the other swift it will
be the better; in other things observe what has been said already.

Other rules in buying or making of Ships.
In buying or making of Ships you may also observe these rules; begin your work
when Jupiter or Venus are located in the fourth House in a watery sign, strong
and free from all manner of impediment, or in a sign of their nature, and let
the Moon be in Taurus, Gemini or the beginning of Cancer. or Virgo or
Sagittary, or the last degrees of Capricorn; for the latter degrees of
Capricorn are reputed watery, and the first degrees earthy; but it is best to
place the Moon or the Ascendent in Pisces.

Let the Sun also be in Trine of the Fortunes, and the Moon increasing in light
and motion, as also in latitude, and beheld also of the Fortunes; but let not
Mars be in any aspect of the Ascendent, nor of the Moon, for it denotes
casualties thereunto by fire, and that the Ship shall at the last be burnt;
also if the Moon be in Aquaries, and the Sun and Mars in aspect to her, viz. by
Square or Opposition, or else bodily joined thereunto, it signifies the Ship
shall endure many storms and much damage and fear of shipwreck: Also if the be
not in, but in a watery sign in either, ^ or of the and, it denotes the Ship
shall be drowned and suffer shipwreck, and shall be sunk with all that is in
her to the bottom of the sea: Moreover, if the be in any such configuration of
them, and be in a fiery sign, the Ship shall be split upon a rock, and shall
lose most of her Goods, or stick upon the Sands, and so perish. Lastly, if the
Moon be in humane signs, and afflicted by the Sun and Mars, as you have heard,
it shall met with Pirates and Cutters at Sea, which shall slay all that are in
her, ransack her, and last of all sink her.

Of lanching of Ships, and setting out to Sea.
Now as touching lanching of Ships, and setting forth to Sea, to avoid the
tedious reiterations and tautologies of the Ancients, you need do no more then
this: See that the Moon be strong essentially and accidentally, well placed in
the Heavens, and in good aspect of the Fortunes, viz. Jupiter or Venus, and
free from the malevolent aspects of the Infortunes, as also the Ascendent, and
its Lord, and Part of Fortune, and its dispositor at either of the times; for
look by how much your significator is impedited by the Malevolent, and by so
much shall the Ship or the persons therein be damnified; according to the
signification of the significator, and the Planet afflicting.

Of Navigating or Voyaging by Sea.
In Navigating and Voyaging by Sea you are to follow the same rules as has been
delivered unto you for traveling by Land; only you are to elect watery signs
in this, as in the other earthy: but as touching the main end of your Voyage,
whether it be for gain or any other thing, you are to order your significators
accordingly; but be sure you ever remember to observe these five times to
fortify them to your best advantage.

The first is the time wherein the Ship is first begun; the second is the time
wherein it is bought or purchased; the third when it is lanched; the fourth is
the time of the entering thereinto; and the fifth and last is the time wherein
it sets out to Sea: The which you having observed, and according to art
ordered, especially your entering thereinto, and setting forward (if you cannot
obtain the other times) is sufficient to be said hereon, etc.

CHAP. III. Of learning of Sciences, and of Singing and Music.
HEre I may seem to rob the tenth House of this Election; but since the tenth
properly has signification of Majesty, and one may exercise Singing and any
other Science without making it their profession; and because the rules depend
rather on this House then the tenth or any other, it is requisite it should be
here placed.

Wherefore if you would learn any Science see that the Ascendent be an humane
sign, as also that the Moon be located in an humane sign, and the Lord of the
Ascendent in the tenth House or entering thereinto, and the Lord of the tenth in
configuration of the Ascendent, as also the Lord of the ninth; and let the Moon
be joined to Mercury, or applying to him by a good aspect, and Mercury strong
and well dignified.

Make also Mercury behold the Lord of the Ascendent in a good aspect, and let
not the Moon be decreasing in light, nor descending in latitude; and make the
Lord of the ninth to be in reception with the Lord of the Ascendent.

In learning of Music thou art to have regard to the chief significators
thereof, viz. Venus, Mercury and the Moon: Of Music.
Wherefore that there might herein be found a true harmony, place Venus in some
of her own dignities (if thou placest her as strong as possible it will he the
better) and Mercury applying unto her, being also in some of her dignities; as
also the Moon especially in Pisces, or separating from Mercury, and applying to
Venus; and let the Ascendent be a sign agreeable to the nature of this
business, and let Venus have power therein; and it will be the better if
Mercury also have dignity therein.

Look that neither Venus, Mercury nor the Moon be remote from an angle, unless
it be the Moon, and then place her in the ninth House, strong and well
disposed, and let the other significators be also strong.

Of Singing.
Also if the Lord of the Ascendent were in the ninth strong and free from
affliction, it were very good; and place the Moon in Capricorn to learn
singing, and this causes a shrill voice; but in playing on any Pipe or
Instrument touched with the mouth, place the Moon in the last face of Leo,
Scorpio or Pisces, because these are Mute signs; but in learning Prick-song or
any other Song wherein words are to be uttered, place her in Gemini or Virgo,
and fortify the ninth House and its Lord, and let them be free from all the
Impediments of the Malevolents, as also the tenth and its Lord, if you intend
to make it your profession. Also if thou would exceed all others in singing
(as says Bonatus) place Mercury direct and joined to Venus retrograde, either
in the Houses, Exaltations or other Dignities of any of them.

SECTION XI. Containing Elections appertaining to the signification of the
tenth House.
CHAP. I. Of electing of Kings and Nobles, and of their enstalling and
beginning their Rule or Government.
Of electing Kings and Governors.
REmember in choosing and electing Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, or other Nobles, or
such as are to bear office in government, that thou fortifiest the Ascendent,
and make it free from the malevolent aspects of the Infortunes, as also the
Lord thereof, and the tenth House and its Lord, the Sun also and the Moon, and
let neither of them be in any aspect nor bodily conjunction of the Malevolents,
Saturn and Mars: but if thou can not avoid their aspects, let it be by
Sextile or Trine with reception, and place them in angles or succedent houses,
and if possible place the Sun in Leo free from impediment; and if he cannot be
in Leo, place him in Sextile or Trine of that Planet that bears dominion in
the house wherein he is by house or exaltation; but if thou can not order it
otherwise but that he must be beheld thereby by a Square, let it be with
reception; but shun the Opposition, whether it be with reception or no, and if
possible let the Square aspect be out of Masculine signs, and let them also be
such wherein they have some dignity.

See also if there is any Eclipse of either Luminary that year to be
celebrated, or any great Conjunction; and let not the sign wherein the Eclipse
or Conjunction is, be on the Ascendent or tenth, neither let the Lords of the
Ascendent or tenth be therein, nor the Lords of either of these places in the
tenth or the Ascendent, and place both the Luminaries in the terms of the
Fortunes beholding each other with a Sextile or Trine; and if possible, let the
Lords of those terms be in Sextile or Trine also of the Luminaries, or at least
one of them.

See also that the Conjunction or prevention of the Luminaries before this
election be not unfortunated; but if it be so, let your Election be deferred
till fifteen days after the Conjunction or prevention, if possible.

Of Coronations and Enstallings.
At Enstallings or Coronations place Leo the sign of the Ascendent, and the Sun
in Taurus in the tenth, and the Moon in the Ascendent joined to Venus, Jupiter
or Mercury, and they strong essentially and receiving the Moon.

Of beginning of Government.
And when you begin first to rule or govern according to the election and choice
of the people, let the angles be all fixed, especially the Ascendent and
fourth, and let the Lord of the tenth be free from all manner of impediment,
and place the Lord of the Ascendent either in the Ascendent, tenth or eleventh,
or at least in the fifth, received of the Lord of the tenth: and let the Lord
of the tenth be received of its dispositor by Sextile or Trine, and the Lord of
the fourth free from impediment, and in a good aspect of the Fortunes: And if
thou can not do all this, let the Moon be received of the Lord of the tenth,
and the Lord of the fourth, free from impediment; but let him not behold the
Ascendent nor its Lord, and let some of the Fortunes behold the fourth House or
tenth, or at least one of them, if possible.

And thus may you judge of electing of other inferior Magistrates whatsoever,
by distinguishing their several significators, and disposing of them according
unto these rules, Mutatis mutandis: wherefore it were needless here further to
enlarge.

CHAP. II. Of obtaining favor of Kings and great men, Justice on Enemies, and
Pardons; also of going of Progress with the King, or any other Grandee.
Of obtaining favor of Kings and Grandees.
ABout obtaining of favor at the hand of any King or great man, whatever sign
you place in the Ascendent, let Jupiter be therein in a good aspect of the Lord
of the tenth with reception, or place the Lord of the tenth in the Ascendent,
or in Sextile or Trine thereunto, or to the Lord thereof, or the Moon; and if
possible place the Moon in the tenth, free from all impediment, and let the
Lord of the Ascendent also be strong and no wise afflicted by the Malevolents;
and let not Saturn nor Mars be in any of the angles, especially the Ascendent,
unless he be a significator, and you have ordered him according to discretion.

And if thou can not perform all these, let the Lord of the thing desired be
in the tenth, or the Lord of the tenth in the House signifying the thing, or in
good aspect thereunto, or to the Lord thereof; and if possible let the aspect
be with reception, etc.

Of obtaining Justice or Assistance from the King.
Also when thou would obtain aid or leave of the King to prosecute thy
adversary, or when thou requirest Justice against him, place the Moon free from
all impediment, and let her be increasing in light; let the Ascendent also be
free from affliction, and place the Lord thereof in a good place, strong, and
free from the malevolent aspects of the Infortunes, and if possible let him be
in his own dignities and direct; and debilitate the Lord of the seventh (which
has signification of your adversary) and let him not be assisted by any of the
Fortunes, nor behold the Ascendent, nor the Moon, nor the Sun, and let the Lord
of the tenth be in reception with the Lord of the Ascendent; and so if your
condition be the others, and thou would obtain pardon, debilitate the Moon
and Lord of the Ascendent, and fortify the seventh, Of obtaining of pardon.
etc. quite contrary: And thus by varying thy rule thou may apply thy
business which way thou please, and be furnished upon any occasion, provided
thou art well acquainted with thy true significator.

Of going of progress with the King or any other Grandee.
In progressing with Kings or Grandees, place Jupiter in the Ascendent or in the
seventh, for this signifies good in the journey to those that undertake it,
and that they shall be merry; but look thou place him not in the fourth,
neither let the Moon nor Venus behold him out of any angle; nor let Saturn or
Mars be in the Ascendent nor any other angle, nor joined by body or aspect to
Venus; neither let the Moon be under the Sunbeams, nor with or the Infortunes;
for this denotes the party going to progress shall never return (the Ancients
also affirm,

CHAP. III. Of learning any Art or Occupation.
MOst of the Ancients have placed this matter in this House; I conceive their
reason was, because a Trade or Occupation is the highest dignity such can look
for that are bound thereunto.

Of learning of Trades or other Occupations.
Wherefore in this matter you are exactly to distinguish of the Planet
signifying the Trade or Mystery you would learn, the which you have been
taught in the second Book of this Volume; then let your Ascendent or tenth
House be a sign wherein that Planet bears dominion by House; as if you would
learn Morality or any study, or if thou desire to be a Merchant, place Gemini
or Virgo in the Ascendent, or else Libra, the last fifteen degrees of Sagittary
or Aquaries, and fortify the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Cusp of the tenth,
and its Lord, also and the yet have a more special care to fortify then any
other, because he is the Planet signifying the Trade or Occupation.

Still remember to fortify the Lord of the Trade, or that Planet which
naturally has signification thereof above any other; for I shall say no more
on this matter in this place, since I have been large in the second Section and
first Chapter of this third Book, Note well.
whether I shall here referr thee, and now proceed, being even weary of
reiterations: For whosoever can understand the reason and ground of any one
Election, has sufficient to lead him through all other whatsoever, without
these needless repetitions, or else he shall never be able to apprehend them
when we have said all we can; yet because I have an earnest desire to make
every thing plain even to the weakest capacity, I have been thus tedious; yet
whosoever shall compare me with the Ancients, will find I do not equal them in
tautologies.

SECTION XII. Containing such Elections as are under the signification of the
eleventh House of Heaven.
CHAP. I. Of accomplishing any thing hoped for, and of gaining a good repute,
and the love of friends.
EVery man wishes and hops for some one thing or other, and few but strive
to have a good Name, or at least to be thought worthy thereof; and because this
may be obtained, and yet the person no wise honored in the world, this
Election is rather placed in this House then in the tenth by me. To gain credit
and the thing hoped for.


Wherefore when either thou would accomplish thy hope, or gain credit by any
thing thou undertakes, place Sagittary, Pisces or Cancer in the Ascendent, and
fortify Jupiter, and the Moon, as also the eleventh, and its Lord; and if
possible place Jupiter in the eleventh, or else in the Ascendent, or at least
in Sextile or Trine of these places, or one of them; and let him be in
reception with the Lord of the eleventh, and place the Lord of the eleventh if
possible in the Ascendent, and in the eleventh the Lord of the Ascendent; and
if you can, let the Sun be in the tenth, or the Ascendent free from impediment,
and the Moon in a Trine or Sextile of him, or in Square with reception,
provided she be strong and free from affliction; and if you can possibly, let
her separate from Jupiter, the Lord of the Ascendent, or the Lord of the
eleventh when she applies to the Sun and it will be much the better; for this
denotes the credit or applause desired will be the more blazed and spread
abroad, for the nature of the Sun is to discover things.

Order thy significator to thy best advantage; the more thou dignifiest him the
better it will be; however be sure thou let the Luminaries be in Sextile or
Trine of each other, as also the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of the
eleventh; but if it must be by a Square, let it be by reception, Of gaining the
love and friendship of any.
etc.

In obtaining the love and good will of friends, fortify the Moon, and the
eleventh House, and its Lord, and make them both be received of Venus by a
Trine, and let Venus be also well dignified; or else let her receive the Lord
of the Ascendent and the Lord of the eleventh by the same aspect, and let the
reception be by House or Exaltation; and if this cannot be done, let them be
received by a Trine of Jupiter in the same manner, and let the Lord of the
Ascendent be well dignified.

Moreover, if thou desire the love and friendship of any to gain or profit
thy self thereby, let Part of Fortune be in the Ascendent; and if it be for the
accomplishment of thy heritage, or for any assistance therein, place Part of
Fortune in the fourth; and so in any other House according to the nature of the
thing wherein thou desire the aid, friendship or assistance of thy friend.

CHAP. II. Of obtaining of Promises and Requests.
SEE that herein thou fortifiest the eleventh and its Lord, the Ascendent and
its Lord, as also Part of Fortune, and its dispositor; and make the Lord of the
Ascendent be beheld of both the Lord of the eleventh, and the dispositor of
Part of Fortune; or make one of them amically behold the Lord of the Ascendent,
and the other the Ascendent it self; and let the Moon be allo well dignified
and received of the Lord of the eleventh, and the Planet signifying the thing
promised; and let the Lord of the seventh be also applying to the Lord of the
Ascendent, or Ascendent it self; for the seventh House has signification of
the party sought to, and the Ascendent is the significator of him requiring
promise or requesting; and the Moon is significatrix of the promise or thing
quesited; wherefore it will not be amiss if in this Election you make the Moon
separating from the Lord of the seventh, and applying to the Lord of the
Ascendent.

Thou art also to remember to place the Cuspe of the eleventh House in the
dignities of the Planet signifying the party sought to for promise; as if he be
ancient and under the signification of Saturn, let his dignities be thereon
placed; if a Judge or some reverend man, let the dignities of Jupiter be
preferred, and so or the rest; let also the Planet it self apply to the Lord of
the Ascendent by a loving aspect; as also the Lord of the House in the Election
whereby he is signified; as if he be a Father, then let the Lord of the fourth
aspect him; if a Mother, or some Nobleman, the Lord of the tenth; and so in
order according to their significations.

Also if thy business be touching wealth or substance, order the matter so as
that the second House or its Lord may receive some amicable aspect from the
significators of those from whom thou expectest promise or any other request;
for thou must remember still to prepare in this manner the House and Lord
thereof signifying thy business.

SECTION XIII. Comprehending the Elections of the Twelfth House.
CHAP. I. Of Freeing of Prisoners and Captives.
Endeavor always to know your true Significator in every Election, and you
have accomplished half your business; you must know then that the Ascendent and
its Lord has signification of his or their condition that are freed, the Tenth
of the person freeing, or that has power to set at liberty, etc.

Wherefore if there be any Infortune in the Ascendent at the time of
deliverance, it denotes inslavery and imprisonment again; place therefore a
fortune in the Ascendent, and let the Lord thereof be well dignified and free
from the Malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes, and if possible let him be in
Conjunction or loving Aspect of the Lord of the Tenth, and received by him as
also the Lord of the Twelfth, and if you can let the Lord of the Tenth be in
the Twelfth, or applying thereunto, or to its Lord, and let him be also
received of the Lord of the Tenth.

Make also the Moon increasing in Light and Motion, and joined to Fortunes, and
let the Fortune to which she is joined either by Body or Aspect be Oriental,
and swift of motion also; but let not the Moon be in the Twelfth, nor beholding
a Planet slow in motion; Neither let the Lord of the Twelfth be slow nor joined
to any Planet but such as are swift and well dignified; fortify also the Tenth
House and its Lord, and let him not be impedited by any means; for then it
signifies imbecility in the party that is to free the other out of Prison,
fewds or slavery; wherefore it is requisite also you dignifie the Sun who is
the general Significator of power and authority, etc.

CHAP. II. Of Buying and Riding of Horses.
YOu have him taught in the 16. Chapter and 7. Section of this Treatise, how to
buy smaller Cattle, as also in some measure great; however you need but vary
your Significators to the Twelfth, as you are there taught of the Sixth, and I
need say no more on this matter, for I love not tedious discourses Naturally.

Wherefore note, been inserted, you are to supply it out of another by varying
in this manner your rules; as in the Eleventh House also you see there is
omitted Elections touching making of agreements between friends at variance,
etc. but you have that delivered in the second Chapter of the fourth Section,
which may serve in the Eleventh or any other House by exactly changing your
Significators; and so likewise any other thing you must supply in this nature,
for it were both tedious and superfluous thus to make repetition.

As touching riding of Horses for any Race, or to win at such a time, fit the
Ascendent, its Lord, the Moon and its Dispositor, as also the Planet to whom
they are joined, also Part of Fortune, and its Dispositor, and make the Lord of
the Ascendent and the Moon apply thereunto, and then place the Lord of the Hour
in the Ascendent at that time he steps out of the stable.

But if all these cannot be observed, place the Lord of the hour (to be sure)
in the Ascendent and fortify the Moon, and place her if you can in Sagittary,
or in the first half of Libra, and look that neither the Lord of the hour, the
Moon, nor the Lord of the Ascendent be in their fall, for that denotes the
horse shall fall in the race before he come to

The End.
ASTROLOGIA MVNDA OR ASTROLOGY In it is PVRITY: BEING A Short but Compendious
INTRODVCTION To the Judging of the ANNVAL or YEARLY REVOLVTIONS O F The WORLD;
by which, AS ALSO ECLIPSES, Great CONIVNCTIONS, COMETS, AND BLAZING-STARS Are
Judged (by the ordinary Course and Order of NATURE) the general accidents of
Countries, Kingdoms, Provinces and Cities, alterations of Kingdoms and Empires,
Laws and Customs, cause of Plenty, Dearth, Wars, Peace, Health, Sickness,
alteration of the Air, and (to be short) of all things appertaining to the life
of Man in a natural way; wherein the Infinite Wisdom of GOD is seen manifestly
in the Government of the World by the Influence and constant Harmony of the
Celestial Planets and Stars; the Innocence, Legality and Purity of the Art
demonstrated, and proved by Demonstration of the Inevitable Events of the
Heavens, so long as GOD upholdeth the order and course of Nature unperverted;
And the Students thereof consequently proved rather Divines then Conjurers or
Practisers of what is unlawful.

By WILLIAM RAMESEY, Gent. Student in Astrology, Physic, and the most Heavenly
and Sublime Sciences.

Tempora Mutantur nos and Mutamur in illis.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. 1653.

HONORATISSIMO ATQUE ILLVSTRISSIMO DOMINO NON MINVS VIRTVTE SVA QVAM GENERIS
SPLENDORE, DOMINO MOVNTAGVE BERTY COMITI DE LINDSEY; DOMINO DE WILLOUGHBY DE
ERESBY, ET TO TIVS ANGLIAE SVPREMO CAMERARIO, Salutem in Perpetuum.

DOMINO SUO MVLTIS NOMINIBVS OBSERVANDO HANC SUAM ASTROLOGIAM MVNDAM SUBMISSE
DEDICAT

Wilhelmus Rameseus.

TO THE Right Honorable and truly Noble Montague Berty, EARL of LINDSEY, LORD
WILLOUGHBY of ERESBY AND LORD HIGH CHAMBERLAIN OF ENGLAND.
My LORD,
DId not your Honors Merits claim this fourth and chief Part of my Labors as
Your due, I durst not have assumed that audacity as to implore Your Honors
Patronage; for as I have humbly made choice of the three preceding most Noble
Heroes, So (my Lord) lest yet notwithstanding my Fabric should at length fall
to the ground, (which it must inevitably do, unless Your Honor pass by the
presumption and unworthiness of the Penner) I humbly presumed to crave Your
Honors Patronage and support thereof (craving pardon for this my Simile) being
the main pillar on which I desire it should be built and upheld) not
questioning then, but Your Honors Virtues and most Excellent Endowments will
add such a lusture to the whole, that the beholders will not question the
insufficiency or unworthyness of Me the Author, nor further call the thing it
self in question, but with all assured confidence accept thereof as most worthy
and immaculate, which in it self I presume to conclude it is, how ever my
weakness and insufficiency has expressed it to the World; the which as I
question not but Your Honors piercing Judgment will discover, so I hope Your
Honors Munificent goodness will pass over and pardon.

I must confess (my Lord) the ridiculous and base Mercenary practices of some
that have pretended to the knowledge of this sublime Science has brought the
whole Art into contempt, and in question with the ignorant therein, and such as
are not able to distinguish between the use and the abuse of a thing, or the
purity of the thing studied, and the corruption of the Student; whereby the
very word ASTROLOGY, under which this most heavenly Science and piece of
NATURAL PHILOSOPHY is expressed, is become both odious and ridiculous to most of
the rural now living; but such is Yout Honors Magnanimity, that the Traduced
shall not without diligent examination and evident witness be condemned, nor
abolished Your Honors Presence, not making Tradition, but Truth and Experience
the guide and ground of Your Judgment.

I shall not need here to speak ought in the behalf of the whole Science, which
I have endeavored in these my labors to purify from its dross and feculency,
since in the preceding Epistles, and the first Book, I have hinted both at its
Verity, Excellency and Validity; but only of this subsequent Discourse, which
now after my great care and indefatigable pains being produced, I am by an
happy gust drawn to this Anchorage, and crave Your Honors acceptance and
Patronage.

It is an Instruction to the whole General Part of that Liberal Science which
is called ASTRONOMY or ASTROLOGY, the which together with PHYSICS make
according to Aristotle, 2. Phys. 2. Cap. but one entire Science; for he
throughout all his works indifferently uses the Name of ASTROLOGER and
ASTRONOMER, and ASTROLOGER and PHILOSOPHER for one and the same; and amongst
all Ancient and Learned Writers Astrology and Astronomy have been received for
one and the same Science, though distinct parts or properties, as has been
hinted at in the first Book of this Volume, and the 2. Chapter.

It contains four Sections, the three first treating of the Revolutions of
the Years of the World, and the fourth and last of Eclipses, Comets and
Blazing-Stars, and the great Conjunctions of the Planets, by which we are
taught how to judge of the order and course of Nature, and the Government of
the World; as the general accidents of the World, and the alterations therein,
the change of Laws, Customs, Empires and Governments, the alterations of the
Air, the cause of Plenty, Scarcity, Health, Sickness, Peace, Wars, etc. We may
also hereby most manifestly see the infinite Wisdom, Providence and Government
of GOD in the whole Universe by the constant Harmony and Celestial influences
of the PLANETS and the STARS, whose Portencies, so long as GOD upholdeth the
order and course of NATVRE unperverted, must inevitably prove true and
effectual, they being never frustrated but by Miracle. My Lord, this is the
ASTROLOGIA MVNDA, the Pure Astrology, which the Patriarchs and the Ancient
Fathers studied and contemplated: by which the Babylonians, Arabians, Syrians,
Egyptians, Grecians, Persians and Lacedaemonians ruled and became famous and
glorious to the whole World, and therefore (My Lord) as being the chief and
most exquisite part of these my undertakings, I have placed it last, that so it
might not be attempted by any that are unacquainted with the preceding
Discourses, which serve but as it were Introductions hereunto, for which cause
(My Lord) it is that I humbly presume to lay it at Your Honors Feet above any
others, being so nerely bound to Eternise for ever Your late Honorable and
Virtuous Consort of happy memory, doubting not but by the unparalleld splendor
of Your Honors surpassing Endowments, it might be exalted to that hight of
Honor as to be but accepted into Your Honors Presence, which will be a
perpetual Fame unto it and him, who in all humility Presents it to Your Honor,
and from thence assumes that Honor as to subscribe himself

My LORD, Your HONORS most Humble Servant William Ramesey.

To the Studious Reader.
READER,
IN this following Discourse is presented unto thee the chiefest knowledge of
the whole World, and the Mysteries of Nature; so I call them, because they seem
no other then Mysteries, and strange unto us whilst we are Ignorant in the
causes thereof; In this piece thou may read the time past, present and
future, the whole Government of the World from its Creation to its Subversion
in a Natural way, by the Revolutions of the Years of the World, Eclipses,
Comets, and great Conjunctions of the Celestial Planets, and all accidents that
shall happen in any Year, whether good or evil, whether Wars or Peace, and who
shall overcome, whether Sickness or Health, Plenty or Scarcity, what shall be
the condition of Kings or Grandees, and those that are placed in Authority in
any Region or Kingdom, as also of the Beggar, and such as are of low and poor
degree, the state of the Commons in any place, the wealth and prosperity or
want of any City, Town or Village, and of all things belonging to Man, also of
Rain, Hail, Snow, Frost, Dew, fair Weather, Tempests, Storms, Thunder,
Lightnings, Earthquakes, Apparitions in the Air, and alterations therein, and
the causes of all these; and to be short, thou have here Jasons Golden Fleece,
and the greatest riches of Divine Knowledge and Learning that any Man [that is
Philosophically given] can wish or desire; hereby thou shall not only with
SOLOMON know all things under the Sun, but be able to Govern the World with
Solomon's wise man, and not with Phaeton. Wherefore lest it should be attempted
by any such giddy rash Yongsters, I prefixed these preceding Books; that so
this may be made the more plain, and thy destruction thereby avoided, I mean
the gross absurdities thou will be ready to run into, as also that thou
might not be lulled asleep with self-conceited ignorance; read it therefore
warily, and with attention, but first be thoroughly informed of the Nature and
Quality of every Sign, Planet and Configurations thereof, which thou have
delivered thee in the second and third Books, and then there is no question but
thou will soon attain to this most heavenly and delectable Science; the which
that thou may be the better enabled, let me advise thee to seek first the
true Knowledge of thy Creator, and then afterward study to see him in his
Nature and his Works; for perhaps otherwise thou will be apt to attribute all
to His great Handmaid NATVRE, and so rob him of the glory most due unto him:
Yet upon better consideration, I cannot see but even the most rural in Divine
matters must needs acknowledge (if they thoroughly understand the Mysteries of
this Science) some Superior and Divine Power, although they cannot be led to
the perfect knowledge of him; and this we have found in most Philosophers in
former ages, especially in Plato, who for his rare knowledge in Divine matters
which he attained to by his study in Philosophy, was termed DIVINE PLATO, the
which Title he very well deserved, as will appear to any that shall peruse his
labors: And this may serve very well to reprehend such Carpers at Humane
Sciences, and the Students thereof that think it is impossible for them to be
seen in such matters without being Heathens; for if I may deliver my judgment,
I think it will be a means rather to induce them to acknowledge a Divinity, and
to draw them nearer to the knowledge of the Creator, the which I can
experimentally aver to be true, if they be any thing first grounded in
Christianity: Reader, I shall here say no more, but wish thou may make no
worse a use of these my labors then I intended in my publishing thereof, and
remain

Thy Loving Friend, William Ramesey.

ASTROLOGIA MVNDA OR, Pure Astrology: BEING An Introduction to the Judgment
of the Stars. Touching all general Accidents and Events in this Elementary
World, portended by the Revolutions of the Sun, Eclipses, Comets, and Great
Conjunctions in a Natural way and course of the Government of the Universe.
SECTION I. Containing the Groundwork of Revolutions, considerations before
Judgment, and the true Significators of such things as are necessary to be
judged of in this manner of Work.
WE shall desire the Studier and Well-willer to this most Heavenly and
delectable Art seriously to consider and weigh the subsequent Rules since this
general part, and it only (as you have sufficiently heard) is to be accounted
ASTROLOGY in its purity without fallacy or abuse.

Wherefore for the better illustration thereof, as also instruction of the
well-willers thereunto, I shall in the handling of this our Introduction to the
Judgment of Annual Revolutions of the World follow this Method.

The method the Author follow in this Book.
First to demonstrate (since you have heard already in the Epistle the extent
of Revolutions, and what general Accidents may be foreknown thereby in the
Elements and Elementary World) the ground on which Astrological Judgments are
to be laid, or from whence to be deduced, for the predicting or knowing any
accident or mutation in the World, and how many Schemes or Figures of the
Heavens ought to be erected for the performance thereof.

Secondly, what is to be considered before Judgment be given thereon,
necessary for the accomplishment of the work.

Thirdly and lastly, most rational and authentic Rules deduced from natural
causes, how to judge of all accidents whatsoever portended by Revolutions of
the years of the World, which (notwithstanding you have already heard them
expressed) by reason some of the Ancients have reduced them excellently to four
heads, I shall thus further illustrate.

What accidents are portended by Revolutions of the years of the World.
The first, denotes such accidents as are visible in this World, and to every
man's sight obvious, and common to every one, as any Epidemical or general
thing, fertility and sterility, rain, hail, storms and the alteration of the
air and weather and such like.

The second, such as are invisible in the Elementary World, either general or
particular, as are Earthquakes, Thunders, Floods, etc.

The third, things peculiar to one single Nation or People, as Wars, Peace, etc.

The fourth, relates to such things as happen in the air, such as are fiery
apparitions, Lightnings, Comets or Blazing stars, and such like, etc.

CHAP. I. Showing the Groundwork on which Astrological Judgments for the
judging of Revolutions are to be built, and how many Schemes or Figures of
Heaven ought to be erected for this Work.
IN this matter the Ancients (in those days wherein the Art remained obscure in
some points) have had diverse opinions, some grounding their judgments in these
businesses on the Ascendent of the Law, Nation, Commonwealth or Kingdom,
concerning which they have undertaken to write, and others on Eclipses, and
great Conjunctions, the which although considerable in some matters, and to be
taken also into consideration in every annual Judgment; yet the true time from
whence Judgment is to be raised for the exact knowledge and predicting of
future natural events in the Elements for any year, The Groundworks from whence
Astrologers raise or derive their judgments of future accidents, and events in
the elementary world.
is when the Sun enters the first point or minute of Aries, which as you have
heard is the first sign of the Zodiac, and (in the 24. Chapter of our Second
Book Of the Judgment of the Stars) that the Sun was in this very sign, and in
this very punctum at the first Creation, and therefore (I say) it is all the
reason in the World his return thereunto every year ought to be the chiefest
ground on which Astrologers are to build their judgments, touching the Natural
events of all sublunaries; especially since he is (as you have been shown in
the first Book) Fons Vitae the Fountain of life, and Anima mundi the soul of
the World, by which all things, as well Vegetatives as Sensitives have their
subsistence and vivifying nourishment.

Besides we see that when the Sun enters this Equinoctial all things increse
and flourish, the Trees and Earth grow green and blossom, and also fructify by
degrees afterward, which may also prove unto us the manifest certainty of that
opinion, or rather affirmation of the Ancients that the Sun was in this first
sign at the Creation of them; and truly, if we will be regulated by reason, it
will be sufficiently proved by the very Word of God, which although not
expressly in terminis testifying so much unto us in plain words, yet will the
Text delivered in the first of Genesis verse 11. be sufficient together with
the sequel, verse 12. showing the effect, be enough in all reason to evince the
Carpers at both this Art and Artists tenets, which for the most part are guided
by passion, error and tradition in all their discourses they publish against
them.

See more of this in the first Book.
So likewise on the contrary, we see when he enters Libra which is the sign
opposite to Aries and the other Equinoctial, all things decay and diminish in
their vegetative vigor; the earth becomes as it were barren, the leaves fall
from the Trees, etc.

How to erect the Scheme.
Thus have you heard the time of erecting your Scheme for your Work; now you are
further to note thus much, that your Figure of Heaven be exactly set for the
Region or place on which you would give Judgment, having first punctually
taken the Elevation of the Pole.

How to place the Planets therein.
And then having also reduced the Planets and Dragons-head to the instant of
time the Sun enters the aforsaied point, and erected your figure according to
Art and placed them therein, you may proceed to Judgment.

Yet first take this for a Rule; Sun enter the first point of Cancer, and from
thence (as of the former you do judge of the Spring Quarter, comprehending
March, April, and May, under the signs Aries, Taurus, and Gemini) may you know
the events of the Summer Quarter, being June, July and August, under Cancer,
Leo and Virgo; the third figure, for the third Quarter, and that which is
termed Autumnal, being September, October and November, under Libra, Scorpio
and Sagittary, is to be erected for the Sun his entrance into Libra; and then
the last for the Winter Quarter when he enters Capricorn, which together with
Aquaries and Pisces does rule December, January and February.

If it be a common sign, two are necessary to be framed.
If your Ascendent at the Suns ingress into the first point of Aries be a common
sign (you have already in the Second Book Chap. 24. been shown which signs are
common, also which are movable, and which fixed, wherefore we shall not here
make any repetition) then must you erect two Figures, that of the ingress into
Aries continuing in force but the first half year, viz. but till the Sun enters
the first Punctum of Libra, for which time you must erect a Scheme for the
other half year, and for the knowing of the effects portended thereby.

If it be fixed, that alone is sufficient.
But if your sign ascending be fixed, then will that figure serve for all that
Revolution, or to the end of the year, viz. you may thereby undertake to
predict or acquaint your self with all matters signified thereby, even till the
next ingress, without erecting any figure of the Suns ingress into the other
points.

Thus much for your foundation and Platform, viz. the Schemes; but first now
before thou layest one stone, let me advise thee to acquaint thy self well with
these following necessary considerations, and then may thou safely and with
more judgment go through with thy work.

CHAP. II. Containing some necessary considerations before Judgment.
LOok that you can readily and exactly distinguish of your true significators,
as which House and Planet denotes the King, which the People, which their
Assistants, and which their Enemies, etc. and from whence you are to inquire of
the fertility and sterility of the Earth, Wars or Peace, or any other Accident;
otherwise you shall never be able to come to any perfection in this most
Divine Science.

Ever be sure you weigh well the Fortitudes and Debilities of your
Significators, as how they are essentially and accidentally dignified (which
you are sufficiently taught in the eight Chapter of the Second Treatise) how
located in the Figure of the Heavens, and how Aspected benevolently or
malevolently by the Fortunes or Infortunes, and so judge according to the
Nature of the Planet afflicting or assisting your Significator, good or bad, as
the signification and nature of the Aspect, Planet, Sign and House wherein he
is denotes, and the signification of the Planet to which he transfers his light.

saturn; and not always evil, neither and ever good.
Do not conclude Saturn and Mars always Malevolents and Infortunes, and Jupiter
and Venus ever Fortunes and Denoters of good; for as it may happen, they may be
(contrary to this general and simple opinion) Fortunes and Infortunes as they
may be posited in Houses, and be Significators, as you have been already shown
in the first Chapter of the first Section of our Introduction to Elections.

The vanity of the opinion that and are always bad, and and good.
As for example, in the Suns ingress into Aries, I have Libra ascending, or
Aquaries or Capricorn, and Saturn located therein; I must not hereby, because
Saturn is Naturally evil, judge the condition and state of the People signified
by the Ascendent to be evil and unfortunate this year, but contrariwise (other
testimonies concurring) they will be in a most prosperous and gallant condition.

For you must know a Planet in his own, house is strong and advantageous,
according to the old Proverb, The Devil is good to his own Children; and so
contrariwise Jupiter in my Figure at the ingress is in detriment and afflicted,
and Significator or Planet from whence I am to inquire of fertility, and in
Square or Opposition of other Significators, which also concur to the same
signification; must I from hence because Jupiter, who for the most part is
good, and in his own natural inclination free from mischief, affirm or conclude
the year to be fruitful and free from any want or penury? No, but because he
is the Significator this year of this matter, and in detriment, retrograde, in
his fall, afflicted, impotent and weak, I judge the clean contrary.

For I am to judge according to his signification and ability at that time not
according to his natural signification; for otherwise we should make most
manifest contradictions, and confound our selves both in judgment and reason,
to make Saturn and Mars the only Workers of iniquity; for we see clearly all
the evils in the World are not of the Nature of these two, which would of
necessity follow, were this admitted; but some are Jovial, some Venereal, and a
third fort Mercurial, others participating of the Nature of the Sun and again
of the Moon.

But to clear this point yet more fully, (for I would not have the ingenious
thus misled in so gross an error) admit Jupiter or Venus bear chief Rule of
the eighth house, which you know has signification of death and mortality; and
I find by several consequences and reasons in nature the Heavens do incline to
such mischief: shall I barely because one of these rules that House conclude
contrary to all found reason and manifest testimonies, the year will be rather
healthful? Believe it, I shall refuse thus to do, for every Planet must
perform that whereunto it is ordained; Venus is now to denote death, as being
Lady of the eighth, and therefore in such years I ought thus to judge.

Yet thus much I shall follow her nature, as to say there shall be much
mortality or death amongst the People by reason of voluptousness, or Venery and
such like, because she has naturally such signification: In like manner if
Jupiter be Lord of the eighth, and mortality that year denoted, I shall
(notwithstanding he bears rule in that part of the Heavens) thus judge as has
been said, viz. death and mortality, but the nature thereof I shall take from
his natural signification, as by corruption of Blood, Fevers and the like, I
shall say is this mortality to be occasioned, etc.

In the next place you are to have a special care to be well instructed in the
nature of every Planet and House; wherefore be thou sure to have the exact
knowledge of the second Treatise it being Introductory, before thou adventurest
thus far, least thou be discouraged from ever attaining to the perfection of
this study, which I am certain thou will never do, if thou be not therein
very perfect; wherefore let the first eight Chapters thereof be perused over
and over, and then proceed.

Judge not upon every light testimony, but according to Reason and Art do thou
order thy matter; for the more assurances and testimonies you have on any
matter and concurrences in causes, the more affirmatively may you deliver your'
conclusions.

Fear God, study Nature, follow the Rules of Art, be knowing therein, and be
ignorant in the vanities of the course of the World, and thou shall come
nearest unto Truth, and infinitely augment thy knowledge.

In your judgment of the Suns ingress, join also in consideration with it, the
significations of Eclipses, great Conjunctions, Comets and Blazing-stars, if
there be any either preceding or coming after it; for be assured these things
never happen but before some notable change and alteration in the World.

Remember that according to the Debility and strength of your Significator you
are to judge of the condition of any person, the people, or thing whatsoever
thereby signified, and you have attained to a great help: but now least you
should be still to seek in the true understanding of the Significators
necessary in this manner of Judgment, I shall (notwithstanding what has been
delivered in the Introduction or Second Book of these our labors) here beneath
clearly demonstrate them unto thee.

CHAP. III. Showing which are the Significators of the King, People, their
Enemies and Assistants, in any Revolution of the years of the World.
LArgely have the Ancients treated of these matters, yet some therein have come
very short, and to little or no purpose troubled their heads, leaving still the
Student both in doubts and errors; wherefore according to the sincerity of my
first undertakings, I shall here endeavor to undeceive my Readers touching
these particulars, and impart unto them the truth and surest rules for the
judging thereof.

I shall first give you some of their Instructions, and then my own, or such as
I in my judgment hold to be most rational, that so thou may be the better
able to distinguish truth from falsehood.

Note that those in Authority are understood by the tenth house, when there is
no King.
We shall begin with the Significator of Kings (but you are to note that in any
Nation where no such are, the Grandees or chief Rulers of the times are to be
understood) the which say they is thus to be known or found.

Look to the Lord of the tenth house in your Figure at time of the Revolution
of the Sun into the first point of Aries, who if he be free from Combustion,
Retrogradation, Impedition, and such like, and within five degrees of the cusp
of the tenth, either before or after, viz. within or without the house, he
shall without doubt be the Kings Significator, or chief Rulers, without any
farther inquiry; but if he be any ways impedited, as in Detriment, Fall,
Combust, Peregrine, Retrograde, or besieged, etc. he shall not be significator
of the King or Chief Rulers.

Have recourse then to that Planet who has Exaltation in the Sign of the
tenth, and if he be within five degrees of the cusp (as you have heard) and in
no sort impedited or afflicted, thou shall conclude him to be Significator of
the King; but if he be impedited or afflicted (as abovesaid) he shall not be
Significator.

But now, you must regard the Sun, the Planet that is Almuten of the tenth, the
Planet placed within five degrees of the cusp thereof (if any such be) or the
Lord of Part of Government, the which if you find (first beginning with the
Sun and then considering the rest as they are set down in order) placed and
dignifyed essentially, or free from affliction (as you have heard) he shall be
Significator of the King, otherwise not.

The Rules of the Ancients in this particular are not to be grounded on.
So that then by these their Rules (omitting many such like Instructions for
brevities sake) there shall no Revolution whatsoever, though never so bad or
mischievous, in the least have any relation, or extend unto the King or Chief
Rulers of any place, as if they were excusable from misfortunes, or the Heavens
afraid to molest or afflict them, which must needs be if these Documents of the
Ancients must be admitted authentic, who will have no Significator for them,
but such as is free from all impediment, from which, consequently, we must
conclude they shall never be molested or disturbed by Wars, Commotions,
Insurrections, Losses or Crosses whatsoever, which I could wish were true, but
we can woefully testify to the contrary: besides to affirm it, were both
ridiculous and preposterous.

The greatest Potentate in the World is not free from the influence of the
Heavens and stars.
For the Grandees of the Earth, although never so great and proud, yet they must
know (with us) they are but men, and such too, as are not excused from the
harmonious configurations of the Celestial Planets and Heavens.

But the Ancients, although they have deserved by their writings infinite
applause from all ingenious and judicious souls; as also high esteem, for both
their care and learning; yet in this particular they have come short (for the
generality of them I mean) and therefore if in this I dissent from them, as
also in some other of their Rules, I desire to be excused, since I know no
Reason why in every Age and in every study there may not some one or other, not
only find out some failings of ancient Authors, but also correct them, nay far
exceed them, though perhaps in every particular they may again come short: for
we see even the best Divines, the best Philosophers, and Physicians have been
corrected, and in some things amended, and so also the Astrological Philosopher
may come short of another that stands upon his shoulders.

The true significators of Kings and Rulers, after the opinion of the Author.
Wherefore then know, that the true significator of the King or chief Rulers, is
the tenth house of Heaven at the time of the Suns ingress into Aries, the Lord
thereof, and the Planets therein posited; but more especially, the cusp of the
tenth and its Lord, whether well or ill disposed (...) mattereth not: These in
any Revolution to the end of the World shall still be Significators of the King
or Rulers particularly, and the Sun and Saturn in general, but more especially
the Sun.

The true significators of the People of any Nation, in any Revolution of the
years of the World.
In like manner, look what ever sign ascends at the time aforesaid, viz. the
Suns ingress into Aries in any year, and that sign, together with its Lord,
shall particularly denote the common People of that Kingdom or Nation for which
your Scheam is erected, and shall be their significators, and the Moon
generally, as the Sun is the general Significator of the Rulers.

In declaring unto you the sign ficators of the Enemies of both King and People
in any Revolution, I might also show you the defects of some of the Ancients,
but I should rather choose (though I had not a desire to be as brief as may be)
to pass them over in silence, they meriting so much at our hands otherways;
wherefore let us to our business.

Of the enemies of King and people in any Revolution.
See that in every Revolution of the World you have regard to the opposite house
signifying your Significators, as the seventh house denotes the open Enemies of
the Common People and King in a hostile way; the twelfth house their private,
and the ninth house the secret Enemies of the King or Rulers, because (as you
have heard in the 42. Chapter of the Second Book) it is the twelfth from the
tenth.

Of their assistance, etc.
Even so, as the second house signifies the wealth and assistance of the people,
so does also the eleventh the Kings aid, wealth and assistance; the eighth the
assistance, aid and wealth of their open enemies, etc. as you have been fully
instructed before in the same 42. chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Significators of Rich and Noblemen, the Kings Standard or
Armor-bearer; also Clergymen, and of Students, Merchants, Lawyers, and Women
in general: also Friars and Monks; and these according to the significations of
the Planets.
I Shall here only give you the general Significators of these according to the
Ancients, as brief as may be, that I may proceed to the second Section, having
at large spoken of them already in the second Book.

Wherefore know, that Rich and Noblemen are signified by Jupiter and the Lord
of the sign in which he is located in the Sun his ingress into Aries.

Soldiers, Armor or Standard-Bearers, Generals of Armies and the like, are
understood by Mars.

The ninth house and the Lord thereof, denotes Clergymen particularly, and
generally they are signified by Jupiter: Also Judges, and the graver sort of
men.

Students, Merchants, and Lawyers, and Scribes, Clerks, and all Penmen,
Picture-drawers, and ingenious wits; also youth and young men in general, are
signified by Mercury.

Venus generally denotes women and all females (see chap. 5. Book the 2.) and
the Moon the vulgar and rural sort of People: as the Sun, you have heard, does
Emperors and Kings.

And lastly, all such as live obscurely and devoutly to the service of God, as
Monks, Abbots, Friars, and the like, amongst the Papists (as in the 1. chap. of
the second Book) and amongst us such as slight all things in the World, in
comparison of Gods Service and Divine Mediation, are signified by Saturn. As
touching Cities and Countries subject both to the signs and Planets, you have
also fully heard them declared in the Second Book, where we treat of them.

Now to know the state and condition of any of these in a general way in any
Annual Revolution, you have no more to do but this; look to your significator,
from which judgment is to be required, and see if he be essentially or
accidentally strong or assisted, and judge according to his strength or
debility good or bad to the parties signified; for if well dignified and
located, good may be expected: if afflicted, and impedited, the contrary, etc.

SECTION II. Showing the state and condition of the King or Rulers, and their
continuation and durability in any Revolution; as also the condition of the
People from the position and fortitudes of their significators. Also how to
know the Lord of the year in any Revolution of the years of the World, and the
significations thereof in the twelve Houses, Signs and Aspects of the Planets;
also of the significations of the Head and Tail of the Dragon in any of the
twelve Houses.
CHAP. I. Of the state or condition of the King or chief Rulers and People in
any Annual Revolution.
AFter thou art well informed of the true significator of the King and People,
or any ones person or thing, concerning which thou would judge of any future
event, thou will be the better able to accomplish thy desires.

How to judge of the condition of the King in annual Revolutions.
Wherefore now to know the true state and condition of the King, People or any
other, have regard to their true significators, as unto the sign of the tenth
(if thou inquire concerning the King, etc.) its Lord and the Planet or
Planets therein posited; and some of the Ancients have said the Sun, Part of
Fortune, and its dispositor are also to be joined in consideration with them
(thou may choose which thou will follow) and see how they are dignified, how
aspected, and by what Planets, their nature, place in the Heavens, and nature
of the sign from whence they aspect your significator.

If he be in Sextile or Trine of the Fortunes, and out of good Houses, thou
may expect and judge from thence good; but if beheld by the Square or
Opposition of the Infortunes, mischief is to be feared; if the aspects be good
and from many benevolent Planets, judge much success; if otherwise, less; and
so contrariwise much evil if your significator be several ways afflicted, etc.

To know the nature of the good or evil threatened.
If you would know the nature of the evil or good which is threatened by the
assistance or debilities of your significator, look to the nature of the Planet
afflicting, and the nature of the sign wherein he is located, and the part of
Heaven in which he is placed, and according to their significations judge.

As for example, in your figure you have (suppose) the Lord of the tenth in the
ninth, by which you shall judge some secret treason or plot against his person
during that Revolution, because it is the twelfth from the tenth, and
signifies secret enemies and plots; But if beheld by the Lord thereof by a
malicious Square or Opposition, you shall say he shall undertake some Journey
by which he shall endanger his life, or in the which some such Perils shall
happen; and if also at the same instant he be afflicted by the malevolent
Aspect of the Lord of the Eighth, which is the Fifth in the figure, no wise
assisted by the adjuvant beams of the Fortunes, thou may then assuredly
conclude him to be in great jeopardy of his life: and if other Testimonies
concur, thou may absolutely pronounce death; for you must still remember that
according to the signification of the Sign the afflicting Planet is Lord of,
and the Sign and place of heaven wherein he is, to pronounce the nature of the
evil threatened; for we shall suppose the Lord of the Eighth before mentioned to
be in the Seventh, which is the Fourth in the Figure, though Seventh from the
Tenth, by which you may assuredly say that the evil, viz. the danger of death
threatened, shall be occasioned by the malicious and furious actions of his
enemy, the Seventh house having signification thereof; and so judge of any
other position; and contrariwise if the Aspects and Planets aspecting be
Fortunes, and in good places of Heaven, judge the contrary.

The Condition and state of the Common People in any Revolution of the years of
the World, or any other.
So likewise judge of the state and condition of the People having regard to the
Ascendent, its Lord, the Moon and Lord of the year, and if they be well placed
and dignified, also well aspected by the Benevolents, judge the condition of
the common People or Subjects to be prosperous; but if you find the contrary,
judge also the contrary. In like manner you may judge of any of the aforesaid
significators, mutatis mutandis.

As if the Sign of the Eleventh, the Lord thereof, and the Planet or Planets
therein posited be essentially strong and free from all manner of impediment,
judge the condition of the Soldiers and assistance of the Rulers to be
fortunate and successful during that Revolution; If otherwise, judge the
contrary, and so of the rest, etc.

Rules touching the Significator of the King.
If the Significator of the King be under the Sun beams, there is much danger
(as say the Arabians) of his decease in that Revolution; but I should rather
judge his Kingly power to be then near Death or an End, or likely to be much
eclipsed, for that there are many Significators to be considered for the
judging of Death, which ought never to be pronounced upon one bare testimony;
besides, were this admitted, we should consequently conclude by the same rule,
the Death of a whole Senate upon such a position in such an Ingress, they being
signified by the same significator, where there is no King, which were
ridiculous in any one so to do; but I say that their power and glory shall be
eclipsed and shaken, and perhaps overthrown at that time when any such Position
is found.

If the Significator be not as yet under the Sun beams, but within twelve or
thirteen degrees entering, then judge this Catastrophe to be when he comes under
his beams, or in conjunction with the Sun bodily.

The same also is to be feared when the Sign of the Tenth is Leo, and Mars in
Square or Opposition of the Sun, or in corporal Conjunction with him, but more
especially if he be Lord of the Eighth, or therein located, or in reception or
translation of light with the Lord of the Eighth, or with Saturn, or any
Aspect, especially if he be infortunately placed in the time of his Nativity or
Coronation.

So likewise when the Lord of the year is in Combustion in the Tenth, this
danger is threatened him in his own Dominions; but if he be thus afflicted in
the Fourth or Seventh, the danger is to be feared and expected from some coming
out of those Regions signified by the Sign wherein the Lord of the Year is
afflicted.

Know also that when in any Revolution the Sun is Significator of the Rulers of
any place, and in Square or Opposition of Jupiter, they shall be envyed and
molested by their own Household Servants and Subjects; if there be any such
Aspect betwixt the Lord of the Ascendent and Lord of the Tenth, the Common
People will also rise up against their Superiors to reject them.

But if there be any friendly aspect betwixt them, or reception, or translation
of light, judge the contrary.

How to know the several accidents to happen to any.
You may know the several accidents and the nature of them by your significators
coming to the place wherein the Infortunes were at the time of the ingress, or
meeting with them in their ordinary motions, etc. and this of either King,
People or any other; still remembering to have regard to the Planet afflicted,
and who are thereby understood.

If the significator of the King or any other applies to a malevolent Planet,
or receive the light of one slow in motion, it threatens very much mischief or
death to the party or parties signified by your significator.

To know the cause of any evil threatened.
Also if thou would know the cause of any evil or cross to happen to the King
or chief Rulers by the significations of the Houses, thou must be sure thou
be well versed in them, which thou may learn in the 42 Chapter of our
second Tract in this Volume; as if the significator be afflicted in the second
House, or from Planets therein, judge the cause to proceed from the
signification thereof, as Money, Wealth, Assistants, etc. if in the third, it
is caused from or by Children, Kindred, Neighbors, short Journeys, and the
like; and so according to the signification of the other Houses judge if it
happen in any of them, and so likewise of any other significator as well as the
Kings, Mutatis mutandis; also of any other thing or accident let this be your
rule, etc.

When it shall come to pass.
Look when the afflicting Planet comes to the perfect Conjunction, Square or
Opposition of your significator, and at that time say the evil threatened will
come to pass, or when the afflicting Planet comes to the Cusp of the House
signifying any person or persons of whom thou would judge, or to the place,
viz. degree and minute of the sign wherein the Planet which is your
significator is located, and say then the evil shall happen, unless the
fortunate aspects of the benevolents thereunto at the same time prevent it; and
if so, then also see what House that fortunate Planet is Lord of, and where
located, and of what, significator, and judge the deliverance or prevention to
proceed from the person, persons or things signified by the nature and
signification of the Planet, sign and House he is Lord of, posited in, and is
significator of, etc. but if the aforesaid Conjunction, Square or Opposition be
in an angle, then judge the evil portended to happen when your significator
becomes combust of the Sun.

How to judge by the nature of the aspects of the nature of the persons
signified by the Planet afflicting your significator.
Further note, that if your significator be afflicted by Sextile, judge the evil
proceeds from such as are pretendedly friends to the King, People or any which
your significator denotes, or from such as are not thought or suspected to be
Enemies: if it be by a Square aspect, judge the mischief signified thereby to
arise from such as are clandestine and secretly Enemies; if by a Trine, from
real Friends and Confederates; and lastly, if by Opposition, by open and
professed Enemies.

Consider also the Planet afflicting, and how dignified; as if a Planet in his
own House afflict the significator of the King or chief Rulers, judge the evil
to arise from their own domestic friends and alliance; if he be in his
exaltation, say it will proceed from some of the Nobles, Princes, Dukes or such
as are in high power and authority, or near unto the Crown; if but in his
triplicity, from such as have their dependency on the aforesaid Nobility, or
are allied unto them; if in term, from such as are inferior unto these, as are
Marquesses, Earls, Lords and the like; if in face only, then say they are but
Knights or Gentlemen: but if the Planet afflicting be peregrin and in no
essential dignity, it shall proceed from such as are altogether vile and base,
or of no reputation or quality, having no honorable rise or dignity; after the
same manner may you judge (as you have heard) of the significator of any other
as well as the chief Rulers, by varying your rules according to art and
discretion; but I believe you will never have much need of these curious rules
of the Ancients.

What is signified by the retrogadation of any Planet in Revolution.
If your significator be retrograde in any annual Revolution, judge much
trouble, impediment and anxiety to the persons or things signified thereby.

As if it be significator of the King or chief Rulers, it denotes much trouble
and detriment unto their persons, and great fear of unthroning of them;
likewise if it be significator of the People (and so of any other) or if the
Lord of the year be thus afflicted, say the condition of the People shall be
very sad and grievous, and much trouble and mischief shall be to their Cities
and Towns; and this shall more assuredly be, if your significator be then in
the terms of the Infortunes, and the unfortunate Planet afflicted also and
indisposed, for then shall the mischief and trouble be the more grievous and
troublesome: So also if your significator be in the terms of a fortune, if he
be ill-affected, weak and in the Houses of the Malevolents; but if he be free,
the evil will be the less; especially if he be in his own House or Exaltation,
or triplicity, essentially well dignified.

What Kings and Rulers may expect when their significator or Lord of the tenth
House of Heaven in any Revolution is impedited.
Now as touching the significations of the impedition of the Lord of the tenth
in any annual Revolution; and then let us proceed to the rules of the Ancients
in judging the true state and condition of the Common People in any Region, by
any Revolution of the year, over and above what has been already said, for the
better illustration thereof, that so the Student may be the better able to
retain and understand the rules of Art, as also to judge of these matters the
more accurately.

You have heard that the sign of the tenth House in any annual Revolution,
together with the Lord thereof, has signification of Kings and chief Rulers;
the which if it be combust in any of the Angles, it signifies destruction to
the King or chief Rulers during that Revolutions effects.

As if it be in the Ascendent, and the Sun be Lord thereof, you may from hence
conclude (if other testimonies concur) that the Common People or Subjects will
rise up against their Superior or Governers, and kill him or them or depose
them, or at least grievously molest and afflict them, according to the power
and strength of the significators; for if Mars do then afflict him by
Conjunction or aspect, and be either Lord of the eighth or fifth, or therein
located, death is the more to be feared; but if Saturn be then in aspect or
Conjunction with the Lord of the tenth, it is likely some Saturnian disease or
evil will afflict his person if he be not Lord of the aforesaid Houses, and
bear dominion either by essential dignity or bodily presence in the sixth, or
else some other misfortune will befall him according to the nature of Saturn and
the place and sign of Heaven wherein he is located.

If the Combustion fall out so as to be in the seventh or fourth Houses of
Heaven, Judge the mischief to be according to the signification of these
Houses, as you have heard of the Ascendent: for if it be in the seventh you
shall say (because it has signification of the Enemies of the People) that the
disaster shall be occasioned by them; in the fourth (being the seventh from the
tenth) from his own proper Antagonists, etc. if in the tenth it self this
combustion be, it shall proceed from his own unruliness or wilfulness, etc.
this is clear. Wherefore now also have regard to the condition and state of the
People, but first let us consider the durability of Kings and Rulers.

CHAP. II. Teaching how to judge of the permanency or durability of Kings, or
such as are in Authority by any Revolution.
MUch time and paper might I here consume in delivering unto you all the ways
the Learned in former ages have set down for the judging of this matter; but
lest I then deviate from both my intentions at this time, and natural
inclination to short discourses, and trouble both thee and my self to no
purpose, since it may as well be delivered in fewer words, I shall satisfy my
self with these following rules.

From whence Judgment is to be required for the predicting the durability of
any Kingdom or Government.
First, Erect your figure of the Heavens, which for the judging of these matters
must be according to that punctum of time the King was first Elected or
Crowned; if you are to judge of a Senate, take the time of their first sitting
or assembling together, or wherein they were first created or made a Free
State, or assumed power to act according to what their own counsels shall
produce.

Then having exactly placed the Planets therein according to their then several
places, and reduced them to the just hour and minute of the day, especially the
Moon, you are to see what Planet is Hylech or Alchochoden or Giver of Life in
your Figure, and Almuten or Chief Ruler of the Ascendent, to know the state of
his body or person; what of the mid-heaven, to judge of the state and condition
of his Kingdom or Regal power; and having thus done thou may easily judge of
either of these in this manner.

Observe what sign, degree and minute ascends and culminates, what sign, degree
and minute the Sua and ^^oon possesses, and where to a very minute also is your
Almuten and Hylech of each House; then see in every Revolution, Eclipse or
great Conjunction, how these places and significators are disposed, and how
aspected by the Malevolents, and judge the continuation or subversion of their
Government according as you see occasion.

If your Hylech or Giver of Life be afflicted, judge the evil (according to the
strength of the afflicting Planet) to fall on the person or persons of the
Rulers, or touching their lives: if the Almuten of the mid-heaven, upon their
Regal power; and so contrariwise if they be assisted and fortunately beheld, or
come to the places of the Fortunes, or the Fortunes fall in any of their places
in any Revolution, Eclipse or great Conjunction, judge the contrary; still
remember the good or evil does depend on the power of the Benevolent or
Malevolent Planets; for if much afflicted, much evil is to be expected, and so
on the contrary as you have already been taught.

If any of the aforesaid places or significators fall in the place of any
Eclipse or great Conjunction, judge the mischief threatened to happen according
to the signification of the Eclipse or Planets so in Conjunction; warily
judging according to the nature of the Houses wherein they are in the Scheme of
the Eclipse or Conjunction, and the signification of their own nature, and the
nature of the Houses which they rule and are located in at the time of the
Kings Coronation or Election; This you shall more fully understand in the
delivering the rules of this Art touching the Judgment of Eclipses and great
Conjunctions at the latter end of this Treatise.

I utterly for my own part Refuse to follow the rules of the Ancients touching
their giving a year to every sign betwixt the Planet afflicting and afflicted,
for the judging the time of the alteration of any Government and the like; for
that they stand not with much reason, or are they built on any strong
foundation, so as to stand unquestionable; a little experience and observation
will soon manifest unto thee the truth hereof; for touching the just time when
any such accident shall happen, I conceive ought rather (and that with a great
deal of more reason) to be left to the good pleasure and will of the Most High,
who is the great orderer and disposer of all the Causes in Nature, and will
according to his own good time effect what is most agreeable unto his Divine
will.

Wherefore let it suffice to know by the iuclinations of those Glorious Bodies
the alterations and durabilities of sublunary things, without enquiring how or
when it will be performed; if thou find at the beginning of any Government
or State the Angles of Heaven fixed, the Lords thereof well disposed,
especially of the Ascendent and mid-heaven, and free from the malevolent
presence and Configurations of the Infortunes, and essentially dignified and
aspected by the adjuvant Planets, thou may from hence conclude the firmness
and permanency of the Rule or Government then set up; but if thou find these
places and significators contrariwise afflicted, moveable and weak, judge the
contrary thereunto.

If Saturn be then Lord of the Ascendent, and essentially well dignified and
altogether free from the affliction of the Malevolents and Angular, say that
the Kingdom, State, Rule or Government then began shall flourish and continue
unchangeable 465 years, being the greatest years of Saturn; and if he be not
altogether so well placed, but free from all impediment and in a succedent
House, the Government or Rule then settled shall continue firm and unaltered 57
years, being his greater years; if he be significator and essentially
dignified, and free from all impediment aforesaid, and in a Cadent House, say
it shall continue in the condition it first was in, 43 years and a half, being
his mean years; but if he be but thus meanly placed and but moderately
dignified, judge the continuance thereof to be but 30 years, which are his
least years; and so accordingly judge of all the other Planets when they are
significators, and well placed and dignified, as you have heard of Saturn,
their greatest, greater, mean and least years being all recorded in our
Introduction to the Judgment of the STARS, where the nature and significations
of the Planets are delivered, etc.

CHAP. III. Showing the state and condition of the Common People in any Region,
by any Revolution.
IN the first Chapter of this second Section I have sufficiently shown the way
and manner of judging the condition and state of the People; yet for the better
illustration thereof (as I have said) I shall in this manner further enlarge my
self thereon.

The Ascendent, Lord thereof, and the Planet therein posited, but more
especially the Lord of the Ascendent and the Moon are significators of the
Common People of any Nation, Country or Kingdom concerning which thou do
intend to judge by the Sun his ingress into the first point of Aries, the which
if at that time thou find well disposed, fortunate, in their own dignities
essential and in an angle, or succedent, free from the aspects of the
Infortunes, it denotes the People shall that year be in a good condition, shall
thrive, shall be successful and prosperous, and shall have one gain and success
upon the neck of another; especially if the Planet or Planets in Configuration
with them be Fortunes or well disposed, or that to which the Moon does then
apply.

If the Planet to which the Lord of the Ascendent or the Moon does apply or is
in aspect with be Jupiter, they shall be safe and secure that year, shall enjoy
their Liberties, shall be free from all manner of molestation, shall have
Justice and good Laws executed, and shall be in credit and honor.

If it be Venus, they shall abound and have plenty of all things, shall be
merry, delight in and enjoy pleasure and sufficient recreation, shall be neat,
curious, and propagate Marriages: Thus you see we still judge according to the
nature of the Planet in configuration of our significator, and the strength of
both Planets; see this yet further cleared and demonstrated.

If the Moon at this time when she is thus in aspect with these Planets that
naturally (you know) are Fortunes, be cadent, weak and no wise essentially
dignified, yet shall the condition of the People be fortunate and good, but
shall not so abound in their felicities, nor have them multiplied so one upon
the neck of the other, as you have but now heard; and if the Moon were so very
well fortified and dignified (as you even now heard) and apply to these
Fortunes, being also as aforesaid essentially fortified, but cadent, it shall
signify the gallant condition and state of the Commons, and that they shall
have good success upon the neck of another, but yet not in so ample a manner as
was before declared when they were also placed in Angles.

The Moon applying to the Fortunes weak and out of their effential dignities.
Also if these Fortunes be out of all essential dignities and weak, yet shall
they receive so much benefit therefrom as to be safe in their persons and in
health, though not much abounding in other matters, etc. Yet further observe
but the subsequent rules, and the reasons being well pondered in thy mind, thou
shall be fully enabled to judge of other matters and significators, your rules
being varied according to art and discretion.

If in any annual Revolution the Moon being weak and peregrine applies to the
Infortunes, being essentially strong and well disposed, it denotes mischief,
trouble and anxiety to the people, poverty, want and disgrace, according to the
nature and signification of the Planet so in configuration with her; and if the
unfortunate Planet be Lord of the eighth, and be therein located, or have any
dominion therein, judge the death and mortality of the People; nay even though
the Infortunes were not so placed, and the Lord of the eighth beholding the
Moon or the Lord of the Ascendent, it still portends the mortality of the
People; but more particularly according to the nature of the Planet afflicting.

If it be Saturn, thou shall judge the People to be afflicted and perplexed
with cold Saturnian diseases, such as are Consumptions, Palsies, Agues, and the
like, which shall be the occasion of death: if to Mars, they shall be hot and
dry, Fevers, over-heating of the blood, etc. and if then Mars shall happen to
be in an humane sign, there shall be much bloodshed and man-slaughters; and so
much the more assured shall this judgment be, if the Ascendent come then to
the place where Mars was in at the time of the beginning of that Law, or
Government, or Commonwealth, etc. or to the Square or Opposition thereof, or to
his place in any great Conjunction of his, going before this revolution; for in
any year where thou find such like Configurations, thou may assuredly
judge Wars, Commotions and effusion of blood to follow, especially in those
parts subject to the sign and quarter of Heaven wherein Mars was.

War may also be predicted when he is in an angle and strong, also when he in
any Revolution is Combust, or enters his Fall, or when Jupiter is in
combustion; see in what part Mars is, and whether Occidental, Oriental,
Meridional, or Septentrional, and judge those in the quarter wherein he is to
overcome.

If Saturn and Mars in any Revolvtion be joined in signification, and in an
earthy sign, it denotes Earthquakes in those parts wherein they are; if Mars
be joined with Mercury, there shall be much Merchandising.

Also if the Moon and the Infortunes be so disposed and mixed together, so that
one part is strong and well dignified, and the other weak and peregrine, if
signifies the People shall change their condition during that Revolution from
worse to better, and from better to worse, according to their strength and
significations.

So likewise if Part of Fortune be strong or well disposed, as also its
dispositor, and free from all manner of affliction, good success shall be to
the People; if afflicted, mischief and loss; judge the nature of the good or
bad according to what you have been already shown.

Of the signification of the^ Planets in Revolutions, when either strong or
weak.
Moreover, if Saturn be strong in any Revolution, and well placed, he signifies
Content, quiet and rest unto the People, also prosperity, health and increase
of both food and money; but if he be weak and afflicted, he denotes the
contrary, as misfortunes, destructions, depopulations, etc.

If in any Revolution Jupiter be significator of the People, or Almuten of the
Ascendent, and strong, the People shall be good, virtuous, honest, chaste, just,
and loving Justice, Law, and all points of equity and honesty; but if he
contrariwise be unfortunate, the People shall exercise Cruelty, Oppression,
Injustice, shall be disobedient and break the Laws, and prove quite contrary to
what you have heard: Also when in any Revolution Jupiter is placed in the
seventh, or opposite to the Ascendent, it signifies that the People shall have
no success or good that Revolution.

If Mars be as aforesaid Almuten and strong, etc. the People shall be safe,
secure and free from the molestation of all their Enemies; they shall overcome
them and beat them all under their feet, and shall be in a successful and most
prosperous condition; but if contrariwise he be then weak and impedited,
retrograde, combust, etc. he denotes wars, quarrels, slaughters, trouble,
effusion of blood, epidemical diseases, fevers, hot and dry diseases, many
mischiefs, and the clean contrary to what he before promised.

So likewise if the Sun be as aforesaid significator and strong, the People
shall assuredly be in an honorable and noble condition, and many that are
thereunto fit shall be raised to dignity, power and authority, according to the
capacity and quality of their persons, and be in great esteem and favor with
their King or Rulers: but if he be weak and impedited, it diminishes the
honor of the King, and abaseth their condition, and the People shall suffer
much damage and disgrace from their Superiors, and be tormented by them.

If Venus be placed and dignified as above said, the People shall have all the
pleasures and good promised by her signification, as delights, banquets,
riches, pleasure, etc. and shall delight themselves with Women, and the like;
if she be impedited, you may judge the clean contrary, as sadness, poverty and
little or no mirth, etc.

If you find Mercury in your Figure placed as you have heard, the People shall
gain by Merchandising, and increase their riches by Traffic, shall love and
delight in knowledge, good instructions and ingenious Arts and Sciences; shall
also cherish and propagate all good Learning, and the Studious therein, and
shall love one another: but if he be afflicted and unfortunate, they shall
suffer much loss and vexation by contrary winds, decay of Trade and
Merchandising, and have no disposition at all to any good Learning or
Education; and to be short, he signifies the clean contrary to what you have
but now heard.

In like manner if the Moon be well placed, and be Almuten, and essentially
strong, as has been said, the year shall be seasonable, fortunate and fertile,
and the People during that Revolution happy, successful and in a prosperous and
fortunate condition, and shall be preserved from death, slaughters and
sickness: Also if she be ill-affected and impedited, much damage and mischief
shall happen unto the People, the year shall be unseasonable, destructive,
sickly and unfruitful or scarce, by distilling unseasonably rain and dew when
no need is thereof, and withholding of it when it is requisite and thirsted
after by the earth.

So likewise as thou have judged of the Moon and the Planets (in a general way,
as being Almuten) may thou judge of the Lord of the Ascendent, who if he be
fortunate, and well dignified and aspected, thou may judge the fortunate
condition and state of the Common People during that Revolution; also their
misfortune, if afflicted, impedited, etc. Judge the nature thereof from the
nature of the House, Planet afflicting, and sign wherein it is, whether it be
good or bad, as you have been already sufficiently taught; wherefore it were
needless and superfluous here to run over the nature of the Planets fortunate
and unfortunate, afflicting or assisting your significator, and the nature of
the Signs and Houses they are in for an example.

Yet least thou should not be so apt and ingenious herein as I could wish
thou were, I shall a little hint at the manner thereof, that so thou may be
the better enlightened to the through understanding of this kind of Judgment.

If the Lord of the Ascendent or Moon be in the seventh afflicted and weak,
especially if malevolently aspected by the Lord of the seventh, and he
essentially strong, say the People shall during that Revolution be grievously
afflicted and molested by their enemies, if in the eighth by death, in the
ninth by or in long journeys, in the tenth by their Rulers, Superiors and
Kings, in the eleventh by their friends, or so in pretense, or by the
frustration of their hope and trust, in the twelfth, by imprisonment, secret
enemies and the like; in the Ascendent they shall suffer bodily in their own
proper persons, according to the nature of the sign then possessing the cusp
thereof (and so accordingly vary your Judgment after the nature and
signification of the other houses, if therein he be in the like manner
afflicted) the more assured will this Judgment, be if it be a humane sign; if
bestial, then will it happen to the beasts of that place, for which your
Revolution is observed.

And according to the Nature of the sign will the evil fall on such beasts, as
are appropriated thereunto, as if the sign ascending at that time be Aries or
Capricorn, it will happen on Sheep, Hogs, Hares, Goats, etc. and all lesser
Cattle for the use of man; if Iaurus, or the last fifteen degrees of Sagittary,
on Cowes, Oxen, Horses, and the greater sort of Cattle; if in Leo, or any of
the feral signs, on the wild sort of Beasts; if in Scorpio, Cancer or Pisces,
on Fishes and such Creatures as live on the Water; if in any of the aerie signs,
the mischief shall be in the air, viz. it shall be Intemperate, Pestilential
and Infectious.

Some of the Ancients also say, that if Gemini do then ascend, the evil will
fall on young men chiefly; if Virgo, on Virgins and young women; if Libra, on
men of more mature years; if in the first fifteen degrees of Sagittary or
Aquaries, on the Antienter People; this shall chiefly happen to those Regions,
Cities and Places subject to the sign and the part of Heaven thereby signified
(of which you are fully informed in the 28th. Chapter of our Introduction to
the Judgment of the Stars) also to these places assigned to the dominion of
the Planet, concerning which thou may also fully be informed in the same
aforesaid Treatise.

As, if the Ascendent be Aries, and Mars be then impedited, the Regions,
Cities, Villages, and places subject to Aries shall be damnified, and shall
suffer much detriment by the heat of the air and defluctions of Rheum,
headache and the like; except the benevolent Aspects of Venus be prevalent and
gainsay it; if the Ascendent be Scorpio, those places subject thereunto shall
be afflicted with water, and venomous Creatures, the Pox, pain in the head and
arms, etc.

If the Ascendent be Taurus, and Venus then impedited and afflicted, the
Regions and Countries subject thereunto shall suffer much detriment and loss
through extremity of Cold, Frost and Snow, and also dryness, whereby the fruits
of the earth shall be destroyed, etc. If the Ascendent be Libra, such as are
thereunto allotted shall suffer affliction by winds, pestilential air,
sicknesses and pains in the head and reins, except Mars work or signify to the
contrary.

In like manner, if the Ascendent be Gemini and Mercury then afflicted and
weak, the Places under the power or Gemini shall be afflicted with corrupt air,
and receive much hurt and loss by winds, and the people shall be troubled with
Headaches and obstructions of the Lungs and Breathing-pipes; if it be Virgo,
the evil threatened will be in the Regions and Cities under it; as they shall
suffer through extremity of cold and dryness, and in some sort barrenness and
scarcity, and the people shall have palpitations of the heart, and grief in
their chests and bellies, unless it be prevented by Jupiter.

Also if Cancer ascend, and the Moon be afflicted and weak, the People under
its jurisdiction shall be molested with pains and Rheumes both in their head
and breast, and there shall be also much hurt and damage by unusual and
excessive rain and moisture if Saturn prevent it not.

If Leo, and the Sun be also weak, such places, Cities, Nation, or Kingdoms as
are subject thereunto shall suffer damage through extremity of heat and
drought, warm pestilential air, etc. the people through intemperancy and
diseases incident unto the heart and brain, unless Saturn by his coldness
restrain and alter the fury thereof.

If it be Sagittary that ascends, and Jupiter impedited, then the Regions and
places under Sagittary shall be afflicted with infirmities in the head and
legs, and these shall in the first half of the year be incident to the persons
of men, and in the other part to beasts of the greater sort, as are Horses,
Oxen, Cows, Bulls, etc. If the sign be Pisces which then ascends, the places
where it Rules shall suffer inundations, and grievous infirmities both in the
head and feet, as the Gout, Dropsy, and the like, if Mercury mediate or
prevent it not.

Lastly, if Capricorn ascend, and Saturn be impedited, the places subject to
Capricorn shall be perplexed with extreme cold and dry weather, and sterility,
and the people with griefs and aches in the joints and knees: and if Aquaries
ascend, the places subject thereunto shall suffer by over-moist air and high
winds, and the people shall have many infirmities in their legs and heads, if
the Sun and Moon contradict it not. In the like manner may thou judge the
good condition of the People of any Country, and the happiness of any place if
thou find the Lord of the Ascendent fortunate and free from impediment;
observe these Rules, and ponder the reasons thereof, and thou shall not need
any farther example or illustration for any other in the like Case.

For after the same manner may thou also judge of the significations of the
second, third, fourth and fifth houses, and so of them all round the whole
Heavens, by having (I say) regard unto the Fortitudes or Debilities of the
signs on every Cusp, and their Lords, etc. Take notice also that
proportionably, according to the affliction and strength of every Sign and
Planet, and the Signs wherein the Planets are afflicted and assisted, shall the
good or evil threatened fall on the Persons of those signified or their Estates,
etc. and on the Places, Regions, Cities, Towns, Countries and Provinces subject
to the Signs wherein the afflicted or assisted Planet Falls.

And thus much shall suffice for the judging of the true state and condition of
the Common People in any Nation or Kingdom, in any Revolution; yet by other
testimonies and Significators, viz. the Lord of the year, and the Planet or
Planets in the Ascendent accidentally at the time of the ingress, thou will
have their condition farther declared and enlarged in this subsequent Discourse.

CHAP. IV. How to know that Planet which is Lord of the Year in any Annual
Revolution of the Years of the World.
USually the Ancients have found out the Lord of the year by these Rules
following, which I shall cordially deliver unto thee, and that with as much
plainness as I can, and my Judgment which of them stands with most reason to be
followed.

What events are known by the Lord of the year.
You must know that by the Lord of the year is known the condition of the whole
Nation, People, and indeed every thing therein a general way to happen during
the time of that Revolution, wherefore it ought warily to be considered and
known, that so thou may do thy work completely.

The Rules of the Ancients for finding the Lord of the year.
After thou have exactly calculated the true time (to a minute) of the Sun his
entrance into the first point of Aries, and have erected thy figure as the
Heavens were then on the cusp of every house, and the punctual places of the
Planets therein (being reduced to the exact time of the day) then see what
Planet you find in an angle; for if there be any at that time so located, he
or she shall be Lord or Lady of the year, or such as shall denote the condition
thereof during that Revolution; but if you shall find many Planets in Angles,
or one Angle, and would know which of them is to be assigned Lord of the
year; look which of them is Lord of the hour or day, and he shall be chosen
Lord of the year (having compared one with another, and judged by the major
testimonies) especially if he behold the Lord of the term wherein he is, or the
Sun, if the Revolution be by day; or the Moon, if by night; and judge according
to his strength and debility good or bad as you have already been sufficiently
taught.

If you find none of those Planets in Angles Lord of the hour or day, or both,
then see which of them is most Fortunate or strong, and make him Lord of the
year; see also which of the other Planets are joined in signification with him,
and according to their strengths and debilities and nature do thou make a right
commixture, and judge thereof.

But if at the time of your Revolution there be no Planet found in any of the
Angles, see what Planet is in the eleventh or fifth houses, and that Planet
which is found in either of them shall be Lord of the year; if there be more
then one, see that you canvess the business, as you have heard of the Planets
in Angles in every particular.

And yet if thou find none in the eleventh or fifth, see what are in the
ninth or third, and say the Planet in either of them is Lord of the year, and
so accordingly judge as you have heard: but if there be no Planets neither in
these Houses, see which of all the Planets (the Moon excepted) goes first out
of the sign wherein it is, for he shall be Lord of the year, especially if he
behold the Lord of the term wherein he is, or the Sun, if the Revolution be by
day; or the Moon, if it be by night.

But if it happen that the Sun in a Diurnal Revolution be in any of the Angles,
or the Moon in a Nocturnal, he or she shall be then Lord or Lady (as I may say)
of the Year. Haly also says, that when in any Revolution it shall happen that
the Lord of the Ascendent be also Lord of the house wherein either of the
Luminaries are, especially that of the Time, he shall without doubt or
controversy be Lord of the Year, and also significator of the People.

These are the Rule of some of the Ancients for finding the Lord of the Year in
any Annual Revolution, others have taught us to have regard to the Lord of the
Ascendent, who if he be direct, free from Combustion, and in the ascendent, viz
within three degrees within the house or four without, or without side of the
cusp, he shall (without any more ado) be concluded Lord of the year, and you
need not trouble your self further to seek any other; but if he be either
Combust or Retrograde he cannot be admitted Lord of the year.

Wherefore then you are to consider the condition of the Planet that has
Exaltation in the Ascendent; if it be a sign wherein any of the Planets have
Exaltation, and see whether he be free from Combustion and Direct, and placed
in the Ascendent, as you have heard: for if so, he shall be Lord of the year;
but if he be Retrograde or Combust, he shall not have that honor.

So that then you are to inquire whither the Sun or Moon be not worthy of this
Rule; for if the Revolution be by day, and the Sun have any dominion in the
Ascendent he shall have it; if by night, and the Moon so dignified, it shall be
hers; but if neither of these be thus, have regard to the Lord of the term of
the cusp of the Ascendent, and see whether he be free and placed as you have
heard of the Lord of the Ascendent and Planet therein exalted, and if so, he
shall be Lord of the year, otherways not; and then lastly, consider the Lord of
the Triplicity, of the sign ascending in the like manner, and if neither of
these yet can be admitted Lord of the year, then you are to look whether the
Lord of the tenth house be free from Combustion and Direct, and placed within
three degrees within, and four without the cusp of the tenth house, and if so,
he shall be assuredly Lord of the year; but if Retrograde or Combust, not; and
so you must consider the Lord of the Exaltation of the tenth house, if there be
any, and the Sun and Moon, the Lord of the Term of the tenth, and the Lord of
the Triplicity as you have heard of the Ascendent, etc.

And if still thou art to seek for the Lord of the year, have regard unto the
seventh house, after the same manner thou have to these; and then to the
fourth, after that to the eleventh, fifth, ninth and third; first considering
the Lord of the sign upon the cusp of the house, then the Planet therein
exalted, afterward the Luminaries, the Lord of the term then, and lastly the
Lord of the Triplicity, etc. and some of the Ancients also have had regard to
the Lord of the face; but both that, as also all the rest, I do not much
esteem, yet may thou, if thou please follow them, also all the rest, The
Rules of the Ancients for finding out the Lord of the year, very Inconsistent
with reason.
I do not much esteem, yet may thou, ir thou please follow them, wherefore
I would not totally omit them; for by these Rules you see there is no Planet to
be admitted Lord of the year, but such as are direct and free from Impediment
and Combustion, and so consequently the year in every Revolution must always be
fruitful, and the People always successful, never crossed or troubled, etc.
which we see repugnant both to reason and experiene; and therefore the Ancients
in this matter are no wise, I say, consented to by me.

What is portended by the Lord of the year when well or ill disposed.
For this is most certain, that if the Lord of the year be free from Impediment,
well dignified and aspected, the year during that Revolution shall be
plentiful, temperate and healthful, and the People in good condition,
fortunate, successful, and in esteem; but if the Lord of the year be
impedited, afflicted and unfortunate, judge the contrary; especially if the
Moon concur in signification: for she is still to be considered, being a
general significatrix of as well all things sublunary, as men and women.

Where the effects of the Lord of the year shall be manifested.
What the Lord of the year signifies in any Revolution, whether good or bad,
shall be manifested chiefly in those Regions and Cities subject to the sign
wherein he is, the Quarter of Heaven he is located in, and to the signification
of the Planet who is Lord of the year; if the Lord of the year be unfortunated
or afflicted in the Ascendent, or assisted by the Fortunes and essentially
dignified therein, the People shall be successful or afflicted in their
persons according to the fortitude or debility of the Significator, and the
nature of the house: if in the second, in their Substance; in the third, in
their short Journeys, Friendship and neighbourly Conversation; in the fourth,
in their Lands, Grounds and Heritages; in the fisth, in their Children, Mirth
and Jollity; and so judge of all things appertaining to the life of man,
whether good or evil, by running over the signification of every house, and
considering the nature of the Planet afflicted or assisted therein, etc.

I might here still run on with the Rules of the Ancients for the finding out
of the Lord of the year, and enlarge this Chapter to the consistence of two or
three sheets, for (omitting the sayings of other Authors) Bonaturs alone has
no less then 54. several Rules or Considerations for the finding out thereof,
but to rehearse them all were but to tire thee and my self both, to little or
no purpose; for were they of any moment, should there be as many millions as
units in them, I should be very willing and ready to acquaint thee therewith.

The true way of fiding the Lord of the year, according to the judgment of the
Author.
Wherefore take this short, but sure Rule, for the finding out of the Lord of
the year in any Annual Revolution whatsoever; see what sing ascends, and who is
Lord thereof, at the time of the Sun his ingress into the first Punctum of
Aries, and Almuten, and let that Planet who is Almuten be Lord of the year,
whether he be Combust or Retrograde, or both, it mattereth not; yet join in
Judgment with him the Planet therein exalted or dignified by house (in the
eighth Chapter of the second Treatise you are sufficiently taught the essential
dignities of the Planets, and how to judge of them) as for example.

We shall imagine at the time of the Sun his ingress (being Diurnal) Aries to
ascend upon the cusp of the first house in any horizon, and the first degree
thereof; the Lord of Aries I find to be Mars, who by reason he is therein
essentially dignified by house, has five essential dignities therefore allowed
him; the term of the cusp being one of the first six degrees of the sign is
Jupiters, the exaltation is the Suns, who has therefore four dignities allowed
him, the Triplicity (if by day) is also the Suns, for which he has also three
dignities, which makes with the other four seven; then if we examine yet
farther what face the cusp is in, it being in the first ten degrees of the
sign, we shall find it to be Mars his, for the which he has one dignity
assigned him, which together with the aforesaid five, makes six and no more;
hence then. I am to conclude the Sun to be Lord of the year being Almuten of
the ascenden, or the Planet bearing most dominion therein, whose dignities you
see were seven; yet Mars shall be joined in judgment with him, but still the
Sun shall be chief Dominator or Significator whether of good or evil, according
to their strength or debility, as you have already sufficiently been informed;
yet because I desire that the Students in this Science should be well verst in
their Rules, I shall yet further deliver some Instructions touching the
condition of such things signified by the Lord of the year in any Revolution,
by the signification of his Nature, place in the Heavens, and his
configurations with the other planets, and I hope to give you any more examples
in this matter, being so plain in this one; wherefore then we shall to our
business in hand.

CHAP. V. Of the Significations of the seven Celestial Planets, when any of
them is Lord of the Year, whether Fortunated or Impedited, and of the Aspects
of the other Planets with them.
DElivering unto you the Rules of the Ancients, for knowing of the Lord of the
year in the preceding Chapter, I have fully declared unto you the general
denotation of the Lord of the year, when well or ill dignified or disposed in
any Revolution, to which I shall only add these two or three words, and proceed
to the signification of every particular Planet when Lord of the year and
Fortunate, or afflicted.

If the Lord of the year be beheld by his Dispositor ( viz. the Planet in whose
house or sign he is in any Revolution) and free from Impediment; for if so, the
People under that Revolution shall be in a good condition, quiet, secure, at
peace and tranquillity; also joyful and pleasant.

If the Lord of the year be not impedited, and not beheld by his Dispositor, or
if he be impedited and aspected by him, judge their condition to be between
both, viz what you have heard, and what follows.

For if he be impedited, and behold him not, they shall be sad, solitary,
fearful, shall be molested with War, Trouble, and Anxiety; for thou shall
judge the clean contrary to what thou have heard.

Judge this also according to the Nature of the house wherein the Lord of the
year is; for if he be in the Ascendent, judge as you have but now heard; if in
the second, the good or evil signified shall happen to the signification of the
second house, as to the Peoples substance, assistants and friends, etc.
according as you have been taught in the former Chapter, and other places in
this Treatise.

Of when Lord of the year and fortified.
Now then to our business, if Saturn be Lord of the year, and well dignified,
the People shall that year, or during that Revolution build and erect houses,
shall make many alterations in Fabrics, shall abound in all things, the earth
shall be fruitful, and the People shall be in esteem and honored by all their
neighbors, and the husbandmen shall exceedingly increase their Store and
Wealth, and be successful in all their labors.

Lord of the year and weak
But if Saturn be Lord of the year and weak or afflicted, there shall be much
cold, great and grievous infirmities, and men shall sustain much sorrow, losses
and crosses, and great damage by storms, wind and rain (but this must warily
be considered, if other Significators of Weather concur, and then may thou
assuredly conclude it to be so) Ancient and old men and women shall die; and
these things shall chiefly happen to those Places, Cities and Regions under
Saturn his Dominion, and the Dominion of the sign which he does then possess.

when Lord of the year other strong or weak.
When Jupiter is Lord of the year and strong and well dignified, the King shall
do Justice, and it shall be happy for those that are Noble men, Judges,
Counselors of the Law, and men of all sorts of Religious Orders shall be in a
successful, happy, pleasant and good condition, and shall live plenteously and
contentedly, in honor, and also great esteem; and the People also shall be in
a good and prosperous condition, and shall receive good from their King and
Superiors, and they from the People also, if the Lord of the Ascendent of the
Moon be in reception with the Significator of the King or Lord of the year, or
be located in the mid-heaven; but if Jupiter be weak or afflicted, judge the
contrary to all what you have heard in every particular, which I omit to
rehearse for brevities sake.

When Lord of the year either strong or weak.
Mars when he is Lord of the year, strong and well placed, all such as belong
to Arms as Soldiers and the like, shall be fortunate and in good condition,
and shall overcome their enemies; there shall be also during that Revolution
sufficient and plenty of rain, as such times (and no other) it is convenient
and requisite, and the People shall be prosperous and happy; but if he be Lord
of the year and weak, etc. judge the contrary, and you must remember still in
the judging the good or evil portended by him, and also all the rest of the
Planets, it shall chiefly happen in those places and Regions subject to his or
their Dominion, which you have been at large shown in the second or
Introductory Treatise.

The Sun when Lord of the year either strong or weak.
If in any Revolution you find the Sun Lord of the year and well dignified, the
King and Nobles shall exceed and increase in glory and renown; Corn, Beasts,
and Birds shall be plentiful, the people generally prosperous and successful,
and all things in a good condition whereof the Sun has any signification; if
weak, judge the contrary.

Venus when Lady of the year, either strong or weak
When you find Venus Lady of the year and well and fortunatly disposed, the year
will be successful and advantageous unto women, who shall be free generally
from Infirmities and mischances, they shall love and delight themselves in the
society and company of their Husbands, shall be fruitful, easily conceive and
bring forth their Children; the People shall also generally thrive, and be
prosperous, shall delight themselves in Recreations, sports, feastings, mirth
and jollities, and all pleasure whatsoever they desire, shall feast, make
Marriages and delight to go neat and fine in apparel; if she be weak and
impedited, she denotes the contrary.

Mercury when Lord of the year either strong or weak,
Mercury signifies, when he is Lord of the year and strong, that Merchants,
Tradesmen, and all such as give their minds to Learning, Arts and Sciences,
shall have a successful year, etc. and if weak, judge the contrary.

The Moon Lady of the year, either strong or weak.
Lastly, if thou see the Moon Lady of the year in any Revolution, and that she
be strong and well placed, say, there shall be no want of rain in its due
season, both former and latter, men shall be generally healthy, fortunate, just
and punctual in all their actions and promises, especially if she be in
reception, or good Aspect of the Planet who is her Dispositor, etc. but if she
be the weak, judge the contrary.

And thus much briefly, touching the general significations of the Planets,
when they are Lords of the year, and either strong or weak, which you have been
shown somewhat more briefly, yet altogether as plainly before in the preceding
Chapters of this same fourth Treatise; yet by reason the Ancients set them down
thus large, nay far larger, and least the significations of the Planets should
not be well apprehended by thee, I thought good (notwithstanding what had been
said) to spend one quarter of a sheet more for thy better understanding; and
that the rather because thereby the subsequent Discourse, I hope, will be the
better understood.

Of the aspects of any Planet to the Lord of the year in any Revolution.
Now we are to speak of the Planets to the Lord of the year, that we may know
how to judge of future events thereby; the Ancients as in some other things, so
in this have not been so plain and full as I could wish they had been for the
instructing of such as are but young Students therein; wherefore I shall
endeavor to be as plain therein as shall be requisite for the instructing even
the weakest capacity if he observe what is beneath expressed, which is not
much, yet ad rem, it is more then has been delivered by any Author that ever I
met with for all their tediousness: At the beginning of the first Chapter of
this second Section, I have in few words fully delivered sufficient Rules for
the judging of any Aspect of any Planet to any Significator, speaking of the
Significator of the King, and how to judge thereof, by which Rules, I say
(having regard still to your Significator) thou may judge of the condition of
any person or thing to be considered in any Annual Revolution, and the natural
inclination, and accidental signification of the Planet in Aspect therewith,
whether it be by Sextile, Trine, Square, Opposition, or corporal, together with
the signification of the signs and places of Heaven they are located in at the
time of the revolution.

As for example (because I desire thou should be well and perfectly seen in
this particular; for then have thou attained to the accomplishment of the whole
Art, if thou can exactly vary thy Rules) I shall give you one or two by which
thou may easily judge of all the rest.

If Saturn be Lord of the year, and in configuration of the Sun, suppose by a
Seatile, upon which the Ancients say the King shall be poor, and be enforced to
require aid of the people, this because the Sun is a general Significator of
the King; but I see no reason at all it should therefore follow we should thus
conclude, unless the Sun were at the time of the Revolution Lord of the tenth;
but rather thus, if Saturn be also Lord of the Ascendent, the Sun then (if the
cusp be Aquaries) being Lord of the seventh, is particularly and chiefly
Significator of the enemies of the people, as you have heard, and therefore
being thus in Sextile with Saturn, unless by reception, I should say the
enemies of the people shall desire peace, and a conformity with the People, and
shall entreat and sue for it, and if there be any reception betwixt him and
Saturn, either by House, Triplicity, Exaltation, Term or Face, say it will be
agreed to by the Common People, who are signified by Saturn, who is Lord of the
year and Ascendent. If the Aspect be by Opposition, judge dissentions, quarrels
and discords among them or between them, also open War, if you find other
testimonies concurring in signification: for you are not to derive your
judgment from the general signification of the Planet in configuration with
your significator altogether, though somewhat may be hereon affirmed, or from
hence concluded: but from the signification of the Planet as located in your
Scheme, and therein significator having regard to the places of Heaven and
signs they are placed in; for we see even the most pernicious Planets Fortunes
sometimes, as they may be Significators and placed; and the most beneficial and
Fortunate Planets, Infortunes, as you have already heard; for every Planet must
perform the Natural Office whereunto in any Revolution or other Scheme of the
Heaven it is constituted, as we shall further instance; Admit the Sun be in the
12th. you shall then say the Peoples enemies (the Aspect being by Opposition as
aforesaid) shall Clandestinely and Treacherously by some underhand Plot or
Device, study the overthrow or prejudice of the People, the twelfth house
signifying secret Plots and mischief; and so judge according to the
signification of the other Houses when therein located, be sure you ever
remember the true signification of the Planet in his own proper nature, and
accidental signification, by his Position in the Heavens, afflicting your
significator, or assisting him, and the nature of the sign and house wherein he
is, and your shall never fail (if accordingly you pronounce Judgment) of
giving not only a rational but solid conclusion on any configuration from any
sign or house of Heaven made by any Planet whatsoever to the Lord of the year:
or indeed to any Planet whatsoever Mutatis mutandis.

And this (I say) if thou can attain unto, thou have accomplished not only
the way and manner of judging the signification of the Aspects of any Planet to
the Lord of the year, but also to any other Significator in the whole Scheme,
and art Master of the whole Art; and this thou shall never be capable of by any
instruction, but only by a diligent search, and contemplation of the natures of
every sign, house and Planet, and the Reasons why they were so constituted;
wherefore I should desire thee for thy better instruction and assistance, to
read over and over, and seriously consider every title of our second Treatise
of this Book, being an Introduction to the Judgment of the Stars; and now let
us proceed to show you what may be expected in any Revolution from the Position
of the Planets in any of the twelve Houses of Heaven, whether they be Lords of
the year or no, for the further illustration of what has been said.

CHAP. VI. Containing the true Significations of the Planet Saturn as he is in
any Annual Revolution accidentally placed in any of the Twelve Houses of
Heaven, whether he be Lord of the Year or no.
EVen as it was an earnest desire that all the ingenious spirits of our Nation
should increase in Knowledge (especially this, which of all other comes nearest
to Divinity) that has egged me on to this undertaking, I shall (according to
my desire and first intentions) be herein as plain as possibly I can, and shall
cordially and sincerely deal with thee as I would be dealt by, for wilfully I
shall not in the least detain or keep back the smallest matter according to
that little knowledge God in his wisdom and infinite mercy and goodness has
bestowed on me, that might advantage thee in this most heavenly study, or be a
means to propagate the Art.

Of Saturn in the Ascendent in any Annual Revolution, and what he signifies,
whether he be Lord of the Year or no.
If in any Revolution of the years of the world Saturn be in the Ascendent, and
diurnal, and beheld by his dispositor by a good aspect, as also by the Lord of
the mid-heaven, or in reception therewith, it signifies the People under that
Revolution shall be quiet during that Revolution, not making many Journies,
shall be in a good condition, fortunate, successful, and shall be much honored
by their King and Superiors, of whom they shall obtain much good; but if he be
therein afflicted, unfortunate or anywise weak, he denotes mischief and trouble
to the People in their proper persons, also infirmities and all vexations
signified by Saturn; and this shall the more assuredly happen if he be in
humane signs and no wise beheld of the Fortunes or adjuvant Planets.

Saturn in the second.
In the second, and beheld by the fortunate aspects of the Lord of the second,
he denotes the successful and prosperous condition of the Common People in
their Trades and Merchandizings, and that they shall thrive and grow rich,
especially in such things as are signified by the sign wherein the Cuspe of the
second is; if he be therein weak, impedited and unfortunate, he shall signify
the contrary, and that the People shall be poor, have losses and crosses,
especially in such things as are signified by Saturn and the sign wherein he
is; And this understand touching the quality of the good or evil understood or
signified by any of the other Planets; for according to the nature of the Sign
and Planet therein must you give Judgment.

Saturn in the third.
Saturn in the third if he be well dignified shall generally denote mirth and
jollity to the People, that they shall delight and associate themselves one
with another, and all heart-burnings and differences between them shall be
forgotten and laid aside: but if he be in the third and unfortunate, men shall
suffer by short Journies, shall envy, hate and disturb one another, shall be
liars, perfidious and treacherous, and oftentimes shall have terrible and
troublesome dreams, etc.

Saturn in the fourth.
Also if he be in the fourth and strong (as abovesaid) men shall be very
laborious therein, and shall thrive thereby, as also by heritages and houses;
but if he be weak, there shall be no profit in such things, houses shall come
to ruin, the earth shall not give its due increase (especially if other
testimonies concur, for how to judge of plenty and scarcity you shall have
anon; yet Saturn his presence in this house and unfortunate (you must know)
will somewhat lessen the fertility promised in any Revolution) as will be
expected by the husbandman whose hopes therein will be frustrated, and much of
his time spent in vain.

Saturn in the fifth.
Again, If he be in the fifth and strong, the People shall be jocund, pleasant
and merry, shall delight in their Children, Feastings, and the like; if he be
therein weak, judge the contrary; sadness for joy, crosses by Children for
delight in them, and penury and want instead of Feasts.

Saturn in the sixth.
If he be fortified in the sixth, judge health to the People if it be a humane
sign which possesses the Cusp thereof, and good to servants; if it be bestial,
it will be more especially manifest in such Creatures as are thereby
represented; as if Aries or Capricorn, Sheep, Goats and small Cattle; if
Taurus, Bulls, Cows, Oxen, and the greater sort of Cattle, Horses, etc. if in
watery signs, success and good to Rivers, Fountains and Fish; if the sign of the
sixth be Virgo, to the Earth and its Fruits, as Corn, etc. if he be impedited
or weak, judge the contrary, sickness and detriment unto them, according as you
see the several significations of the sign on the Cusp of the sixth House.

Saturn in the seventh.
Moreover if Saturn be in the seventh and strong, and the sign be humane, men
shall delight themselves in women, especially old men, and shall Contract and
make Marriages; if it be any other sign, see of what nature and signification
it is, and judge they shall delight themselves in such things as are according
to the nature thereof, and profit thereby; but if he be weak, judge the
contrary.

Saturn in the eighth.
And if he be in the eighth, although he be strong, yet shall he signify danger
of death, and ruin to those things signified by the sign of the eighth; as if
a humane sign, to men, etc. but if he be weak, it is the more to be feared, and
if other testimonies agree, it is to be concluded, but especially to men of
elder years.

Saturn in the ninth.
Also if he be in the ninth, well dignified, and in a fixed sign, men shall be
chaste, lovers of Religion, the Law and all good Learning; but if the sign be
movable, they shall make many Voyages by Sea, or long Journies, in which they
shall continue long; but if he be then weak, judge the contrary, and that many
Ships shall suffer shipwreck, and men shall receive much damage and detriment
through long Journies.

Saturn in the tenth.
Again. If Saturn be in the tenth and strong, the People shall receive much
honor and benefit from their King and Superiors; but if he be weak and
elevated above all the other Planets, it signifies that his cold unfortunate
and malicious inclination shall go generally through all the Region, Country or
Kingdom; and then the King shall remove out of one place into another, and
shall do much mischief and evil acts, and too tyrannically impose unusual
Taxations on the People.

Saturn in the eleventh.
Saturn in the eleventh and strong, shows that men shall obtain their desires
and hopes, shall be successful in their Journies and Removes, and shall be
merry; but if he be weak, judge the contrary.

Saturn in the twelfth.
Lastly, If he be in the twelfth and strong, men shall be quiet, shall love one
another, and retain no malice or ill will; but if he be weak, men shall be
envious, malicious and wicked one against the other, and there shall be many
quarrels and discords in that Region for which your Revolution is.

CHAP. VII. Of the Signification of Jupiter as he is accidentally placed in any
of the Twelve Houses of Heaven in any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of
the Year or no.
THus have you heard plainly and fully the true significations of Saturn as he
is located in any of the twelve Houses in any Revolution whatsoever, whether he
be Lord of the year or no; it rests therefore now we descend to Jupiter, who
as you have heard in our Introduction is the next under Saturn, and therefore
we shall in this place speak first of him, and then of all the rest in order as
they are accordingly located in the Heavens.

Jupiter in the Ascendent or first House of Heaven in any Annual Revolution of
the years of the world, and what he thereby signifies.
If Jupiter then in any Annual Revolution of the years of the world be in the
Ascendent and strong, and in good aspect of his dispositor (as you have heard
of Saturn in the former Chapter) he signifies the People of that Climate or
Region shall be successful and fortunate on every side, healthy in their
bodies, shall have much joy, honor and peace, men shall be desirers and
searchers of and in Divine Mysteries, and the Law and the Students thereof
shall be in great and high esteem, and they shall build and repair Churches and
Courts of Judicature, etc. and if he be weak, men shall be negligent and
careless of Divine Duties and the Law; and though thou may not judge
altogether the contrary to what has been said, yet may thou say the People
shall be little the better for his presence in their Ascendent, or receive
little or no good from him; for the good he would and is naturally willing to
do you see he is altogether unable to perform, being weak or having no power or
ability; in like manner judge of his consistence in any other House when he is
in the like case indigent.

Jupiter in the second.
If he be in the second and strong, he signifies abudance of prosperity and
riches to the People, especially in such things and commodities as are
signified by the sign wherein Jupiter is; also if the Lord of the second apply
unto him, their riches will come tumbling on them they know not how; but if he
apply to the Lord of the second, it will be by their own labor and industry
that they shall augment their riches: By this rule may thou (if thou have
well considered what has been said in the preceding Discourse) judge of every
thing appertaining to the signification of any House: If Jupiter be weak and in
the second, he neither promises riches nor poverty in himself except by
accident; wherefore you are warily to consider (as has been said) the
signification of each Planet as he is in your Scheme significator of any thing,
and not (wholly) as he is naturally; and so judge of the good or evil portended
by his signification and aspect, sign and quarter of Heaven he possesses.

Jupiter in the third.
Also if he be in the third and strong, the People shall be pleasant and delight
to associate themselves with their neighbors, acquaintance and kindred, shall
delight also in charitable and alms deeds, and be prosperous and successful in
all short Journies, and give themselves to the study of Arts and Sciences; but
if he be weak, they shall not have the like strong inclinations unto these
things.

Jupiter in the fourth.
Again, If Jupiter be in the fourth and well dignified, men shall infinitely
abound in wealth, and prosper by their labors on the ground, especially
husbanders and manurers thereof; but if he be unfortunate, there shall happen
much sadness and trouble unto them toward the end of the year, etc.

Jupiter in the fifth.
Moreover if he be in the fifth, men shall delight in feasting, sporting and all
manner of recreation and pastime, shall be pleasant, merry and receive much joy
and content from and by their Children, women shall be apt to conceive with
Child, and they shall bring them safely forth, perfect and without danger; but
if he be weak it will not be so well, if any thing at all good.

Jupiter in the sixth.
In the sixth and well dignified, the good condition and state of Servants is
promised, also health both unto them and the People in general if the sign
wherein he is be humane; if bestial, to beasts of that nature the sign is of,
etc. as you have heard in the preceding Chapter where we spoke of Saturn his
being in the same House; if he be afflicted, judge not so much good, but (if
you see other testimonies concuring) say rather there will be the clean
contrary, and diseases, such as are Impostumes, unnatural windy, swellings,
obstructions of the Liver, and the like; be sure you derive your judgment
according to discretion, and the nature of the Planet and Sign he is in, etc.

Jupiter in the seventh.
Jupiter in the seventh fortunate, denotes many Marriages and Contracts shall
be made, and Men shall delight themselves with Women; but if he be unfortunate,
they shall not agree, shall jarr, clash and fall out one with another during
that Revolution.

Jupiter in the eighth.
If he be in the eighth, there shall not be any great mortality (if he be then
strong) but if he be weak, judge the contrary, or there shall be some
affliction according to the nature of the sign in which he then is.

Jupiter in the ninth.
Also if he be fortunately placed in the ninth, men shall make safe and
prosperous Journies and Voyages by Sea, and also thrive by removing from one
place or house to another, and men shall love and delight in the Law both of
God and Man, Moral and Divine; but if he be weak it will not be so good: By
what has been already said and rightly apprehended, thou may easily judge
when it will be contrary or bad in any degree.

Jupiter in the tenth.
Again, If he be in the tenth and dignified, the King and Superiors shall be
good, shall honor his or their People, and do Justice generally and
impartially, and they shall thrive under their Government and be successful;
but if he be weak in dignities, he cannot be so strong as to perform this good
so effectually, and there shall be both Law and discord amongst the People, etc.

Jupiter in the eleventh.
If he be in the eleventh, the People shall be most successful or fortunate,
also faithful, just and honest, shall not be deprived of their hopes nor
confidence, and shall be merry; but if he be weak it will not be so good.

Jupiter in the twelfth.
Lastly, If Jupiter be in the twelfth, the People shall profit and gain by their
Enemies, shall be quiet, love and cherish one another, and shall be free from
malice and envy; but if he be weak, judge the contrary, as you shall have
occasion and reason.

CHAP. VIII. Containing the Significations of Mars in the Twelve Houses of
Heaven in any annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or no.
Mars in the first.
HAving done with the significations of Jupiter, it follows now we come to Mars
and his significations, who if he be in the first House in any Revolution and
strong, whether he be Lord of the year or no, shows that the People of that
Country shall gain and be advantaged by wars or slaughters, and shall overcome
their Enemies during that Revolution; but if he be weak, they shall disagree
and fall out one among another, and shall beat, draw blood and wound one
another, for which cause much evil and damage shall happen unto them.

Mars in the second.
If Mars be in the second House at the time of any Revolution, or Ingress of the
Sun into Aries, and strong, he denotes many thefts, rapines and robberies, and
cozening and cheating of one another; those also that are entrusted with money
or goods of any one, shall be false and deceitful, and the People generally
shall be driven to want, and be perplexed with taxations and tributes.

Mars in the third.
But if he be in the third, men shall not associate themselves with their
neighbors and kindred, but instead of being friends hate and envy one another.

Mars in the fourth.
Also if he be in the fourth, he sends his vigorous heat and malice to all the
other Planets, so that if he be in a fiery sign, he dryes up and scorches the
earth, and causes great mischief by fire, also mortalities; if the sign be
humane, he causes many slaughters and effusion of blood, quarrels and war, and
that chiefly in or toward the latter end of the year, and in those places
generally subject to the sin wherein she is.

Mars in the fifth.
And if he happen in the fifth, hard and tedious labor is threatened to those
with Child, little or no merry meetings and feastings; but if any, he causes
dissentions and discords amongst them.

Mars in the sixth.
Again, If he be in the sixth, in a hot and dry sign, he causes hot and dry
diseases; if the sign be moist, the diseases will be hot and moist; if aerie,
they will be fevers, corruption of blood, impostumes, ventosies, etc. if it be
an earthy sign, they will be consumptions and melancholy diseases, with some
mixtures of choler; and if the sign be bestial, the beasts subject thereunto
shall suffer, etc.

Mars in the seventh.
Moreover, if he be in the seventh, afflicted and weak, he denotes then great
dissentions and enmities, and that men shall be perplexed with theft, much
bloodshed, contentions and wars; and these shall chiefly be incident to the
People of that Climate for which the Radix of your Figure is made, viz. evil
accidents, wars and discords, also fraud and deceit in Merchandising, trouble
and sadness.

Mars in the eighth.
And if he be in the eighth, there shall be fearful and terrible sudden deaths,
according to the nature of the sign in which he is.

Mars in the ninth.
If he be in the ninth, traveling shall be dangerous, also much robbing and
plundering therein, if the Journey be by Land; if by Sea, Shipwreck is much to
be feared.

Mars in the tenth.
Again, If he be in the tenth, the King and Rulers shall be froward and cross
with their People, exercising cruelty and tyranny without any piety or fear of
God, and punishing and taxing them without any mercy or pity.

Mars in the eleventh.
If in the eleventh, men shall not love one another, nor delight in each others
society, neither will they be moved with any compassion or pity.

Mars in the twelfth.
And if in the twelfth, the People shall be much terrified and troubled by their
Enemies, from whence shall proceed slaughter and effusion of blood.

CHAP. IX. Showing the Significations of the Sun in the Twelve Houses of Heaven
in any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or no.
REhearsing the Planets according to their order and places in the Heavens,
after Mars follows the Sun, The Sun in the first.
who if he be in the Ascendent fortunate, essentially dignified, and in
reception with the Lord of the Ascendent, and beheld amically by him, the year
shall generally be happy and successful for every one, as well the King as the
Beggar; but if he be therein unfortunate, it shall be clean contrary; and
especially noble and great men shall suffer in their persons dishonor,
disgrace, and be perhaps cast out of their dignities and places.

The Sun in the second.
The Sun in the second, the People shall waste and expend their wealth, also
their Rulers shall covet after the fingring and disposing thereof, insomuch
that they shall live sneakingly and poor.

The Sun in the third.
The Sun in the third, shows the People shall delight in goodness, and in the
Law, shall love and associate themselves with their neighbors, friends,
kindred and associates, for the which they shall be praised.

The Sun in the fourth.
If he be in the fourth, Gardens and Vegetables shall be spoiled and suffer
detriment, especially if he be in signs of that nature; great men and high
shall be made low and degraded; and if it be a watery sign, the earth shall be
dry, and the water dried up: [I believe the Ancients meant fiery.]

The Sun in the fifth.
Again, If the Sun be in the fifth, he denotes detriment and grief to such
Creatures as are with young, so that hardly do any escape without some manifest
hurt or other.

The Sun in the sixth.
Also if he be in the sixth, many griefs and infirmities shall happen, and
chiefly in the eyes, and such living Creatures shall dye as are signified by
the sign wherein he is located; the King also or chief Rulers shall be sad that
year, much loss also and damage shall be by servants, and such things as are
signified by the sixth House; also the ignoble and baser sort of People shall
envy and raise themselves up against their Superiors.

The Sun in the seventh.
Moreover, if he be in the seventh, he denotes discords between the People and
their Rulers, and betwixt the King and the Nobles, and that the King shall keep
at a distance with the People, or keep himself retire from them.

The Sun in the eighth.
In the eighth, he denotes the death of Kings and great men, also the deposing
of Kings, and unthroning of Nobles and Grandees, and a lessening or diminishing
of their power, especially if he be beheld by the Lord of the eighth.

The Sun in the ninth.
But if he be in the ninth, he shows the inclinations of the People are
generally to good, and that they shall be fortunate and successful in long
Journies and Voyages, and shall love and delight in both the Law of God and Man.

The Sun in the tenth.
Also if the Sun be in the tenth, it denotes the glory, renown and honor of the
King or chief Rulers, also the good condition of the People, and that there
shall be kindness and love betwixt them; for the People shall willingly obey,
and the Superiors shall conferr honor and privileges on the People.

The Sun in the eleventh.
And if he chance to be in the eleventh, the People generally shall have joy and
gladness, and shall be merry and solace themselves with their friends,
acquaintance and familiars, and their hopes shall not be frustrated; the chief
Rulers shall love the People also, and be advantageous unto them.

The Sun in the twelfth.
Lastly, if he be in the twelfth, Rich and Noblemen, and the Grandees shall be
eclipsed in their honor, and ignoble persons shall affront and prejudice them;
and the People generally shall hate and despise their Superiors, and their
Superiors shall oppress and torment them.

CHAP. X. Showing the Signification of Venus in the Twelve Houses of Heaven in
any Annual Revolution, whether she be Lady of the Year or no.
Venus in the first.
AFter the Sun follows Venus, who if she be in the Ascendent, strong and well
dignified, the people shall be strong and healthy, and have much joy and
gladness, shall endeavor to live neatly and in a comely spruce manner, both
for matter of meat and raiment, and all other things necessary for the
perfecting of a man's pleasure in this life.

Venus in the second.
Venus in the second, causes profit and gain by Women, happiness and fertility
of the Fruits of the Earth.

Venus in the third.
If she be in the third, men shall hate one another, and no wise desire the
society of their friends and neighbors, also be careless of Religion, Law and
all goodness.

Venus in the fourth.
Also if she be in the fourth, men shall be jealous of their Wives, and shall
therefore shut them up, also sadness and anxiety caused by Mothers; but yet the
latter end of the year shall be better then the beginning.

Venus in the fifth.
If she be in the fifth, damage is portended through the occasion of Children;
but the latter end of the year will be better then the beginning, and the grief
and sadness converted into joy; such Creatures as are with young shall go
safely and be delivered, but the most part will be Females; Men shall be
Captivated with the love of Women, and shall be merry with them, shall delight
in singing, dancing, feasting, and seeming spruce and neat.

Venus in the sixth.
Also if she be in the sixth, and the sign humane, men shall profit by servants;
in like manner if the sign be bestial, they shall also gain thereby, viz. by
such beasts as are thereby signified, and they shall be free from sickness and
other accidents, and women shall be sick through surfets and weakness of the
stomach.

Venus in the seventh.
Again, If she be in the seventh, Women shall make and conclude Marriages, and
delight themselves with their Husbands if she be strong; but if she be weak,
they shall fall out and scold with their Husbands, and shall be disobedient
unto them, and shall run scolding and prating out of their houses, and separate
and divorce themselves many of them from their husbands.

Venus in the eighth.
Moreover if in the eighth, she denotes the death of Matrons and great Women,
also generally mortality to all Women, if she be then weak.

Venus in the ninth.
If she be in the ninth, she shows Men of Religious Orders shall flit and remove
from one place and house to another, and that Men shall dream true Dreams, and
perform long Journeys and Voyages with safety, and profit and gain thereby; Men
shall be Lovers of the Law both of God and Man, and esteem of all good
Learning, and strive to be virtuous.

Venus in the tenth.
But if she be in the tenth, joy and gladness will be occasioned by and from the
King and Superiors, the Grandees also shall love and delight themselves with
Women, whom they shall adorn and deck sumptuously; they shall also take much
pleasure in Jesters, all merry conceits and tricks, also in Music, Songs and
the like; the People shall be in a good condition, and shall be beloved and
honored by their Superiors.

Venus in the eleventh.
Also if she be in the eleventh, the People shall be fortunate, successful and
happy, by reason their faith, trust and hope shall not fail them; they shall
also accompany themselves with Women, and shall be taken in love one with
another, and commit Fornications, and transgress the Law, yet shall they spend
the year with great jollity and mirth.

Venus in the twelfth.
If in the twelfth, Tribulation is threatened, and enmity with Women; for Men
shall hate them, and no wise be assistant unto them, so that they shall be
during the time of that Revolution most unfortunate.

CHAP. XI. Of the Significations of Mercury in the Twelve Houses of Heaven in
any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or no.
Mercury in the first.
MErcury in the twelve Houses of Heaven comes now to be considered, who if he
be in the first, he shows the year shall be good and successful; Men shall be
ingenious and also Children and Youth, so that they shall during that
Revolution be apt to attain to any thing that shall be taught them, or that
they shall incline their minds to understand.

Mercury in the second.
If he be in the second and strong, Merchants and Tradesmen shall profit and
gain by their Merchandizings, shall be faithful and justly perform the trust
reposed in them, shall be honored, famous and in great esteem of their
Superiors; but if he be unfortunate, it denotes loss and decay of trading,
infidelity and breach of trust, and that men shall give themselves over to gain
by unlawful and indirect means, and the like.

Mercury in the third.
Also if he be in the third, men shall love and delight in the Law, and in all
kind of Knowledge and Religion; and shall love and associate themselves one
with another, and shall delight in short Journies.

Mercury in the fourth.
Again, In the fourth he causes discords and jarrings in words betwixt man and
man, also vexation and sadness; also many Scribes shall be captivated, or such
as keep Books of Accounts, or Secretaries of State; and if the sign wherein he
is be fixed, they shall continue long in Prison; if moveable, judge the
contrary; and if Mars do then maliciously aspect him, they shall be grievously
beaten and tormented, and perhaps slain.

Mercury in the fifth.
Also if he be in the fifth, he denotes success and joy by and in Children,
messages, sports, pastimes and ingenious recreations, by which sadness shall be
totally abolished; also such as are with Young shall go their time safely, and
be at length well delivered, and these for the most part shall be ingenious
Creatures; but if he be unfortunate, no Conception shall be brought to
perfection, and judge the contrary to what you have heard.

Mercury in the sixth.
Moreover if he be in the sixth, contentions, trouble and vexation shall happen
through the default and actions of servants and vile ignoble persons, or such
as belong to a man's own family, or by small Cattle, viz. such as are signified
by the sign wherein he is, or by sickness, etc. Children also and Young men
shall many of them dye and be diseased according to his affliction in this
House.

Mercury in the seventh.
If he be in the seventh, he denotes men will be addicted to lasciviousness, and
the company of women carnally; and if he be weak, they shall fly out and commit
many fornications and filthy acts.

Mercury in the eighth.
In the eighth, he shall cause the death of many Young men, Women and Children,
also discords and contentions between men concerning Wills, Legacies and the
mind of the deceased.

Mercury in the ninth.
Also if in the ninth, long Journies will be performed with safety and pleasure,
also men shall mutually desire each others society, and delight in all honest
and good Learning, and apply their minds to the finding out of hidden secrets
and mysteries; but if he be weak, their study will be impious and wicked; and
so of all the rest, judge the contrary.

Mercury in the tenth.
Again, If Mercury be in the tenth, Merchants and Scribes, also Scholars and
Ingenious men shall be honored by their King and Superiors; also all such men
as are signified by Mercury; but if he be afflicted, judge the contrary,
according to the nature of the Planet afflicting and the Sign and Quarter of
Heaven he is in.

in the 11th.
Moreover if he be in the Eleventh, men shall love and associate themselves one
with another, they shall mutually give gifts, and profit one by another.

in the 12th.
In the Twelfth, the People shall be plotted against by their Enemies: also
Servants and Children shall disagree and clash with men and women: also losses
by great Cattle, if the Sign be Bestial, etc.

CHAP. XII. Of the significations of the Moon in the Twelve Houses of Heaven in
any Annual Revolution, whether She be Lady of the Year or no.
EVen as we have already treated of the Six foregoing Planets, let us yet
continue to show also the significations of the Moon in the Twelve Houses of
Heaven. in the first.
Wherefore if the Moon in any Annual Revolution be in the first House whether
she be Lady of the Year or no, she denotes the People shall be fickle, ever
wavering and going out of one Opinion into another, and one house and place to
another: and men shall have joy and profit by women: especially such as have
Mothers shall gain much by them. The Year shall be prosperous, men shall be
successful, and in health of Body and strong: this if she be fortunate, but if
she be impedited and weak judge the contrary.

in the 2d.
Also if she be in the Second and Fortunate, men shall gain and profit and
abound in Riches, having plenty of all things: but if she be unfortunate, they
shall be indigent, poor and vile, etc. shall have many losses and crosses.

in the 3d.
If she be in the Third, men shall delight and joy in the society and company
of their Friends, Acquaintance and Kindred, and all enmity and former
heart-burnings shall be forgotten and laid aside: they shall delight in all
goodness and charitable Alms-deeds; also short journies shall be performed with
all the security and profit that may be.

in the 4th.
In the Fourth, and the Revolution be diurnal, she denotes misfortune at the
beginning of the Year; but toward the latter end amendment: but if it be
nocturnal the People whether at the beginning or ending of the Year shall not
have any success, but contrariwise many tribulations, crosses, losses,
vexations and imprisonments: but if she be strong and well dignifyed, the evil
will not be altogether so bad.

in the 5th.
In the Fifth, men shall be fortunate in and through their Children in whom
they shall rejoice and take pleasure: there shall be plenty of every thing: men
shall juncket, banquet, feast and be merry, and the like, delight to get
Children, and many shall be conceived, and all things with young shall be
safely and well delivered: in a word, every thing appertaining to the
signification of this House shall be successful if she be fortunate: but if
afflicted, judge the contrary

in the 6th.
Also if she be in the Sixth, men shall leave off their accustomed
wickednesses, and apply themselves more to goodness then usually they were
wont: gain by Servants and small Cattle: but if unfortunate, loss and damage
thereby, and the clean contrary is to be expected.

in the 7th.
Again, if in the Seventh, men shall be fortunate and happy in women, and gain
and profit much by them.

in the 8th.
And if in the Eighth, Mortalities shall happen amongst men: and if she be then
unfortunated, it shall be so much the worse: and if she be in any of the houses
of Mars, there shall be many and grievous slaughters, also tribulations and
anxieties amongst men, and that about Legacies, and the like: and men shall
endeavor to prosecute one another, and to cast one another out of their
Possessions, etc.

in the 9th.
Moreover if she be in the Ninth, men shall make many journeys, and Remove out
of one place into another; if the Sign be watery, they shall make Voyages by
Sea; if an earthy, long and tedious journies by land; Men shall be lovers of
Arts and Sciences; for if the Sign on the Ninth be one of the Houses of Saturn,
they shall delight in Alchimy and Chimical preparations; if it be one of the
Houses of Jupiter, in Divinity, Law and Justice; if of Mars, in wars, feats of
Arms, etc. if belonging to Sol, in all noble Sciences; if to Venus, in Music,
singing and dancing; if to Mercury, in Astrology and all curious Sciences and
ingenious Arts; to herself, in all waterworks or things pertaining thereunto;
and if she be therein afflicted, then may thou judge inconveniency will come
thereby, expenses and trouble according to the nature of the Planet afflicting,
etc.

in the 10th.
If she be in the Tenth, the People shall be in a good and prosperous
condition, shall be honored and beloved by their King and Superiors, and this
shall the more assuredly happen if she behold the Lord of the Tenth, or be in
reception therewith, and the revolution Nocturnal.

in the 11th.
If in the Eleventh, the year shall be fortunate and successful in every thing
appertaining to that houses signification if she be strong; but if weak, judge
the contrary.

Lastly if the Moon be in the Twelfth, in the 12th.
she denotes the instability and uncertainty of every thing, and the People
subject to the Sign wherein she is shall have many quarrels, dissentions and
discords, if not wars, etc,

Remember still that if your Significator or Lord of the year,

Also you are to remember to judge the nature of the good or bad according to
the nature of the Planet afflicting or assisting, and the nature of the Sign in
which he is, whether Aerie, Earthy, Fiery or Watery; for it is not for me upon
every Rule to make repetition; wherefore you are warily to understand and
consider what has been already delivered, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Containing the signfications of the Head and Tail of the Dragon in
the Twelve Houses of Heaven in any Annual Revolution of the Years of the World.
SInce we have now waded through the significations of the Seven Celestial
Planets in the Twelve Houses of Heaven in any Revolution of the Years of the
World, it rests we now also show the significations of the Head and Tail of
the Dragon, and then proceed to the significations of them in the Twelve
Celestial Signs; in the first.
wherefore then if you find in the first, the People will be successful,
fortunate, in honor and health, especially if free from the malevolent aspects
of the Infortunes, in the first.
and fortunately beheld by the Benevolents; But if be in the first, it denotes
dangers, misfortunes, crosses, losses, and that all manner of mischief shall be
incident to the persons of the People, also infirmities according to the Nature
and signification of the Sign wherein it is.

in the 2d.
If he in the Second, it portends fortune and good success to the People in
their Trades, that they shall grow rich and thrive in the world: but if be
therein, little or no Trading, crosses and losses in their substance and wealth
is to be feared, in the 2d.
and that casually and unexpectedly.

in the 3d.
If be in the Third, short Journies shall be profitable, safe and advantageous
to the People who shall also be good and well disposed, and dream true Dreams,
and shall delight in all manner of good things: Brethren and Associates shall
love and agree, also be helpful and advantageous one to another: but if be
therein, in the 3d.
judge the contrary, discords, dissentions and feuds among them; chiefly
amongst the men if the Sign wherein it is be masculine, amongst the women if
feminine; also damage and loss by long journies, etc.

in the 4th.
If be in the Fourth, and the Sign wherein he is be, or, or,, or, if signifies
good success and increase of things of the Earth, as fruits and the like, and
all immovable things signified by the Fourth house; but if it be,,, or, judge
the contrary: and if be therein, Poverty and Indigency, in the 4th.
also a scarceness of fruits, and the ill state of things signified by that
house is to be expected.

in the 5th.
Also if the Dragons Head be in the Fifth, it signifies increase of Joy by
children, also abundance of pleasure, etc. but if the Dragons Tail be therein,
sadness, trouble, in the 5th
vexation and anxiety is to be expected, also grief and trouble by and through
children: and if any recreation or pastime be used, it is an hundred to one if
there follow not much inconveniency thereby.

in the 6th.
Again if the Dragons Head be in the Sixth, it denotes increase of small
Cattle, and much gain and profit thereby: also faithful Servants and such as
shall advantage their Masters, and the Air shall be healthful and pleasant:
but if you find the Dragons Tail therein, judge the contrary, also loss by
Cattle and Servants, in the 6th.
and that they shall be perfidious and false.

in the 7th.
Moreover if the Dragons Head be in the Seventh, men shall delight in the
company and society of women, and love shall be increased between them; the
enemies of the People shall be strong and in good condition; but if the Dragons
Tail be there, in the 7th.
say there shall be no love nor delight between men and women, nor society in
any love, but 02 rather quarrels, scoldings and brawlings, chiefly among the
common sort of people, etc.

in the 8th.
If be in the Eighth, the People shall gain and profit by the decease of men and
women, also by Legacies and such like, etc. but it be there, in the 8th.
it signifies loss by the death of men and women, quite contrary.

in the 9th.
Also in the Ninth, long journies shall be successful, men shall also be Lovers
of the Law and all good Learning; but if be therein, in the 9th.
long journies and voyages by Sea shall be tedious, dangerous and unprofitable;
also men shall be negligent and careless of the Law and Learning.

in the 10th.
Again, if be in the Tenth, the condition of the King and Rulers shall be good,
and the People shall study such Trades as are very curious and ingenious, also
dive into the Secrets of all Sciences and Studies; but if be there, in the 10th.
they shall be also as inquisitive, but the Arts shall be Diabolical and
unlawful, and the Tradesmen shall devise ways in their Trade to cozen and
cheat their Neighbors; and the King or Rulers shall have crosses and troubles,
and perhaps their Honor ecclipsed.

in the 11th.
Also if be in the Eleventh, the Ancients have said he signifies neither good
nor bad; the same also they affirm of. in the 11th.
I must confess I have not had much regard to the verity thereof by any
sufficient observation, nor can I as yet conceive the true Reason thereof: I
hope a little time and Search thereinto will better inform both me and thee: in
the Interim because they have so concluded, I shall not in the least contradict
them in this Point, nor derogate from them, because something may I know be
said for this their Tenet, although not so much as is fully satisfactory to my
Objections, etc.

in the 12th
Lastly, if be in the Twelfth, he denotes increase of mischief and not good; and
loss to and by great Cattle, that few men shall during that Revolution be
imprisoned: and if they be, they shall not so continue: thou art to judge good
or bad, and not always according to these general Rules, as you have been
sufficiently taught of the Planets, so also touching the places where their
effects shall be manifested, observe the same Rules you have been already
taught, viz. those subject to the signs in which they are, etc.

CHAP. XIV. Showing the Significations of the Planets in any of the
Triplicities, when any of them is Lord of the Year in any Annual Revolution of
the years of the World.
EVen as we have before promised to give you some Rules more at large for the
better and further illustration of what has been already delivered, so (though
what has been said is sufficient) we shall yet further persist, and endeavor
to make every thing so clear, that there shall not be the least complaint
thereof; now therefore as touching the signification of every Planet when they
are either Lords or Ladies of the year in any of the four Triplicities (what a
Triplicity is, and how and wherefore so divided you have been already shown in
the 12. Chapter of our Introduction to the Judgment of the Stars) and then
what may be expected by their being in any of the twelve signs, as also the
Head and Tail of the Dragon, and so we shall proceed to the third Section, that
we may the sooner hasten to a conclusion.

I might hereon enlarge, as have the Ancients, but it shall be needless to say
more then thus much, That look what Planet is Lord of the year, and the sign he
is then placed in, and ponder exactly his Debilities and Fortitudes, and
according to his strength you know and have been sufficiently already taught,
you are to judge, good or bad, according to his nature, the nature of the sign
he is in, and the nature of the place of Heaven he is placed in; as if Saturn
be in Aquaries or its Triplicity, this being both his house and Triplicity by
day, and so consequently (if the Revolution be Diurnal) strong and well
dignified, as also having exaltation in Libra the same Triplicity, you shall
judge what he signifies and denotes shall be advantageous and good to the
Common People and Nation, but it shall chiefly be manifested and effected in
the Western parts, because this is a Western sign.

For, whatever your Planet Lord or Lady of the year denotes, whether by her or
his natural Complexion, or Accidental Fortitudes, good or bad, it shall be
chiefly manifest in those Regions subject to the sign wherein he or she is, and
the Countries also subject to that Triplicity, but more particularly in the
quarter signified by the said Triplicity; as for example, if Saturn be in
Aries, he shall denote mischief and damage to all Noble, Rich and Great men
(because they are denoted and signified especial by fiery signs, which also you
have heard in the 23. Chapter of the second Treatise of this Volume are regal)
also to the Common People and Nation in general (because he is Lord of the
year, and so becomes significator thereof or of them) now I say mischief shall
be unto these, losses, and crosses, because Saturn in this sign, as also in the
whole Triplicity, is weak, Aries being his Fall, and Le^ his Detriment etc. And
this shall be in the Places, Cities, Regions, Countries and Kingdoms signified
by Aries, and all the Triplicity (which you have also been shown in the
aforesaid Book, and 27. Chapter) especially in the Eastern parts thereof,
because they are Eastern signs, etc. this is clear.

So that if thou have but regard to the Natural and Accidental significations
of the Planet,

CHAP. XV. Demonstrating the Significations of Saturn when he is Lord of the
Year in any of the twelve Signs.
YOu have been promised this plain jog trot way, and therefore I shall here
deliver it you, though to the ingenious what has been already said is
sufficient, and this superfluous.

Of the significations of Saturn when Lord of the Year, and in Aries. In Aries
and impedited.
Wherefore then know, that if Saturn be Lord of the year, and in Aries, he
stirs up many great winds, and those Eastern, and causes the death of many
Matrons and old Women, or such as are Overseers of Nunneries, scarcity of
Provisions, and a leanness and barrenness of the earth: And if he be impedited,
he causes many Thefts and Robberies, Cutters by the Highway, anxiety, sadness
and tribulation during that Revolution: Also if he be the only Lord or
Significator of the year, and be Cadent from the Ascendent, and behold it not,
and be direct, he shows anxiety and trouble to Rich and Noblemen, or such as
are the Grandees of the earth; and if he be Retrograde, their houses, substance
and coffers of wealth shall be visited and destroyed or taken away, and so much
the rather, if he be beheld by the malevolent Aspects of Mars; for then he
shall denote grievous cold weather, the death of Cattle, especially Sheep, and
such as are signified by Aries, and that by some rot or the violence and
rudeness of Wars; and if he do not behold Mars, or Mars him, the Winter shall
be extreme cold, according to the nature and quality of the Climate, and there
shall be a destruction or death of Cattle; also if he be not Retrograde there
shall be dissentions and quarrels amongst men, Sackings, Robbings and
Spoilings, and a great deal of mischief; especially if he be beheld of Mars out
of an angle; but if he behold him from a Cadent house, it shall not be so bad:
Also if Saturn be direct, and in an angle, he signifies much rain, discords
amongst great and rich men, especially if he be aspected by Mars, for then the
Common People shall assuredly disagree, and contend with their King and
Superiors; and if he be Retrograde, the state and condition of the People
shall be grievous; and if both Mars and the Moon behold him with a malevolent
Aspect together, there shall be terrible cold weather, Cattle shall die, and
there shall be dissentions and Wars.

Saturn Lord of the year, and in fixed signs.
In any Revolution of the World, if you find Saturn in a fixed sign, he denotes
mortality, poverty, scarcity, and great want of the fruits of the earth (if he
be Lord of the year this is meant) especially in Leo, because he is therein
afflicted and in detriment (being the sign opposite to his own house Aquaries)
not altogether so bad in Scorpio, and in Taurus a great deal less mischievous
then in Scorpio; for the more he is impedited, the more evil shall he be the
occasioner of, especially if he behold Mars, or be aspected by him, except
Jupiter do moderate the matter by his benevolent beams.

If Saturn be Lord of the year, and have Septentrional Latitude, Saturn when
Lord of the year, and has North latit. When South latitude.
(or more plainly North Latitude, because every one understands not
Septentrional) he denotes thick, gross and corrupt air, also dark and cloudy.

If he have Meridional or South latitude, he signifies much hard cold weather
and frost.

Saturn Lord of the year, and Oriental.
If he be Oriental also, he shall be the occasioner of trouble, sadness, grief
and sorrow to Great and Noblemen, perhaps through the coldness and frostiness
of the weather.

Saturn Lord of the year and Occidental.
Again if he be Occidental, there shall be Earthquakes during that Revolution,
especially in the Eastern parts (this is if he be in Aries or any sign
signifying that Quarter) if he denote Earthquakes, and be Oriental, joy shall
not be so great; if he be Retrograde it will be the worse, and so judge of the
quality and greatness of the good or evil still signified by any Planet
according to his strength or impediment and affliction.

Saturn in Taurus, and Lord of the year.
Thus much touching the significations of Saturn when Lord of the year, and
posited in Aries; wherefore now as touching this position in Taurus when he is
Lord of the year, who if he be then in an angle and direct, he signifies War
and Discords or Quarrels, chiefly in the Regions and Places subject to Taurus,
and in the Southern parts of the Nation in which the Revolution is made, also
destruction to the Seeds and Plants in the earth, because Taurus is an Earthy
sign, and he no ways essentially fortified so as to do there any good, and
being naturally evil, unless the good aspects of the Fortunes do prevent and
alter his influence; he shall also cause Catterpillers, Worms, and such kind
of Creatures as shall destroy the Fruits of the Earth; also Tribulations, and
Sorrows in the earth, destruction of Houses, Cities and Towns, also
Earthquakes, chiefly Southward (because Taurus is a Southern sign, etc.) and in
those places subject unto Taurus.

Moreover if Saturn be Lord of the year, and located in Taurus, he signifies
Wars, Scarcity and Famine, or a want of such things as are produced out of the
earth; and if he be impedited, he also denotes mortality, and that also to the
great Ones of the earth; and if Mars and the Moon be joined either in
Conjunction or Aspect with Saturn, in what ever sign it be, or what ever then
ascends, they shall denote mortality and famine, or a scarcity and if they be
joined to Mars, it signifies trouble and vexation to the King and chief Rulers;
also Quarrels and Wars in the Southern parts; and if he be then Retrograde, he
denotes destructions and violencies generally over all the Region, Wars and
Bloodshed, especially if he be in the tenth, for then it shall be more
universal; also mischief and damage to children and young men: but if he
behold the Ascendent, and be direct, the evil shall not be so great and
general; and if he be Cadent from the Ascendent, nor in Aspect therewith, and
be direct, nor beheld of Mars, the evil is thereby still declared not to be so
great: but if he be retrograde and impedited by Mars, he denotes destruction to
the fruits of the earth and mortalities, according to the nature of the sign he
is in.

Saturn Lord of the year, and in Gemini.
When Saturn is Lord of the year and in Gemini, and in an angle direct, he
stirs up many great and high Western winds, and causes very sharp cold
weather in Winter according to the nature and quality of the Climate; the Birds
of the air shall suffer Detriment of which there shall be a scarcity; also men
shall be afflicted with cold and dry Diseases commixed with heat and moisture,
and men shall be liars, contentious and shedders of blood; there shall be much
Frost in Winter, and in Summer corruption of air, thunder, lightning and rain;
and if he be Retrograde, dissentions and discords shall happen between Kings,
Nobles and great men; also they shall during that Revolution be in great fear
of death; it signifies also Earthquakes and these toward the Western parts;
and if he be remote from an Angle, he signifies as well Eastern as Western
winds, and abundance of Cold, and men shall suffer many changes; so also judge
they shall be if Saturn be then Retrograde; and that there shall be many
infirmities through winds, storms, unnatural Dews and Rains: but if he be
Cadent and not beholding the Ascendent and be direct, these things shall happen
in the sign in which Saturn then is, and shall cause many Southern and
Southwest winds.

Also if Saturn be in the fourth house in Gemini, or its Triplicity, and Lord
of the year, or if he be not Lord of the year, yet if he be in aspect of the
Lord of the Ascendent, he signifies that in the Western parts during that
Revolution many men shall die through Earthquakes; but if he be in Aspect with
the Lord of the tenth, there shall be many controversies and dissentions about
Rule and Government, and the power and right of one another; also many
inundations, and abundance of overflowings of Waters, by which the fruits of
the earth shall be damnified.

Again, Saturn Lord of the year, and having Septentrional lat. in
if Saturn have Septentrional Latitude, there shall be many grievous high
winds, corrupt, foggy dark air and earthquakes, and these chiefly in the
Western parts and places subject to Gemini.

If he be Meridional. Oriental.
But if he have Meridional Latitude, there will be a hot and dry air, mortality,
and little or no rain; if he be Oriental, he denotes infirmities and sickness,
also trouble to the Grandees of the earth, and Nobles of those Regions under
Gemini; Occidental.
so if he be Occidental, there shall be a very dry air, and little or no rain,
etc.

Saturn Lord of the year, and in Cancer.
Again, if Saturn be in Cancer in any Revolution and Lord of the year, there
shall be an increase and abundance of Water, Fish and Locusts (or Caterpillars
rather in our Country) and such Worms and creeping Creatures as are destructive
to Fruits, and are engendered by immoderate rain with which the year shall
abound, as also with Fishes; and if Mars behold him not, there shall be
grievous and terrible cold weather, and many infirmities in those places under
the sign wherein Saturn is, as also under the signs in Square and Opposition to
him, and they shall be such Diseases as shall be of the nature of the sign he
possesses, and if he be Retrograde, let the King have a care of death, or some
prime and chief Ruler during that Revolution: and if Mars behold him with any
Malevolent aspect, it signifies Mortalities to the aforesaid places and many
evils and mischiefs.

And if Saturn behold not the Ascendent, there shall be much cold, rain and
dew; but if he be direct, the evil shall not be so bad, except then the Moon be
in the Ascendent, for that signifies the evil shall fall on the King or chief
Rulers of the Region in which the Revolution is, if not death it self; but if
he be retrograde, and beheld of Mars, it signifies death and mortality in
those Regions aforesaid; and if he be Cadent and not beholding the Ascendent,
and be direct and Mars Cadent from him, it signifies that men shall be secure
and safe; and so much the more assured will this be if he be past the first
fifteen degrees of the sign; yet shall there be infirmities in the Regions and
Places subject unto the said sign: but if he be retrograde and beheld of Mars,
and neither of them in the Aspects of the Fortunes, many tribulations and
troubles shall be incident unto those Regions, also abundance of rain and cold
weather, also Shipwracks and Disasters by Sea, and much danger to Navigators,
and such as make Voyages; also death to fish, and the creatures lying in the
Sea and other Waters.

Saturn in Cancer, and having Septentrional latitude. Meridional. Oriental.
Occidental.
If that Saturn be in Cancer having Septentrional Latitude, he denotes a
scarcity of Waters, and a drought of fountains and rivers, and but little rain;
Also if he be Meridional, that men shall labor and take much pains in their
Trades, but shall gain little or nothing thereby: if he be Oriental, he denotes
dark, thick and obscure unwholsom air, also in the Winter time, grievous cold
raw weather; and damage to fruits by Northern winds; if he be Occidental, also
much rain; And if he be retrograde the evil shall be augmented, and the King or
Rulers of the Countries and Nations under the sign wherein Saturn is, shall
undergo grievous aspersions, reproaches and disgraces even equivalent to death
it self; but if he be direct it will lessen and diminish the evil a little, for
look how much your significator is fortified, and so much the less shall the
evil signified be, and so much the more the good, etc. And this thou will
plainly see by what follows, if thou have diligent respect to what shall be
expressed, so as to ponder thoroughly the reason of every Judgment, the which I
would advise thee to do, for then shall thou be assuredly an expert
Philosopher, and be soon able to deliver Judgment most rationally on any
Configuration of the Heavens without recourse to thy Books; for, that
Astrologer whose brains remains in his Library shall never come to the
accomplishment of this Science: but he that makes his Library remain in his
brains shall not err; Et ille erit mihi amicus.

Saturn Lord of the year, and in Leo.
But if Saturn be Lord of the year in any Revolution, and in Leo, having
Septentrional (or North) latitude, he causes much rain and corruption of
things both to the prejudice of great and small, Rulers and People, also
brings to naught the designs and works of men's hands.

If he be Oriental, he denotes many infirmities to the People of the Climate
under that Revolution: and if he be Occidental, many Mortalities and
Pestilencies shall happen unto the People: and so much the more grievous will
the Evil and mischief be if he be retrograde, less if direct.

Saturn Lord of the year in Virgo.
Also if Saturn be in Virgo, and be Lord of the Year and Septentrional, he
signifies good, wholesome and sweet gales and blasts of wind, also convenient and
seasonable gusts in Harvest-time: and if he be Meridional, there shall be a
drought of Fountains, and a scarcity of waters; but if he be Oriental, the
women that shall conceive during that Revolution shall miscarry, by reason of
wind or carnal copulation after conception: but if he be Occidental, he causes
acute and sharp Fevers: and if he be Retrograde, the King and Rulers shall fear
their Enemies: but if he be Direct, they shall not thus fear, but be provided
for by them.

Saturn Lord of the year in Libra.
Again if Saturn be in Libra and Lord of the Year Septentrional, he denotes a
hot and dry Air, and little or no rain during that Revolution, and a scarcity
of Waters: And if he be Meridional, a good wholesome sweet Air and no noysom
Blasts: and if he be Oriental, men shall have a lustful inclination to women:
but if he be Occidental, he denotes infamy and disgrace which shall come of
such Doings: If he be Retrograde, he signifies Infirmities to Servants and the
Baser Sort of People: And if he be direct, there shall be pretty Plenty of the
Fruits of the Earth, especially of Barley, etc.

Saturn Lord of the year in Scorpio.
Saturn Lord of the Year and in Scorpio Septentrional, signifies abundance of
Rain and increase of Waters both in Rivers and Fountains: also that they shall
be corrupt: and if he be Meridional, he shall denote a scarcity of provisions
appertaining to the life of man, especially such as are produced by the Earth:
And if he be Oriental, there shall be many dissentions, and quarrels amongst
Great men: but if Occidental, he signifies destruction and trouble on the Sea,
also loss and damage to such as have their Livelihood thereon: also if he be
Retrograde, there shall happen Pestilential Diseases: but if direct, Babylon
(as say some of the Ancients) shall be safe.

Saturn Lord of the year in Sagittary.
Again if Saturn be Lord of the Year Septentrional and in Sagittary, he denotes
the increase of Fountains, and extremity of Cold in Winter according to the
nature of the Climate: if he be Oriental, Noble and Rich men shall be put out
of their Countries and Habitations: and if he be Occidental, there shall be
many dissentions, quarrels and wars between Kings and Great men: also if he be
Retrograde, it shall go ill with all manner of men and their affairs; and
quarrels shall be amongst them: and if he be Direct, Travelers both by Sea and
Land shall be in a good Condition and successful

Saturn Lord of the year in Capricorn.
Moreover if Saturn be Lord of the Year, and in Capricorn and Septentrional, the
Air shall be temperate and healthy, and there shall be moderate and seasonable
Rains: but if he be Meridional or have Meridional Latitude, in Winter there
will be dark, cloudy, cold weather: and if he be Oriental, the state of Great
and Noble men shall be but sad and troublesome, neither shall they agree with
the Common People: and if he be Occidental, the fruits of the Earth shall be
wasted and consumed by and through extremity of heat and creeping things, as
Catterpillers and the like: and if he be Retrograde, the Common People shall be
angry and fall out one with another: if Direct, it signifies the good Condition
of Great and Noble men, that they shall carry themselves well toward all men,
and that they shall delight in and love the Law, and put it in execution.

Saturn Lord of the year in Aquaries.
If Saturn be Lord of the Year and in Aquaries having Septentrional Latitude, he
signifies much Rain, Frost and Cold at Times convenient; when Meridional, a
scarcity of water in Fountains and Rivers: if he be Oriental, the Common People
shall obtain but few Heritages, and thrive but little: if he be Occidental, he
signifies many Combustions: if he be Retrograde, the Evil is increased; and if
Direct, he denotes the Death of such Cattle as Men ordinarily employ about
their Occasions.

Saturn Lord of the year in Pisces.
Lastly, if Saturn be Septentrional, and Lord of the year, and in Pisces, he
signifies many great and tempestuous blasts of winds and that from the North,
and grievous cold weather in winter; if he be Meridional, he denotes storms and
tempests by sea and many shipwracks, also hurt and loss to those that have
their living and dependency on the sea or water; and if he be Oriental, it
signifies dissentions and discords amongst great and noble men, and also
slaughter amongst them; but if he be Occidental, the ignoble and baser sort of
people shall exalt themselves above their Superiors; and if he be Retrograde,
there shall be many dissentions, tribulations and discords amongst Religious
men and such as study Divine matters; and if he be Direct, men shall serve and
worship God, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Showing the Significations of Jupiter, when he is Lord of the year
in any of the Twelve Signs.
WE are now in order to descend to Jupiter, being the next Planet under Saturn
in the heavens, Jupiter Lord of the year in Aries.
who if he be in Aries and Lord of the year, he signifies an appearance of
religion in the Eastern parts, or that some new Sect or Schism shall there
arise; and men shall be observers and lovers of the Laws, both Moral and
Divine, and shall be given to good works: also he denotes much windy weather,
and that from the East or Eastern parts: as also much cold and rain in winter,
yet not so much as shall be hurtful, or to cause any inundation; the fruits of
the earth also shall be plenteously and seasonably produced: And if he be then
well dignified when he is Lord of the year and in Aries, he signifies the
prosperous and successful condition of those men, places, Cities and Countries
subject unto him and the sign wherein he is, that they shall be merry and
jovial and want nothing: the like also to the common people in general, and
that they shall love their Superiors; but if he be impedited and weak, judge
the contrary.

Also if Jupiter be in humane Signs, or fiery Signs in any Revolution and Lord
of the year, you are to know (if he be weak) that he signifies great and noble
men shall be dejected and perplexed, molested and afflicted, and shall sustain
many losses, and disgraces according to the nature of the affliction, and these
shall chiefly be incident to the Regions and places subject unto him, and the
sign in which he is located, as also the place for which the figure of the
Revolution is erected; but if he be strong, judge the contrary. Also if he be
strong and well placed, or accidentally aspected by any of the other fortunate
Planets (which you have heard may sometimes accidentally be fortunes) in earthy
or watery Signs, he shall denote good to all such things as are thereby
signified, as the fruits of the earth and seeds if in earthy Signs, also fishes
and such things as appertain to water, if in watery signs, as Navigators and
such as have their living out of the Sea, they shall make good voyages and that
safely and with security; but if he be weak, you may judge danger by shipwreck,
tedious and unprofitable voyages and the like: and so contrariwise in earthy
Signs when he is weak and afflicted, he denotes a scarcity of Grain, fruits and
seeds, and that the earth shall be afflicted with barrenness, according to the
nature of the Planet or Planets assisting him, etc.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Taurus.
Jupiter in Taurus and Lord of the year well dignified, or assisted by Adjuvant
Planets, shall denote fertillity, and the good condition of the fruits of the
earth, and that there shall be a temperate and good air: men shall delight in
the husbandring and manuring of the ground, and shall profit thereby; the King
also and the Rulers, or Great and Noble men, shall do good to the people, and
encourage them, and do them justice and equity: and again, the People shall
love, honor, and respect their Superiors; there shall also be sufficient and
moderate rain, and sweet Southern winds, and all things signified by Jupiter
shall chiefly be manifest in the Southern parts, and those places subject to
Taurus; but if he be weak and afflicted, judge the contrary, and judge the
nature thereof from the significator aff^icting, as you have been often taught
before.

Nora been.
But you are ever to remember this general rule, which I would also have you
observe and take notice of in all the other Planets, that although Jupiter do
in Taurus signify good when he is well disposed, he being naturally good in
himself, yet does he not effect it so powerfully or so fully as when he is in
Aries; for he has therein borh Triplicity and Term; but in Taurus only Term,
and in Sagittary more power then in Aries to effect what he denotes; for
therein he has both House, Triplicity and Term; for by how much the stronger
essentially a Planet is, by so much is his power increased; and so on the
contrary, when he is debilitated, etc. this, I say, I would have thee still
remember in what thou have already heard, as also in what follows, and in all
the other Planets.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Gemini.
If Jupiter be Lord of the year in Gemini and well dignified, and in some
Aspects of the Malevolents, men shall be perplexed with extreme warm winds; and
if he be in Aspect with Mars, many casualties through thunder and lightning
shall be incident unto them; but if he be aspected with Saturn, he denotes
corruption of air; and if other testimonies concur, pestilential air and
diseases through corruption of blood are to be feared; but if you see him free
from any Aspect of the Malevolents, yet shall he denote no very pleasant air,
many sudden gusts of winds, and storms of rain, which shall be somewhat
destructive to the fruits of the earth, and not pleasant unto men; For it is
certain, that when Jupiter is in Gemini, if he do no hurt, he does as little
good, or rather none at all, especially if Retrograde, weak or afflicted.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Cancer.
When Jupiter is in Cancer, and Lord of the year, the People and Nobles shall be
in a most prosperous and good condition, shall live credibly in honor and
esteem, the air shall be pleasant and healthy, the earth fruitful, and the
fruit wholesome and good. There shall be no danger by Sea, but men shall make
prosperous and succesful voyages; rain shall fall seasonably and moderately,
the winds also shall be temperate and calm, if other testimonies also agree
therewith; but if he be in Cancer, and weak, the year will not be altogether so
happy as you have heard; yet you are to know, that if he be so aspected and
afflicted, that his sweet influence of doing good is let; yet will he not do
any mischief when he is in any Revolution of the years of the world located in
Cancer.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Leo.
Jupiter Lord of the year in Leo, denotes high winds and cold weather in
winter: also much rain and tempests, even to the blowing up trees by the roots;
yet there shall be a clear and wholesome air toward the latter end of winter, in
the spring abundance of rain, a drought of fountains, and a scarceity of water
in rivers; and lastly, in Autumn thou shall be sure of a plentiful and good
harvest, yet many people shall be troubled with unusual coughs, etc.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Virgo.
If he be Lord of year, and in Virgo, free from the Malevolent Aspects of the
Infortunes, men shall be sociable, and love one another, and delight in
Husbandry and manuring of the earth, the fruits shall be plentiful, but soon
corrupt, also seeds shall come to good; many Southerly winds and those
sometimes obnoxious, etc. but if be afflicted in this Sign, he will not be of
sufficient force and efficacy to effect the good he naturally would perform.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Libra.
Also if Jupiter be in Libra, in an annual Revolution, and Lord of the year,
well aspected and placed, he shall manifest his effects chiefly in the air,
which shall generally be temperate and wholesome, many warm winds, and pleasant
showers for the production of the fruits of the earth, which shall be good and
pleasant; men also generally shall be healthy, and love one another; if he be
beheld by the Malevolent aspect of Mars, there shall be much thunder and
lightning in Summer, and in the Western parts some hurt thereby; if by Saturn,
the air shall sometimes be perplexed with unwholsom fogs and mists.

Jupiter (...) of the year in Scorpio.
Again, Jupiter in Scorpio, denotes a good clear air if he be Lord of the year,
and not afflicted, and thin clouds, the year shall be plentiful, many
seasonable and sweet showers or rain shall fall, hot weather may be expected in
summer, but very cold in winter, and thick clouds; the air shall be healthy,
and there shall be many Northern winds; also the Sea shall be free from
misfortune; viz. Shipwracks, Wars, and the like; but if you find him
Retrograde, and in Square or Opposition of Saturn or Mars, judge the contrary
to what has been said.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Sagittary.
Moreover, if Jupiter be in Sagittarie, he denotes a temperate air in the
beginning of winter, but in the end thereof great cold, but few or no high
winds, also much snow and frost in the spring, insomuch that the fruits of the
earth shall be much damnified thereby; for many of them shall be nipt in the
bud, and blasted: And if his latitude be Septentrional, he signifies little
rain, but a most temperate good air; if Meridional, a turbulent air, and many
great gusts of wind; if he be Oriental, noble and rich men shall be in a good
and joyful condition; if Occidental, they shall be raised to dignity and
renown; if Retrograde, it shall not be safe traveling or voyaging by Sea; but
if Direct, judge them to be safe and free from any danger that voyage by sea;
judge also, that fish, and such creatures as delight in waters shall in crease,
etc.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Capricorn.
In Capricorn, Jupiter if he be Lord of the year, does not promise much good
weather; indeed he will be the Author of much mischief, but according to his
position, and the aspects of other Planets unto him you are to judge; for if he
be well aspected, and free from Retrogradation and other impediments, he
promises a plentiful year quo ad Capax, yet no extraordinary abundance, but
sufficient; also a pleasant air, many great Southern winds; success and profit
to the common people, etc. but if you find him afflicted by their Malevolent
Aspects, and ill placed, judge the contrary.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Aquaries.
But if Jupiter be in Aquaries, and Lord of the year, also assisted and well
placed, judge the year to be temperate and seasonable, for the most part a
temperate air, pleasant showers, etc. but if you find him afflicted, judge the
contrary, much hurt and damage by high winds, rain, and snow, etc.

Jupiter Lord of the year in Pisces.
Lastly, if Jupiter be Lord of the year, and in Pisces, the air shall be
wholesome, clear and good, a plentiful year, seasonable showers, and success to
all those that navigate and negotiate by sea, abundace of fish etc. but if he
be afflicted, he shall denote much thunder and rain.

CHAP. XVII. Showing the Significations of Mars, when he is Lord of the year in
any of the twelve Signs.
Mars Lord of the year in Aries, and afflicted.
IN the next place you see follows Mars who is next under Jupiter, and therefore
now to be treated of; wherefore if he be Lord of the year, and in Aries, he
signifies many great and high winds, and various mutations in the air, in the
Eastern parts especially; he signifies also little or no rain, and that men
shall have pain in their eyes, and quarrels, dissentions and debates amonst
men, especially in the Eastern parts, and such places and Cities subject to
Aries, and that Kings shall disagree amongst themselves and fight: but
understand, this is when he is maliciously aspected of Saturn, or any other
Infortune.

Free from affliction.
But if he be free from their affliction, as also retrogradation and combustion,
the common people in that Revolution, as also those subject unto Aries, shall
be in a happy and good condition, shall prosper and overcome all their enemies;
the air shall be temperate, and the year fruitful, and there shall be much
plenty, chiefly if he be then Lord of the Ascendent, and men shall generally be
joyful and merry, as having no other cause.

Septentrional.
And if he have Sepentrional latitude, he notes little or no rain, and a hot
air.

Meridional.
If he have Meridional latitude, he denotes much thunder and lightning.

Oriental.
Also if he be Oriental, wars and discords amongst noble, great and rich men,
or such as are the Grandees of the earth.

Occidental.
But if he be Occidental, many fears and troubles shall fall upon men, as also
discords and contentions.

Retrograde.
Again, if he be retrograde, men shall be perplexed with many infirmities in
many parts of their body, but especially in their eyes.

Direct.
But if direct and combust, or otherways impedited, men shall be hypocritical,
clothed in sheeps clothing, but shall inwardly be ravening woolves.

Mars Lord of the year in Taurus.
Also, if Mars be Lord of the year in any Revolution, and in Taurus, he denotes
many great Southern winds and blasts, very hurtful and destructive to the
fruits of the earth, by reason sudden heats will follow thereupon: there shall
also be many showers of rain, and much thunder and lightning, death to greater
cattle and women, or at least many tribulations and crosses unto them: also the
year shall not be fruitful, nor healthful, the fruits shall be blasted, and
rotten, and the seeds of the earth destroyed.

If he have north latitude. South latitude.
And if he have North latitude, he signifies much rain, and somewhat the more
good unto the herbs and fruits of the earth.

But if South latitude, he denotes many gusts of wind and blasts (as you have
heard) and destruction to the fruits of the earth.

Oriental. Occidental. Direct.
If he be Oriental, there shall be peace in the Southern and Western parts.

And if Occidental, he denotes much death, and many infirmities, especially to
women, and that they shall be hated if he be direct and otherways impedited.

Retrograde.
But if he be Retrograde, many children and young people shall dye, during the
time of that Revolution.

Mars Lord of the year in Gemini.
But if Mars be Lord of the year, and in Gemini, many casualties and damage
shall befall men through thunder, and lightning, and little rain, or through the
want thereof also by excess of heat; there shall also be debates and
contentions, thefts and robberies in the Northern and Western parts; the King
or chief Rulers shall be exalted and overcome their enemies; there shall be
many griefs of the ears, as inflammations and pustules which shall be very
offensive and troublesome to men.

If he have north, south latitude. Oriental. Occidental.
And if he have North latitude, he signifies much rain; but if his latitude be
South, there shall be a drought of fountains, and a scarcety of water.

If Oriental, he causes many infirmities, pustules, scabs, and breakings out
in the skin; and if Occidental, he denotes much trouble and auxiety to Lawyers,
Scribes, Merchants and Judges, and that some of them shall run away by reason
of their injustice, extortion and cheating tricks.

Direct. Retrograde.
Again, if he be Direct, men shall be blabs of their tongues, and divuldge both
their own and others secrets, committed to their charge; and when he is
Retrograde, religious men, or such as take such kind of functions on them,
shall clash, disagree and contend upon some nice points.

Mars Lord of the year in Cancer.
Again, if Mars in any annual Revolution of the world, be Lord of the year in
Cancer, he shall signify frequent shipwracks, by reason of sudden blasts of
wind; also dissentions and quarrels in the Western and Northwest parts, and
that men shall suffer much damage under taxations; many infirmities also are
threatened, fevers, pains and infirmities in the throat and breast; the air
shall be grievous and contagious, and a want of rain; also the year shall be
turbulent and dangerous, many cattle, especially horses shall dye, the fruits
of the earth generally shall be wanting, and there shall be a palpable scarcety
thereof.

Septentrional. Meridional.
And if his latitude be Septentrional, there shall be grievous sharp cold
weather in winter, and a drought of fountains: also if he have Meridional
latitude, many noisome gusts of wind, very destructive to trees and fruits.

Oriental. Occidental.
If he be Oriental there shall be a death or mortality amonst such creatures as
are kept upon Commons, and in the open fields: when Occidental, the common
people shall be very careful and industrious in their ordinary employments and
negotiations.

Direct.
And if it be Direct, the air shall be healthy and pleasant; but if he be
Retrograde, men shall be lascivious, and study how they may opportunely commit
Adulteries and Fornications.

Mars Lord of the year in Leo. If he have north latitude. If south. Oriental.
Retrograde.
Yet again, if Mars be Lord of the year, and in Leo, he signifies wars,
contentions, and discords and a scarcity of provisions, and the fruits of the
earth, in the Eastern parts especially: also death amongst men, and that
chiefly to those of younger years; and if he have Septentrional latitude, there
shall be a scarcity of waters; but if he be Meridional, there shall be no want
thereof; if Oriental, damage to such beasts as are useful to mankind,
especially the greater sort; Occidental, fish, and such creatures as inhabit
the water shall be destroyed and dye: If he be Retrograde, loss and detriment
shall be to the great and rich men of the earth; and if he be Direct, many
great Western winds, Direct.
and ships shall be safe and secure at Sea.

Mars Lord of the year in Virgo. If Septentrional. Meridional. Oriental.
Occidental. Direct. Retrograde. Mars Lord of the year in Libra.
Moreover, if Mars be in Virgo, and Lord of the year, he denotes war and
effusion of blood in the Northern parts; also pains and griefs in the eyes,
plenty of provision and fruits of the earth, death to many women, etc. And if
he be Septentrional, damage to fruits and seeds; also infirmities to man's body:
if Meridional, success to the fruits, etc. if Oriental, the death of old men:
if Occidental, he denotes great and tempestuous winds; if Direct, he denotes
the good and prosperity of rich and great men; if Retrograde, wars shall happen
amonst men.

When Mars is Lord of the year, and in Libra, he signifies vehement and great
winds, infirmities and mortalities, and more especially to men then women; also
winds rain and clouds, also mists, and those chiefly Southward, and infirmities
and mortalities, a scarcity of the fruits of the earth, corn and wine, many
sackings and robberies, quarrels, dissentions and discords amonst men, terrors,
fears and tribulations.

Septentrional. ^eridional. Oriental.
And if he have Septentrional latitude, there shall be many thunderings and
lightnings; if Meridional, many infirmities amonst men, especially on the left
side; and if he be Oriental, he signifies wars and dissentions amonst rich and
noble men; if Occidental, Occidental, Retrograde. Direct.
rich noble and great men shall be safe and secure; if Retrograde, sickness
shall be incident to noble, great, rich men and Judges; if Direct, it will not
be so bad with them.

Mars Lord of the year in Scorpio.
Again, when Mars is Lord of the year, and accidentally located in Scorpio, he
signifies much misty and cloudy weather, also much cold in winter, and very
excessive heat and intemperate air in Summer, for which cause the fruits of the
earth shall be much damnified, as also the herbs and seeds shall be much hurt;
men shall be molested with pains and griefs in the eyes, thefts and robberies,
quarrels and debates, as also deceits and frauds, and a scarcity of fruits and
provisions: Also if he be Septentrional, Septentrional. Meridional. Oriental.
Occidental. Retrograde. Direct.
there shall be a scarcity of water; if Meridional, abundance of water; if
Oriental, many infirmities shall be incident to man, especially in the lower
and secret parts, if other testimonies concur; if Occidental, small Piety among
men; if Retrograde, he denotes many tribulations, fears and troubles; if
Direct, things will be so much the better.

Mars Lord of the year in Sagittary.
Also Mars in Sagittary, if he be Lord of the year, he signifies wars shall
happen in the Eastern parts; also damage and mischief unto the inhabitants of
those parts, and the Regions subject to the sign Sagittary; death, infirmities,
coughs and infirmities in the eyes, as also in the loins and back; little or no
rain, and extreme cold weather in winter, as also the spring, so that the
fruits of trees shall be blasted and nipt; also plants, herbs and seeds shall
be very much damnified, and the year generally shall be scarce and indigent of
provisions, also honey shall not be plentiful; for by reason of the scarcity of
herbs, Bees shall many of them be destroyed: and if therein he be well
aspected, and free from the Malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes, all such as
bear arms, or have any relation thereunto of what degree soever, shall be in
good condition, fortunate and successful.

Some of the Ancients with Albumazar say, that if Mars be in the last fifteen
degrees of Sagittary, If strong.
and Lord of the year in any Revolution, or in any humane Sign, he denotes
wars, tumults and insurrections of the people against their King and Superiors,
sudden death, fevers both Tertian, Quartan, and Pestilential, and many other
infirmities, robbings, sackings and polings, bloodshed, fire and sword, and
lightnings, and if he be Infortunately aspected by the Malevolents, and
otherways also debilitated, If weak.
he signifies all these things you have now heard, but more mischievously,
unless the Benevolent Aspects of Jupiter prevent and contradict his fury.

Septentrional. Meridional. Oriental.
If his latitude be Septentrional, he signifies the air shall be good, pleasant
and temperate; if Meridional, Merchants and Tradesmen shall be on the thriving
and gaining hand; if he be Oriental, he denotes peace, quietness and security,
and no war; Occidental, the safety of trees, and much fruit; and if Retrograde,
he denotes coughs, Occidental. Retrograde. Direct.
and pains in the hinder part of the head and neck, also in the thighs; if
Direct, a death or mortality amongst cattle.

Mars Lord of the year in Capricorn.
Again, if Mars be Lord of the year in any Revolution, and located in Capricorn,
he denotes wars, tribulation and slaughter to young men, perplexities and fears
to the Eastern parts: also rain in due season, and that moderate, plenty of all
provisions, and a fruitful and plentiful year.

North latit. Meridional. Oriental.
And if he have North latitude, he signifies much snow in those parts where it
is usual and requisite if he have Meridional latitude, he denotes a close, hot
air; if Oriental, let the Roman Emperor have a care of a stob, and so much the
more assured will this be if the Moon be in the eighth house or joined by body
or aspect to the Lord thereof, or joined to Mars in any of the Angles, or
indeed any other house, especially in the eighth, or be beheld by the Square or
Opposition of the Lord of the eighth; and the more assuredly will this be, and
thou may be confident thereof, if there be mutual reception also betwixt
them, or either of them, and the Lord of the eighth; for if then Jupiter
prevent not by his Benevolent beams, and cast his aspect unto Mars or the Moon,
he will not escape with life that Revolution, unless God miraculously show his
infinite mercy toward him; if he be Occidental, botches, boyls, Occidental.
Direct. Retrograde.
and such like, shall molest the bodies of men; if Direct, abundance of plenty
is promised during that Revolution; if Retrograde, want, scarcity and penury.

Mars Lord of the year in Aquaries.
Moreover, if Mars be in Aquaries, and Lord of the year, tribulation and trouble
is threatened to men during that Revolution; abundance of rain, snow and cold
weather in winter and such times as it is usual; a probability of degrading and
unthrowning Kings and great Hogens of the times, in those places for which the
Revolution of the year is; a scarcity and want of provisions and fruits of the
earth, especially in the Western parts; but if he be beheld then by Venus, or
the Lord of the Ascendent, and she be then also Septentrional, the spring shall
be good and seasonable; and if he be Septentrional, Septentrional.
much snow and cold hard weather in winter; if Meridional, much hot weather,
but a thick, obscure, muddy air; if he be Oriental, it shall be well with
great, noble, and rich men, and they shall be jovial, Meridional. Oriental.
Occidental. Retrograde.
and merry; if Occidental, it will not be so good: but if he be Retrograde, he
denotes very hot weather, and detriment to trees and their fruits by reason
thereof; if Direct there shall be many Catterpillars, and such like creatures,
Direct.
that shall destroy trees, especially if then the Dragons head be also in this
Sign, or in Gemini.

Mars Lord of the year in Pisces.
Lastly, if Mars be Lord of the year, and in Pisces, he signifies much snow and
rain; also destruction to fish, and such creatures as live in the water, for
men shall catch many during that Revolution; the slaying and massacring of
Kings and Great men, scarcity of provisions, and the fruits of the earth, and
generally it shall be a turbulent and hard year both for man and beast; and if
Venus behold the Ascendent, there shall be much thunder and lightning, also
much death and mortality amongst men, and grief and pains in their eyes:
Septentrional. Meridional.
and if Mars be Septentrional, the air shall be good, pleasant and healthy; and
if he be Meridional, there shall be many Caterpillars and Locusts in such
places, as shall be natural for them, and such like noysom creatures, but they
shall not do much hurt: if he be Oriental, Oriental.
he signifies the slaughter of rich and great men: if Occidental, Occidental.
Direct.
many infirmities shall fall on servants, and the inferior sort of people; and
if he be Direct, they shall be safe and in health: also sheep and small cattle
shall be in good condition: if Retrograde, the good condition and state of
those that follow Trading is also promised, Retrograde.
who shall gain and profit.

CHAP. XVIII. Containing the Accidents signified by the Sun when he is Lord of
the year in any of the twelve Signs.
Labor but to understand the nature of every Planet and Sign, and to
distinguish exactly every ones strength and fortitudes from his debilities, and
then by observing the reasons of what has been already said in these three
forgoing Chapters, in handling the Significations of these Superior Planets
thou may soon know how to understand the Significations of the Sun in every
Sign, when ever he is Lord of the year, and judge of them without any further
instruction.

The Sun Lord Lord of the year in Aries, free from affliction.
Yet thus much I shall say, If the Sun be Lord of the year in Aries, free from
the Malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes, it shall be well with the Common
people, the year shall be fruitful and succesful unto them, as also to great,
noble and rich men, Kings and the Grandees of the earth, and that they shall be
fortunate in honor, and shall overcome their enemies, be gracious and loving to
their people, and shall do them justice, etc.

The Sun Lord of the year in Aries, weak or afflicted.
But if he be in Aries afflicted and impedited, judge the contrary; yet know
that whatever he signifies whether good or evil in Aries or its triplicity,
shall chiefly happen in and to those parts subject unto the Sign and their
Cities and Towns, and more particularly to the Eastern parts thereof, so
understand of the rest of the signs when he or indeed any of the other Planets
are located in them or in any Triplicity.

The Sun Lord of the year in Taurus.
When in any annual Revolution you find the Sun Lord of the year and in Taurus,
you shall judge the state both of rich and poor, great and small, noble and
vile to be but so so, although he be no wise afflicted by the Malevolent beams
of the Infortunes; for in Taurus he has no manner of dignity, but is wholly
peregrine and weak; the fruits of the earth also shall not be very plentiful,
especially if he be afflicted; and you must still remember, (as you have been
sufficiently taught before) that according to the nature and quality of the
affliction you are to judge damage or detriment to such things as are
signified by the Sun, and that they shall chiefly be incident to those places
subject unto Taurus, and in the Southern parts of those places.

The Sun Lord of the year in Gemini.
If the Sun be Lord of the year and in Gemini, if he be well aspected by the
Fortunes, judge success, health and good (according to the nature and
accidental Significations and the adjuvant Planets or Planet) to the Commons,
and year in general, fruits of the earth, nobles, rich and great men, and that
these shall chiefly be incident to the Regions and Cities subject unto Gemini,
and the Western parts; but if he be afflicted, judge also the affliction
accordingly by the nature and signification of the afflicting Planet, etc.

The Sun Lord of the year in Cancer.
If he be in Cancer or its Triplicity, judge the good or evil signified by him
(according to the natures of the Planets afflicting or assisting him) to happen
to the Northern parts of those places, Cities, Regions and Kingdoms signified
or ruled by the Signs wherein he is; this you have had often reiterated; I do
it not through forgetfulness or carelessness, but through a willingness and an
earnest desire the Rules may be easily apprehended and retained by the young
Students, for whose sakes only I did undertake these my labors; for I doubt
not but thereby they will soon be enabled to give a probable judgment upon any
position of the heavens, without the help of any Book, when they have well
pondred (as I have often said) the Rules of Art and the reasons thereof.

The Sun Lord of the year in Leo.
Again, if the Sun be Lord of the year and in Leo, it shall be well with the
Grandees of the earth, and people in general, the fruits of the earth shall be
plentiful, etc. for you must know the Sun in Leo is very potent and strong, by
being in his own house, unless he be afflicted at that time by the Malevolent
Aspects of the Infortunes, and then according to their mischievous power you
are to judge the misfortune and detriment of such things as they shall
naturally or accidentally signify, etc.

In the fourth Chapter of the second Book of this volumn, you have heard the
Sun has no latitude, neither can be Oriental, Occidental, Stationary,
Retrograde or Combust: and therefore, if you but remember to judge according to
his strength essential and accidental in all the other subsequent signs, as you
have heard the method before, this shall suffice to be said of the
significations of the Sun when he is Lord of the year and located in any of the
twelve Signs of heaven; Wherefore let us proceed to the significations of Venus
when she is Lady of the year and so posited.

CHAP. XIX. Of the things signified by Venus when she is Lady of the year in
any of the Twelve Signs.
LIttle will it avail you to observe the Latitudes of the three inferior
Planets in this manner of Judgment as you have heard of the Superiors as say
most of the Ancients: and truly in this I do agree with them (though not in in
many other of their tenets, especially in their Rules in the last Chapter,
where they would teach the significations of the Sun in the 12. Signs in Annual
Revolutions, when it is impossible for him at such a time to be in any other
sign then Aries; and if the Judgment be half yearly, or quarterly in Libra;
Cancer, or Capricorn, he must needs be but in no other) for oftentimes we shall
find the Rules in the inferior Planets vary and prove false by reason of
their swift motion and frequent variations but in the superior seldom or
never; This I thought good to prefix before our Discourse of the inferior
Planets that it might not seem strange to the diligent Inquirer we follow not
the same Method in these as in the former.

Venus Lady of the year in Aries.
When Venus then is Lady of the year and in Aries in any Annual Revolution well
aspected and in Configuration of none of the Malevolents and neither Retrograde
nor Combust, the air shall be temperate, the Earth fruitful, men in general
successful, shall thive, be merry and delight in all pleasant recreations, it
shall also be well with Great and noble men, and with the smaller sort of
Cattle, men shall be peaceably given, and many pleasant moderate showers of
rain shall fall, and generally there shall be plenty of provisions, and these
shall chiefly be in the Eastern parts, and those Cities, Regions and Countries
subject unto Aries.

Notes.
But to speak the truth, I see no reason at all why Venus should occasion so
much good in Aries, it being a sign wherein she suffers detriment and
affliction, although no wise aspected by the malevolents, and although she be
naturally of her self fortunate and good, yet it will not follow (I conceive)
that she is of the same power to effect good when she is weak and impotent, as
when she is strong, for she can promise no more then this you have heard, when
she is well dignified and in Taurus or Libra which are her own Houses, and
wherein she is essentially strong and dignified; a poor weak fellow in another
man's power and constraint without arms (there is no man but knows) is not so
able to rescue or assist his friend, as one that is strong, at liberty, and a
good Sword, or Rapier at his command.

Wherefore I must needs dissent from the Ancients in this point; for it is not
the Nature of a Planet simply that must be the ground on which we must judge
good or bad, for then Jupiter or Venus shall never be occasioners of mischief
in what ever house or sign they are placed; the which to affirm were ridiculous
and very erroneous, but this you have already sufficiently heard cleared; I
should therefore say when any benevolent Planet is thus posited in any sign
wherein he suffers detriment or any other affliction, that the evil threatened
will not be altogether so bad as was likely because the benevolency of the
Planet does contradict it; nor the good altogether so effectual, by reason the
Planet signifying it, is in detriment or otherwise afflicted; and therefore in
such positions as are these, let not the Rules of the Ancients and Tradition,
lead you wholly beyond the bonds of reason and sense for thereby you shall not
avoid rendering your self both irrational, weak and senseless.

Venus Lady of the year in Taurus.
Venus in Taurus Lady of the year denotes prosperity, health and gladness unto
all men in general under that Revolution, and in those places subject unto
Taurus, especially in the Southern parts, plenty of provision, and the fruits
of the earth, pleasant wholesome air and moderate showers and blasts of wind,
safety to women with child, and also to all cattle for the use of man,
especially the greater sort, and the year generally happy; but it will not be
altogether so good if she be impedited, retrograde, combust or the like,

Venus Lady of the year in Gemini.
Also if Venus be in Gemini, and Lady of the year, well aspected of the Fortunes
and free from Retrogradation, impedition, combustion and other such like
impediments and the aspects of the Malevolents, the bodies of men shall be
healthy, safe and sound; the air temperate, good and wholesome; the fruits
pleasant, profitable and plentiful; and the year generally happy, fortunate
and successful; But if she be afflicted by the malevolents, or otherwise
impedited, the contrary may thou judge, or so far as shall be agreeable to
reason, remembering your former Rules.

Venus Lady of the year in Cancer.
Again if Venus be Lady of the year and in Cancer in the like manner free from
impediment and well aspected or accidentally dignified, the Fruits of the Earth
shall be plentiful, the Sea safe and free from many usual Piracies and
Shipwracks, many comfortable, pleasant, necessary showers, and men shall
generally be healthy, successful and prosperous: But if she be afflicted it
will not be so well by so much as she is afflicted, etc.

Venus Lady of the year in Leo.
Moreover if she be Lady of the year and strong or accidentally dignified and in
Leo, many Diseases, Wars and Discords shall be abated and taken away; also men
shall delight themselves in such things and Recreations as are of the nature of
Venus; But if she be weak, impedited or afflicted, it will not be so well.

Venus Lady of the year in Virgo.
And if she be in Virgo and well dignified as abovesaid, the year (as say the
Ancients) shall be fruitful, and plenty of all things of the earth is thereby
promised, safety also to seeds and grain, and that men shall generally be
healthful.

I should judge that the year would not be very scarce, because the Lady of the
year is Venus one of the most fortunate Planets, nor very fruitful, or
plentiful, because she is in her fall but so so; and indifferent both for
plenty of fruits and health of body; But if she be afflicted, it will be so
much the worse.

Venus Lady of the year in Libra.
Again if Venus be Lady of the year and in Libra free from retrogradation,
combustion and other impedition and aspects of the Malevolents, although not at
all beheld or assisted by the fortunes, yet shall the Cities, Regions and
Countries be safe that are under the power of Libra and in good condition,
mankind also shall generally be healthful, and likewise the air; it shall be
also temperate and pleasant, also fruitful and plentiful in every thing, and
the people shall be generally happy, and free from all Thefts, Rapines and
Robberies, and dissentions, troubles and discords; and if she be assisted by
the benevolents it will be the better.

Venus Lady of the year in Scorpio.
But if she be Lady of the year, and free from all manner of impediment and in
Scorpio, she shall cause a pure, good and thin pleasant air, but somewhat
sharp, and shall lessen the heat of Summer and cold of Winter; as also
Diseases, and increase Provisions and Fruits of the Earth; and there shall be
little or no filching and stealing; But although these be the Rules of the
Ancients you are to remember she is herein in detriment, judge thou therefore
according as thou have been taught in the former Rules.

Venus Lady of the year in Sagittary.
Moreover if Venus be Lady of the year and in Sagittary well dignified
accidentally, she denotes peace and quietness amongst men in the Western parts,
also health of body and prosperity to men in general under that Revolution, and
in those places subject to Sagittary unless it be hindered by Mars, the earth
shall be fruitful, and the Winter somewhat abated of its cold; but if she be
afflicted by Mars or any other way judge the contrary, or at least not so much
good by the quantity of the evil afflicting.

Venus Lady of the year in Capricorn.
Also if she be in Capricorn free from all manner of impedition and be Lady of
the year, there shall during that Revolution be little or no War, Thieving,
Pillaging, Plundring or Robbing, little rain in the Eastern parts, and
abundance of provision, and the earth shall be fruitful and the year generally
successful; but if she be impedited, it will be nothing so well.

Venus Lady of the year in Aquaries.
Again if Venus be in Aquaries in any Annual Revolution, and free from
impediment, men shall be in a happy and prosperous condition during that
Revolution, and there shall be no abundance of rain nor snow, neither much cold
in Winter, the year shall be successful and plentiful, and people in a happy
condition and prosperous if Mars work not the contrary.

Venus Lady of ^^e year in Pisces.
Lastly if Venus be in Pisces free from the Malevolent aspects of the
Infortunes, and Lady of the year, there shall not be much cold weather in
Winter, nor much snow nor rain but what shall be necessary and convenient, and
that too in due Season; the Earth shall be fruitful, the year plentiful, and
the Sea quiet and safe from Shipwracks and Pirates: but if she be afflicted,
Retrograde or Combust, and beholding the Ascendent, she denotes Thunders and
Lightnings, also death amongst men, and pains in the eyes, and generally,
unless Mars hinder, they shall abound in all things that are produced by the
Earth.

CHAP. XX. Of the Significations of Mercury when he is Lord of the Year in any
of the Twelve Signs.
IN the next place we are to look what are the significations of Mercury, who
is the second of the inferior Planets, and the next under Venus, who if he be
Lord of the year and posited in Aries, Mercury Lord of the year, in Aries.
there shall be abundance of water and rain, and a scarcity of provisions in
the Western parts; he signifies also great winds, much dew, and many thin
clouds, also death to young men and women.

Now because he is of that quality that he participateth still of the nature of
that Planet in Configuration with him, it is requisite we have respect
thereunto; for with the Fortunes he is good, with the Infortunes bad, in his
own nature indifferent, and he is with the Masculine Planets a Masculine Planet
and of that signification; with the Feminine a Feminine.

Wherefore if Mercury be joined to the Moon either by body or aspect, it
denotes plenty of Fish; if to the Sun, plenty of Wine, and the safety and
prosperity of women, and so much the rather if Mars and Venus be then in
Conjunction or Aspect with the Sun; and if Saturn be in the place of Mercury,
he signifies very much rain and abundance of Waters; but if Mars be only then
with the Sun, he denotes pains in the eyes and much war and bloodshed.

Mercury Lord of the year in Taurus.
If Mercury be Lord of the year, and located in Taurus, he signifies many
showers and plenty of waters, and a destruction of Corn and the fruits of the
earth through diversity and change of air, pains and infirmities in the eyes in
the Eastern parts and the death of Great and Noble men, unless Jupiter or Venus
work the contrary by their benovolent aspects to him or to the Ascendent; but
if Mars behold the Ascendent, he signifies the death of Cows, and the greater
sort of Cattle, especially in the Southern parts.

Mercury Lord of the year in Gemini.
Also if he be in Gemini, and be Lord of the year in any Revolution of the
World, he denotes Wars in those parts subject to the sign, much snow, and
damage to the fruits of the earth, and plenty of wine. This is one of the mad
Rules of the Ancients; I would fain know why not a plentiful year for every
thing else as well as wine if he be strong; for this is his own house; and if
he be weak, how comes he to be so successful to Vines and nothing else? they
say also he signifies pestilencies and death, inflammations, swellings and
eruptions; he denotes also much dew and moist air: I believe, it should be a
wholesome good air, and health and prosperity to the People in general; the
Ancients say, if Jupiter or the Sun behold the Ascendent of the Revolution,
Pestilence and Sickness will be lessened, and that there will be a diminution
of these evils, and men in the Eastern parts shall be stronger and in a better
and happier condition then before; it is clear to me all this will happen
without their assistance, so Mercury be but free from impedition and the
malevolent aspects of the Infortunes when he is located in this sign. Reader,
thou may follow the Ancients in every thing they say if thou will, and be a
Drone for ever; for my part I am absolutely resolved to the contrary,
especially in these and such like whimsies of theirs.

Mercury Lord of the year in Cancer.
If Mercury be Lord of the year in Cancer, he signifies slaughter and bloodshed
in the Western parts (I believe it should be in the Northwest parts; a little
time and experience will soon decide the controversy) scarcity of provisions
and the fruits of the earth, mischief and detriment to Trees and Seeds, many
infirmities through Rheums, Defluxions and Swellings, and those chiefly in the
neck, throat, and breast, such as are Squincies, King's Evil, Obstructions and
stuffings in the pectorals, through thick, gross, tough Phlegm, unnatural
Swellings or Hydropical Humors in the legs: If he be joined by either body or
aspect to Mars and Venus both together, he denotes the murdering and
slaughtering of great and Noble men, or perhaps of such as are rampant in
authority in any Nation for which your Revolution is made; but if Venus and the
Moon be so joined to him, judge the contrary.

Mercury Lord of the year in Leo.
Also if he be in Leo, and be Lord of the year, he denotes excessive and
vehement hot weather in Summer; also hot and warm winds; also if he be beyond
the tenth house, viz. toward the seventh, he signifies impediment and damage
to those parts, or to that Quarter of Heaven, viz. Southwest, Southwest and by
South, and Southwest and by West, and a diminution or a scarcity of Provisions
and Fruits, but not an absolute Famine. If he be in any Configuration of the
Fortunes, the evil will be lessened by so much as the adjuvant Planet is in
strength, and the aspect in goodness; but if beheld by the Infortunes, by so
much the more is the mischief increased by how much the worse is the aspect and
power of the malevolent Planet; he also signifies the death of Lions, Wolves,
and such beasts as are ravenous.

Mercury Lord of the year in Virgo.
Again, if he be in Virgo, and Lord of the year, there shall be much rain and
plenty of Corn (and the fruits of the earth too, I may add) and there shall be
many Infirmities of the eyes and death in the Southern parts. I should truly
rather conclude (this sign being the house wherein he is both exalted, and
essentially dignified by house) contrary to the precepts of my Predecessors in
this most heavenly Science, that there will be a pleasant wholesome healthy air,
and a diminution of infirmities both of the eyes and other parts of the body,
comfortable and seasonable showers, and gusts of wind, and plenty of all
manner of fruits and provisions convenient for the life of man, unless the
malicious beams of Saturn or Mars prevent it.

Mercury Lord of the year in Libra.
Mercury in Libra and Lord of the year, denotes great and high winds, and if he
be free from impediment of the Malevolents (says my own Natural Reason) the
air shall not be so troublesome, and the year shall be pretty plentiful; yet
the Ancients say (without any exceptions) there shall be a diminution of
Provisions if he be in Libra; and truly I am of their opinion, if he be then
afflicted, otherwise not. If Saturn be either joined to him in this sign by
either Conjunction or Aspect, he signifies men shall be troubled with pains and
infirmities in the head and belly; (I know no reason why they might not also
have said in the neck, throat, back and reins) but if the Sun do then behold
Saturn, the malice and mischief of Saturn is taken away.

Mercury Lord of the year in Scorpio.
Also if he be Lord of the year and in Scorpio, there shall be much snow and
cold weather in those parts wherein such are natural or usual; also Wars and
Quarrels in the Northern and Western parts; and if he be beheld of Mars, they
will be rather Northern then Western; and there will be also much thieving,
pillaging and robbing, both by Sea and Land; the Sea shall be very turbulent,
and there will be many Shipwracks and mischiefs therein, also pestilencies and
contagious Fevers in the Northern parts (why not in those Regions and places
subject to Scorpio?) and all manner of infirmities and diseases of the eyes.

Mercury Lord of the year in Sagittary.
Much snow during that Revolution shall fall in Winter when you find Mercury
Lord of the year and in Sagittary, especially in those parts of the World where
such accidents are most usual, as also in the place under which your Revolution
is, an unconstant turbulent air, a scarcity and dimunition of the fruits of the
earth, and provisions for the use of man; and Wars and dissentions in the
Western parts, say the Ancients; but if it should prove in the Eastern parts, I
know no reason why we should so much confide in every thing they write.

Mercury Lord of the year, in Capricorn.
Again in Capricorn, Mercury signifies if he be Lord of the year in your annual
Revolution, Wars, Tribulations and Sorrows to the Southern parts and places
subject to the sign; this is if he be afflicted; but if assisted by the
benevolent aspects of the Fortunes, and free from all other impediments, the
year will be pretty fruitful and healthy; but if he be afflicted by the
Malevolents, judge the contrary.

Mercury Lord of the year in Aquaries.
Also if he be in Aquaries and Lord of the year or Quarter, he signifies many
Catterpillers and Locusts in such places where they are naturally, and
diminution of rain; also that men shall be molested with Plurisies and Pustules
or Eruptions in the skin, especially in the thighs; and this shall chiefly be
occasioned through corruption of the air, and several changes thereof; and if
he be then in a corporal Conjunction of Venus, there will be earthquakes in
that Revolution, especially if the Sun do then behold them or be joined unto
them; and if Mars also, or Saturn behold them with a Square or Opposition, thou
may be confident thereof, and that there will be pestilential Diseases, and
many Thefts and Robberies; and if Saturn be corporally joined to Mercury, there
shall be an increase of waters and rain.

Mercury Lord of the year in Pisces.
Lastly Mercury in Pisces in any annual Revolution when he is Lord of the year
or Quarter, denotes very much wind and rain in the Northern parts, also death;
Fish shall abound, and want of provisions and fruits of the earth; detriment
also to the Sea and those that converse therein, many Shipwracks, etc

Now although Mercury at time of the Sun his ingress into Aries cannot possibly
be in some of these signs (by reason he is never distant from the Sun above 28.
degrees, as you have heard in the sixth Chapter of the second Treatise of this
Work) yet may not any one conclude these Rules superfluous, and the Ancients
therein ridiculous, since as you have heard in the first Chapter of the first
Section of this very Treatise, it often falls out that there are four Schemes
to be erected, and sometimes two, for the judging of annual affairs in the
World; and therefore it was requisite that his significations should also be
known in any sign of the Heavens; for in these we shall otherwise be to seek,
etc.

CHAP. XXI. Containing the Significations of the Moon, when she is Lady of the
Year in any of the twelve Signs.
ALL that I have said from the 15. Chapter of this second Section has been but
(in a manner) merely reiterations, and an enlargement of such rules as were
more briefly delivered before, that the Students in this Art might be very well
versed in their rules, and perfected in the reasons and grounds thereof.

It rests therefore now we also handle the significations of the Moon in
every one of the twelve Celestial signs when she is Lady of the year; but I
must confess I am almost tired and wearied out with this kind of repetition;
wherefore I shall only in less bounds, [yet as largely and plainly as the
Ancients for matter of Instruction,] deliver unto you the ground of these
rules, and so proceed to the significations of the Dragons Head and Tail.

Know then that the Moon (as you have heard in the 5. Chapter of this second
Section) does denote all the good that can possibly be desired to the Commons
and People in general when she is Lady of the year and strong or well
dignified; if she be weak, the contrary according to her debility and
impediment you are to judge.

Well then when you see in your figure she is strong either essentially or
accidentally, look to the Nature of the sign she is in, and artificially
commixing their Natures and their strength therein, judge thou good to such
things and places as are by her and the sign she is in signified or understood
either naturally or accidentally as they are placed in the Heavens, according
as you have heard sufficiently before; if she be weak, judge the contrary after
the same manner.

For you must remember that the Moon in humane signs shows her events whether
good or bad on mankind, according to the Sex of the sign she is in; if in aerie
signs in the air; in watery, in the water; in earthy, in the earth; in bestial
in and upon beasts of the nature and quality of the sign; as if it be Aries, on
sheep; Capricorn, on Goats; Taurus, on Bulls, Cows, Oxen and the greater sort
of Cattle, and the like.

Neither ought thou to forget to make commixtures according to the nature of
the Planets in configuration or Conjunction with her at the time of the
Revolution; for upon the true and exact commixtures (which you have been shown
in the foregoing Planets, and therefore needless here again to make repetition)
depends the whole secret and key of the Art, and therefore let me here
admonish thee once more (although I have often already) to be perfect in the
nature and temperature of every Planet, every sign, every aspect, every house,
every dignity, every Triplicity, every exaltation, every term, every face,
every detriment, every fall, every essential dignity and debility of every
Planet in every Sign, and then thou have attained above half the Art, nay three
parts and three quarters (being divided into four) and therefore let the second
Treatise entitled An Introduction to the Judgment of the Stars, be read over
and over, which will perfect thee in these particulars, so may thou boldly
venture upon these two other Treatises, which will then be most easily
comprehended, and the greatest mysteries therein quickly attained.

And thus much shall suffice to be said of the significations of the seven
Celestial Planets in the 12 signs when they are Lords or Ladies of the year;
the same also should serve for Rules to the judging the Portencies of the
Dragors head and Dragons tail, but that perhaps (their natures having not been
before discussed, so much as have the Planets) they might remain obscure, and
the knowledge of the young Students therein defective; wherefore I shall yet
spend one quarter of a sheet more for their further instruction in this matter.

CHAP. XXII. Showing what is signified by the Head and Tail of the Dragon, as
they are placed in any of the Twelve Signs in any Revolution.
MAny are the significations of and therefore to particularize every particular
thing, would be both tedious, and in a manner needless, yet I hold it very
necessary you be well acquainted with their denotations in every sign of the
Zodiac in any Revolution, as follows.

If therefore in any annual Revolution of the World you find in Aries, in.
it signifies the rise of great and noble men, and the dejection and
suppression of vile and ignoble; and if be in Aries, in.
it shows the ill state and condition of noble and great men, and that they
shall be injured and damnified by the common sort of People.

If be in Taurus, it denotes the slaughter of Kings, Noble, in
Great and Rich men in the Northern parts, and in the Western parts many
controversies and Dissentions amongst great and noble men and the Pleabeans: if
be in Taurus, in.
it signifies little Piety or Mercy in men and women, and many troublesome and
unprofitable journeys in the same parts.

in Gemini shows sicknesses and diverse infirmities to Rich and Noblemen, in.
or such as are the Grandees of the earth, which shall happen through
tempestuous and noysom gales of wind, earthquakes, and unwholsom infectious
Mists; it signifies also Wars and Dissentions betwixt great and rich men, and
men of a middle degree, and that the Trees shall be much damnifield by
Catterpillers, and such like Worms. If be in Gemini, the Commons shall be
exalted and elevated, in.
and they shall spurn at, and despise their Superiors and Rulers, and endeavor
to get all power and authority into their own hands.

Also if be in Cancer, in.
it denotes honorable and bountious acts of the King and Rulers toward their
People and Subjects; and if be in Cancer, in.
it denotes great mortalities and pestilencies, sudden deaths, fornications and
little or no justice, reason or honesty amongst men, the destruction of
treasuries, and the flitting of great and noble men our of one place into
another, also their sad condition and banishment through the works of their own
hands, as writing, or some other thing signified by the ingenious Planet
Mercury.

in.
Again in Leo in any Revolution signifies much lightning and apparitions in the
air, much damage trouble and vexation, and also infectious air: in.
Dragons tail in Leo, signifies a dark obscure air, earthquakes, increase of
waters and wet weather and destruction to the fruits both of trees and the
Earth.

in.
Also if be in Virgo, the fruits of the Earth and of trees shall be destroyed,
there shall be many Catterpillers, and damage and hurt shall pursue even those
fruits does of Trees, and of the Earth that are gathered into the Storehouses
or Barnes, and they shall suffer great detriment: and if be in Virgo shame,
hatred, in.
and disgrace shall fall upon noble and great men, and there shall be much
dissension and controversy amongst them, Religious houses, and such as study
Divine matters, also shall greatly suffer damage, trouble and loss, many
discords, debates and quarrels amongst men in points of Religion and Faith,
Schisms and Heresies, etc.

in.
Moreover in Libra shows that Kings and the Grandees of the earth, shall
exercise their power and authority over their People, both against Justice and
their own Honor, taxing them with crimes, whereof they are innocent, and
imposing Taxations, and heavy extortions and burdens on them, insomuch that by
reason of their poverty, which they shall be reduced to, and their grievous sad
condition, they shall sink under the burden as not being able to sustain it;
but if be in Libra, in.
it denotes the mortality of fourfooted Creatures, especially those of the
smaller sort; also in Summer, extreme drought; and in Winter, very hard cold
weather; the Fruits of the Earth shall be destroyed, also the Seeds, Plants and
Trees shall be damnified, so that they shall produce little or no increase.

in.
Dragons Head in Scorpio, signifies joy, success and gladness to men of mean
degree, and sadness, grief and trouble to great men, and those in high degree;
also dissentions, quarrels and bloodshed amongst them (if other testimonies
concur) and amongst the common people, deceat, treachery and fornications, for
the which misdemeanors, they shall (many of them) fall into the hands of their
Kings and Rules; if Dragons tail be therein, in.
men shall be molested with many fevers and infirmities in the breast, catarrs
and defluctions in the throat, but noble and great men shall be safe, quiet and
in a peaceable condition.

in.
Again, if Dragons head be in any annual Revolution in Sagittary, the common
people of Babylon shall be afflicted by their King and Superiors, and suffer
many vexations and injuries by them; also their beasts shall suffer much
detriment, and those that are in an hostile-posture, especially if it be in the
last fifteen degrees of Sagittary, it signifies also an hot and dry air, also a
thick and obscure face of heaven; in.
And if Dragons Tail be therein, it signifies the dejection of Noble and Great
men and their misfortune, but the rise of Ignoble base fellows, and the sad
condition of Judges, Counselors, Learned and Wisemen, espetially if
Dragons-Tail be in the first fifteen degrees.

Also if Dragons-Head be in Capricorn it denotes joy and gladness to Rich, in.
Noble and Great men, and their honor and preferment, but the dejection of the
base and Ignoble; in.
but if Dragons Tail be therein, it signifies Earthquakes and damages
especially in the southern parts.

And Dragons-Head in Aquaries signifies the death of religious men and such as
study the Law, in.
this to some few, but in one kind or other they will all suffer detriment and
vexation, in.
many Sects and Shismes shall also arise: and if Dragons Tail be therein, Kings,
Great-men and Landlords shall be very injurious and tyrannical over their
subjects, servants and tennants, and shall afflict, tax and grind their faces
beyond common humanity and honesty.

Lastly Dragons-Head in Pisces shows the honor and dignity of Great and Noble
men, in.
and of every man according to his degree; and if Dragons-Tail be in Pisces, in.
many Noble and rich men shall be subjugated and brought under the power of the
militia or men in arms, and be removed out of their habitations for their
faults, and much controversy and debates concerning Sects and the apperance of
some new Heresy or Schism.

And so much for the significations of the Head and Tail of the Dragon and what
we have to say in this second Section; Let us now proceed to the third and
hasten to a conclusion.

SECTION III. Containing some other necessary Instructions for the judging of
Events portended by any Revolution of the Years of the World; Also showing how
to judge of such Years as signify fertility, sterility, wars, peace, health or
sickness, alteration of and in the air, and of all other things foreknown by
the position of the Heavens at the Ingress of the Sun into the first point of
Aries.
CHAP. I. Showing the Significations of the Planets in their Exaltations, and
also in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Saturn or Mars at that time in any
Revolution.
IN this matter we shall have chief respect to the superior Planets, who by
reason of their magnitude and slowness of motion in comparison of the other, do
effect more forcibly and infallibly on the Elementary things of the world, and
bodies of men.

The signification of Saturn when in any Revolution he is in the point of his
exaltation.
We shall begin then with Saturn, being the highest as you have heard, who if he
be at the time of the Sun his Ingress into the first point of Aries in Libra,
especially the 21 degree thereof, which is the sign and point of his
exaltation, and receive the light and nature of Venus, he shall signify and
denote and be the forerunner of some great and most notable thing to happen
during that Revolution, especially in those parts subject to Libra and Saturn,
and men shall suffer much loss and detriment in their estates and fortunes, and
that his significations shall be of long continuance; but if Venus be
fortunate, Occidental, direct, free from the affliction of the Malevolents, or
other impediment, free from combustion and the Sunbeams, Saturn shall be the
portender of good, prosperity and increase of the Kingdoms and Powers in the
places subject to his dominion and the sign Libra; but if Venus be weak,
retrograde, unfortunate, afflicted by the Malevolents, combust, under the
Sunbeams and impedited, judge the contrary; but yet you may be confident of
some strange Catastrophe to happen thereupon, but the nature thereof will
incline rather to evil then good.

Also if Jupiter in any Revolution be in the 15 degree of Cancer being his
exaltation, fortunate and strong accidentally as being well aspected of the
Fortunes and no wise afflicted by the Malevolents, Of Jupiter when in his
exaltation.
and well aspected of the Moon, and she also strong both essentially and
accidentally there is no doubt to be made of it but that he shall be the
occasioner of some great alteration in Church Affairs and matters Divine and
appertaining to the Law, and that for the better; but if they be afflicted,
weak and impedited, judge the contrary, viz. that the alteration shall be for
the worse.

Again, if at the Sun his ingress you find Mars in the 28 degree of Capricorn,
being his exaltation, Of Mars when in his exaltation.
he denotes many and great Mutations, yet not altogether so notable and strange
as the two other preceding, and the nature and quality thereof shall be
according to his own proper signification, viz. wars, fire, combustions,
uproars, slaughters, thefts, rapines and robberies, and such like, unless he be
beheld of Saturn by a Sextile or Trine, and Saturn be then also well dignified
and free from all manner of impediment and affliction, or behold other Planets
of whom he is received and well aspected, and those Planets also fortunate and
free from all manner of impediment; but if otherwise, it shall be the worse.

Of the Sun.
There is nothing to be said of the Sun in this particular, who (by reason the
Revolution is still made by his return to the first point of Aries) can never
be in the point of his exaltation in any Revolution of the World: neither
indeed have I found any of the Ancients regard any of the inferior Planets in
this matter; only Bonatus testifies of Albumazar (a most learned Arabian in
this Heavenly Science) that in every Revolution of the World we are to have
regard to the exaltation of Mercury, which is the 15 degree of Virgo, and see
what Planet is then therein receiving Mercury, or Mercury him, for he shall be
Lord or chief Denoter or Significator of what is portended by him according to
his strength or weakness, as you have heard of the Superiors; for after the
same manner must you judge, etc. And truly I see no reason why we may not after
this rule judge of Venus and the Moon also.

Of the Conjunction or Aspect of Saturn with any Planet in exaltation, in any
Revolution.
In every Revolution see what Planet is in his exaltation, and how aspected by
either Saturn or Mars; for if it be Saturn, he shall cause much damage and
detriment and trouble to those Regions and Places subject to the Planet with
whom he is in Configuration; and if Saturn be in a fixed sign, and the Planet
also in a fixed sign, the evil shall continue so many years as there wanted
degrees betwixt the perfect Conjunction or Aspect; if in common signs, so many
months; if movable, so many weeks or days: but if one be in a fixed sign, and
the other in a common one, you are according to discretion to make commixture
of months and years; one in a common sign, and the other in a movable, make
commixture of months and weeks, or weeks and days, as you see reason; but if
by other testimonies thou find that the evil shall not continue after that
Year wherein your Revolution was made although the Conjunction or Aspect be in
or from fixed signs, yet shall thou give but months then for every degree they
want of the perfect Conjunction or Aspect: Note also, that if the Conjunction
or Aspect be by common signs, and thou thereby judge months, and the evil
still continue longer then thy time prefixed, then* shall thou convert them
into Years: So likewise if thou did judge days or weeks thy significators
being in movable signs and the evil still continue after those weeks or days be
expired, then art thou to say the continuation thereof will be so many months
or years, etc. for as Ptolomy in his Centilo. 1. says, A te and a scientia;
for though thou have the art to help thee, yet thou art not wholly to lay aside
discretion and reason.

But if any Planet by his body or aspect does frustrate the Conjunction or
Aspect of Saturn, then shall not the evil happen in the places subject to the
Planet in exaltation, but to those places ruled by the Planet so frustrating;
but if there be no frustration by neither the interposition of the body or
aspect of any Planet, but that Saturn do come by his beams to touch the beams
of the Planet so in exaltation, the evil by him threatened shall assuredly
happen in those Regions and Places subject to his Dominion, etc.

Of Mars in aspect or Conjunction with any Planet in exaltation.
Also if any Planet in exaltation in any Annual Revolution be beheld of Mars (as
you heard of Saturn) by a Square or Opposition, or else afflicting any Planet
by his bodily Conjunction, he shall denote very much evil, detriment and
damage to the people under his jurisdiction that is in exaltation; but if the
Planet so exalted be afflicted by Square or Opposition, it will be the more
grievous by reason the nature of Mars is to cause quarrels, dissentions, wars,
bloodshed and thefts which will then be incident to those parts; as touching
the durability of the time, you are to judge thereof according to the nature of
the signs your significators are in, as you have heard of Saturn, whether they
be movable, fixed or common, etc.

Consider also the position of the Sun and Moon, and see how in every
Revolution they are placed, and in Conjunction or Aspect with any Planet; for
if either of them be in any Configuration with any Planet in the whole Heavens,
they shall be joined in signification therewith; and note that if the Moon be
lately separated from any Planet according to the nature thereof, and the place
of Heaven he is located and has dominion in, may thou judge of what has
lately happened; but if he be applying to any, thereby may thou know what is
immediately to happen, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Significations of the Planets, and Dragons Head and Tail, as
also Blazing-Stars, when they are (in any Revolution) exalted one above another.
UNless I here remove a seeming obstruction or stumbling block, perhaps some
mistakes or errors might arise much to the damage and puzzeling of the
younger Student; which is this; In the foregoing Chapter you have heard the
significations of the Planets (especially the Superior) when in any Revolution
they are in the point of their proper exaltations; but in this Chapter when we
speak of their being exalted one above the other, we mean as to their places in
the Heavens at the time of the Sun his ingress into Aries; for he or she that
is nearest to the Cuspe of the mid-heaven or tenth house, is the Planet most
elevated or exalted, and shall have signification as follows; yet note that
it is not meant barely by the position of one above the other at that time, but
when any two are in Conjunction or other Configuration and elevated the one
above the other at that time, then I say shall their significations be as is
here expressed.

Contrary to the Ancients who begin in this matter with Venus, I shall as all
along I have done begin with Saturn, and so give you their significations still
in order as they are placed in the Heavens; as Saturn being in Conjunction,
Square or Opposition with any Planet, the Dragons Head, and Tail, or Blazing
Star, and exalted above them, we shall begin thus: Saturn exalted above
Jupiter, and then above Mars, and afterward above the Sun and so forwards; and
not as the Ancients have done who set down his significations as he is exalted
above the Moon first, then above Jupiter, then Mars, then Dragons Head, Dragons
Tail, Blazing-Star, and lastly Venus; omitting his significations when in any
Configuration of Mercury or the Sun, and exalted above them; which defect as in
this, so in the signification of the other Planets, I shall endeavor to
supply; for in the significations of Venus they have omitted Jupiter and
Dragons Head; and a Blazing-Star in the significations of Jupiter; the Sun in
the significations of Mars; the Sun and Venus, of Mercury, the Sun also, of the
Dragons Head, Jupiter and Mars, etc.

If you find not my opinion and judgment herein sufficiently grounded on
reason, you may follow what other you can find delivered unto you, which may be
more pleasing and agreeable to thy fancy, or remain ignorant as the Ancients
have left thee; but to our business:

Saturn in any Scheam at the time of any Revolution of the years of the World,
Saturn exalted above any of the Planets, Dragons Head, Dragons Tail, or Bl^z.
Star. Jupiter.
Eclipse, or great Conjunction, or at the time of the appearance of any Comet,
or Blazing-Star, or at the time of any Opposition of the Superiors, or any
other remarkable or considerable face of the Heavens, in Conjunction; Square,
or Opposition, or any other Aspect of Jupiter, and at that time elevated above
the Body of Jupiter, in the figure of the Heavens, Great and Noble men shall be
slain; if he be exalted above Mars, Mars. The Sun.
he signifies good, and better success; if above the Sun when in any of the
aforesaid Configurations with him, Let those Kings and such as are in high or
chief Authority in those Regions subject to the sign the Sun then is in look
for much trouble and sorrow, as also Treacheries and Treasons; If he be exalted
above Venus, Venus.
men shall delight in Pictures, Ornaments, and neatness, and addict themselves
to their Trades and Occupations and delight themselves therein; Mercury.
above Mercury, they will delight in Arts and Sciences, especially such as are
Ingenuous; above the Moon, Luna.
men shall be clownish and ill-behaved; Above Dragons Head, Great and Noblemen
shall have good success joy and gladness; Dragons Head. Dragons Tail. Blazing
Star.
but if above Dragons Tail, this felicity shall happen to the Commons; And if
he be exalted above any Blazing Star, when he is in any Configuration
therewith, men shall generally suffer poverty, penury and want anxiety and much
misery.

Jupiter exalted above Saturn. Mars. Sol. Venus. Mercury.
If Jupier be eaxlted above Saturn when in any Configuration with him, he
signifies much lamentation, weeping, howling, grief, trouble and sadness: Above
Mars there shall happen much grief and trouble to Men, also damage and loss if
above the Sun: above Venus, Women's affairs and business shall succeed well and
prosperously: and if above Mercury the Kings Officers shall be increased, and
they shall have honor, Luna. Dragons Head
profit, gain and praise: above the Moon, Noble and Great men shall increase
and abound in honor, prosperity and success: Above the Dragons Head he denotes
all good success and fortune: Dragons Tail. Blazing Star.
if above the Dragons Tail, depopulations and destruction of houses and
buildings; above a Blazing Star, it signifies that Noble men and such as are in
great esteem shall be slain.

Mars exalted above Saturn. Jupiter. Sol. Venus. Mercury.
When Mars is exalted above Saturn and in any configuration with him he does not
signify much hurt or mischief: Above Jupiter, great men shall agree to take
arms and kill one an other: Above the Sun, Kings and Rulers will go near to be
slain treacherously: Above Venus, men shall not care much for pleasures,
neither will women soon conceive with Child: Above Mercury, quarrels,
slaughters, and discords are signified: Luna. Dragons Head.
And above the Moon, Earthquakes, and those very violent: Above Dragons Head
he denotes good success, and prosperity, and honor to Great and Noble men:
Dragons Tail.
Above Dragons Tail, there shall happen Combustions, troubles and
inconveniences to Men concerning Plants and Vegetables; And if he be exalted
above a Blazing Star, Blazing Star.
there will happen many slaughters amongst men, and they shall delight to sway
and bear Arms.

The Sun is of that nature and quality, The Sun above any of the ^lanets, Drag.
H etc. Venus exalted above Saturn. Jupiter. Mars.
that by his beams any Planet is afflicted, wherefore when he is exalted so
above any Planet, he is the significator of much evil and mischief, excepting
Mercury strong and fortified.

Venus being exalted above Saturn, Men shall be perplexed with much grief and
trouble: Above Jupiter, Great and Noble men shall be in a prosperous and happy
condition, and all things shall succeed well with them: Above Mars, Women shall
willingly use the Art of Generation, and soon Conceive, and Men shall be
troubled in their stomachs through Surfeits and eating too much: Above the Sun,
Sol. Mercury.
men shall be lavish and expensive: Above Mercury, men shall domineer and
triumph one over another: Above the Moon, men shall have much joy and gladness:
Luna. Dragons Head
Above Dragons Head, joy and gladness to Great and Noble men, and all
prosperity and happiness; and they shall delight themselves with young Maids
and Virgins, Dragons Tail blazing Star.
and in Women's affairs; But if above Dragons Tail, judge neither prosperity nor
good; and if she be exalted above any Blazing Star. being in Configuration
therewith, she signifies that there shall be a scarcity of waters, and that
women shall not be in any great esteem, shall miscarry and come to many
misfortunes and mischances.

Also Mercury being exalted above Saturn, men shall go about to deceive, cheat,
and betray one another: Above Jupiter, Kings, Great men, Merc exalted above
Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. So^. Venus. Luna. Dragons Head. Dragons Tail. Blazing
Star.
and those in power and Authority shall increase in health and Honor: Above
Mars, fear and terror shall fall upon men: above, Kings and Rulers shall be
famous, and addict themselves to knowledge and learning: Above, men shall
addict themselves to sports, and the study of Necromancy, occult and secret
Arts: Above the he signifies joy and gladness, and that men shall do wonderful
and strange feats: Above, there shall be many manifest thefts and robberies:
above it signifies men shall be scoffers and jeerers one of another: Above a
Blazing Star, men shall stay and destroy those that are Masters of their
Militia, and such as are in most eminent and chief command and best soldiers.

The being in any Configuration of, and exalted above him, Lana exalted above
Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol.
signifies evil and mischief, and that men shall be ill-conditioned one
toward another: Above, rich and noble men shall increase in health, wealth, and
honor. Above. Houses and buildings shall be destroyed by fire; also
Earthquakes and much bloodshed: Above, mischief and much evil; and take this
for a general rule, Let her be Significatrix of what you will, she ever denotes
mischief and misfortune if she be under the Sunbeams: Above, Noble and rich
Women shall increase in honor and esteem: Venus. Mercury. Dragons Head.
Dragons Tail. Blazing Star.
Above, men shall be wise, shall choose grave and judicious Counselors, and
shall make good Laws and wise Acts: Above, she signifies damage to Rivers and
Fountains, Springs, and water-places: Above, mortality and destruction to
beasts: And lastly, above a Blazing Star, she signifies loss of of substance.

Thus much of the significations of the Planets, when exalted one above the
other, and above,, and Blazing Stars, it rests therefore now to show you the
significations of them, being exalted over one another, and also over the
Planets, and so conclude this Chapter; according then to the same order we have
hitherto followed, we are to begin with, and then of the other two.

Now if be beheld of, and at that time exalted above him, Dra. H. exalted above
Saturn. Jupiter.
it stirs up Wars, and men shall delight to bear Arms: Above, Noble and rich
Men shall increase in honor and greatness, and all business shall succeed well
with them: Above, Soldiers and such as carry Arms shall be prosperous, in
esteem, and fortunate; Mars.
It shall also go well with Kings, and the Grandees of the Earth when it is
exalted above: And if it be above, Sol. Venus. Mercury.
it signifies that Women and Virgins shall be joyful and merry, and that every
thing shall succeed well with them in a general way: Above, men shall delight
and addict themselves to laying of foundations for Palaces Royal, Castles,
Cities, Towns, and Villages: Above the, Luna.
men shall have loss and detriment in their substance and goods: Above in this
nature it cannot be exalted, Dragons Tail.
(because (as you have heard in the 17. Chapter of the 2. Treatise of this
Volume) they are but Nodes, and can behold no Planet, because they have no
rays nor beams, but may be beheld by any Planet) and therefore in this, is
omitted; again if Dragons Head be exalted above a Blazing Star, Blazing Star.
it signifies tempestuous stormy winds and tempests, and those very often.

Dragons Tail exalted above, Dra. T. exalted above Saturn. Jupiter. Mars, Sol.
Venus. Mercury. Luna.
signifies the death and destruction of old people, and Monks, and Religious
men: Above, long life and joy: Above, sadness and vexation: above, much evil
and want of charity: Above, damage to Women, especially to young Maids and
Virgins: Above, evil to learned and wise men: above the, destruction to rich
men and loss of substance: Above a Blazing Star, It denotes damage in the
affairs general of women.

Now lastly, touching Blazing Stars, Blaz. S. exalted above Saturn. Jupiter.
and what may be predicted by their being exalted above the Planets, and; A
Blazing Star then being in Configuration of, and exalted above him, signifies
many and great infirmities: Above, men shall kill and murder their Nobles, and
Great men, and such as are in esteem: Above, men shall usually delight to bear
Arms, and there shall happen many great wars and slaughters: If above, Mars.
Sol. Venus. Mercury. Luna. Dragons Head Dragons Tail.
men shall quarrel one with another, be treacherous and given to Treasons:
Above, a deminution and drying up of waters: Above, damage and destruction to
young men: Above, loss and damage to men in general in their substance: Above,
Noble men shall be slain, and such as are in esteem: Above, there shall happen
loss and destruction to fruits of the Earth and Trees.

CHAP. III. Containing Considerations from the Sun and Moon when the Revolution
is either Diurnal or Nocturnal, also when the Revolution happens at Sunsetting
and break of day; from the Lord of the hour, Part of Fortune, the indisposition
of Saturn and Mars, from their Conjunction with the Dragons Head and Tail in
any Annual Revolution.
DIligently thou art to observe whether the Revolution in any year be by night
or by day, viz. Diurnal or Nocturnal; and if it be Diurnal, have regard to the
Sun, If any Revolution be Diurnal.
how and where he is posited in the figure at the time of the Revolution, and
how aspected of the Fortunes or Infortunes; for if he be well aspected by
benevolent and adjuvant Planets, it signifies according to the nature and
signification of the Planets aspecting him and the nature of the signs they are
in; if he be maliciously and unfortunately beheld by the Malevolents, judge the
contrary damage and evil.

For if the Sun be strong and well dignified and aspected, he signifies (the
Revolution being Diurnal) the accomplishment of some high and remarkable
action; see also if the Lord of the then Ascendent be strong essentially, and
accidentally well aspected; for if so, he shall signify prosperity, health and
happiness during that Revolution to those Regions, Cities, Towns and Places
subject to the sign which is then upon the Cuspe of the Ascendent, also to that
Kingdom or Nation for which the Revolution is made, and the Kingdoms, Regions
and Places subject to the Lord of the Ascendent; but if he be weak, afflicted
and impedited, he shall signify trouble, vexation, misery, detriment and very
much unhappiness (according to the quantity and quality of his affliction) unto
those aforesaid places subject to the Lord of the Ascendent and sign thereof.

And if the Ascendent be Libra, and Venus who is Lady thereof be cadent from
it, or from an angle, impedited, retrograde or combust, afflicted by the
Malevolents or any other ways unfortunated, it signifies there shall happen
sadness, vexation, trouble, misery, and many infirmities and destruction in an
high measure to all those Regions, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms and Nations under
the dominion of Venus and Libra; what those are you are taught in the second
Book; and so likewise judge of any other Planet and Sign in the same nature.

If the Revolution be Nocturnal.
But if the Revolution be Nocturnal, you are to have regard to the place and
strength of the Moon, as you have heard of the Sun, and judge accordingly; for
if the Moon be Lady of the Year; or of the Ascendent, increasing in light and
motion, in Cancer well dignified and aspected of the benevolent Planets, you
shall judge the Year will be successful, the people generally healthful,
fortunate and happy; but if she be weak, impedited, afflicted of the malevolent
Planets, slow in motion, decreasing in light and impedited, judge the contrary,
and that this good or evil shall chiefly be incident to those Regions and
Places signified by her and Cancer, etc. but if she be not in Cancer, look to
the Planet that is then her dispositor, viz. [he that is Lord of the sign
wherein she is] and see whether he be essentially or accidentally debilitated
or assisted, and accordingly judge as you have heard of the Moon good or bad,
as he is strong or weak, and that it shall happen to the places subject to the
sign ascending, the Lord thereof, and to the sign wherein the Moon is, and its
Lord, as also the Region for which your Figure is erected.

See also if the Moon (the Revolution being Nocturnal) be either in Conjunction
or aspect with Saturn (or any other malevolent Planet if in your Figure you
find him also accidentally significator of mischief and impediment) without any
reception either of house, exaltation, triplicity, term or face, and the Moon
decreasing in light; for if so, the mischief and misfortune is so much the more
increased, as is the nature and signification of the afflicting or impediting
Planet; but if the Moon be separating from the Conjunction or aspect of any
afflicting and unfortunate Planet, and be increasing in light and motion, the
evil will be so much the more lessened and diminished, etc.

The nature of any affliction, and from whence it shall arise.
If you would know the nature of the affliction threatened or portended by any
Planet afflicting or impediting your significator, you need do no more then
this; see to the natural signification of the afflicting Planet, and also
accidental as he is placed in your Scheme, the nature of the house and sign he
is placed in, and so judge accordingly; judge the evil shall proceed from the
signification of the house wherein the afflicting Planet is located; the nature
and quality thereof from the natural and accidental signification of the Planet
and sign wherein he is.

As for example, we shall suppose your significator to be the Lord of Year or
Ascendent, the Planet afflicting to be Mars and he Lord of the seventh and
located in the second; from hence you shall conclude that the people of the
Nation for which the Revolution is made, signified by the Lord of the Year or
Ascendent, shall be afflicted and damnified in their estates and riches, being
afflicted in or from the second house (which you know denotes the wealth and
riches of the people) therefore from hence shall the evil or mischief threatened
proceed: Now as touching the nature thereof, or manner how it shall come to
pass, you shall say it shall be by the sword, thefts, wars, murders and the
like, which are the natural significations of Mars; or else by the power or
treacherous plots of their Enemies, which is his accidental signification as
being Lord of the seventh, which you have heard is the house of Enemies, etc.
or if the sign of the second be Libra, and Mars therein, look to his
significations in Libra, as you have been taught in the seventeenth Chapter of
the second Section of this same Treatise and say it shall be occasioned so and
so as you have it there expressed; in like manner if it be any other sign or
any other Planet, judge according as you shall see most requisite and agreeing
to art and nature; if the afflicting Planet be in the third, the evil shall
proceed from short journies, neighbors, kindred, or brothers and sisters or
associates; if in the fourth, from fathers, heritages, loss of possessions,
houses, farms, or destruction of seed and fruits, etc. judge still according to
the nature of the house wherein your afflictor shall be found, which you have
been taught elsewhere sufficiently.

How to judge of any thing signified by the 12 houses of Heaven.
Having hereby now fully declared unto thee the manner how thou may exactly
and truly judge of the state and condition of what is signified by the Lord of
the Ascendent, so also is it requisite to acquaint thee that thou may
(following the same method) judge of what is also signified by the Lord of the
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and so round the whole Heavens of every
thing appertaining to the life of man in a natural way, there being nothing in
the world but what is signified by one house or other, and by which a man may
judge of the quality and nature thereof.

As if the Lord of the second house be strong, free from misfortune and
impediment, judge the good success of all things thereby signified, and to all
Nations and Places subject unto the sign thereof and its Lord; but if
unfortunate, impedited, weak and afflicted, judge mischief, trouble, crosses
and losses, etc. according to the signification thereof, and the aforesaid
Places and Regions under the sign and Lord thereof; and so (I say) may thou
easily in this manner judge of any other thing, still remembering to derive your
Judgment from the signification of the house, nature of the Planet afflicting
or assisting, and that the good or evil will be incident to those Regions and
Places subject to the sign and Lord thereof, etc.

If the Revolution be at Sun setting or day breaking.
Look also that if your Revolution be at the time of the Sunsetting, or within
an hour and half thereof, you regard not the position and fortitudes of the
Sun, but of the Moon who is the Governess of the night, which does then
immediately succeed: In like manner if the Revolution be about the same time
before break of day, the Sun is to be considered in the same manner as you have
been shown, and not the Moon, it being so near day-breaking; and over and above
what has been delivered unto you, you are in the consideration of the strength
of either the Sun or Moon, to see if either of them are to suffer an Eclipse
during the time of that Revolution; and if so, to look to the place thereof,
viz. in what house of Heaven, in what sign and degree of the Zodiac, and the
Almuten of those places, and the state of those Planets in Configuration with
him, or the place of the Eclipse, viz. whether they be strong or weak; good or
bad, and accordingly judge; but of this more in the next Section, wherein we
shall treat of Eclipses.

Considerations from the Lord of the hour, Part of Fortune, and its Dispositor.
Again, you must know that in every Revolution the Lord of the hour, or Planet
ruling the time in which the Revolution is made, is to be regarded, as also
Part of Fortune and its dispositor; for if they be well dignified, well placed
and aspected of the fortunate and adjuvant Planets, thou may assuredly
conclude that the good signified by the Lord of the Year, or significator of
the King, shall be augmented, if the Lord of the Year or significator of the
King do denote any good; but if they portend evil, and the Lord of the Year,
Part of Fortune and its dispositor be also ill disposed, unfortunate and weak,
the mischief shall be also augmented; but if then the Lord of the hour, Part of
Fortune and its dispositor be strong, the mischief shall be diminished, and so
on the contrary if they be weak, and the Lord of the Year strong, and also the
significator of the King, they shall diminish the good by them signified.

Considerations from the Position of Saturn and Mars.
Consider also in every Revolution the position of Saturn and Mars, and see if
Mars be then stationary to retrogradation, and in Conjunction with Saturn, or
Saturn applying to him whilst he remains stationary, or Mars unto him when he
becomes retrograde; for if so, thou shall assuredly judge there shall be much
fierceness, cruelty, barbarous and outrageous actions amongst men, and little
or no piety, or mercy, but Malefactors, Thieves, Cutters, Murderers and
Robbers by the Highway shall abound, and servants and the rural sort of people
shall be disobedient to their Masters and Superiors; and it shall be the worse
if Saturn be in Libra retrograde, and in Opposition of the Sun, and the Sun in
aspect with Mars, and Mars by his retrogradation also applying to the Sun (for
you must know that the superior Planets cannot apply to any inferior Planet,
except when they are retrograde) and the evil will be yet the more increased if
Mars be then peregrine and going to the Conjunction of Saturn, and the
Revolution be at Sunsetting, or near thereunto, viz. a little before or after;
also when these Configurations are in any Revolution, some of the Ancients have
concluded there will be many wars, quarrels, discords and much bloodshed in the
Cities and Regions of both the East and West; and truly my opinion also is that
there will thereon assuredly happen many commotions, intestine wars and
bloodshed in many parts; those places chiefly I conceive will be concerned in
it that are subject to both Saturn, Mars and the signs wherein they are then
located.

From the Conjunction of Dragons Head with Saturn. Dragons Head in Conjunction
of Saturn in Aries.
Again, see whether the Dragons Head in any Annual Revolution be in with, for
then shall thou conclude much mischief and detriment to those Regions and
Places subject to the sign wherein the is, unless the benevolent aspect of some
fortunate Planet prevent it: for if they be in in they shall denote evil and
mischief to Sheep and the smaller sort of Cattle, unless the or of intervene,
and he well dignified essentially; also much anxiety, vexation and trouble to
Kings, Nobles and great men, if behold them not with a good aspect, and be also
fortified, or else the Lord of the tenth.

Dragons Head, Saturn, Conjunction in Taurus.
And if be in with in, the evil shall happen to Oxen, Bulls, Cows, and the
greater sort of Cattle, Horses, etc. also in some sort to Sheep, and to young
Men and Youths, Herbs, Plants and Trees; there shall be little rain, and a
diminution of provisions and fruits of the earth, if and prevent not.

Dragons Head, Saturn, Conjunction in Gemini.
In Gemini if they be in Conjunction, because it is a humane sign, there shall
much evil and mischief fall on mankind, especially those in their younger
years, but those in the strength of years, not so much nor on such as are well
stricken in age; there shall also be many great winds and abnoxious.

In Cancer such places as are subject to Locusts and Caterpillars shall abound
therewith, and where rain is no novelty there shall be much more then is
usual;, in in.
the fruits of the Earth also shall suffer much damage by Locusts and such
kind of obnoxious creatures, unless aspected by Luna or Jupiter.

And if they be in Conjunction in Leo, the evil shall fall on wild and savage
beasts,,, in.
also on Kings and Great men, if the Sun does not with some benevolent Aspect
behold them.

Also if they be in Conjunction in Virgo,, in.
damage is threatened to women and chiefly to the younger sort, and also young
men will not be wholly free; Seeds, Corn* and such fruits as are reduced to
seed, will be diminished, or there shall be a scarcity thereof, by reason they
shall be much damnified, for you must know this is an earthy sign.

Again, if in Libra, which is an aerie and humane sign,,, in.
it shall happen to men and in the air, and that chiefly to those of mature
years, and such as are of a good age, and not to the younger sort; and there
will be many great and high winds, if Saturn or Venus contradict it not.

Moreover if they be in Conjunction in Scorpio,,, in.
the mischief shall happen to such creatures as are of a poisonous and venomous
nature, especially to Scorpions.

Also if Dragons Head and Saturn be in Conjunction in the first fifteen degrees
of Sagittarius (which is humane) the impediment or mischief shall happen to
mankind; but in the last fifteen degrees on great Cattle,,, in
especially on Horses and such as men ride on.

In Capricorn on Goats and such like,, in.
and the fruits of the Earth will suffer detriment, but not altogether so much
as when they are joined in Virgo; also grievous cold and sharp weather if Mars
work not to the contrary by his Aspect unto them.

In Aquaries on ancient and old men,,, in.
and not to those in their prime and strength of age and youths or young men.

And in Pisces on such creatures as live in the element of water,,, in.
especially such fishes as are usually eaten by men, if Jupiter or Venus
prevent not.

And if Dragons Head be in Conjunction with Mars in any of the twelve signs,,,
in any of the 12 signs.
he shall signify also much evil, but not so much as Saturn does, and it shall
chiefly be by heat and drought, unless Jupiter or Saturn work to the contrary.

Also in Conjunction with Dragons Tail, be it in what sign it will,,, in any of
the 12 signs.
he signifies destructions, depopulations, fire, sword, slaughter and great
bloodshed, famine also and much mischief.

So likewise if Saturn and Dragons Tail be in Conjunction in any sign,,, in any
of the 12 signs.
he signifies famine, a scarcity of provisions, great mischiefs, cold in the
extremity, grievous fears, anxieties, terrors and troubles, much want and
scarcity of the fruits of the Earth, and a superfluity of evils, torments and
grievances; and these shall be incident to those places subject to the sign
wherein they are joined, and understand the same of Mars when he is joined with
either the Head or Tail, etc.

CHAP. IV. Teaching how to judge of the evil of any year, the nature thereof,
and when the year is most likely to be both turbulent, obnoxious, and
unfortunate, also what is portended in any Revolution when one Planet transfers
his light and nature to another.
EVer when you would know what grievous and heavy accidents and evils are to
happen, or are threatened to any place, look to the Position of Saturn and Mars,
for from them are you to require judgment touching this matter, for if you find
them in the higher circle, viz. in the middle thereof toward the North, and
they have then Septentrional latitude, and be above the earth, thou shall judge
there will grievous and horrible actions happen in that Revolution, or before
the Sun enter again the first point of Aries, in and to those parts under the
Sign and Triplicity wherein they are; also look how much they are elevated
above the earth, (especially Saturn) and they shall signify so much the more
mischief and trouble, and the more certain will your judgment be; also when
they are in the superior part of the Circle, they denote a hard and scarce
year, both for provisions, fruits of the Earth, and all things else.

And if one be in a Square of the other, it will be the worse in every
particular, also Iefections to and in all kind of living creatures,
tribulations and troubles, and that of continuance and durability, and so much
the rather if Saturn be then in Virgo, and Mars in Gemini, and the Revolution
Nocturnal, and Mars applying or translating his light and nature to Saturn, and
he receive him and either, both or one of them Retrograde: and Saturn shall be
then most mischievous, In so much that Jupiter shall not be of sufficient
efficacy to alter it, unless Saturn or Mars be in Cancer in a Sextile or Trine
of Jupiter, and he strong and well dignified at that time, and then he shall
break his malice with whom he is aspected, and diminish it or wholly take it
away, which you may judge from the strength of your Significators.

The affairs also of the King or Grandees of the Nation where your Revolution
is, and their condition shall be bad and suffer detriment, and much trouble and
difficulty there shall be in or about them, and they shall require aid and
assistance from the common people, Religion shall be slingted and impiety and
wickedness shall increase amongst men, and no mercy or pity shall be found
amongst them, and this shall continue till either Saturn or Mars transite the
cusp of the tenth House at time of the Revolution, or shall then begin ad
continue, at least till Mars have made one Revolution through the twelve Signs
of the Zodiac.

But if then Saturn be in Virgo and Mars Aspect him out of Gemini (as has been
said) and the Moon also translate her light to Saturn and she in Sagittarie,
there shall be misery upon misery, the mischief of mischiefs, the trouble of
troubles, the tribulation of tribulations, the pestilence of pestilencies, and
the misfortune of misfortunes, and all kind of vexations, troubles and
torments, also it signifies the destruction of Kingdoms, and translation of one
Kingdom into the power and under the subjection of another.

Moreover if the Moon when she translates her light and nature to Saturn,
either by Conjunction, Square or Opposition, and the Lord of the Sign wherein
she is when there is a Partil Conjunction, Square or Opposition betwixt them,
be then impedited, unfortunate, weak or afflicted, there shall be many
diversities of mischiefs during the time of that Revolution; and if then the
Moon were eclipsed at the Preventional, or to be eclipsed at the Postventional
full Moon immediately going before or coming after any such Configuration, the
mischiefs and troubles threatened shall continue so many months as the Moon is
or shall be ecclipsed hours, reckoning from the minute she first begins to be
ecclipsed till the Punctum wherein she is again free.

But if Part of Fortune be Impedited, and its dispositor when the Moon is so in
Conjunction or aspect partil of Saturn, the evil thereby signified or
threatened shall be increased; have regard also to the Sun how he is placed,
dignified and aspected by the Malevolent Planet, or by what Aspect he beholds
him, (as you have heard of the Moon) and the Lord of the Sign in which he is at
the time of the Partil Conjunction or Aspect, and make Part of Fortune and its
Dispositor participate in signification therewith, and judge accordingly
mutatis mutandis, as you have heard (I say) of the Moon; and if the Sun was
eclipsed, or to be eclipsed at the Preventional or Postventional Conjunction of
the Luminaries or change of the Moon (to speak plainly) the evil then
threatened shall continue so many years as the Sun is at that time eclipsed
hours.

Also when any Planets behold one another, and be in any Reception, look in
what place in the figure they project their rays or beams; for those places
subject to the sign wherein they cast their rays, shall suffer such things as
are by those Planets signified, whether good or bad, more then any other place.

And if one planet transfer his light, Nature and Virtue to another, you are
diligently to weigh their natures and significations, and judge accordingly as
you have been before sufficiently shown; as if the Significator of the King
transfer his light and Nature to Saturn, and he also well disposed, such people
and religious orders and things which you have heard elsewhere signified by
Saturn, shall be bettered, and receive good from the bounty or liberality of
the King or Superiors; If to Jupiter, Nobles, Judges, and such as converse in
the Law, and are signified by him, shall receive honor, liberty, and much good
from the Kings hand, etc. And so judge if any other Planet and if any other
Significator transfer his light to any, remember the Nature of your
Significator; transfering his light, and the Natural and Accidental
signification of the Planet to whom it is transferred, and judge according
thereunto and you are right, and will soon be able to judge of any matter
mutatis mutandis, varying your rules according to Art.

And thus far have I in a manner reiterated rules and words for thy through
understanding and instruction in such matters as have been delivered in a more
short and compendious manner before, and indeed so much the rather, because
that though what was at the beginning of this Discourse set down, was
sufficient to and for any one that is any thing entered into this Art, yet would
it perhaps have seemed somewhat difficult to those who are as yet altogether
unseen therein, and therefore I hope this fault will be by the Judicious deemed
venial; Wherefore let us now proceed.

CHAP. V. Showing how to judge of health or sickness in any year.
THus then, if thou would be expert in this manner of judgment, have respect
to the Cusp of the Ascendent of the figure of the heavens at the time of your
Revolution, and the Ascendent of the figures at the time of the Conjunction or
preventional Conjunction of the Luminaries before the Sun his ingress into
Aries; and then if these two Ascendents and the Moon be free from Misfortune,
and the Lord of the place of the Conjunction also free, and then applying to a
Fortune, as also the Luminaries beholding him, especially that of the time, viz
the Sun, if it be by day, the Moon, if by night; then it signifies that that
year shall be free from infirmities general, and diseases, and shall be
healthful; but if the Lords of these two Ascendents, and the Moon, and Lord of
the place of the Conjunction, and prevention, be all or the major part of them
unfortunate, it denotes general infirmites and diseases, and no healthful year;
and that according to the power of the unfortunate Planets, their nature and
the nature of the signs and places they are in; what diseases are appropriated
to both the Planets and Signs; I have sully delivered unto you in the second
Treatise of this Volumn, entitled, An Introduction to the judgment of the
STARS.

Also if the Lords of those two Ascendents, or one of them being so
unfortunated, apply to the Lord of the Eighth House, there shall be many
general infirmities and also death; but if otherwise, there shall be many
infirmities and general diseases, but not mortality, and if death, it will not
be great.

Moreover, if the strongest Planet of these Significators apply to the Lord of
the Eighth, there shall be many sudden deaths, without any great or tedious
sicknesses; also if to the Lord of the sixth, there shall be many infirmities
and general diseases, and those of long continuance: And if Mars be the
afflicting Planet, he shall signify hot and dry diseases, especially if he be
in a siery sign, and swift of motion: and if it be Saturn, he shall cause
lingering Agues, Coughs, Consumptions and Saturnian tedious diseases, especially
if he be in a cold and dry sign, and flow in motion.

CHAP. VI. Of Wars or Peace.
HItherto we have proceeded in a plain and easy manner of Instruction, for it
is my most earnest desire that knowledge may flow as a stream amongst all
judicious souls, especially those of this my native Nation of England; and
therefore I shall here again desire the more quick and nimble apprehensions to
pardon both my largeness and plainness, since I write to those that are
altogether to seek in these matters.

How to judge whether there shall ^e war in any year.
Wherefore then know, that years of War, Dissension, Quarrels and Bloodshed, are
to be judged from the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, as also from their
Square and Opposition, also from the Ascendent and Angles of the Revolution of
the year; for if these Superior Planets be either in Conjunction, Square or
Opposition of each other, or applying to each other by any of these
Configurations, wars are to be feared, and that they shall then begin when they
are in Partil Conjunction or Aspect, if they are in Angles, or else they shall
begin when Jupiter enters his exaltation or one of his houses, or any of the
Angles of the Figure at time of the Revolution; and judge that party to have
Victory that is signified by the Planet most elevated in his excentrick; for if
Jupiter be most elevated, and be exalted above Saturn, they shall overcome who
make insurrection or begin the strife.

Also if Mars be in any of the Angles at time of the Revolution, whichsoever it
be, he excites and stirs up wars according to his strength and power; for if he
be strong and well dignified, it will be the more certain, also the strife and
war will be the more invective and grievous; in like manner if he be in a
Square of Saturn or Jupiter, because these are the Superior Planets; for take
this for an approved Aphorism, that when any of the Superiors, viz. Saturn,
Jupiter or Mars (who are thus termed because they are above the Sun) are in
Conjunction, or any Malevolent Configuration one of another, there happens
great and manifest Alterations in this Elementary world, according to their
strength and natural and accidental Significations.

In what place war shall happen.
If thou would know where the war shall be, when in any Revolution or other
face of heaven thou see it threatened, have regard unto the sign in which Mars
is located, also the sign wherein he aspecteth either Saturn or Jupiter by
Square or Opposition; also in what sign and part of heaven, Part of War,
Bloodshed, or Contention falls, and say that in those parts signified by
those signs, the War, Dissension, Bloodshed and Strife will be, and so
accordingly judge, or by the major part. How to take Part of War. as also Part
of Peace, and all other parts requisite to be known, I shall not here mention;
the exact knowledge whereof would require a volumn by themselves, which (God
enabling me and granting me life and health) I shall endeavor to deliver to the
world, if I find the inclinations of men worthy of such blessings, and therein
also I shall endeavor to give them some grounds and reasons why the Ancients
have invented such variety of parts, and why they are of such signification.

See also if any of the Infortunes, or all, behold the house of Mars or Part of
War, with a Square or Opposition, or be therein, or behold the sign by which
the Nation, Town or City is signified for which your Figure is set, or the
Significator of the King or Nobles of that Nation, Kingdom or People with a
Square or Opposition; or be corporally joined thereunto; it signifies, that if
the King or that People have Wars with any, they shall be beaten and worsted;
or at least, possessed with much grief, sadness, trouble, sorrow and anxiety:
also if the Planet that is their Significator be combust, it signifies the
same; and if Retrograde, they shall fly from before their enemies, and grow
weakerand weaker, shall be indigent and cast down; judge also the same,
although he were at first well placed, and after a while becomes thus afflicted.

When the was or quartel will happen.
Again, if in any Revolution of the year Mars be joined to Part of War,
especially in fiery signs, it denotes Wars and Quarrels; and if Part of War be
strong and free from affliction, they shall overcome that begin and soment the
dissension and quarrel; but if it be weak judge the contrary; you may also
judge of the time when the War will happen, from the distance of Saturn and
Mars, if their Conjunction or Aspect be a forerunner thereof, or of any other
Significators, by seeing how many degrees they want of the Partil Conjunction
or Aspect, and giving a month, day or week to every degree, according as they
are in signs fixed, moveable or common, as you have been taught before; or else
you may have regard to the Planet denoting War, who if he be Direct, it will
happen when he becomes Retrograde; if he be Retrograde, say it will be when he
becomes Direct, or when his beams are joined in Configuration or Conjunction of
the Significator of the King; and if he behold the Significator of the people,
he signifies much thieving, pillaging and robbing, especially if the
Malevolent Planet be in an Angle; but if he be not in an Angle, but only in a
succedent or cadent, the evil will not be general, but only in such Towns,
Cities and places under the sign wherein he is, unless his beams be mixed in
Aspect or Conjunction with the beams of the Lord of the Ascendent; for unless
he have rule and Dominion in the Revolution, he shall not then signify
generally evil.

Also if Mars be in any of the Angles, and the Division apply to any term of
his, and the Revolution apply to the place where Mars was, in the last
Conjunction of the Planets preceding, or to the place in which Mars was, in any
great Conjunction, it signifies in that year fighting and quarrelling in those
places and Regions subject to the sign wherein Mars was, and the application
is; Dissentions and quarrels also are threatened when Mars is in Square or
Opposition of Saturn, and Mars received; but if Mars be not received, neither
Saturn, it signifies but little quarrelling; also if in any Revolution he be
under the Sun beams, he denotes Wars, especially if in a moveable sign, but in
a common sign he promises not much; and if Mars be in Gemini, in the Tenth
House, the King shall be very lavish and spend his treasure; Note also that if
the Lord of the Fourth be in the Ninth House of Heaven, it signifies the
prisons and goals shall be set open, and many Captives and Prisoners shall
escape.

Other rules for the predicting war, and how it wild be occasioned.
Moreover, thou art to remember, that in what ever Revolution of the World thou
look, Wars are still to be known and judged from Mars, who is the occasioner
of all dissentions, quarrels, wars, bloodshed and commotions in the Elementary
world generally; but if thou would know the Immediate causes and fomenters
thereof, look from what Planet Mars last separated before the Sun his ingress
into the first point of Aries; for although they be Fortunes, yet shall they
and such as are by them fignified be the occasioners thereof; as, we shall
admit Mars last separated from Conjunction or Aspect of Jupiter, from whence we
shall judge that Noble men, rich and great in power, authority and esteem,
shall be the fomenters of the War threatened; or Bishops, Pope, Cardinals,
Churchmen and Religious people, they being all Signified by him; In like
manner if it Venus, Saturn, the Sun, the Moon or Mercury, you have no more to
do then judge in the like manner according to their several Significations
which you are sufficiently taught in the second Book of this Volume.

When we may predict peace, victory, loss, damage, assistance; and from whence
the assistance is to ^e expected, and from what kind of men.
Now when thou have found in any Revolution, that wars are threatened, have
regard unto the Planet signifying it; for if he be direct and well dignified,
the war shall not continue or last long, but shall be broken by the King of
that Region for which your Revolution is, for it signifies a cessation of
arms, and that there shall be peace; see also how he is aspected and by what
Planets, and by how many; for many Planets beholding him, (especially being
then essentially strong) it signifies the people shall be in good condition,
shall be strong and able to defend themselves, and offend their enemies, shall
overcome them and have assistance from others, according to the nature of the
Planets so aspecting him.

But if he be retrograde, they shall be beaten, shall run away and be dejected;
and if stationary to Direction, they shall be strong and powerful in war; but
if stationary to Retrogradation, at the beginning of the war they shall be
strong, but it shall go hard with them in the end. In like manner have regard
to the Significator of their enemies, or those that begin and first foment
strife, and judge of their condition mutatis mutandis, as you have of these;
for if their Significator be direct there is a probability of peace, and that
to proceed from their desire and willingness, or if there be war that they
shall overcome; but if thou would know by what means they shall thus become
victorious, if thou find their Significator strong essentially, and not
beheld by any other Planet, say by their own strength and policy; but if it be
aspected and assisted by the benevolent rays of other Planets, their
Significator essentially not being very strong, say by the help of such as are
signified by those Planets so assisting and beholding their Significator shall
they become victorious; as if it be Saturn, say by the help of some King; if
the Sun, by some Prince or Noble man (for the Sun signifies rather petty
Princes then ^aturn) if Mars, by soldiers and warlike men; If Jupiter, by
noble, wise and discreet grave men; If Mercury, by scholars, and learned,
witty, politic men; If Venus, by riches or by some noble spirited women; If
Luna by Merchants, Sea men or the common people of any place; but if thou
would particularly know the place, or from what Country, Nation, or
Province, it is no more then thus, look to the Sign wherein your adjuvant
Planets, or Planet is, and judge according to discretion, that they will be
such as are of the Nation or place thereby signified, remembering that ancient
Aphorism ate and ascientia, for you must not judge impossibilities, or what is
contrary or repugnant to reason.

By what Nation or People the war shall be begun.
Again, If thou would know by what Nation or men the war threatened is to be
begun or acted, look to which part Mars seems to be assistant, remembering that
the ascendent, the Lord thereof, and Planet from whom Mars last separated are
Significators of the Kingdom, People or Nation wherein your Revolution is; the
seventh House, the Lord thereof and the Planet Mars next applies unto, are
Significators of their enemies: and that he is more assistant to that party
with whose Significator he is applying or in Configuration, or that which he
does more lovingly behold; for on whose side soever you find Mars, say that
that party shall be the beginners or fomenters of the war if he be direct, and
that they shall be valiant and stout, and turn their backs upon no enemy
whatsoever; but if he be retrograde it shall be occasioned by diverse men who
aim at the honor and applause of such actions as they are never able to
perform or are worthy of the name, yet attributing that unto themselves which
was acted and accomplished by others, shall boast of great and high matters,
but shall perform little or nothing, and lay the burden of the war on other
men's shoulders, and shall themselves only thieve, pillage and plunder, and cut
by the high ways; and if Mars be stationary (as abovesaid) the war shall be the
more grievous and hot, and the men more strong and courageous.

Have regard also unto Saturn, who stirs up most deadly fewds and
heart-burnings above any of the other Planets, when he is Significator of
dissentions and troubles, and that to those to whose side he takes: also
grievous troubles and miseries unto those Cities and Towns subject unto the
sign wherein he is, according to the signification of the house of Heaven he is
in, as if in the second, they shall be damnified in their estates, substance
and riches; in the third, in their small journeys, brethren and kindred, and so
(as you have been taught above) you may run over the signification of every
house of Heaven; if he be retrograde, he shall signify the same mischiefs
which you have heard of Mars, but they shall be more grievous and intolerable.

What may be expected when the Lord of the year, half year, quarter, month or
day are in good aspect, and reception of the Planet signifying war.
Know also that if the Planet denoting war be in good aspect and reception of
the Lord of the Year, he shall denote good during that Revolution, viz. peace
and no war; If with the Lord of the half Year or quarter, no mischief by war
shall happen that half year or quarter; In like manner, if he be thus in
Configuration with the Lord of the month and day, such mischief shall not
happen therein: and if this reception by either body or aspect, be in the first
seven degrees of any sign, the good shall be chiefly at the beginning of the
year and during the first quarter; If it be between the seventh and fifteenth
degree, during the first half year, If betwixt the fifteenth and one and
twentieth, in the third quarter; If between that and the end, in the last
quarter and later end of the year: In like manner judge of the months, days
and hours.

Whether the Enemies General be young or old.
The Ancients amongst other curiosities in this nature have given these rules
for the knowing whether the General or chief Commander of the enemies party be
young or old; have regard to the Significator of the afflicting Planet and
Significator of the enemy, and see if they be Oriental, for then it denotes
him young, especially if then the Moon be also Oriental; but if they be all
Occidental, he is old; but if one shall be Oriental and the other Occidental,
he is neither young nor very old but of a middle age.

I shall here now conclude this Chapter with this note, that all quarrels and
blood-sheds that happen in the World are generally occasioned by Mars, because
when he enters any angle, especially the fourth, he signifies there shall be
many quarrels and wars, and great slaughters and effusion of blood, and that
men shall delight to kill one another.

CHAP. VII. Of Fertility and Sterility.
How to judge of plenty in any year.
REason and Experience teaches us, that commonly after war comes a scarcity;
and after peace, plenty; and therefore these being their successors (as I may
say) or events, I have thought good in this Chapter to speak thereof.

Wherefore in this matter have regard to the Ascendents of the Conjunction and
prevention of the Luminaries to the Revolution and their places; and if the
place of the Conjunction or prevention apply to the place of Jupiter, and
Jupiter have dominion in that place, or if he assist the Lord of the Ascendent,
and the Lord of the fourth house at that time free from misfortune, and the
application of the Ascendent of that law or the change of Triplicities,
applying to the place of Jupiter or Venus by Conjunction or Aspect, there shall
be plenty at that year of such things as the earth does produce; especially if
the Lord of the second house assist or apply unto the Lord of the Ascendent by
a good and friendly Aspect; and this shall be the more assuredly confirmed; if
Part of Fortune have power and dignity there in that place, because those
signify plenty upon plenty.

Of scarcity or dearth.
But if thou would know when the year is likely to be scarce and unfruitful,
see if Saturn be ruler or disposer of the place of the Conjunction or
Opposition by Essential dignity or Aspect, or whether he be Lord of the
Ascendent or Almuten thereof, or afflict it by any malevolent Aspect, or be in
any Angle, and the Lord of the fourth afflicted of the Infortunes, especially
of Saturn; for if so, scarcity is threatened and may assuredly be expected,
especially if he be in Opposition of Mercury, or in any of the Angles of the
figures at the time of the Conjunction or prevention; or be in Square or
Opposition of the Lord of the second, Lord of the Ascendent, Part of Fortune,
or its Dispositor; scarciry may also be expected when Saturn afflicts the
Moon, or the Moon apply unto him by either Conjunction or Aspect, having last
separated from the Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun; In like manner, judge
penury and want, if either of the Malevolents afflict the year thus, especially
if they be in Square or Opposition of Mercury, but you must note that the evil
threatened by Saturn is worse then that promised by Mars, as the good promised
by Jupiter is much better then that signified by Venus; and judge the quality
of the good or evil promised or threatened by any of these, from their proper
nature and the nature of the sign wherein they are; as if Saturn be in an aerie
or watery sign, he denotes floods, inundations and many storms, tempests and
destruction by high winds; if in a fiery sign, drought, etc. Also note, that
if Mars in that Revolution in which the Lord of that Nation, Kingdom, Law, or
Commonwealth is exalted, be then in any of his own Houses, he shall signify
much rain; and if he be in any of the Houses of Saturn, little or no rain is to
be expected, and in other Houses a mean is promised.

CHAP. VIII. Teaching how to know the price of any thing in any Year.
A Tabarim amongst other of the Ancients has been herein most large; what is
most expedient to be known, I shall here set down, and as near as I can omit
that which may be superfluous

In this manner of judgment, you are to have regard to the ingress of the Sun
into Aries, from whence you are to require Judgment, as also of the Position
of the Heavens at every Conjunction and Opposition of the Luminaries every
month, and from the Conjunction preceding every Ingress, as well quarterly and
half-yearly as yearly, for all things happening in this World in a natural way,
are occasioned by the Stars, and may be known by the Position of the Heavens,
Stars and Planets at the time of the Conjunction and Opposition of the
Luminaries if rightly understood, so that by the Conjunction, the Generation
and beginning of things are judged, by the Opposition, the destruction and
decay thereof; for the Moon being nearest of all the Planets to the Globe of
the Earth, and the swiftest, does immediately convey unto it and men thereon
the virtue and signification of all the other Planets, and therefore we see by
reason of this her great power and influence, all things, as well Vegetatives
and Minerals as Animals, increase and decrease in vigor strength and growth in
some sense according to her motion, and that the corruption and generation of
all things are appropriate unto her and the Sun, and therefore by their
Conjunction and Opposition these things may perfectly be known unto us if we be
but searchers and contemplators of Nature and its Causes.

Now if thou would know what shall happen generally touching the price of any
thing in any year, have regard unto the Position of the Heavens at the Suns
Ingress into Aries if there be but one figure to be erected, but if two look to
their Positions at his Ingress into Aries and Libra, if four, or for every
quarter, at his Ingress into Aries, Cancer, Librae, and Capricorn; and if you
would more particularly make monthly observations thereon, have regard unto
the Conjunction of the Luminaries every month; and remember that the Ascendent
thereof, or the sign ascending at that instant for which you desire to erect
the figure of the Heavens, its Lord and the Planet or Planets therein located
are significators of the condition and state of Man and the Air, and you may
join also in signification with them the Dispositor of the Lord of the
Ascendent, if the Planets or Planet therein located be peregrine and afflicted,
judge mischief and detriment in these according to his nature, signification
and strength; and so judge the contrary if he be then strong and essentially
dignified.

If there be any Planet in an Angle who has dignity and power in the
Ascendent, especially Exaltation, he shall be the Significator of the price of
things, or any Planet in an Angle Essentially dignified and strong; and if the
Lord of the Ascendent be remote from this House and the Planet in an Angle
Peregrine, yet he shall be Significator as long as he is in that Angle; But
when the Lord of the Ascendent is in any of the Angles, or in the eleventh or
fifth Houses, he shall more manifestly show his significations then any other,
especially if he be Oriental and going from under the Sunbeams: ever take this
for a general and true rule, that what ever Planet you find fortunate in any
sign, words may suffice for sufficient instruction in these matters, yet may we
apply it thus

Look if the Lord of your Ascendent be received or disposed of by any Planet
and the receiving or disposing Planet be strong in an Angle, it signifies that
Corn and such things as are most necessary for the use of man shall be at a
high rate all that month; And the Dispositor of the Lord of the Ascendent in
Opposition of the Luminaries or that of the time promises the same; as also if
the Lord of the Ascendent be received or disposed of, and he together with the
receiving and disposing Planet be ascending; But if the Lord of the Ascendent
and the Planet in an Angle apply to any Planet Cadent, slow in motion, or
afflicted, the price shall fall; so likewise if the Lord of the Ascendent, its
Receptor or Dispositor be Cadent, weak and afflicted it signifies the same,
according to their affliction; if much weakened and afflicted, they will be very
cheap, if a little afflicted their price will fall but not altogether so much
etc. And if the Lord of the Ascendent, its Dispositor and Receptor do then also
apply to any Planets weak, cadent and afflicted, this will be the more certain.

See also what Planet you find in the Ascendent, for he shall have
signification with the Lord of the Ascendent, and shall according to his
strength or weakness denote the cheapness or dearness of provisions; But if the
Lord of the Ascendent be not received by any Planet, he shall not have
signification with him, but the Planet therein placed shall be Significator
only: If your Significator, or Lord of the Ascendent, (if he have
participation with him) and the Luminaries be in the Ascendent, or in any other
Angle at the time of their monthly Conjunction, the price of Corn and other
necessaries for the life of man shal-continue and remain as it was in the
preceding month; but if your Significator and the Luminaries be received and
strong, and be in the eleventh, or fifth, the price shall be raised, and that
according to their fortitudes; for if they be essentially very strong it will
be much raised, and so on the contrary: Also if the Planet in the Ascendent
apply unto the Lord of the Ascendent, the price shall be raised that day you
find your significators in Partil Conjunction or Aspect; but if the Lord of
the Ascendent and the Luminaries be weak and afflicted in the third, or ninth,
or twelfth, or eighth Houses, it signifies their price shall be abated and
fallen; But the Angles signify the fixation and durability of what is; If any
afflicted Planet also apply to the Lord of the Ascendent, judge the abatement
of the price, and that especially if the Lord of the Ascendent apply to any
Planet weak or afflicted.

Moreover if the Lord of the Ascendent be weak and afflicted, and its
Dispositor strong, yet shall not he by his strength signify any thing; for the
Lord of the Ascendent shall still be Significator of the price of things unless
he were in a Cadent House, and some Planet be then in an Angle (as has been
said) for then that Planet shall be Significator: Lastly, if the Ascendent be
any of the houses of the Luminaries, have regard unto them, and according to
their fortitudes or debilities and places in the figure and Configuration with
the Ascendent, judge.

Some of the Ancients have taught that we are to regard the Planet in the tenth
House, if any be there at the time of the Sun this ingress into Aries, or the
Planet applying to the Lord of the tenth, and make him significator of the
price of things; As if the Planet located in the tenth or beholding the Lord
thereof be strong and direct, such things signified by the sign wherein your
Significator is shall be deer and of an high price; but if your Significator be
weak and retrograde, judge the contrary.

Dorotheus with others say to know the price of things, look what Planets you
find at the Sun his ingress into Aries Oriental, and judge such things
signified by him, and the sign wherein he is shall be deer; and that those that
are under the signification of those that are Occidental and the signs wherein
they are, shall be cheap; In like manner have regard to every Planet, and see
which of them is strong and free from all impediment, and judge such things as
are signified by him and the sign wherein he is, shall be deer, and on the
contrary they shall be cheap whose Significators are weak, combust, cadent,
under the Sunbeams and Retrograde, etc. and so also according to their mean
betwixt those two extremes judge of the business when they are not altogether
so strong, nor altogether so weak; and truly this is very rational and for the
generality may pass current, yet may thou follow which most pleases thy
fancy, but I would recommend this unto thee.

Abrahamus Judaeus says, If Saturn in any Revolution or other time be not in
any of the angles, such things as are edible and most beneficial and useful for
man shall be cheap; but if he be therein, judge the contrary, especially if he
be strong and have dignity therein, for then he shall denote grievous penury
and want, things shall be so deer.

Messehalah says, have respect unto the Lord of the Ascendent and the Moon,
and if the strongest of them apply to any Planet in the Ascendent or
Mid-heaven, judge the price of provisions necessary for the use of man to be
high; and if it apply to any Planet in the seventh house the price shall be
indifferent; but if to a Planet in the fourth, received or the Lord of the
Ascendent, its Dispositor, or the Moon received by him, it shall be high; but
if they or either of them apply to a Planet in a cadent house not receiving
him, provision shall be so bad it will hardly be sold; but if they do receive
him, they shall be deer.

Haly says, have regard to the Lord of the Year who if he be going to
Retrogradation or be Descending in his circle, or be in the lower part of his
Epicycle, he signifies things shall be cheap and of a low price that are of
the nature of the sign wherein he is; so likewise if the Moon be either in the
Revolution of the year, quarter or month decreasing in light and motion, or
applying to a Retrograde or weak Planet, she signifies the same.

But as touching the cheapness and dearness of any thing, have regard to the
Ingress of the Sun into Aries, or any other quarter (if it be so that so many
figures are to be made) and therein diligently consider the state and condition
of the Planet and Sign signifying that concerning which you would require
judgment, and according to his strength and debility judge; for if strong, the
things will be deer and of an high price or value; and if weak, judge the
contrary.

Some of the Ancients have also taught that for monthly observations in this
matter we have regard to the Conjunction of the Luminaries, and Haly says that
we ought in every year to have regard whither Saturn or Jupiter enter the sign
of the Kingdom, Nation or Country for which you erect your Figure, and from
their then places, strengths and debilities we are to judge; for that if the
Planets are unfortunate in these places, it signifies things shall be cheap;
but if they be there fortunated and strong, judge the contrary.

Moreover you are to take notice that every Planet in his Exaltation or
elevated in his Epicycle whether he have dignity in the Ascendent or no,
signifies things shall be deer that are of the nature of that Planet and the
Sign wherein he is; and therefore I say again it is most requisite you be
thoroughly acquainted with the significations of the Planets and Signs taught
you in the second Book.

CHAP. IX. Containing some Instructions touching the alteration of the Air and
change of weather in any Year.
MUch pains and diligent observation is required for the delivering rules
infallible in this matter, I mean for these Regions and parts of the Earth
wherein we live being Islands; but doubtless the Ancients did sufficiently
treat hereof; neither is the validity and certainty of their rules which they
have left to posterity to be questioned; for such is the reason they carry with
them, that questionless they were most authentic and seldom or never admitted
of correction in those parts of the Continent wherein they lived; and perhaps
in these parts also with a little amendment they may be made infallible,
wherefore I shall here do my utmost endeavor to deliver them unto thee, and
perhaps hereafter according as I shall have life, liberty and leisure afforded
me, I may give you them more short, compendious and efficacious: For I must
confess the present Philosophers of this our age are more to seek in their
judgments of weather then in any one thing whatsoever and do oftenest therein
deviate from truth.

How to judge of the alteration of the air and change of the weather.
In the judging then of these matters have regard unto the figure of the Sun his
ingress into Aries, for the general judgment thereof for the whole year, if no
more Figures are to be erected; but if two, or four, (as you have heard in the
1. Chapter of this Treatise) you are to have respect unto them, to know the
state of the weather quarterly and half-yearly, but you are also to remember
you join in judgment with them the figures at the time of the Preventional
Conjunction and Opposition of the Luminaries; and if you would judge of the
alteration of the air for every month, you may have regard to the figure of
Heaven at the time of every Conjunction of the Luminaries; as also to every
Square and Opposition if you would predict of every week.

Of the chief and general signicator of the weather.
When you would judge of any of these times, have regard unto the degree
ascending of the figure, whither it be for the year, half year or quarter, and
the places of the Conjunction and Opposition preceding, and see in what mansion
of the Moon these places fall, viz. whether in a dry, moist, cold or temperate
mansion (the which you are taught in the 1. Sect. and 3. Chapter of the third
Book of this Volume being our Introduction to Elections) and whither the Lord
of the Mansion have any Aspect to the Conjunction, Opposition, Ascendent of the
Revolution, or Lords thereof; and of what nature, temper and quality he is, and
the mansion he is in. and accordingly judge of the state of the weather, he
being the general and chief Significator, especially if he be Almuten of the
Ascendent, for he shall (as says Ptolomy) be Significator though he does not
behold their Conjunction or Opposition, but if any other does, you must join
him in judgment with him.

Have regard also to the fixed stars of the first, second, third and fourth
Magnitudes, rising, culminating and setting; and see how they are aspected by
the Significator, and see whither any of them be in Conjunction with him;
consider their nature and mansion they are in; also have regard to the nature
and quality of the Lord of the place of any great Conjunction, or Eclipse of
any of the Luminaries; and to what Planets or fixed Stars they apply, as also
the Moon after her Conjunction and Opposition with the Sun, and as you find it
requisite, having regard to the major testimonies, judge of the nature, quality
and temper of the weather.

If your Significator be free from impediment, strong, no wise beheld by any of
the Planets, nor he in Conjunction nor applying by Aspect to any of them, nor
to any notable fixed star, you shall judge the quality and nature of the
weather from his bare signification; but if any Planet be in Configuration with
him, or he with any Planet or fixed star, you are to judge according to the
nature of your Significator, and the nature of the Planet or fixed star in
Conjunction or other Configura^ion with him by making a rational and judicious
commixture, and this shall happen at that time, and on those days wherein you
find them in Conjunction or Aspect.

As if Saturn be chief Significator of weather in an Angle no wise impedited
nor applying to any other Planet, nor any to him, he shows temperate showers
and seasons, dark clouds over-spreading the sky, especially if he be in a
temperate Mansion; but if it be a cold Mansion, the weather will incline to
cold; if a moist, to moisture: But if he be impedited or ill aspected he shall
signify storms, tempests, hail, rain, wind, thunder, and dark clouds,
especially if he be then malevolently aspected of Venus or Mercury out of an
Angle and in a moist Mansion; of Jupiter, winds, rain and thick clouds; of
Mars, yellow clouds, lightning, thunder and rain in places and time convenient;
of the Sun, red clouds, wind and great rain, also in Summer thunder and
lightning; according to the nature of the Signs, Mansions, and Places of the
Heavens their Conjunction or Aspects are: But you must know the Sun or Moon are
never assigned chief Dominion in any Figure concerning weather, because they
are general Significators of times and seasons; as the Sun of the Year, and its
parts, viz. Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, by his Ingress into the
Equinoctials and Propicks; the Moon of the months and weeks by her
Conjunction, Square and Opposition to the Sun, etc.

Your chief Significator being Oriental, will work his effects chiefly toward
the latter end of the Year; if Occidental, toward the beginning.

Moreover you are to have regard that you may be the better enabled to your
work, to the nature of of the sign ascending at any Lunation, time, or quarter
of the year, the Planet Lord thereof, and the nature of those Planets located
in the Ascendent, or in any Configuration thereof, and in what Mansions all
these are, as also the Planets in Conjunction or Aspect of the Moon; see also
from what house she is beheld, or in what house corporally joined to any, and
according to the major testimonies judge, if wet, wet; if dry, dry; etc. and if
the testimonies be equal, judge an indifferency.

Consider also the Angle the Moon is next to enter into; for if most Planets
are therein located, or cast their Aspects to the Cuspe thereof, or are therein
accompanied with the most notable fixed Stars, it is a sure testimony of rain,
and that general throughout the whole Region; especially if the Lord of the
Ascendent be in that Angle and chief Significator; also if the sign ascending
belong to the Dominion of Saturn, Venus or the Moon, or if they be in the
Ascendent, or behold it with any Aspect, it prenotes also rain and a moist air
and weather; Also if a Retrograde Planet (especially if it be one of the
Superiors) be with the Opener of gates, also when Venus is in any
Configuration of the Sun, especially Square Opposition or Conjunction, in
seasons convenient.

See also you have an especial regard to Mercury; for as soon as he changes
his habitude either in the Zodiac, or in his Orb though never so little, the
air and weather is altered; observe also to what Planet he is joined either by
Body or Aspect in the opening of gates; for if it be Saturn, he causes fierce
blasts, darkness of the air and rain; If Venus, clouds and shows in times and
places convenient, and so of the rest.

It is also an approved rule, that when Saturn goes out of one sign of the
Zodiac into another, the air and weather does immediately alter, let it be at
what time of the year it will, and sometimes causes thunder and lightning, and
very tempestuous stormy weather: Also when the Moon after any Conjunction,
Square or Opposition of the Sun applies to the chief Significator, or to the
degree ascending at the time of the same Conjunction, Square or Opposition, the
weather will he disposed according to the nature of the Significator in the
Figure.

What opening of Gates is.
Opening of gates is when a Planet applies to another who rules the sign
opposite to his house, or when another Planet separeteth from any and applies
immediately to another that has Dominion by house in the signs opposite to
those ruled by the Planet from whom he last separated; as for example, If the
Sun apply by any Aspect or Conjunction of Saturn, it is an opening of Gates (or
windows as it is termed by Moses in the 7. of Genesis 11.) because Aquaries which
is a house or Sign under the Dominion of Saturn, is opposite to Leo, which is
the house of the Sun; so likewise if any other Planet should separate from the
Sun and immediately apply next to Saturn, or separate from Saturn and apply to
the Sun, it is also an Opener of Gates; because that Planet transferreth the
light and nature of the Planet with whom it was last joined either by Body or
Aspect to the Planet it next applies unto, and so causes an alteration of the
air, as rain ever follows upon Opening of Gates.

Now you may soon know the Opening of Gates in all the other Planets, by having
regard to the houses and signs appropriated to each Planet, as you have been
taught in the 8 Chapter of our Introduction to the judgment of the STARS; But
if you please you may have regard to this following direction.

Any of these four applying to a.... or.
Of these three opposite unto them, or they to these, or any Planet,
translating the light of each to the other,
Is an opening of Gates, for that their Houses are opposite the one to the
other, viz.

to to to

rules and;, and;, and, and;,;,;, and according as you may see them places.

So that the Planet from whom any Planet separteth, opens the Gates of the
other to whom he applies; as if from Jupiter to Mercury, or they be in each
others Aspect, they raise fierce North winds; If Mars and Venus, according to
the season and place and signs they are in they shall denote rain, hail, snow
and thunder; If the Sun and Saturn, dark air, many clouds and much wet, etc.

CHAP. X. Showing how to judge of the weather by the Aspects of the Moon to the
other Planets, and by the several Aspects of the Planets amongst themselves.
Nota been
EVer remember you be wary in pronouncing judgment touching weather and the
alteration of the air; for in some places and Regions rain is more natural and
usual then in others, and again [which is wonderful] rain is never seen in
Egypt which is watered with the overflowing of the River Nilus only; and
therefore let your judgments be framed according to discretion, considering
the nature and quality of the Climate concerning which thou art to judge.

How to judge of the alteration of the air by the Conjunction or Malevolent
aspects of the Moon to the other six Planets.
The Moon in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Saturn in moist signs
signifies cloudy weather, cold, and moist air that day, and so according to the
nature of the sign judge; and if she separate from Saturn and apply to the Sun
by any Aspect or Conjunction, the weather will be tempestuous, and very hard
and uncomfortable.

If she be in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Jupiter either in Aries or
Scorp she denotes fair weather and white clouds; with Mars in watery signs
promises rain; in fiery, diverse colored clouds throughout the whole heaven;
In Summer often thunder. With the Sun in moist signs denotes rain, especially
if she immediately after apply to Saturn; In aerie signs and applying to
Jupiter afterward denotes a temperate air and moderate weather; In fiery and
applying to Mars, hot and dry weather and much lightning; If the Moon be in
like manner in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Venus, rain is threatened,
especially if they be in moist signs; with Mercury if she be so beheld, or he
so aspected by her, signifies rain also and wind, and that the more if she
then go to any Aspect of Jupiter, or from Venus to Mars, because these are
Openers of Gates as you have heard.

How ^o know the state of the weather by the mutual Aspects of the Planets.
Thus much of the Malevolent Aspects of the Moon with the other six Planets; now
it rests, we see also what may be predicted touching the alteration of the
air when the Planets are mutually aspected the one by the other.

Saturn then in Conjunction of Jupiter, in fiery signs signifies a great
drought; In watery, floods, continual rain, also inundations and overflowings of
water; In aerie signs plenty of wind; In earthy, Earthquakes and the fall of
Houses and eradication of trees; judge also the same when they are in a
malicious Square or Opposition, etc.

Saturn in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Mars in watery signs, Of Saturn.
denotes rain in Winter, Autumn and Summer, as also in Summer oftentimes
thunder and lightning, especially if in fiery signs; but in Autumn and Winter
windy dry weather, as also in the Spring; And in aerie signs both Spring,
Summer, Autumn and Winter, promises great winds and sometimes rain.

Saturn in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of the Sun, in the Spring denotes
cold rain or hail, in Summer much rain, thunder and lightning according to the
nature of the sign; In Autumn tempestuous stormy weather; and in winter,
grievous cold, and snowy slabby weather.

Saturn in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Venus, promises in the Spring
rain and cold, in Summer sudden cold, in Autumn much rain, and in Winter rain
and snow, especial if in these times the sign be watery; but if otherwise,
judge according to discretion and the nature thereof.

Saturn in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Mercury, signifies winds and
rain in the Spring, especially in watery and aerie signs, as also in Summer
wind and showers; but if they be in fiery signs, thunder, lightning and rain;
In Autumn wind and cold, according to the nature of the sign, and in Winter
cold and snow.

Jupiter in like manner in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Mars, Of
Jupiter.
Spring to be windy and tempestuous; a thundering and lightning Summer; rain
and storms in Autumn; and in Winter cold snows and sharp winds according to
the nature of the sign.

Jupiter in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of the Sun in the Spring
signifies high winds, in Summer thunder and lightning; and in Autumn vehement
winds, and very dry, cold, frosty weather in Winter; for the most part they
signify thus in every sign.

Jupiter in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Venus, shows a temperate air
according to the nature of the season all the year long; yet if they be in
watery signs they will incline somewhat to misling showers.

Jupiter in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Mercury, denotes great and
vehement winds in every quarter they are so aspected if in aerie signs; In
watery, rain; In fiery, thunder and lightning, but of no great continuance.

in, or of, in fiery signs promises drought in Summer, in the Spring a dry
air, also in Autumn and in Winter frost; in watery signs, shewers in the Spring;
Summer, thunder and rain; and in Autumn, shewers; in Winter rain and cold.

in, or of, in the Spring causes sudden great and violent rains; Tempests in
Autumn, and in Summer: but if in fiery signs or in each others house great
thunders and lightnings.

in, or with, in fiery signs, causes heat and drought in Summer; rain in watery
signs, and sometimes thunder and lightnings; in Autumn and Winter sudden great
winds, also cold in Winter.

Of the Sun.
in of, in the Spring causes rain, in Summer thunder, tempests and rain; in
Autumn, shewers and wind; and in Winter, much moisture in or of, he can never
be.

in of, denotes winds and moisture, especially in watery and aerie signs, but
in fiery a serene air in Summer, and frost in Winter; in or he can never be
neither ^, by reason of his proximity, as you have heard in the 2 Book, Chap. 6.

Of Venus.
in of, Rain in the Spring, Summer, and Autumn, as also snow in Winter and
sudden high winds, also in Summer they raise storms and tempests; judge also
the same in every one being in or as you have heard of these Aspects, but you
must know they are not altogether so bad.

CHAP. XI. Demonstrating the alteration of the Air by the Combustion,
Orientality and Occidentality of the Planets in every of the 12 Signs.
SAturn in Combust, denotes a dark, obscure, cloudy, misty air; Oriental, fair
weather; Occidental, great and vehement wind.

In Combust, causes thick clouds; Oriental, Thunder; Occidental a turbulent
air.

In Combust and Occidental, drought; Oriental, fair windy weather.

In Combust and Occidental, dark air, fogs, mists and troublesome weather;
Oriental, somewhat calmer.

In Combust, Oriental or Occidental, causes rain and misling at the best, and
sometimes thunder.

In Combust makes an infectious air; and turbulent if Occidental; but
Oriental, it will not be so bad.

In Combust causes a defect in the sight of men and women; Oriental, winds;
Occidental, whirlewindes and a turbulent air.

In Combust, cold air; Occidental, frosts; Oriental, cold North winds.

In Combust and Occidental, a cold rainy air; Oriental, cold and frost.

In Combust, denotes a dark obscure air with South winds; Occidental, cold;
Oriental, North winds.

In Combust, cold air; Occidental, tempests; Oriental, rain.

In Combust, clouds; Occidental, rain; Oriental, a more temperate air.

in Combust is a token of rain; being Occidental he causes clouds; and Orital,
fair weather.

In Combust, indifferent weather; Occidental, pleasant shewers; Oriental, close
calm weather.

In Combust, Occidental or Oriental, fair temperate weather.

In Combust, Occidental or Oriental, brings a calm and pleasant air.

In Leo Combust, Occidental or Oriental, pleasant winds.

In Virgo Combust, Occidental or Oriental, causes weather fit for the
production of seed and the fruits of the Earth.

In Libra Combust, Occidental or Oriental, indifferent weather.

In Scorpio Combust, rain; Occidental, bitter weather; Oriental, more temperate.

In Sagittary Combust, much rain; Occidental, worse weather; Oriental, better.

In Capricorn Combust, moist air; Occidental, it is worse; Oriental, better.

In Aquaries Combust and Occidental, rain; Oriental, fair.

In Pisces Combust, Occidental and Oriental, calm winds.

Mars in Aries Combust and Occidental, bad weather; Oriental, the contrary.
Mars.


In Taurus Combust, a quiet air; Occidental, stormy; Oriental, windy.

In Gemini Combust and Occidental, heat; Oriental, somewhat more temperate.

In Cancer Combust and Occidental, great heat; Oriental, not so violent.

In Leo Combust, and Occidental, drought; Oriental, not altogether so dry.

In Virgo Combust, Occidental and Oriental, signifies the same as you have
heard of Saturn.

In Libra Combust, causes moisture; Occidental, high winds; Oriental, more
temperate.

In Scorpio Combust, moisture; Occidental, storms; Oriental, gales of wind.

In Sagittary Combust, drought; Occidental, the same; but Oriental, it will not
be so very dry.

In Capricorn Combust, clowdy; Occidental, some heat; Oriental, more temperate.

In Aquaries Combust, drought; Occidental and Oriental, plenty of winds.

In Pisces Combust and Occidental, drought; Oriental, thunder and lightning.

The Sun now should follow in order, The Sun.
but he (as you have heard before) can never be either Combust, Oriental or
Occidental, the Planets being thus termed in respect of him: besides you have
been also shown that neither the Sun nor Moon are to be admitted chief Rulers
in any Scheme, because they are general significators of times and seasons;
therefore let us now have regard unto the significations of Venus, when she is
either Combust, Occidental or Oriental in any of the signs of the Zodiac.

Venus in Aries Combust and Occidental, causes moisture and great winds;
Venus.
Oriental, thunders and rains.

In Taurus Combust, thunders; Occidental, fair* Oriental, pleasant weather.

In Gemini Combust and Occidental, wind; Oriental, a calmer air.

In Cancer Combust, Occidental or Oriental, a quiet calm time.

In Leo Combust, Occidental or Oriental, drought.

In Virgo Combust and Occidental, drought; Oriental, the contrary.

In Libra Combust, moist air; Occidentall, rain; Oriental, fair.

In Scorpio Combust, Occidental or Oriental, rain.

In Sagittary Combust, rain; Occidental, wind and cold; Oriental, not so bad.

In Capricorn Combust, cold air; Occidental and Oriental, rain.

In Aquaries Combust, clowdy; Occidental, hot; Oriental, rain.

In Pisces Combust; cold; Occidental and Oriental, disposed to snow.

Mercury in Aries Combust, promises tempests; Occidental and Oriental, Mercury.
fair windy weather.

In Taurus thunder, and storms being Combust; Occidental and Oriental, a clowdy
dark muddy air.

In Gemini Combust and Occidental, wind; Oriental, temperate air and small
gusts of wind.

In Cancer Combust and Occidental, tempestuous stormy weather; Oriental, calmer.

In Leo combust, Occidental and Oriental, wind.

In Virgo Combust, drought and often tempests; so also when Occidental; but
when Oriental, the contrary.

In Libra Combust, Occidental or Oriental, winds.

In Scorpro Combust and Occidental, raging weather, chiefly Oriental.

In Sagitary Combust and Occidental, rain* Oriental, clear air.

In Capricorn Combust, Occidental and Oriental, rain.

In Aquaries Combust, snow; Occidental, more cold; Oriental, rain.

In Pisces Combust, Occidental or Oriental, moist air.

CHAP. XII. Containing further Instructions touching the alteration of the Air,
from the application of the Moon to the other Planets, having separated from
the Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun.
Endeavor thou but to understand this Chapter well, and thou shall be
sufficiently furnished with ability to judge of the weather for every month;
In the ninth Chapter of this Book, you have heard that the Planet the Moon next
applies unto after her Conjunction and Opposition with the Sun is especially to
be regarded for the exact judging of the state of the weather; wherefore I
thought good for thy better Instruction to insert this Chapter, which teaches
largely how to judge by her application unto any other Planet (after her
aforesaid Configurations with the Sun) of the mutation or alteration of the air.

Because Saturn is the higest of all the Planets (as you have heard) and
therefore we have still began with him in all the progress of this our labor,
we shall here also follow the same method, and show what is to be expected when
she separates from the Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun and applies next
unto Saturn, and then to Jupiter, and so in order of the rest.

Having erected your figure then for the Conjunction, (if that be your time) or
for the Opposition of the Luminaries if you are to consider that, have regard
to the place of the Conjunction or Opposition, the nature of the signs and
Mansions they are in, and the Square Aspects of the Malevolents unto these
places, and accordingly judge; judge the time when the effect will be
manifested from the number of degrees they want of the Partil Aspect, and the
nature of the signs, fixed, common, or moveable, and so according to reason
judge days or hours; but if your Significators or the Moon be swift of
motion, it will be the sooner; if slow, the contrary, etc.

The Moon separating from the Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun, and
applying to Saturn.
If the Moon after her bodily Conjunction or Opposite Aspect with the Sun do
immediately next apply unto Saturn in moist signs and mansions, let it be by
what Aspect it will, rain shall follow in some measure, more abundantly if she
apply by Conjunction, Square or Opposition; not so much if by Sextile; and if
by Trine, yet there will be mislings, and dark clowdy obscure air, etc.
Remember according to the nature of the signs, aspects and mansions to
pronounce judgment: But if Saturn be then in a fiery sign and a dry Mansion,
and the Moon also so posited, there shall rather be a turbulent, dark, obscure
air then rain.

To Jupiter.
On the contrary, if she then apply next unto Jupiter although she and he both
be in moist signs and mansions yet shall they denote only sweet showers and
moderate dews and the like, but in other signs and mansions hardly any rain at
all; how ever it will be but very moderate, seasonable and pleasant if there be
any, which sometimes (as other causes may concur) perhaps may be; But if either
Venus or Mercury, or both do then cast their beams unto either the Moon or
Jupiter or both, there will happen rain in some measure; judge the quality from
the nature of the mansions and nature of the signs they are in; as if moist,
then it will be the more wet; if dry, the less; if in signs aerie, winds and
showers by fits; but seldom is any rain or weather produced or occasioned by
Jupiter that is destructive or unseasonable, but it is still moderate,
temperate and wholesome.

Again if the Moon apply next unto Mars after her Conjunction or Opposition
with the Sun, and Saturn be then also in any Aspect with her or Mars, To Mars.
or with the Sun, rain is threatened, and that immoderate if they are in moist
signs and mansions, and if in temperate, and yet the Moon be in a moist sign
and mansion, it shall denote rain though not so much; but if she be in a moist
sign and mansion and they in a dry, there shall be but very little wet; but if
Venus do then. Aspect Mars also, you shall judge the contrary, that there shall
be much rain, and if it be in summer, thunder and lightning with all.

To the Sun.
Also if at the time of the Conjunction or Opposition of the Luminaries you
find them in Aspect with none of the Planets nor any with them, judge it will
be fair weather and little or no rain; but if Saturn or Mars, especially Saturn
behold either of them, or any other Planet in a moist sign and mansion,
especially from an Angle and the Sun then Peregrine, much rain shall follow,
and so on the contrary judge.

To Venus.
To Venus if in aerie or watery signs and moist mansions, without doubt rain will
thereon follow, (but it will not be so much, if the signs be aerie) especially
if they or either of them be beheld of either Saturn or Mars; but it will be
infallibly true if then they be beheld of both Saturn and Mars, especially if
Saturn behold the Moon, and Mars Venus, because these are Openers of Gates as
you have heard; but you must note the rain will not be so great, if but one of
them behold the Moon and Venus or either of them: But if Jupiter behold them in
like manner, judge there will be no rain, but contrariwise fair weather, or at
least such moderate, gentle showers as shall be very seasonable and acceptable;
and if Venus be free from impediment, when she is thus aspected of the Moon,
and fortunate, and not in moist signs nor mansions, there shall not be any rain
on their then Configuration, whether it be Conjunction or Aspect, but clouds
and dews.

To Mercury.
And if she immediately apply to Mercury and they be in moist signs and
mansions, there shall be continual rain and that daily, especially if Saturn
and Mars do then behold them; also if Venus have then any dignity in the place
of the Conjunction or Aspect of the Moon and Mercury, there shall be unusual
wet weather; so likewise if (when the Sun and the Moon are in Conjunction)
Mercury be also in the same degree with them in a moist sign and and mansion
and apply to Venus; And if you find these Configurations in other mansions and
signs, you shall also judge wet weather is threatened, but not so abundantly:
And if Mercury and the Moon be alone in Conjunction or Aspect, dews and gentle
showers are most commonly produced; but if Jupiter behold them when they are in
Conjunction, or Mercury at any time, he shall cause much rain and winds
according to the nature of the signs and mansions; and thus much shall suffice
to be said of the Moon her application of the other Planets, having been
immediately before in Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun; I know the Ancients
have been more large, but I question whither all their rules will be agreeable
to the nature of the Climate wherein we live; wherefore if what has been
already delivered unto thee, and what is beneath on this particular further
said, be not infallible rules for the judgeing of weather as I said before,
being very intricate, especially in Islands, I shall desire thee lovingly to
accept of my weak endeavors and well wishes to the propagation of this Divine
Science, and also to study (by a diligent observation and trial of these rules
and others thou shall in thy practice find out) to perfect some rules which may
exactly and infallibly point out unto us the true state of the weather in any
quarter of the year, or day in any quarter.

CHAP. XIII. Teaching by other Rules how to judge of the alteration of the Air,
and to know when Rain is to be expected.
YOu must still remember to erect your Figure for the exact time for which you
require judgment, and place the Planets therein being (reduced to the time of
the day) and see what Planets are then in Conjunction or Aspect with the Sun
and Moon, especially if the figure be made at any Lunation, for if it be
Jupiter or Venus and they corporally joined to the Sun and Moon, or Jupiter in
a Sextile or Trine of them, and they be then free from the Conjunction and
Aspect of all the Malevolents, neither apply unto them after their separation
from Jupiter, it is an assured testimony of fair weather; but if Jupiter behold
them by a Square or Opposition; and they free also from the Malevolent
Configurations of the Infortunes (as has been said) he shall denote gentle
pleasant shewers. But if any of the Malevolent Planets, especially Saturn be in
Aspect with them, or Conjunction, although by Sextile or Trine, or they apply
unto him after their Conjunction, especially if by Square or Opposition, rain
shall inevitably follow, for it is the natural property of the Malevolents to
disturb and thicken the Air with offensive gross vapors, as it is the
disposition of the fortunes to disperse them and clear the air thereof,
resisting the quality of the Malevolents.

Now you must know, that although Venus be one of the fortunes, yet does she by
reason of her moist nature dispose the air and weather to moisture, especially
if she be in any Configuration with the Sun in moist signs and mansions, or
have any commixture or participation with the malevolents, but yet she seldom
sends noisome or unseasonable wet weather, unless, when she participates with
the infortunes she be then also very weak and afflicted, for then she is not
able to lessen their malicious influence.

If the Sun be in the South part of heaven and Venus under his beams, and the
Moon be then in Conjunction with either of them, especially with Venus, or
applying unto her by any Aspect, you shall assuredly judge when that
Configuration is, viz. that very day and hour there shall be rain and shewers,
and if then Mercury also be in the same part of Heaven applying to the Moon by
Conjunction or Aspect, it shall prenote rain, especially if the Moon be in
Scorpio: so also if Mars and Venus be in Conjunction, especially also in
Scorpio; and when the Sun is in Aquaries and the Moon applying by Opposition
unto him, and Venus be also placed as aforesaid, you shall judge rain at that
very hour, so also when Mars applies at that time to either the Sun or Venus,
and the Moon in Square or Opposition of the Sun, and when Venus applies unto
the Sun, and Mercury then also in Conjunction with her or she with him, rain is
to he expected at that very instant; again, if the Sun be in Libra, and Venus
in Sagittarius in the same number of degrees, and the Moon applying, especially
to Venus, that very day and hour you may predict rain; also when the Sun is
either in Aries or Aquaries and the Moon in Opposition unto him many shewers
follow in that day from the hour of their Opposition; judge the same if the
Moon be in Sagitary, yet Leo is a cause of more shewers a great deal; also if
the aforesaid Configurations be out of the houses of Mars and Venus, judge the
same, viz. wet-weather, also thunder, lightning, rain in great drops, and
sometimes hail: Again, if the Sun be in Aries or Pisces, and the Moon in Libra
or Virgo, or Sagittary, there shall be shewers in that hour wherein they come
to a Partil Opposition or Square; In like manner if Venus and Mercury in any of
the aforesaid places behold the Sun out of Leo, and the Moon apply also then
unto him, especially if she be in Leo, it signifies many flashes of lightning
and thunder, yet little or no rain, especially if they are in Partil
Conjunction or Aspect; also if the Sun be in Aries, Leo, Libra, Scorpio or
Aquaries, and the Moon in a right diameter joined unto him by Conjunction or
Aspect, or to Venus by Opposition from either Aries or Libra, it denotes after
rain many flashes of lightning and thunder: Lastly, if the Sun or the Moon be
in Pisces no wise upheld or aspected of the fortunes, and Mars do then behold
them with a Square or Opposition, it shows there will follow much rain, thunder
and flashes of lightning.

But you are here to note that there are some places of the Zodiac called
Places of rain, and again others which are not altogether so effectual; those
which most conduce and incline to rain, are Cancer, Leo, Capricorn and
Aquaries, for if the Moon be in any of them and corporally joined to Venus, or
by any Aspect does participate of her nature, and their beams touch each other
within one degree either before or after the Partil Conjunction, or Aspect,
especially if the Aspect be a Square or Opposition, there shall follow many
shewers, but you are to take notice that the first 15 degrees of Capricorn is
less effectual, or conduces least to rain of any of the other, and the last
fifteen degrees inclines rather to cold, so that you are warily to judge
according to discretion; those places that are less effectual are the last term
of Aries, and the signs Gemini, Virgo and Libra.

And here for the manifestation of the secret and admirable power and influence
of the Heavens, Stars and Planets, I may justly reprehend such as deny their
influences on Sublunaries by these ordinary and common signs of rain; As,

Ordinary signs of the mutation of weather, or tokens of rain.
The unusual crowing of the Cock, viz. at times unaccustomed, denotes rain: Also
inordinate swelling of the Seas, Rivers, and other waters, in calm and moderate
weather: The straightness of doors and windows: The noise and trumpeting sound
of Peacocks: The crying of Fowls about waters: The crying and whining of
Swine: The absence of Sea and Waterfowl from the Sea, and frequenting the
Land: And Land-fowle frequenting the water: The chirping of Sparrows in a
morning, viz. about Sunrising or a little after: The sudden motion of Beasts
out of one place into another, and their making then a noise: The frequent
licking of their feet and hoofs; and this is very remarkable in the Cat, who
still before rain and tempestuous weather, will run up and down the house,
turning over and over, and playing with her tail, and ascend up by hangings,
beds, or such like to the roof of the room; and this she will do very often
together, although each time she endangereth her self by descending: Even as
though (and as I indeed conceive it) she were by the influence of the Heavens
constrained to such mad freakish actions: You may also observe that these
creatures make a great stir at such times in licking their feet, and rubbing
their feet about their visage and head, whence the vulgar usually say at such
times, The Cat washes her face, etc. The greedy feeding of Beasts also denotes
rain: and their snuffing up the air with their head held up against the wind:
The resorting of Poultry to their roost being covered with dust: The egression
of Worms out of the Earth: The tumbling and rubbing o^ Dogs in the dust: The
busy heaving of Moules: The quick prattling of the Crow: The high flight of
Birds: The close flying of the Swallow to the water, and the flapping of her
wings therein: The busy working of the Spider in her web: Also the business of
the Ant with her Eggs: The sound of Bells when they are heard further then
usually: The inordinate sweating of Stones in dry weather: The hankering of
Bees about home in fair weather: The excessive pain of Corns and old sores and
wounds in men and women which are either very great, or not well cured: The
business of Fowls in pruning themselves, especially if it be in winter. And
here I would have the Reader to take notice, that unless they be seen to
squeese the small Pustule (as it were) that grows on their rump, and then
anoint their feathers by slightly stroaking their bills thereon, it is no
certain sign of rain, for in their time of moultring they will prune and peck
their feathers all day long; but in this Pustule (as I may call it for the
resemblance it has therewith) there is a certain unctious matter or oily
substance wherewith they smooth their feathers and anoint them, be better to
keep out the wet, and this thou may easily perceive to be true by taking a
feather and pulling it asunder with your fingers gently, and you will soon see
how the beards on the edges thereof will stick together.

I might here instance many more such like ordinary signs of the mutations of
the Air; but since I desire not to be tedious, and to the judicious and
searchers of Nature, many such like testimonies will be frequently offered to
their considerations, I shall here desist, deriding such as shall deny by their
ignorance the admirable and powerful virtues of the Heavens, Stars and
Celestial Planets, being convinced even by these bruit creatures, Fowls,
creeping things, and the very stones; wherefore such must needs be concluded
worse, or at best no better then Stocks, Dolts or Asses.

CHAP. XIV. Showing Haly his judgment on Weather and the alteration of the Air.
How to judge of the alteration of the air at any time of the year.
WE are to judge and know the alteration and Mutation of the Air and Weather
from the various Configurations and Positions of the Planets at certain times,
especially at the Con^unction and prevention of the Luminaries before the Sun
his entrance into Aries, whose Ascendents are chiefly to be regarded, and the
places of the Conjunction and Opposition, also the places of the Luminaries in
the figure at the Ingress of the Sun into Aries, and the places of the Planets
in these aforesaid Scheams.

So that if Saturn be in any of the Angles from the Ascendent or in any of the
Angles from the Lord of the Ascendent, strong and essentially dignified,
especially in the mid Heaven, he signifies a various and diverse temper of Air,
thick and dark clouds; and in hot weather he lesseneth the heat, and in winter
or cold weather the cold is by him augmented and increased; but if he be not in
an Angle, the times shall be more stable and natural; also if Saturn be in any
of the Angles from the Lord of the Ascendent, he shall not work so forcibly his
effects as when he is in any Angle from the Ascendent it self.

And if Mars be located as you have heard of Saturn, especially in the
mid-Heavens, the heat in Summer shall be increased and augmented, and the cold
in Winter diminished and abated, and the Spring and Autumn also shall incline
rather to heat then cold.

If Jupiter, Venus or the Moon be so placed, they cause a temperate, good and
wholesome air, and cause every thing to grow, increase and fructify well and
kindly that is sown or planted in the Earth.

Again, If Mercury be found as aforesaid, viz. in the Mid-heaven in the figure
of the Preventional Conjunction or Opposition, in an aerie sign and any of the
Infortunes in any of his Angles, it denotes much change of Air, great and high
winds and very hurtful; in like manner judge the contrary if you find any of
the Fortunes in any of his Angles, or he in any Angle from them, for this
signifies the same as if they were in Conjunction.

Wherefore if any Planet be in an Angle or succedent House from the Ascendent
of the Preventional Conjunction, make him your Significator, and then see what
commixture he has with Saturn and Mars or either of them; for if he be in a
Square of Mars or Opposition, or Conjunction, and Mars be in a fiery sign, heat
in Summer shall be augmented, and in Winter cold abated; also if the commixture
with him be by a Sextile or Trine and Mars be in any fiery sign, he denotes the
same but not so effectually.

Also if its commixture be with Saturn by Conjunction, Square or Opposition,
and Saturn be in cold, watery or earthy signs, the cold in Winter shall be
increased and the heart in Summer diminished; also if it be by Sextile or
Trine, and Saturn be in any of the aforesaid Signs, he shall also signify the
same, but not so powerfully; and if Saturn be in aerie Signs which are hot and
moist, and the commixture with the Significator be by Conjunction, Square or
Opposition, it signifies the air shall be temperate and good, and if it be by
Sextile or Trine it shall be the better.

Also if Mars have commixture with the Significator, and he be in Earthy Signs
which are cold and dry, or in watery which are cold and moist, and it be by
Conjunction, Square or Opposition, the air will be good and temperate, but if
it be by Sextile or Trine, it will be much the betrer, and will more
effectually produce the fruits and seeds of the Earth.

See also in the aforesaid figure of the Conjunction you have chief regard to
the Part of Air or Weather, and make it participate in judgment with your
Significator; And if you find Saturn or Mars after the same manner placed, and
in Aspect therewith, judge according as you have heard of the Significator. How
to take part of air or weather, according to Haly.
You are to take this part from the place and degree wherein Mercury is, (if he
be not in his own House,) to the degree of the Lord of the House wherein he is,
to which you must yet add the degree ascending, and so project it from the
Ascendent, and there shall be your part where the number ends; But if Mercury
be in his own House, take only the Sign, ^^egree and Minute wherein he is, and
by adding the Ascendent and projecting it ^^^u shall find it where your number
ends: But if God spare me life and opportunity, I shall for thy benefit and the
good of posterity take some pains to deliver thee the manner and way of taking
any Part either by night or day belonging to any of the Planets, or the
Signification of any of the 12 Houses, in a treatise by it self, as also the
uses of them, etc.

To be short, if you would judge of the alteration of the air for any quarter
of the Year, erect your figures for the Sun, his ingress into Aries, Cancer,
Libra, and Capricorn and according to the same method judge; if for any or
every month, see when he enters the first Punctum of every Sign; if for any
day, have regard to Pars dierum or Part of days which is taken from the place
of the Sun to the place of Saturn, How to take pars dierum, or part of days.
(or more plainly substract the place of Saturn from the place of the Sun) and
add the place of the Moon, and see where your number of Signs, Degrees and
Minutes ends, and there shall be your Pars dierum, and this must he taken at
the punctual appearance of the Sun his arising above our Horizon.

Wherefore if Mercury behold this part or be corporally joined thereunto, in
that day there shall be much wind, especially if the Moon be then also with
him, and Venus have also any Aspect thereunto; for then the more assured will
this judgment be.

There is also another way to judge of the Diurnal mutation of the air, which
is to observe exactly the time of the Moon her entering inro the first point of
any sign; and having erected the figure of the Heavens for that moment see what
Planet Aspecteth or is located within five degrees of the Cuspe thereof, and
make him Significator of the state of the weather during the time the Moon is
in that sign, and according to his strength and Configurations with the other
Planets judge as you have heard according to discretion.

How to judge of I hunder, Lightning, and Winds.
Thus have you been taught the alteration of the Air for any time of the Year,
Month, Day, etc. It rests now you also know how to judge of Thunder,
Lightning and Winds; And this we are to require from the Sun his ingress into
the twenty degree and one minute of Scorpio, for the which time having erected
the figure of the Heavens, and placed all the Planets therein being exactly
reduced to the time of the day or night, have regard to Jupiter, Venus and
Mercury, and if you find them all Occidental or Retrograde, judge there shall
be much rain and wet weather that year.

Look then if Mars be in any of the Angles, especially in the tenth House in an
aerie sign, and in any Configuration of Mercury, he signifies thunder, flashes
of lightning, and tempestuous storms of rain that year, yet sometimes without
rain, they signify also an unwholesome air; but if Mars be in the fourth House
in an earthy sign, and the Fortunes strong and in Configuration with Mercury,
it signifies Earthquakes, fiery apparitions in the air and strange sights;
also damage to the Mines of the Earth; but if Mars be in the fourth in a fiery
sign, it denotes an obnoxious hurtful air to the Earth, and feeds thereof, and
the corn and fruits shall be scorched and burnt up; also if he be in a watery
sign in the fourth, he denotes a diminution and scarcity of waters and
detriment to Fishes and such as Navigate; but if the Fortunes be in
Configuration with him, damage and mischief by Thunder shall be lessened but if
they do no wise behold him, that year there will be mischief by Thunder and
Lightning.

Moreover if Saturn be there, in the stead of Mars, and in the tenth House in
an aerie sign, and in any Aspect of Mercury, and no wise assisted by the
Fortunes, it signifies detriment in the air, and much hurtful rain, and that
for some continuance; but if he be in the fourth House, as has been said in an
earthy sign, and in any Configuration with Mercury, and no wise beheld by the
Fortunes, there shall happen Earthquakes, and there shall be much black water
upon the Earth and the like; but if he be in a watery sign in the fourth posited
as aforesaid, and not at all helped by the Fortunes, there shall be a scarcity
of waters, and all things abiding therein, whither living creatures or other
things, shall suffer detriment; also if he be in (...) earthy sign placed in
the same manner, he signifies damage to the Earth, and the things thereon and
growing out of it: But if Mercury do not behold him by any Configuration,
neither be joined bodily to him, the aforesaid Significations shall not be so
grievous, but more tolerable; and if he be beheld of the Fortunes, the mischief
will be yet less and less; and if by a Sextile or Trine, and they strong
essentially, it will be totally taken away.

Note that every Planet has its own peculiar property;

Moreover the radix from which you are to judge of the alteration of the air,
is the Ascendent of the Conjunction or prevention of the Luminaries before the
Ingress of the Sun into every sign; and have regard to the Lord also of the
Ascendent and the Lord of the place of the Conjunction or Prevention; for if
these places and their Lords be in moist signs and mansions, it signifies wet
weather shall follow; also if the Significator in chief be Occidental,
Retrograde or slow in motion, it signifies rain, and so also if he be Combust,
unless Mars hinder it; for he being Combust hinders and prohibiteth rain;
Also note that if the chief Significator be descending in Latitude or in his
Epicycle, he signifies rain, and so on the contrary if he be ascending;
Moreover note, that when rain is occasioned by the Signification of the
Infortunes, it is still hurtful; if it be Saturn, he causes eruptions and
over-flowings of water; if Mars, he causes for the most part extraordinary
heat.

When rain is to be expected.
Now if thou would know when it is most probable and likely to rain, according
to Haly have regard unto the chief Significator of rain; for if he be in an
Angle from the Ascendent, or entering therein, judge rain at that time; as also
to the Ingress of the Sun into the twentieth degree and one minute of Scorpio,
and see what Planets signifying rain that year are received of him, and
especially of the Moon, and which he is in Conjunction, Square or Opposition
with; for upon those days wherein these Configurations happen, rain is to be
expected; but if these Aspects be without reception, the rain will not be of
long continuance nor very much.

Moreover if the Significator be in an Angle as has been said, and in
Conjunction with the Moon, it signifies Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Earthquakes,
and such like; but if you would know what rain is to be expected for all the
year, Of the state of the weather for the whole year.
have regard unto Venus, Mercury and the Moon, and if you find them all in
Conjunction in Pisces at the time of the Revolution of the year, it signifies
rain, moisture and many clouds that year; but if they be so joined in Aries or
Taurus, the year shall be dry, and shall want rain.

Also if Venus apply to Mercury in any of his Houses, it signifies much rain,
and that of continuance that year; so likewise if the Moon be in Opposition to
either the Sun, Saturn or Venus, it signifies much rain and dark clouds that
year; also when Mercury and Venus are in one and the same term, there shall be
great rain; and if it be in a moist sign, and the Moon in a Sextile or Trine of
them, there will be tempestuous storms and rain, until one of them go out of
the aforesaid term: also at the time of the Sun his Ingress into Aries, if
Saturn be in Square or Opposition of him or of the Moon, or Jupiter and
Mercury, or Venus and Mars so posited, much rain is to be expected in that
year, especially if the Aspect be by Opposition, and they be in Reception by
House; for this is Opening of Gates or Windows, as you have heard: Also if
Venus be before the Sun, it signifies there will be many clouds that year,
dews and moisture of air, but little rain.

And if Venus be retrograde whilst the Sun is in Aries or Taurus, there shall
be much rain that year, especially in the Spring; but if she be Retrograde in
Capricorn, Aquaries or Pisces, there shall not be so much rain in the Spring,
but very much in the Winter.

Moreover when Mercury is stationary, in what ever sign it be, he denotes a
moist air, rain and clouds according to the season; also many storms and
tempestuous showers follow when Openers of Gates and the Significators of rain
are placed in moist and watery signs; also if Venus be so posited judge the
same; also if Mercury be in a fiery dry sign, and the Moon and Venus in watery
and moist signs, there shall be temperate and moderate rain; and if Saturn
behold them and he being in a cold sign, there will be rain and snow and much
cold with an obscure and dark air.

And thus much shall suffice to be said touching the judgment of the weather
and alteration of the air by the Positions and Configurations of the Planets
and Stars the secondary causes of all sublunary accidents; if these rules in
every particular hold not, endeavor thou the more to find out the truth, and
let my failings be rather an encouragement to thee to search further into the
secrets of Nature; wherefore I shall say no more on this point in this Nature,
but conclude our last Chapter touching the alteration of the air with some
particular observations from the aforesaid causes, which are common and may be
observed even by the most illiterate and rural Pesant that is.

CHAP. XV. Showing how to judge of Weather from common Observation of the
rising and setting of the Sun, color of the Moon, appearance of the Rainbow,
Comets, Clouds, Brightness of the fixed Stars, also by the prime day, and from
the time of the day wherein Thunder happens.
IT does no wise seem unto me unnecessary to deliver this Chapter unto the
world; although it be not altogether so Astrological as the preceding Chapters
are, yet by reason it contains Observations deduced from the Stars and other
Superior things, it cannot be absolutely rejected as not agreeing with our
discourse and subject; besides since it may very well be an help both for the
plainness and certainty thereof, to such as perhaps are not of sufficient
capacity to attain to the perfection of what we have set down before, I have
adventured to give them to understand thus much.

How to judge of weather by the rising and setting of the Sun.
That when the Sun rises clear and bright in our Horizon, it denotes a pleasant
day; but fowl weather, if then he be overcast with a thin cloud; if he set
being free from clouds, a fair night follows; also being then diverse
colored, his beams long and red, denotes winds the next day from that part or
quarter of heaven; his beams spotted, green, black or pale, promises rain that
night; if at his setting there be one or more circles about him, you are to
observe whether they are red, and here and there broken; for then he denotes
vehement winds that night: if obscured thick and black circles, it signifies
cold winds and snow in Winter; many circles denote wind of what color soever
they are, but the more if they be red; if but one circle be about him and, and
that clear and of no continuance, fair weather is to be expected; understand
the same of the Moon which you have heard of the Sun, when there is circles
about her; blackness in the Sun and Moon denotes rain; redness, wind; The
element red in the morning, shows wind and rain to ensue that day; the same in
the Evening declares the contrary; for the day following is for the most part
then fair; and in this manner of Prognostication we find the Pharisees very
expert, as appears in the 16. of Matthew.

By the color of the Moon.
Also if the Moon in the third day after the change, and the third day before
the full, or in the midst of the quarter be found of a red color, causes
winds; pale and inclining to blackness and a muddy obscurity, brings rain; but
being bright and clear the end direct upright and free from circles promises
fair weather.

By the Rainbow.
Look also to the the time when a Rainbow appears, and by it judge of weather
thus; if it appear in fair weather, judge fowl will follow; if in fowl, fair
will follow, this is the opinion of some, and it stands with very much reason
to be true, if we look to the first Ordination thereof in the 9 of Genesis again
if it appear in the morning rain and moisture is thereby portended; if in the
evening, fair weather.

By Comets.
From Comets if we require judgment touching these matters, we are to know that
they never appear but they bring as well great and terrible alteration in the
air as on the earth; but of this we shall have more occasion to treat anon in
the next Section; wherefore here only note that they cause dry weather and air,
great and high winds, especially if they appear obscure and cloudy. And their
power and efficacy judge by their greatness, smalness, length and shortness;
they cause also sickness by corruption of air if they appear in Aerie or Earthy
signs.

By clouds.
When you see thick clouds and resembling flocks gathered together in many
places, they denote rain; and so do dark, obscure thick clouds over the North
part of Heaven declining to the West; if they appear like hills and somewhat
above the Earth, it shows weather over-passed; black clouds, promise rain;
white clouds appearing in Winter two or three days together in the East part of
Heaven, shows cold and snow.

By Stars.
When the Stars seem to fall which we vulgarly term shooting of the Stars, it
prenotes wind in that part; but if they shoot in many places, or perhaps all
over the Heavens, Inordinate winds, thunder, lightnings, and very tempestuous
weather; and when they seem to run along out of one place into another, it
denotes wind; and that the weather shall alter from the temper wherein it is,
if but few appear, and those obscure and cloudy; also if they at any time seem
greater and brighter then usual, it denotes wind and rain in these parts where
you see such Stars appear; and in Winter they presage frosts, snow and cold
weather; but herein unless thou art well acquainted with their Natural
magnitudes thou may be deceived and can never be perfect.

By the Prime day.
Again, you may judge of the weather by the prime day thus; if it be Monday,
judge moist weather; Tuesday, windy and cold; Wednesday, very cold; Thursday,
fair and clear; Friday, mixed weather; Saturday, moist; and Sunday, dry.

By Thunder.
Thunder in the Morning also denotes wind about Noon; in the Evening, rain and
tempest; Thunder also in the Winter shows terrible accidents and alterations
the Summer following; whence the old Proverb, A Winters Thunder is a Summers
wonder; also when in any Summer you find no Thunder, the Winter following will
be very unhealthful and obnoxious to all creatures.

And thus much of the alteration of the air and change of weather; Come we now
to show some natural reasons for such things as are commonly incident amongst
us, and yet their cause by many unknown, and so hasten to conclude this Section.

CHAP. XVI. Demonstrating the Natural cause of many Suns, of the Rainbow,
Rain, Hail, Frost, Snow, Dew, Wind, Earthquakes, Comets, Thunders, Lightnings
and the cause of the Sun and the Moons Eclipse.
LEaving now our Astrological Discourse, I shall here a little step out of the
way and show my Reader, who has not waded far into the Ocean of Nature, what
Hail, Snow, Dew, Wind and the Rainbow is, and how it comes to pass we have
many Suns sometimes visible, and Moons; also what Thunder and Lightning is, and
how we come to have such strange and new Stars as are Comets and the like, and
how the Sun and the Moon become sometimes eclipsed or darkened, that so he may
not be to seek in these ordinary and small matters, which I believe may stumble
some more then greater and higher things.

The reason of many Suns and Moon.
We shall then in order handle each of these as they are set down in the
contents, and first then we are to take this for an approved rule, that there
never appears any Parelii or mock- Suns nor mock- Moons above or beneath the
Sun or Moon, but on each side, and that neither, but at the Sunrising or
setting; and they are thus occasioned, when a thick cloud is gathered together
toward the side of the Sun or the Moon in which the broken beams of the Sun or
Moon being gathered, the very form or fashion of the Sun or Moon, is
represented unto us therein.

The cause of the Rain bow.
As touching the Rainbow, it is no more then the reflection of the Sunbeams in
a cloud that turns to the contrary vapor.

What rain is.
Rain is a cold vapor drawn up or exhaled by the attractive faculty of the Sun
to the nether part of the middle Region of the Air, where being thickened
through cold it falls again to the Earth.

What hail and snow.
Hail and Snow are the same, only are drawn up higher; Snow into the middle
Region, and Hail into the upper, and there condensed and congealed into the
body of a cloud, and being disposed by the Configurations of fit Significators
descends.

What frost and dew.
In like manner hoar frost and dew is also the same vapor, and of the same
nature as is rain and the rest, only not drawn so high by the Sun as to keep
up, but when he with draws himself from our Hemisphere falls down again, and
is by the coldness of the Earth congealed or resolved into water which we call
dew in Summer, but in Winter by the sharpness of the air it is congealed into
frost, and by reason of the hoaryness of it, is called Hoare frost.

What wind and the occasion of Earthquakes.
Wind also is but a dry exhalation drawn up from the Earth by the heat of the
Sun also, and dispersed here and there; and this is the reason of Earthquakes;
for through the gathering together of abundance of these vapors in the
Concaves of the Earth, and from thence violently breaking out, and the Earth
closing again, is the Earth caused to shake or as it were tremble; and this is
the forerunner of wars for the most part in those parts of the Earth.

What a Comet.
Moreover a Comet is a flame caused of a dry, hot, slimy exhalation, drawn up by
the Sun to the uppermost part of the air, the which being dispersed and broken
causes high winds; but more of this in the last Section.

What thunder and lightning.
Again, Thunder is a quenching of fire in a cloud, or an exhalation hot and dry
mixed with moisture, carried up to the middle Region, and there thickened and
wraped into a cloud, where meeting with moisture being of a contrary quality,
it breaks out the sides of the cloud, and by this its eruption causes a
thundering noise in the air; and this flying out of the fire the vulgar call
Lightning; the which Aristotle says comes after Thunder; but I am of opinion
they come both together, though the sense of seeing is more suddenly
apprehensive of the light then the hearing is of the sound; because what is
conveyed to the Eye is by a direct line, but to the Ear by an oblique; for at a
distance we may discern a blow before we hear it, yet being hard by we shall
hear it as soon as it is given or can be seen, etc.

Lightning as say some Authors, is of marvailous efficacy, and they have made
mention of three sorts, Dry, Moist, and Clear; the Dry does not burn but
cleaves trees through and also houses and the like; the Moist does not burn
neither, but alters color; the Clear both burns and destroys, and is
indeed the most dangerous of all; for it breaks the bones, and sword, and
bruiseth not theskin nor breaks the scabbard; and melts moneyin the purse,
and yet melts not wax, etc.

Signs of Earthquakes to come.
We are now to give the reason of the Eclipsing of both the Luminaries; but
first I think it very requisite to set down some tokens of Earthquakes to
come, which are briefly six; the first is when the Sun is obscured and darkened
without the presence of clouds or the body of the Moon; the second token that
an Earthquake is at hand, is when the Sun is as it were bloody and colored in
such a strange manner; the third is when a fiery Pillar, or cloud like a pillar
of fire, appears in the Heavens; the fourth is when the air is very quiet both
at Land and Sea for a long continuance and wind absent; the fifth when waters
are salt and troubled, and of another taste then usually and naturally they
are; the sixth and last is when strange unaccustomed and unusual noises of
exclamations of men, howlings, lamentations, and clatterings of armor are
heard, and such sights seen in the Air.

The cause of the Sun his Eclipse.
And now as touching the Eclipse of either of the Luminaries, you are to know it
is only a privation of their light; that of the Sun is occasioned at the
conjunction of the Luminaries (or more plainly at the change of the Moon) by
the interposition of the body of the Moon betwixt the Sun and the Earth
averting or turning his beams from us, and so the Sun becomes obscured or
darkened for that time.

The cause of the Moons Eclipse.
That of the Moon by the Diametrical interposition of the body of the Earth
between the Sun and the Moon, thereby depriving her of the borrowed light she
receives of the Sun, and this is ever upon the Opposition of the Luminaries,
or vulgarly at the Full Moon; and truly this desect of the Luminaries would
happen every change and full, Why there are not 2 Eclipses every month.
did not the Moon sometime deviate from the Ecliptic line five degrees
Northward, as also sometimes again as far Southward, and therefore cannot so
directly meet with the Conjunction and Opposition of the Sun who ever moves in
the Ecliptic line or just under it.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Signification of the most notable fixed Stars both
fortunate and unfortunate in any of the twelve Houses in Revolutions of the
Years of the World.
LOok into the second Book of this Volume and there you shall have the Names,
Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of the most notable fixed Stars; what
are less and more obscure, are not so needful and requisite to be recorded,
since they are of the same nature as are the rest in their constellation;
wherefore what are there expressed may sufficiently serve as touching thy
judgment in the Stars.

I shall not therefore here at all rehearse either the names or natures of any
Star there expressed; only I shall desire thee to be very expert in the
several Natures thereof, and so according to their several Positions,
Conjunctions and Configurations with the Planets judge either good or bad
according to the nature of those Stars, Planets and Houses of Heaven they are
in.

The signification of the Malevolent fixed Stars in the first House.
As if malevolent, mischievous and unfortunate Stars, viz. such as are of the
nature of Saturn or Mars, or both, be upon the Cuspe of the Ascendent, or
within five degrees thereof or with the Lord of the Ascendent in Conjunction
Partil, or within five degrees thereof, judge mischief and damage to the people
of that Nation for which your Revolution is set in one kind or other; compare
and weigh exactly the nature of your Significators, viz. the Stars afflicting
your Ascendent or its Lord, and you will soon discover the nature of the evil
threatened; and this your own Genius must teach you; for all the writings in the
World without it will be of little or no effect; it signifies also diseases in
the head, especially if the sign ascending be Aries.

In the second
If they be in the second House afflicting the Cuspe thereof or the Lord thereof
or both (as abovesaid of the Ascendent) judge the evil to fall in and to men's
estates and riches, especially to the common people who shall many of them be
exposed to poverty and want, and in some measure even the Nobles also and best
of them shall have losses and crosses in such matters; it signifies also that
there shall many maladies and infirmities in the Ears, Throat and Neck, afflict
men* such as are Impostumes, Catarrs and Rheumes, etc. especially if the sign
of the second be Taurus.

In the third
If in the third, the evil shall happen to those that go short journies, and
they shall be unprofitable; strife, contentions and discords amongst brethren,
neighbors and kindred without cause or any occasion given; many grievous
infirmities and those chiefly in the Arms, Hands, and Shoulders or
Shoulder-blades, especially if the sign of the third be Gemini.

In the fourth.
In the fourth, (as you have heard of the Ascendent) or in Conjunction with the
Lord thereof, evil and mischief is threatened to the Earth and its Fruits; it
signifies also wars and contentions amongst men, and one City and Place with
another; also dissentions and quarrels between Fathers and Children, and the
end of men's actions shall be evil; also if any shall purchase Land, Houses, or
Heritages, they shall not find that profit and good therein which they
expected; and there shall be many Infirmities and diseases in the Breasts and
Lungs and parts adjacent, especially if the sign be Cancer.

In the fifth.
Also in the fifth, if they or any of them be found afflicting the Cusp thereof,
or its Lord, much evil shall happen to Children, Parents shall not be so
affectionate and careful as they ought, Women conceaved shall miscarry, such as
are not conceaved shall continue unfruitful, friends also and loving
acquaintance shall disagree and clash, and Men shall suffer detriment in and by
such things as they most delight in, and many infirmities will be incident to
man also, especially in the Back, Reins and Parts or Vessels of Generation, and
in the Stomach, chiefly if the sign of the fifth be Leo.

In the sixth.
Again, if in the sixth, etc. mischief shall happen to small Cattle, servants of
both sex; it signifies also there shall be no gain or profit in Merchandising
and Trading in small Cattle, and many infirmities in the Belly and Intrals, if
the sign of the sixth be Virgo especially.

In the seventh.
In the seventh or any of them in Conjunction with the Lord thereof (as you have
heard, etc.) denotes wars, dissentions amongst great ones, also quarrels and
dissentions amongst Associates and Lovers, and between Man and Wife, Kings and
their Subjects and Associates, and they with their King or Superiors, men's
hearts shall be hardened, neither shall there be any mercy or pity amongst them,
nor faith nor truth; and promises, ties and protestations shall be violated and
lightly esteemed, and men shall not care for the use of their Trade. Profession
or Calling, but shall be given to looseness; and it signifies also there shall
be many Infirmities in the Bladder, Ureters and Reins, especially if the sign
of the seventh be Libra.

In the eighth.
In the eighth, it denotes the evil condition and trouble of Thieves and
Robbers, also that men shall quarrel and disagree that have inherited the Goods
and Legacies of the late deceased; and to be short impediment, loss and damage
in, to and by all things appertaining to the signification of the eight House,
which you have been abundantly shown in the 41. Chapter of the second Book; it
signifies also many Infirmities in the Secrets, if the sign be Scorpio
especially, also Plagues, Mortalities, and Malevolent infectious and poisonous
Diseases.

In the ninth.
Also if in the ninth, judge mischief to happen to the Religious sort of men,
and such as bear Office in the Church and Ecclesiastic affairs; Sects,
Schisms, and new Tenets shall be allayed, perhaps extirpated and totally beaten
down and quasht, etc. Much damage it also signifies to such as travel and go
long journeys, and no success or profit therein: It signifies also that men
shall be corrupt, Heathenish, and of ill conversations; there shall be little
or no war, and men shall be perplexed with many accidents and Infirmities in
the Thighs, especially if the sign of the ninth be Sagittary.

In the tenth.
Again, if any of the Malevolent fixed Stars be in the tenth afflicting the
Cuspe thereof, or the Lord thereof, it denotes much damage and detriment,
sorrow and trouble to those in Authority, also dissension quarrel and discord
amongst them, and they shall be so put to it for money, that they will de
induced to tax the people, neither indeed will they contribute to their
necessities as formerly, nor have so venerable an esteem of them, but shall
slight, deride, and scoff at them and set up themselves if possible in their
room, Nobles will be dejected, and Rusticks erected and elevated, and there
shall be many infirmities in the Knees, especially if the sign be Capricorn.

In the eleventh.
Also if in the eleventh, strife, dissension and discord shall happen among
friends and acquaintance, and one shall abuse and slander the other, and study
to injure and prejudice each other; hopes shall be frustrated, and the Treasure
of the King or chief Rulers shall be exhausted, and those in whom they most
confide shall deceive them, and leave them helpless at their greatest
extremity, and men shall be perplexed with many Infirmities in the Legs,
especially if the sign be in Aquaries.

In the twelfth.
Lastly, if in the twelfth. It denotes many thieves, and much theeving and
robbing by the Highway, also deceit and falsehood of servants toward their
Masters, and much detriment by them, a diminution of indigent and poor people,
the Commons shall be kept under by their Superiors, damage shall be to great
Cattle, and there shall be many infirmities incident to man in the feet,
especially if the sign be Pisces.

In like manner judge the contrary if you find the benevolent Stars so
posited; they are benevolents that you find are of the nature of Jupiter or
Venus, or both, or of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn, Jupier and Mars, or
Venus and Saturn, Venus and Mars, and of the nature of Jupiter and Mercury,
Venus and Mercury, and of the nature of Mercury only, especially if assisted by
the benevolent Aspects of the Fortunes.

And thus much shall suffice for Instruction in the judging of the Annual
Revolutions of the world; let us now descend to Eclipses, and so hasten to a
conclusion of these our labors.

SECTION IV. Teaching how to judge of the Natural Mutations and Accidents of
this Elementary World by the appearance of Eclipses, Comets, great Conjunctions
and Blazing Stars.
IN the Sixteenth Chapter of this very Fourth Book I have already declared what
an Eclipse of either of the Luminaries is, and the cause of that defect in each
of them; wherefore it would be both needless and superfluous here again to
touch thereon. I shall therefore give you now the whole Method whereby to judge
of any Mutation or Accident in this World portended by Eclipses, and that in
brief according to the Rules of our Predecessor Ptolomy, whom I prefer for his
shortness and plainness before any or all other Writings that I have met with;
it is true, Leovitius has been very large on this subject, and others; but
since what Ptolomy has delivered us, is sufficient for instruction to any that
are to seek in these matters, I shall pass them by as more mysterious and
intricate, and yet tending no more to edification.

In the first Section and first Chapter of this Fourth Book you have been
taught that in your judgment of Revolutions you are to consider the place of
the Eclipses of either Luminaries or both, if any such happen, and join them in
judgment; for if there be any Eclipse or Eclipses, you are to see if there be
any agreement betwixt them and the Lord of the Year and Ascendent of the
Revolutions; for there is nothing more certain then that there follows many
inconveniences and alterations in the World after any of the great Lights are
Eclipsed; for by them all things have their subsistence and nutriment in a
natural way; and therefore it must needs follow sublunary things must suffer
detriment in one kind or other when either of them are deprived of their
lights and influences, especially if both in one Month; whence Hermes says,

Wherefore in any Year if either or both the Luminaries are Eclipsed, or in any
quarterly Revolution, see if the Lord of the Sign wherein the Eclipse is to
fall, be strong or weak, or in Conjunction or any Configuration with the Lord
of the Ascendent at the time of the middle of the Eclipse (which you are to
know is the time wherein you are to erect your Scheme or Figure of the Heavens
for the judging of the Effects of any Eclipse) or with the Lord of the Year or
Quarter, What time the figure of Heaven is to be erected for the judging of
Eclipses.
or whether the Fortunes behold these or the Infortunes: for if the Fortunes,
you are to judge good; if the Infortunes, the contrary. The nature and quality
thereof judge from good; if the Infortunes, the contrary. The nature and
quality thereof judge from the nature of the Significators, as you have heard
before: likewise whether much evil or good is to be expected by considering
the strength of your Significators and their Receptions and nature of their
Aspects.

What things or places are signified good or evil in any Eclipse.
And judge this evil or good to those signified by the Planet in Configuration
with these Lords or the Fortunes or Infortunes, whether men or things: as if
the Ascendent or its Lord be beheld by the Fortunes, then you may safely say
the People of that Nation or Kingdom wherein the Revoluton is, shall be safe,
of good health and prosperous, etc. and so judge of all the rest of the Houses
according to their several significations, as you have been taught before: and
so on the contrary evil, if by the Infortunes: And this shall be the more
increased if the Lord of the Ascendent or Lord of the Year be the Lord of the
Sign wherein the Eclipse is to happen. In like manner pronounce evil and
damage to the persons and things signified by any other House of whom you find
the Lord of the Sign of the Eclipse Ruler, etc. Judge the time when it shall be
most grievous unto them, to be when the Sun comes to the same House in the
Eclipse (I mean the very degree and minute of the Cusp) whereby they are
signified, or to the degree and minute of the Zodiac their chief Sgnificator
was then in: as if it be the Common People, when the Sun comes to the degree
and minute of the Ascendent at the time of the middle of the Eclipse: if it be
the Rulers or King, it will be most grievous when the Sun comes to the degree
and minute of the Tenth House at that time; and so of the rest.

Detriment and mischief also is to be expected to all things signified by the
House wherein any Eclipse is: as if in the Tenth, to Kings, Grandees and chief
Rulers: if in the Ninth, to Churchmen: in the Eighth, the death of Old men,
etc. and it shall be chiefly incident unto men, if any Eclipse be in Humane
Signs: if in Aerie, to Birds: if in Earthy, to the Fruits of the Earth and
Seeds: (yet Junctinus assures us, that if an Eclipse be in Libra, it signifies
the rottenness of Herbs, and that there shall be Sects and Schisms amongst
Churchmen) in watery, to the Fish and Creatures living in the Watery Element:
in Bestial Signs, to Beasts, according to the nature of the Sign: as if Aries,
to Sheep: if Capricorn, to Goats: if Taurus, to Bulls, Cows and Oxen: if
Sagittary, the last 15 degrees, to Horses, etc. and if feral signs, to wild
Beasts.

The Portence of an Eclipse in any Triplicity.
See also in what Triplicity the Luminaries are Eclipsed; for Junctinus says,
An Eclipse either of the Sun or Moon in the Fiery Triplicity, denotes the
motion of Armies, the death and destruction of Cattle, Kings and Great men;
imprisonments, enmity between the Vulgar and Nobler sort of People,
dissemblings, fewd and discords, wars, and grievous slaughter and destruction
of men, murders, thefts, depopulations, abortions to women, sharp Fevers and
Epidemical diseases through excess of heat, apparitions in the Air, scarcity of
Rain, especially in those Regions and places subject to the sign wherein the
Eclipse is, admirable and strange mutations.

In the Earthy Triplicity when any of the Luminaries are Eclipsed, it occasions
scarcity of the Fruits of the Earth, and chiefly of Corn, and such things as
are usually sown every Year.

In the Aerie, shows Famine, fierce and violent Maladies and Pestilential
Diseases, tempestuous stormy winds, and those very pernicious.

In the Watery Triplicity it promises the death of the Vulgar and ignobler sort
of People, seditions and rumors of wars, and eruptions and overflowings of the
Sea-banks.

In the Cardinal points.
Moreover he further testifies, that if an Eclipse happen in Aries, it causes
alteration in Fruits: Vines and Fig Trees shall be corrupted.

If in Libra, in Seeds and Herbs; and Schisms amongst Ecclesiastical men (as
you have already heard.)

In Cancer, a rot tenness or corruption of the fruit when it is gathered,
causing sickness to those that eat them, perhaps surfeits.

In Capricorn, it denotes Olives to be devoured by Locusts or Caterpillars and
such like Worms, many shipwracks and submersions of ships, change in men's
dispositions and manners, especially in those Regions and Places subject unto
Capricorn.

In common signs.
In Gemini and Sagittary an Eclipse threatens destruction to flying Fowls,
especially such as men eat, whereby many men come to sudden death.

In Virgo and Pisces harm and destruction to Vegetables and Creatures living in
the Waters, chiefly in Fountains, corruption of Rivers.

In fixed.
In Taurus, Scorpio, Leo and Aquaries, ruin of houses and ancient buildings,
divisions and hatred amongst the Clergy, and they shall excite Tumults.

Let us now come to Ptolomyes Method in judging of Eclipses, which he begins in
Chap. 4. of his 2. Book of his Quadripartite, after this manner.

CHAP. I. Containing Ptolomies method in judging Eclipses, and how to know the
Regions to which the Effects belong.
AFter he had in the preceding Chapters declared the conditions and
constitutions of several Nations of the World, and the occasion thereof from
the nature of the Signs and Planets, he comes in the 4 Chapter to a more facil
way of appropriating them unto the several signs of the Zodiac, the better to
predict the most eminent accidents and casualties in all Nations, Kingdoms, and
Regions, etc.

Four things to be considered in judging of Eclipses.
Wherefore herein there will be four things most worthy our consideration.

The first, The Places or Regions, Countries, Kingdoms or Cities where the
effects of any Eclipse will be manifest.

The second, The time when the Effects shall begin and how long continue.

The third, The kinds of the events.

The fourth, The quality of the events whither good or evil.

Zodiac your Eclipse falls in, whither it be of the Sun or Moon, and what
Cities, Countries, Kingdoms or Regions are subject to the sign wherein the
Eclipse is, and such Cities that had the sign wherein the defect is, in the
Horoscope or first House at the time of its first structure, or the place then
of the Sun or Moon, and the places subject to the signs in Opposition and
Square thereunto, you may say shall assuredly taste of its effects, as also
such Regions wherein the Eclipse shall be visible; Kingdoms, Cities and Places
subject to every sign of the Zodiac you have in the second Book.

CHAP. II. Showing the time when the Effects of any Eclipse shall begin and how
long continue.
MAny men I know wonder why Astrologers have taught that Eclipses operate not
till such a time after their appearance; but they have but small reason to move
them to this their admiration; for the effects of an Eclipse opperate from the
first appearance thereof, though not so apparently; as a child from its very
first Conceptions is in Being, yet cannot properly be termed ought other then
some living creature till it be produced to light.

And therefore I conceive the Ancients without any respect at all to the
former, have still give Rules for judging of the latter, or the time when their
Effects will be in force or begin to be apparent.

When an Eclipse first manifests its Effects, and when more forcibly.
Wherefore Ptolomy teaches us, that if an Eclipse fall in the East part of the
Horizon, (or more plainly in the Ascendent or East Angle) the Events thereof
shall first manifest themselves from the fourth Month after, but it will more
strongly operate in the first third part of its whole duration.

If in the Mid-heaven, the Effects thereof will first begin to appear after the
second four Months (or more plainly about eight Months after the defect of
the Luminary) but more apparent will it be in the second or middlemost third
part of the whole time it continues.

But if it be in the West-part of the Horizon, ( viz. in the Seventh House of
Heaven, or the West Angle) in the third or last fourth Month shall the Effects
be manifested, but more forcibly in the third and last part of the whole time
of its continuance.

But the particular Remissions and Intentions we must judge from the
Conjunctions and Preventions which in the mean time shall happen in that place,
or in any other places of the figure that has relation thereunto, from the
places of the motion of the Planets by which future events are fore-known, viz.
such as are Oriental, Occidental, Stationary or ascending in the close of the
Evening, viz. vespertine and are occasion of any future events by their Aspects
or any other manner; when they are Oriental you must know their effects are
augmented, and when they are Stationary; but Occidental and under the
Sunbeams, or vespertine and Retrograde, deminished and lessened; understand
this as to the time, not Nature.

How long the Effects of any Eclipse shall continue.
As touching the time of their continuance viz. how long the Effects of any
Eclipse shall last or be in force, it is in this manner to be known, for as
much as an Eclipse is not seen in all Regions and Places in the same hour or
instant of time, neither for the beginning, continuation or end thereof; you
ought therefore in every Region to take according to proportion the Ecliptical
hour, the Elevation of the Pole and the Angles of the figure according
thereunto.

And then you are to see how many equal hours ( viz. Natural Equinoctial
hours consisting of 60 Minutes a piece) the Eclipse continues in every Region,
for when you have this, you are to know that the Events of a Solar Eclipse
shall continue so many years as he is Eclipsed hours, reckoning from the first
moment of his Obscuration to the very last; of a Lunar, so many months;
wherefore the beginning of them you shall know from the place where the Eclipse
falls, and the Angles of the figure at that time.

CHAP. III. Of the kinds of the Events of any Eclipse.
Planets and most notable fixed Stars are, the which with the sign of the
Eclipse (or the Sign wherein the Eclipse is) and the sign of the Angle
preceding the Eclipse is to be considered.

How to know the Lord of Eclipse.
To know the Planet that shall bear chief rule of these two places, it is not
more then thus; see which of the Planets has most power and strength in the
place of the Eclipse and Angle preceding the Eclipse, by House, Exaltation,
Triplicity, face or term, and give it to him; but if one Planet be not both
Lord of the sign wherein the Eclipse is, and the Angle preceding the Eclipse,
but there be two Planets bearing rule in these places, then are you to prefer
that Planet which is Lord of the place of the Eclipse to the rule or Dominion
before the other, yet shall thou join him in judgment therewith; but if there
be several Planets that have Dominion in these places you shall prefer that
which is nearest an Angle and most strong in the degree of the Eclipse, and
make him Lord of the Eclipse.

Fixed Stars to be considered
And you are also to observe those fixed Stars which are of most note, and
placed nere the place of the Eclipse and the Cuspe of the Angle preceding the
Eclipse, as also the Cusps of the Ascendent and Mid-heaven at the time of the
Eclipse.

The forms and figures of the signs.
Having thus seriously considered the fixed Stars as you ought, the forms and
figures of the signs are to be considered in which an Eclipse falls, and in
which the predominant Planets are; for the quality of the Events cannot be well
known but by the nature thereof.

For humane signs of such as are of that form have signification unto mankind;
and if they be ferall signs, or such as bear the form of wild Beasts, or
four-footed Creatures, it shall be to such Beasts and Creatures which are found
in shape and Nature agreeable thereunto; whether the sign signify Snakes,
Beasts of the field, domestic, tame Creatures, etc.

Northern signs, Virgo, Sagittary, the Hen, the Vulture, etc. it denotes
detriment to birds and flying fowl, chiefly such as are usually eaten by man;
If in Cancer, Pisces, or the Dolphin, to Creatures living in the water; if in
the Constellation of the Ship, to Ships and such as Navigate; in Aquaries, to
Rivers and the like, etc.

The portence of an Eclipse in Tropical or Equinoctial signs.
Also if an Eclipse of either I uminary be in any of the Tropical or Equinoctial
signs, it denotes change of air in every of these times; if in the vernal
Equinox, damage to Trees when they begin to bud and shout forth, as the Vine,
Fig Tree and others then springing; if in the Summer Solstice, the events will
be on fruits when they are gathered, but in Egypt it signifies the overflowing
of Nilus; If in the Autumnall Equinox, they will be manifest on Herbs and the
Seeds of the Earth when they are sown, and detriment in harvest; in the Winter
Solstice, on Pot-Hearbs, Birds of the season and Fish.

Also if an Eclipse be in Equinoctial signs, it shows its Effects in Religious
things and Church affairs; in the Tropicks, in the air, laws and manners of
men; In fixed signs, in foundations and edifices; in common signs, in mankind
and Kings.

In the quarters of Heaven.
Moreover Eclipses nere the East, signify their Effects will be apparent in
fruits, youth and foundations; in the Mid-heaven, in the Church, State, great
ones and such as are of middle age; but if in the West, in the Laws and Customs
of the People, the alteration thereof, and in those of elder years; it has
signification also of Murders.

To know the greatness of the Events of any Eclipse.
The quantity or the greatness of their Effects are known from the greatness of
the Eclipse, and from those Stars which in the place of the Eclipse are caused
of the future events.

For when an Eclipse of the Sun is vespertine, the evil portended thereby is
lessened; but when Matutine, increased; so likewise on the contrary, an Eclipse
of the Moon Vespertine increases the evil, Matutine impareth it the one half.

The reason thereof is, because the Sun is the proper Governor of the Day, and
the Moon Governess of the Night, Genesis 1.16. and therefore when they are thus
afflicted in their own season, the Effects must needs be much more effectual
then when on the contrary.

CHAP. IV. Of the quality of the Events of any Eclipse, whether Good or Evil.
How to know the nature and quality of the Events of any Eclipse, whether good
or evil.
UNder the verge of this Chapter will the quality of the events, whether good or
evil fall, and the nature of them both, the which is known from the nature of
the Planets, having most fortitudes in the place of the Eclipse and the
Communication and commixtion of one with another, and the places in which they
are in the Figure of Heaven.

For the Sun and Moon bear rule over the other Planets, and are main causes of
future accidents, as also the power and efficacy of the other Stars are by them
augmented or diminished; but the commixture of those Stars who are of most
power, show the quality of the events.

But let us declare the works and properties of each Planet and their natures;
but that our relation thereof may be the more effectual, you are to take notice
that when I nominate or declare the nature generally of the five Planets, you
are to understand their temper, power and force, whether that Planet does of
himself in his own nature predominate or no, or whether any other Star which is
not errant, or other place of the Zodiac of the same nature and temper or
influence of that Star; wherefore if possible we are to know the nature and
quality of every fixed Star worthy the noting for the making a right commixtion
when they are joined in Configuration with the Errant Stars or Planets, because
this is as considerable as their commixtion one with another, according to
their familiarity before mentioned.

Of Saturn when he is chief Ruler, and his significations in general.
So that if Saturn be only chief Lord or Ruler, he shall be generally the
occasion of destruction and mischief caused by cold; and particularly when his
influence relates unto men, he causes long and tedious Infirmities, Tissicks
and obnoxious Diseases, occasioned from Humors, Phlegm and Defluxions, quartane
Fevers, Banishment, Want, Tribulation, Anxiety, Fears, sadness and Death; and
these chiefly to those that are stricken in years.

But when it relates to Beasts and Creatures belonging to the use of Man, he
brings destruction and causes a scarcity of them, and sickness and
rottenness to those that remain; death also and infirmity in the same nature to
those men that use or eat them.

In the air he shall cause frost and snow, and such as shall produce bitter
cold weather, cloudy and obscure, also pernicious, pestiferous and tempestuous,
Snow and inconvenient wind and moisture, producing by corruption pernicious and
offensive creatures to mankind.

But in the Sea and Rivers, tempests and shipwracks, also difficult and
dangerous Navigating, a destruction and scarcity of fishes; increase and
decrease of waters in the Sea by fits, the overflowing of Rivers, and
eruptions of the Sea-banks and mischief by water.

In the Earth, a diminution and destruction of fruits, and chiefly to such as
are more particularly for the use of Man; they shall suffer by Worms very much
detriment and Caterpillars, Locusts, and such like, or by inundations,
over-flowings of Water, or too much abundance of Rain, cold Frost or the like,
so that thereby there shall be such a scarcity and deerness of such things,
that many men shall dye for want of bread.

Of Jupiter when he is chief Ruler, what he signifies in general.
If Jupiter be chief Ruler, he causes generally an increase and plenty of all
things, and particularly to man, he elevateth their condition to honor, renown
and plenty, gives health, tranquillity, peace and an increase of riches and
goods, and all things appertaining to the life of man in a natural way;
Increases the benefits and goods received from Princes, or such as are in
Authority, and causes also even these Grandees to be more Illustrious,
inlargeth their Territories and Dominions, and abundantly augmenteth their
Grandeur; generally Jupiter denotes success and happiness in every thing.

To Beasts belonging chiefly to the use of Man, he signifies an increase, but
such as are destructive and not profitable, he destroys.

The air also he tempereth and makes wholesome, and sends convenient moisture
in seasons requisite for the Production of the fruits of the Earth, the which
he multiplyeth and increases by his sweet influence.

The Sea also for Navigation shall be safe, the floods of Rivers temperate, etc.

Of the significations of Mars, if he be chief Ruler.
If Mars be chief Lord of any Eclipse, he generally threatens mischief to all
sorts and kinds of men which shall happen through extremity of drought; and
particularly he causes much war, intestine hatreds, fewds, quarrels and
discords amongst men, especially of that kind of life, viz soldiers; he
excites men also to many robberies, spoilings, sacking, tyranny and rebellion;
he also causes the wrath of Kings and Great men, and troubles in general,
sudden death, sicknesses and those chiefly tertian Agues or Fevers, and those
principally, or more particularly to those of younger years or in their
strength of youth, much choler and anger amongst men of small repute; they
shall commit unlawful things and violate the Law; many Combustions, slaughters,
rapines, thefts, and robberies.

In the air he causes extremity of heat and very warm winds, also ligthning
and little rain.

In the Sea destruction to ships, and submersions suddenly by mixed winds,
lightning and such like.

In Rivers a scarcity of waters, a drought of Fountains and detriment by
drinking of waters, which for the most part will be corrupted.

And in things appertaining to the life of Man, viz. Beasts and Vegetables, he
shall cause a scarcity, and destruction of the fruits of the Earth, by reason
they shall be scorched with extremity of heat or eaten with Locusts and
Caterpillars, or destroyed by winds, or nipt in the bud.

Of Venus and her significations general.
But if Venus be chief Significatrix, she denotes the same as does Jupiter
generally, but together with it some Venereal sports; and particularly to men
she causeht honor, fame, joy, fortunate success in every thing, happy
marriages, abundance of children and felicity in all things belonging to
Matrimony, and an increase of riches, and an unusual familiarity and
correspondency between Princes and their Subjects and Familiars.

In the air, winds, but temperate, bringing abundance of showers, yet they very
seasonable and convenient for the fructifying of the Earth, a seasonable time
according to the nature of the season.

In the Sea such Ships as Navigate shall be safe and prosperous.

In Rivers abundance of waters by reason of many showers.

Beasts, Vegetables and such things as are for the use of man, shall be
plentiful.

Of Mercury and his significations when he is chief Ruler
If Mercury be chief Ruler, he signifies such events generally as are of the
nature of the Planet he is in Conjunction with and in Configuration; for you
have been taught in our second Book of this Volume, that he participateth in
Nature with the Planet in Conjunction or Configuration with him; but properly
in his own nature he furthers the natural signification of the other.

Particularly in men he excites expedition, industry, cunning and ingenuity in
every thing.

In the Sea he causes unfortunate Navigation when he is joined in judgment
with the Infortunes as being in Configuration or Conjunction with them; but if
with the Fortunes, judge the contrary; with the Malevolents also he denotes
many diseases and infirmities, Quotidian Fevers, Imposthumes, Consumptions and
Coughs, Phthisis and dry diseases; as touching matters of State, Laws, Customs
and Privileges, he orders all according to the Planets and Stars in
Configuration with him; wherefore we see he being dry of constitution being so
nere the Sun, and of a swift motion, and because he is often Retrograde, he
stirs up frequent turbulent and pernicious winds, also thunder and lightning,
openings of the Earth and Earthquakes, and perhaps much damage thereby to
Vegetables and Creatures for the use of Man (I conceive Ptolomy might very well
have left out perhaps) also in the hours of his setting he causes a
diminution of Waters and Rivers; in the hours of his rising an augmentation;
and thus much of the innate significations of the Planets.

Now when according to the variety of the Aspects and Signs they are mingled by
being mutually behold of each other and their Position in respect of the Sun,
they thereby vary their effects or actions according to the variety of
significations and judgments arising from their several Conjunctions and
Configurations.

Wherefore since it is impossible to relate exactly unto thee all their
Configurations and their commixtures, or at least for that it would be so
intricate a thing, we shall refer it to the study and consideration of the
Student; for as I have said before, unless thy Genius leads thee to the exact
knowledge thereof, the reading of all the Books in the World will no wise avail
thee.

But we ought diligently to observe the nature of those Stars by which the
events are signified, and their affinity with those Regions where the effects
are to be manifested thus.

If they be fortunes and have relation to the evil places where the events
shall happen, and no wise contradicted by other Stars, they more effectually
perform what events were before promised; but if they have no relation to those
places, or if they be gainsayed by malevolent Stars, their good influence is by
so much lessened, and so thou may judge on the contrary. And thus much of
Eclipses according to Ptolomy.

Some lines toward the latter end of the eighth chapter of his aforesaid
second Book I have willingly omitted, for that I do not in every word agree
with him, and therefore herein I shall desire to be excused, as also if I have
in any other places varied somewhat from him; I know no reason why any man that
stands on his shoulders may not see farther then he; truly I must really
confess he has merited much honor from his successors, wherefore I shall
esteem him as for his shortness, so for his accurate and sufficient largeness
and method before any or all other Astrological Philosophers whatsoever; and
therefore (as I have already said) with him I shall conclude as touching this
matter, adding only this Chapter which I have collected out of of Junctinus,
that we may hasten to a conclusion of this Treatise.

CHAP. V. Of the Sun and Moon Eclipsed in any Decanate or Face of the twelve
Celestial Signs.
Diverse rules have I before delivered unto thee which I collectedout of
Junctinus; wherefore now for conclusion of this point; I thought good to give
thee this Chapter out of him also, the which he gathered from the writings of
Proclus.

When there happens any Eclipse either of the Sun or Moon in Taurus, Virgo, or
Capricorn, it denotes a scarcity of the fruits of the Earth and Corn; in
Gemini, Libra or Aquaries, a Famine and outrageous diseases, Pestilencies and
Mortalities; in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, the death and slaughter of obscure,
common Plebean kind of people, continual quarrels and seditions, and great
damage to Navigators and such as converse in the Sea, or Sea-affairs; in Aries,
Leo or Sagittary, I need say no more then this, thas it is sufficiently
declared in the handling the several Decanates of these Signs; wherefore it
will not be amiss if we also go through every sign of the whole Zodiac,
beginning at Aries, that so thou may not be to seek upon any Eclipse of the
Luminaries, and first then of the Sun.

Sun is Eclipsed in any of the first ten degrees of Aries (which you have heard
is the first Decanate or Face thereof) it portends the sudden and frequent
motion of Armies, continual expeditions, assaults and batteries with many
tumults, seditions and controversies, and an inclination of the air to
intemperate heat and drought.

viz. from the tenth to the twentieth degree of Aries) it denotes the
Imprisonment, trouble and sadness of some King, and danger of death unto him, a
corruption of trees that are fruitful or of such fruits as are produced of
Trees, as also of the Earth.

viz. from the twentieth to the thirtieth, or last degree of Aries) he brings
grief and sadness to mortals, and the death of great women, and a scarcity or
diminution of Cattle ( viz. those of the lesser sort, because it is signified
by Aries.)

Sun happening in the first Face of Taurus, afflicts Negotiators, Agents and
Solicitors, destroys businesses, and the Corn upon the Earth.

Taurus, incommodities to such as bear children, and also to Travelers.

viz. Bulls, Oxen and Cows.

Gemini (of the Sun) causes dissension amongst Priests, of what Order soever
they are, inveterate hatred and seditions, and a contempt of both the Law of
God and Man is to be feared.



Gemini, and the frustration of such Cities affairs and Negotiations.

Sun in the first Face of Cancer, troubles the air, and causes var^ous winds
and alterations of weather.



Armenia and Africa, and the rest of the Regions and Places subject to Cancer,
Hidropical diseases, seditions, and the disease of France, Naples, Spain,
England, and indeed of all the World; yet commonly called the French and
Neopolitan disease, or more plainly the French Pox.

Sun in the first Decanate of Leo denotes the death of some eminent Prince, and
the scarcity of Bread-corn.





Sun in Virgo, argues the grievous calamity and death of some certain King in
the confines of Virgo.





Sun be in the first Face of Libra; it corrupts the Air, causes the
Pestilence: and a scarcity and dearness of Corn

Libra, Seditions and Famine.



Scorpio, it moves and stirs up Wars and tumults, slaughter, hatred,
captivities, plots and treacheries.





Sagittary, if an Eclipse of the Sun be, it shows grievous dissentions and
deadly fewds amongst men.





Sun in the first Decanate of Capricorn, it denotes unhappiness and chances to
Great men, the transmigration of some King, and the Rebellion of the Nobles and
rusticks.





Sun in the first Face of Aquaries, causes public sorrow and sadness.





Sun in the first Face of Pisces, dries up Rivers, and unfortunateth the Sea
and the affairs thereof.





The Moon eclipsed in the first Face of Aries.
An Eclipse of the Moon now in every Decanate is to be considered, since we have
done with the Sun, wherefore when the Moon is Eclipsed in the first Decanate of
Aries, she denotes Fevers, destruction of Woods by fire, and a siccity and
dryness of the air.





Moon in the first decanate of Taurus, denotes destruction and death to great
Cattle.

Taurus; and a scarcity of seeds and barrenness of the Earth.



Moon in the first Face of Gemini, threatens incursions and rapins of enemies.





Moon in the first Face of Cancer, excites and stirs up Wars.





Moon in the first Face of Leo, denotes the death of either some Illustrious
King or famous Man.





Moon in the first Face of Virgo, causes diseases and Infirmities to the King,
and various seditions and discords amongst men.





Libra, provokes furious and tempestuous hail storms.





Moon be in the first Face of Scorpio, it causes horrible Thunder and
Lightning, and sometimes Earthquakes.





Moon in the first Face of Sagittary, sends thefts and rapines.





Moon eclipsed in the first face of Capricorn, shows suggestions amongst men,
and untimely death: or mischief to some illustrious and Noble man.



Capricorn, also sedition.

Moon eclipsed in the first face of Aquaries, denotes the misfortune of some
King under Aquaries.





Moon eclipsed in the first face of Pisces, brings sadness and anxiety to
those we call Priests, and Religious Houses.





And thus much shall suffice to be said of Eclipses at this time; hereafter God
sparing me life and leisure from my other studies, perhaps I may make some
addition thereunto if I find the present age worthy thereof; Let us now
proceed.

CHAP. VI. Of Comets and Blazing-Stars, what they are, the many sorts thereof,
their Portences, and how long they appear at any time.
What a Comet is.
ELsewhere you may remember you have been shown what a Comet is, viz. in the 16.
Chpater of the 3. Section of this Book, it being no other then a dry
exhalation, viscuous and slimy, exhaled by the Sun and power of the Stars by
degrees into the upper Region of the Air; for by how much the dryer or moister
are the vapors whereof they are compounded, the higher or lower are they
placed and drawn up.

The name thereof.
This word Comet we borrow from the Greeks, who call it (...), Cometes quasi
comata stella, an hairy Star, as the word signifies in English, whence the
Latins call it Crinita, because many times they appear like hair made of fire,
or fire in the manner and form of a man's head, or an horses main, and we in
England do vulgarly call them Comets or Blazing-Stars, of which there are
diverse sorts, as mentions Pliny, Lib. 2. cap. 25. de Not. and others.

Diverse sorts of Comets, or Bl^zing stars.
The first by the Greeks called (...), a barba, resembling a beard, because it
has a circle about it of that form or shape, I mean about the nether part
thereof.

The second they call (...), id est, a jaculo, because it is shapen in form of
a dart or spear.

The third (...), which is the same as is the former, save only they are
shorter and sharper-pointed at the top then the other, and pale like a sword
and without rays.

The fourth (...), discus, id est, a dish or platter; this Comet is so called
for that it is round resembling a dish, yet now and then it puts forth one
of the brims thereof.

The fifth (...), Pitheus, and this is in form like a Tun, environed in a
smoaky light.

The sixth (...), Ceratias, thus called for that it resembles an horn, and
such an one Pliny testifies appeared when the whole manhood of Greece fought
the battle of Salamis.

The seventh (...) lampas a (...), splendeo, to shine like a lamp, and
therefore has it this name.

The eighth (...), Hippeus; this emitteth streams like unto an Horse main, and
therefore it is thus called; this is swift in motion and often turns round,
as says Pliny.

A ninth he records to be white and bright like silver hair, and of that
splendour that a man is hardly able to behold it, and others become shaggy and
compassed as it were with hair or frindge round about.

Where or in what part of Heaven usually seen.
They are in a manner all seen under the Great Bear, or that constellation which
we vulgarly call Charlimains Wain, or Charles his Wain, yet some have been
discerned to appear in that white part of the Heaven called commonly the Milky
way from the fictions of the Poet; they denote many boisterous winds and
excessive heat; seldom are any seen in the West part of Heaven, but about the
South or Antartick Pole some have been seen, as Pliny in the same aforesaid
Chapter testifies, to whom I here refer thee where thou shall find what
Prodigies they were the forerunners of in the time of Claud^us Caesar, Pompey,
and Octavius the Consul.

Their continuance in the Heavens.
It has been observed and noted by the diligent care, industry and pains of the
Ancients, that they never appear a shorter time then a seven-night, nor longer
then 80 days; some have said 40; others 75, from Plutarch, who noted so much
from the Comet which appeared before the Peloponsian wars in Greece; but their
continuance is according to their magnitude; for if they be but small, they
will be soon burnt out, unless they be daily fed with new exhalations: I shall
not here trouble my self to recite what Seneca, Aristotle, and others write in
Histories concerning such horrid accidents which have followed in many places
on the appearance of Comets, since all the learned in the works of Nature do
unanimously conclude they are the forerunners of much tribulation, alteration,
anxiety, and trouble, which I shall by and by more amply deliver unto thee.

Some Comets move, others again are fixed. How to judge of their Portences.
You are to take notice that some Comets do move, as the Planets; and again,
others, stir not but are fixed as are the other Stars.

To judge of the accidents portended by Comets, the place of their appearance
in the Heavens is to be observed, and what Stars are in Configuration
therewith; also in what similitude they appear, and where they appear and shine.

If they appear like swords, wars are threatened, and destruction of mankind;
like Flutes or Hout-boys, it portends mischief to Musicians; if in the middle
of a sign, to whore-masters, and women gamesters; in form of a triangle or
quadrange, viz. a Trine or Square Aspect to any of the fixed Stars, to wits and
learned men; if a Comet appear in either of the Nodes, or those places which we
commonly call the Head and Tail of the Dragon, it proves infectious and
pestiferous.

The birth of our Savior fore-known by the Comet in Augustus his time.
We come now to show the events of Comets, or such things as they are the
forerunners of; yet I cannot but first let my Reader know the strange
foreknowledge Sybilla Tiburtina had in this Science, who from the apparition of
that great and famous Comets which was seen in Caesar Augustus his time (in
whose days and reign was our Savior Christ born) told the Emperor that it
pointed out a child born of a Virgin, which should be great then he; and
therefore she exhorted him to worship and adore him, etc.

The Portencies of Comets and Blazing-Stars.
Histories, ancient Writers, and common experience in former ages testifies
unto us that these signs in the Heaven, or appearance of Comets, are the
assured forerunners of the sterility of the Earth, Pestilence, Famine, War,
alterations of Kingdoms, States and Empires, Laws and Customs, Winds,
Earthquakes, Iuundations, extreme heat and drought, greiveous diseases and
infirmities, and such like horrid evils.

CHAP. VII. Showing the Physical reasons of the horrid and terrible portences
of Conmets and Blazing-Stars.
THat they are the cause of inordinate heat, is apparent by their ardent
burning in the air, and their matter of which they are made.

Of sterility, by reason the fatness of the Earth is (together with the exhaled
matter whereof they are composed) drawn out, and the Earth left dry, and lean,
and so the moisture and convenient humidity, whereby it fructified all things
growing therein, is dried up by excessive heat, and consequently rendered
barren, whence there must needs follow famine or sterility in those Regions as
places where they are seen, or from whence their matter or substance was drawn.

Of Pestilence and Diseases, in that they air is by them infected through hot,
thick cloudy exhalations, the which being drawn in at the mouth of living
creatures, infecteth and kills them; also by excessive and inordinate heat
the radical himidity and moisture of living creatures whereby they subsist, is
dried up, whereby they become no other then dead carcasses: wherefore it is
necessary in such times to use colling and moistning preparatives which are of
that nature as to restore and conserve radical moisture.

Of war and alterations in Kingdoms, States, Laws and Customs, in that when a
Comet or Blazing-Star appears, there are many exhalations in the Air, and those
of nature hot and dry, the which do so dry up the humors in men, and increase
choler, that they are easily excited to quarrels, after which follow blows,
wars and bloodshed; and so consequently alterations in States, Governments,
Laws, Customs, and Empires.

Of Winds, for that they are of the same matter whereof Comets are, as you have
heard in the 16 Chapter and 2 Section of this fourth Book; and when any Comet
or Blazing-Star appears, many such dry vapors are exhaled; besides, when they
vanish, they become windy vapors.

Of Earthquakes, for the same aforesaid reason; for they are the occasion of
winds, and winds of Earthquakes, as in the same aforesaid 16 Chapter you have
been taught.

Of Inundations, for the same reason also; for Comets cause winds, winds cause
the Sea to roar and rage, whence follows inundations.

Thus have I delivered you the reasons of their portences the which I would not
have thee nor any to fear, though never so horrid and terrible, but rather take
courage thereby to call earnestly to God for mercy, that he might evert his
judgments whereof he does so fairly warn us by these his messengers.

CHAP. VIII. Showing some other names of Comets or Blazing-Stars, and their
Portences.
Why Comets are seen but seldom, and but one at a time.
HEre it will not be amiss, if I set down something which I had almost forgot,
viz. that Comets and Blazing-Stars seldom are seen, for that it is not an easy
matter for the Sun and Planets, (neither is it soon done) to draw up so much
dry vapor as is requisite for the composition of such an apparition; and
therefore is it also that there does but one appear at a time, th^ugh Aristotle
affirms there has been many seen together, and this I must confess is as
likely to be true as many other of his stories and tales.

At what time of the year Comets and Blazing-Stars usually appear.
They are seldom never seen in Winter by reason of the abundance of cold and
moist weather that then abounds, so that there can be no such dry vapor
exhaled by the Sun or Stars, nor in that quantity as is requisite to the
composition of such apparitions; neither in Summer, by reason of the excess of
heat, or the heat of the Sun which consumes and disperseth the matter whereof
they are made, so that it cannot ascend unto that part of the Region of the Air
wherein they are usually placed; neither in the Spring time, by reason of the
abundance of moisture that then reigns, and the want of sufficient heat to
elevate so much matter; but in Autumn, especially when Saturn and Mars are in
Conjunction, because then the heat that exhales the matter, is more strong.

Comets white and red; and the reason thereof.
Father note, that some Comets are white, some again red, which arises from the
diverse nature and qualit of the matter whereof they are; for pure thin
exhalations produce a white, clear and bright Comet; when it is more gross and
impure, red, and these appear like burning coals; but when the matter whereof
they are is very gross, they appear as red as Scarlet or blood; wherefore the
Ancients have assigned them unto the several Planets according to their
complexions; for such as are Saturnian, are pale, wan and of a leaden color
like unto Saturn; Jovial, bright; Martial, red; Solar, golden or yellow;
Venereal, obscure; Mercurial, blews, etc.

The reason of their shape and form.
Such as are like the hairs of a man's head (as you have heard) are more
condensed and thick in the middle, but about the edges more rare; those
resembling beards, have their extremes more rare and dispersed; and those that
are much extended in length, are more rare and subtle.

The distinct significations of every Comet or Blazing Star.
The Ancients have delivered moreover these nine following several Comets or
Blazing-Stars, and their virtues or Portences which I could no wise omit being
so necessary to Instruction.

The first then is call^^ Veru, for that it resembles a spit, or dart, and
appears in the day time very terrible to the beholders: It denotes a scarcity
of fruit both of the Earth and trees; mutations in Church and State, grievous
slaughters and the death of Kings, Nobles and such as are of their adherence.

The second, Tenaculum, of the color of Mars, and has rays under it like the
flames of burning coals: it signifies there shall not be such plenty as
formerly, yet not famine; wars also are thereby stirred up to the great
prejudice of the godlier sort of people who shall be very forward therein.

The third, Pertica, which sometimes emitts obscure rays, and again at other
times bright; this denotes a drought both of the Earth and Waters; and a
scarcity of Provisions; the which if corporally joined to any Planet signifies
events according to the nature of that Planet (the nature of every Planet you
have been taught before) as if it be joined to Saturn, there shall be
mortalities, troubles to old men, and those of the religious Orders: to Jupiter
it extends its effects to Kings and Grandees whether good or bad according to
their fortitudes; to Mars, many wars, tumults, slaughters and effusion of
blood; to the Sun it will not appear by reason of the Suns splendor, yet it
portends the death of Kings and many tribulations, plagues, and sicknesses; to
Venus, it signifies drought, and a diminution of great waters; to Mercury, it
denotes the death of young men, wits and ingenuous souls; to the Moon, it
signifies death and grievous mortality to men, especially common people.

The fourth Miles, consecrated to Venus, and has an hairy tail or main,
emitting Moon-like beams or rays; it signifies mischief to Kings, Nobles and
Great men, and that men shall rise that will endeavor to alter the Laws and
ancient Customs, and set up new; but the greatest evil portended thereby will
be incident to those places toward which it extends its tail or rays; it
denotes also wars.

The fifth Ceruleus, of a blew or azure color, appropriated to Mercury, it
denotes the death of Kings and Grandees, Nobles such as are chief Rulers, and
chiefly toward the part toward which it extends its rays; also wars.

The sixth Aurora five Matutina, assigned to Mars, it has a tale, and is of a
fiery complexion; when it appears toward the East, bending its head
downwards, it signifies war, combustions, fire and sword, pestilence and famine
in Arabia and Egypt, drought and a scarcity of waters, and this shall extend
also to the Western Regions

The seventh Argentum sive Argenteus, and this is the brightest and clearest of
all Comets; it has pure bright beams; when it appears, Jupiter being then in
Cancer or Pisces, it promises abundance of corn and fruit in those parts where
it appeared; but if Jupiter be then in Scorpio, it will not be altogether so
good.

The eighth Rosa, this is a great round Comet, and is of the form and
similitude of of a man, it causes the death of Kings, Great, Noble and Rich
men, and the alteration of things.

The ninth and last Niger, appropriated to Saturn, being in color like unto
him; it denotes mortality both natural and also by the sword, beheadings and
the like.

If a Comet appear in the Ascendent of any Town,

The signification of Comets in Earthy signs, watery, aerie and fiery.
Comets appearing in earthy signs, denote sterility through drought; in watery,
through abundance of rain and floods, and causes also Pestilence; in aerie,
they promise Winds, Seditions and Pestilence, yet not always Plagues; in
fiery, Wars, slaughters and commotions.

CHAP. IX. Of the signification of Comets and Blazing-Stars appropriated to the
seven Planets.
REceive these Rule following, as from the Chaldeans, Arabians, and such as
were very expert in these matters in former Ages.

The Portences of such Comets as belong to Saturn.
Wherefore know, that if any Comet of the nature and complexion of Saturn appear
in the Ascendent of the Revolution of the World, it denotes many evils, Famine,
Pestilence, Banishment, Want, Anxiety, terror and trouble, Chronick diseases,
and Melancholy distempers, Catarrs, Quartane Agues, Falling Sickness,
Leprosies, Palsies, Cancers, and those diseases which are of continuance,
lingering Consumptions, and the like; destruction to Beasts appertaining to the
use of man; excessive cold weather in winter; Aethiopia will cause but a
temperate Air, etc. and therefore this is to be understood of these Northern
parts,) clouds, frost and snow, strong and high winds, tempests, shipwracks,
destruction of Fish, as also of Fruit by Caterpillars, Locusts, and such like
Vermin; great Inundations and storms, to the anoyance of Cattle, and all
things, Men and Kingdoms under the Dominion of Saturn shall suffer detriment,
and be in danger of destruction.

Comets of the nature of Jupiter and their portences.
Such as are of a silver color, bright and of great splendour, and of the nature
of Jupiter, cause a plentiful year when they appear in the Ascendent (as you
have heard) wholesome blasts of Air with many seasonable showers especially if
it be a watery sign; it denotes also such infirmities as are of the nature of
Jupiter (which you have heard in the second Book of this Volume) and many
alterations and changes in such Kingdoms, Regions and Places subject unto him,
the which I have there also at large set down.

Comets of the nature of Mars, and their significations.
Those Comets which you have heard we have understood by the names of Veru and
Pertica are of the nature of Mars, wherefore they denote horrible winds,
storms, and tempests, a drought of Fountains, and a destruction of Fruit by
corruption, and all the diseases portended by Mars; etc. frequent Thundering
and Lightnings to the destruction of many Ship at Sea, wrath, quarrels,
heart-burnings, slaughters and bloodshed amongst men; tumults, seditions and
wars, alterations of Kingdoms, Laws, Government and Customs, and such like
evils appropriated to the nature of Mars, and the shall chiefly be incident to
such men as are under his Dominion, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms and Places, as also
to those parts toward which the Comet extends its tail as you have heard.

The signification of the Sun his Coments.
Comets and Blazing-Stars of the nature and complexion of the Sun, denote the
death of Kings, Great men and Nobles in those parts they appear, and in that
Kingdom or Nation under the Ascendent of that sign where in they appear, and
for which the Revolution is made (when they are seen in the Ascendent thereof;)
also alterations in Government to the better; continall and daily tumults also
war, drought, and such infirmities and are solar, and those chiefly to solar
men, and to such places as are under his Dominion.

Comets of the nature of Venus, and their portences.
Such as are appropriated unto Venus, show their Effects on Fruits and in
Waters, and cause change and mutations in the World, alterations of the Laws,
Customs and Privileges of Men; damage and detriment to Women, Nuns, and
Matrons, chiefly in their Stomach, Secrets and Reins, etc. All infirmities
signified by Venus are threatened, to those especially that are under her rule,
and also to those places subject unto her.

What is signified by Mercurial Comets.
Mercurial Comets occasion the death of some Great man (still remember this is
where they have Dominion) grievous calamities, War, Pestilence and Famine,
Destruction, Tribulation, Anxiety, trouble and sadness to Mercurialists, and
Ingenuous and wise men, and such as are ruled by Mercury, and grievous trouble
and sorrow to such places as are subject unto him, and the sign wherein the
Comet appears, and places to which it extends it self, and where it is visible
it sends Mercuriall diseases.

What by Lunar.
Lunar Comets chiefly manifest their significations on women and common people;
as also to all such as are under her rule, whether Towns, Cities, Kingdoms or
Nations; they particularly denote troubles, alteration of the Laws, Customs and
Rites Sterility and Wars, all infirmities signified by the Moon, and those
chiefly to such as are by her governed, etc.

Note also, that if a Comet extends its self toward Saturn, ( viz. its rays
or tail) it portends the destruction of the fruits of the Earth, and a scarcity
or Famine; toward Jupiter, wrath and destruction to Kings, and the Grandees of
the Earth; toward Mars, grievous and terrible sicknesses, wars, slaughters and
bloodshed, and the alteration of Kingdoms; toward the Sun, the death and
destructions of Kings and Government; toward Venus, the death of Great and
Noble women, and damage to such things as appertain unto them; toward Mercury,
much consumption of wealth, with shame and infamy; toward the Moon, troubles
and shame to the People in general.

CHAP. X. Showing the Significations of Comets, when they appear in any of the
twelve Signs of Heaven.
Of the signification of Comets when they appeat in Aries.
ALbumaser and Junctinus with many others say, that if any of the aforesaid
Comets or Blazing-Stars appear in Aries, it signifies evil and detriment to
Noble men, and the Grandees of the Earth in the Eastern parts, and abundance of
sadness to the commoner sort, (and truly I conceive all Nations, Kingdoms and
People, Cities, Towns, Villages and Families under the sign Aries will suffer
the same) also a noise of the clashing of Arms, bloodshed, and the death of
some eminent Prince, or slaughter of some great Lady, (you must remember to
confine your judgment herein to the places wherein the Blazing-Star or Comet
has power, so also in the subsequent rules in the like case) with fear and
trouble of slaughter amongst men; also great drought, common diseases in the
Head, Eyes and Brain, a rot amongst small Cattle, especially Sheep, and a
dejection of Great and Noble men, or an un-throning of some King, and a rise or
promotion of vile and ignoble mean people.

If its apparition be in the Eastern part of Heaven, it will operate sooner,
and there shall be enmity amongst men; but if in the Western, more slow, and
much evil and detriment from Kings or Superiors, and many showers,
inundations and frequent snows in Winter.

In Taurus.
If any Blazing-Star or Comet appear in Taurus, it signifies mischief to men,
and diminution of their goods, also injuries and wrongs put upon them; it uses
also to signify (as say the Ancients) the death of some Great man,
Captivities, injuries, and a toleration of evils; detriment to the greater sort
of Cattle, especially Bulls, Cows and Oxen, great winds, a corruption of Fruit,
and destruction of Corn, and in Winter much cold, also grievous Earthquakes,
vehement sicknesses, and dry scurfie diseases, proceeding of putrefication, as
scabs, etc.

If it appear toward the East, it will sooner operate, and the King shall fear
his Enemies, and men shall be molested with boils and swellings about the
Groins, and these shall continue for some years; also sicknesses in the
Summer-quarter; and if it appear in the Western part, it will work more slowly,
and signifies much rain.

In Gemini.
In Gemini, if any Comet appear, it signifies men shall be lascivious and
incestuous, In Gemini.
loose livers and neglecters of goodness; also it denotes quarrels, wars, and
dissentions amongst men, sicknesses and the death of children, and young men
especially; also Abortive births, the slaughter of Birds, Famine, Thunder and
Lightning, with very high winds to the eradication and subversion of trees and
houses.

And if it appear toward the East part of Heaven, the Effects thereof will
soon be seen, and many Grandees of the World shall be abased, and brought down
from their High Places and Honors; and if it appear in the West, not so soon,
and it signifies much captivity, and abundance of rain and inundations.

In Cancer.
Also if a Comet appear in Cancer, it signifies abundance of Locusts (in the
parts where they are naturally produced, in our Climate it produces
Caterpillars, and such like pernicious worms) which shall eat up and destroy
the Fruits of the Earth, also small worms in Corn and Trees, a scarcity of
Fruit and plenty of Worms; it denotes also wars, discords and much evil, the
death of some Great Person, submersions, Rapes and Robberies, Famine and
Pestilence.

And if it appear in the Eastern part of Heaven, its Effects will be quickly
manifest, and there shall be scarcity of Provisions for the use of man toward
the latter end of the year; if in the Western, not so soon; it denotes the
kindness of Kings and Great men to the Commons.

Again, if any appear in Leo, men shall be damnified by wild Beasts, In Leo.
Lions and Woolfs, (this is to be understood in those Regions where such feral
creatures are) Worms and Vermin shall be destructive to the Corn, an men shall
be damnified in their estates; the Gentry and Nobility shall suffer detriment,
and many of them death, and War amongst Kings toward the end of the year, and
much effusion of blood in the Eastern parts [note the Parenthesis in Aries] and
pains in the Eyes.

And if it appear in the Eastern part, the Effects are soon manifested, and it
signifies great Winds, Lightning, and a scarcity of Waters; in the Western, not
so soon, and it signifies many sicknesses, and that Wolves and mad Dogs will
rage.

And if in Virgo, In Virgo.
it denotes the extirpation of Domestics belonging to some King or Prince, or
their removal out of one place into another, or out of one Kingdom into
another, or their banishment, or their being carried away captive, and their
goods and offices shall be taken away without any hope of restoration, neither
shall they ever recover them; it denotes also damage to Merchants and mutual
injuries and injustice amongst men; also vexations and captivities, and much
labor, pain, trouble, tribulations and sadness, Fevers, Abortions in women, a
noise of Arms, etc.

If it appear Eastward, the sooner are its Effects manifest, and portends war;
if Westward, the later, and denotes quarrels and a rankeness of Corn.

In Libra it denotes theft and robberies, also cutters on the Highway, In
Libra.
and men shall fear poverty and want, and shall suffer through cold; it denotes
also the death of some eminent man, slaughters, and secret plots and
treacheries, a scarcity of Rain, impetuous Winds, a drought of Fountains and
other waters, a want of the Fruits of the Earth, and Provisions for the use of
man, Earth quakes, etc.

And if it be Eastern, these Effects will the sooner appear, and the Kings of
Babylon (and such as are under the sign Libra) shall be unfortunate; and Horses
and Mules shall be dear, and Wars amongst the Romans; but if Western, the
contrary, and servants shall contemn and reject their Masters, and the fruits
of the Earth shall not be altogether so scarce.

In Scorpio any Comet signifies abundance of war and rebellion to Kings, In
Scorpio.
changes and alterations, detriment and damage to soldiers, labor and travel
to all kings of men, contentions amongst Great men, great perils and dangers,
the death of some eminent man, and a scarcity of waters at some certain times,
mischief to such as are with child, a scarcity of Corn and the fruits of the
Earth, and pains in the Testicles and Bladder.

And if it be seen in the East or Eastward, these do soon appear, and it
denotes a scarcity of rain, and that Wolves sand Dogs will ravin; but if it be
Westward, not so soon, and there shall be Locusts and such like creatures.

Also a Comet in Sagittary denotes a decay of Nobility, In Sagittary.
and a suppression of Great and Noble men, wise, prudent and learned, and much
evil and tribulation will fall upon them, and especially to Scribes or
Lawyers, moreover captivity of Princes, war and such like.

But if it be seen toward the East, sooner will these be effected, and it
signifies the death of Kings, fightings robberies and a scarcity of Provisions
for the life of man; if toward the West, later, and it denotes many
fantastical dreams, and that women shall have many Abortions.

Again, In Capricorn.
in Capricorn any Comet signifies fornications amongst men, war amongst King
and Nobles, many calamities and misfortunes, quarrels, poisoning of Kings, the
death of Princes cutting by the Highway, contempt of Religion, men and things;
and it also shows persecution of or to Religion, hail, snow, and a sharp winter
to the great anoyance of the seeds of the Earth; also it threatens Famine,
Pestilence, and the like.

If it be first seen in the Eastern part of Heaven, its Effects will suddenly
appear, and it denotes that Kings shall be damnified by their enemies, and they
shall be the occasion of their death and alterations in Government, snow also
and abundance of rain, to the destruction of Vines and other the fruits of the
Earth; but if in the Western, not so soon, and it denotes a Year of abundance
of grass and water.

Moreover if in Aquaries, In Aquaries.
it denotes many wars and slaughters, and the death of some honorable and
eminent Prince or Lady in the Eastern parts, say some of the Ancients; (but I
should have judged it in the Western parts, Aquaries being a Western sign,
etc.) war for a long time, Epidemical diseases, an obscuration of the Air, with
thundering and lightning, Pestilence also, and the death of both Illustrious
men, and also the common sort of people.

If it appear in the Eastern parts, their Portences will sooner operate, and it
denotes abundance of grass; if in the Western, later, and it signifies various
rumors, and chiefly of war, and that many men shall be imprisoned and
captivated.

Lastly, In Pisces.
a Comet in Pisces signifies war amongst kindred and to another, and there
shall be much slaughter, contentions also touching matters of Faith, and
privileges and customs in Religion and ancient Traditions; there shall be also
many apparitions in the Air, fishes shall many of them suffer destruction, and
it shall be dangerous Navigating; Kings shall War one against another the
father against the son, and the son against the father, and brother against
brother, etc.

And if it appear in the East part of Heaven, the sooner will these be
manifested, and it signifies enmities between Kings, Nobles, and Plebeans,
tumults, bickerings, etc. if in the West part, the later, and there shall be
many anxieties and deaths amongst men in the Western parts (I should judge it
in the North-west parts,) and this shall continue three years, and and there
shall be many birds, fishes, and inundations and overflowings of Rivers.

When Comets chiefly manifest their Effects.
You have heard that they chiefly show their Effects to those parts to which
they emitt their beams or rays, to the which I may add the Regions where they
are seen, and the Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces and Cities subject to the sign
wherein they appear; but the time when it shall be chiefly most manifest is
when the Sun comes to the place of their first appearance, or to that Planet of
whose nature and complexion it is, etc.

And thus much of Comets and Blazing-Stars; come we now to great Conjunctions,
and so conclude these our labors.

CHAP. XI. Of great Conjunctions, their Number, and how to judge of their
Effects.
MOst of the Ancients have been short in their judgments on this subject, yet
some more copious then others, but none so effectual as I could wish for thy
instruction, since by the Conjunction of the Planets all the accidents and
mutations of this Elementary World are known, especially by the Conjunction of
the Superiors; how ever such as they are I shall here deliver unto the with my
best assistance; time and opportunity may happily produce more hereafter; in
the Interim understand thus much,

That there are seven sorts of Conjunctions considerable.

The first and greatest of all the rest, is the Conjunction of the two
superior Planets Saturn and Jupiter in the first term or degree of Aries,
which happens but once in nine hundred and threescore yearr.

The second is the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the first term or
degree of every triplicity, and this is accomplished once in two hundred and
forty years, yet once in twenty years, they come in Conjunction in one part or
other of the Zodiac.

The third is the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the first term or degree of
Cancer, and this is once in thirty years.

The fourth is the Conjunction of the three superiors, Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars in one term or face of any sign.

The fifth is the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, which is a mean and the
least Conjunction of the superiors, and therefore is not the forerunner of
such great n foreefs as the other, as you shall by and by understand.

^^m^re sixth is the Conjunction of the Sun with any of the rest of the Planets
at the time of his entrance into the first point of Aries.

The seventh and last is the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, which happens
once every month.

Considerations before judgment.
Of which we are now in order to treat; but first you must know that the time
for the erecting of your figure is when the Planets are in Partil Conjunction,
viz. in the very same sign, degree and minute of the Zodiac. You may see what
a Partial Aspect is the 27 Chapter of the second Book of this Volume.

Having then erected the Figure of the Heavens at your punctual time, and
placed the Planets therein being reduced to the time of the day, have regard
unto the fortitudes and debilities of the Planets, especially those in
Conjunction, for if they be strong and fortunate, they presage good; if weak
and impedited, the contrary.

And this good or evil shall be according to the nature of the Planets in
Conjunction, and the nature of the sign in which they are; as if the Sign be
aerie and the Planets evil, impediment in the Air, corruption and much damage
thereby both to men and the fruits of the Earth is denoted; and so judge of the
rest of the signs; in like manner judge the contrary if the Planets in
Conjunction be Fortunes and well dignified.

Again, if the Malevolents be in Conjunction in feminine Signs, they denote
Pestilence and evil infirmities to women; and the Female sex of things in
general chiefly. in like manner to the Masculine sex if the Sign be Masculine;
and health, prosperity and good success, if they are benevolent Planets.

Moreover in fixed signs, what they portend (whether they are Benevolents or
Malevolents) is of continuance; in moveable, of little or no continuance: in
common signs, a mean between these, viz. they are neither of long or short
continuance.

CHAP. XII. Of the Conjunctions of the Superiors.
EVery Planet in some measure or other contributeth to the Government of this
World [for the which they were ordained] but some more forcibly then others, as
being forerunners of greater and stranger accidents and mutations.

Of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Aries.
For, the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the first point of Aries,
or the first term thereof, is the greatest and most notable Conjunction of all
the other, for that they are the highest, and so consequently (as to us) the
slowest of the Planets, and therefore have more power to act what they denote
then any of the other h^^^, and for that Aries is the first of the signs of the
Zodiac, and the first sign of the Triplicities, also the first of the fiery
Trygon.

And therefore it is that when these two highest Planets are in Conjunction in
the fiery Trygon, (especially in the first term or degree of Aries the
Ascendent of the world, and the place wherein the chief Luminary ( viz. the
Sun) was at the Creation) many commotions, wars, seditions, troubles,
subversion of Monarchies, Kingdoms, States, alteration of Laws, Customs,
Privileges and Rights, Plagues, Famine, Desolation, Anxiety and trouble,
Treasons, Treacheries, and the death of Kings, Nobles, Princes, Emperors and
Powers, follow.

Of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in any Trygon.
So likewise when they are in Conjunction in the first term of any Trygon,
whether it be fiery, earthy, aerie or watery, but not so forcible is their then
E^^^^, nor so terrible as the former, yet (though in a less degree) the
forerunners an ^^casioners of grievous mutations and accidents, according to
the nature of that Planet which has most power of the two in the Sign wherein
they are joined; for if Saturn be stronger then Jupiter, it will be very
terrible; but if Jupiter be stronger then him, somewhat will be abated; in
fiery, earthy and aerie Signs they cause drought and a scarcity of Provisions
and barrenness of the ground, Pestilence and Famine; in watery, detriment by the
too much abundance thereof.

Also when these two first Conjunctions are in any of the Angles, especially
the tenth, it denotes the arise of some new King or Prophet from the quarter
signified by the sign wherein they are joined, and if the Sign and Lord thereof
be fortunate, it denotes their continuance, establishment and glory; but if it
be weak or afflicted, and its Lord, they shall be slain and put down; for the
whole world is governed by these Trygons, as Ptolomy teaches in his second
Book, and the whole Macrocosm compounded of the four Elements which answers
to the four Triplicities, and therefore it is that the Conjunction of the
Superiors in them are occasioners of such great mutations.

Of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Cancer.
In like manner the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the first degree or term
of Cancer, is the forerunner of much evil* (yet are the two former preferred
before it) viz. terrible wars, slaughters, depopulations and alterations of
Government, and destruction of Kingdoms, fire and sword, famine and pestilence,
etc. and if it be Oriental, its Effects will soon operate; if Occidentall, not
so soon, the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in any other sign and place is not
so terrible.

And truly this is a terrible Conjunction if rightly considered, and dictateth
unto us upon the first consideration, no less then horrible troubles and
alterations in the World; if we but consider it, it is a Conjunction of the
Malevolents, two enemies must needs be stronger then one, and here they are
both together, and in a sign wherein Jupiter our best friend is exalted, and
the Moon the mother of moisture pitcheth her Tent, so that by their Conjunction
therein both the assistance of the one and the nature of the other is much
damnified and afflicted; again, Saturn is therein in detriment, it being the
sign opposite to his House Capricorn, and Mars is therein in his fall,
Capricorn being the House of his exaltation, and therefore it is (these things
being considered) that they are so mischievous, when joined in this sign, the
which of all their Conjunctions is the worst, etc.

Of the Conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars.
Also the Conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars in any term or face, and
beheld by the Sun, they being the three superior Planets and most effectual
for strength and height, signifies the destruction of Kingdoms, Sects and
Schisms, and great things according to their strength and the nature of that
Planet which is strongest in the sign, etc. Note that when these Planets are
joined in their exaltations, they denote good, to their power; yet there shall
be much war, and many Miracles; if they be joined in their falls, they denote
mischief, Famine and Pestilence, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Of the mean and lesser Conjunctions, and their Effects.
SOme of the Ancients have termed the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars ( I mean
their Conjunction in any other sign or place of the Heavens save that in
Cancer) a mean Conjunction, that of Jupiter and Mars, a lesser, and that of the
Sun with any Planet in his ingress into Aries, and his Conjunction with the
Moon every month, least of all.

Their reasons will soon appear, if we but warily consider why they term the
foregoing Conjunctions greatest or greater, for Saturn and Mars must needs do
more mischief then Jupiter and Mars, Saturn being of a Malevolent nature, and
highest of all the Planets, and so consequently slowest, (as to us, yet his
motion does equal if not exceed the Moons, only the largeness of his sphere
causes that it is not so apparently obvious to our sense) and Jupiter of a
Benevolent and sweet Influence, and lower, etc. and therefore as touching the
rest, your own sense will give you (having considered what has been said) that
the Inferior are not of such power and efficacy as are the Superior.

Of the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars.
The Conjunction of Saturn and Mars (I mean this mean Conjunction) denotes war
and bloodshed; but if you would know in what degree this will be executed, you
are to see what Planet is Almuten of the figure, and whether he be fortunate or
no, for if he be strong, essentially and free from impediment and affliction,
and be of a Benevolent nature, judge the evil will be lessened in one kind or
other, and if this Almuten have any good Aspect to the place of the
Conjunction, see to the nature of your Almuten and the quarter of Heaven he is
in, and the nature of the sign he does possess, and judge that by such things,
occasions, or men signified thereby, shall the war threatened be mitigated, and
perhaps dissolved, especially if there be any reception between him and the
strongest of those Planets in Conjunction, etc. understand this in all the rest
mutatis mutandis;

Note also, that if they are joined in humane signs, many infirmities shall be
incident to men, and those according to the nature of the strongest of the two
in Conjunction; in earthy signs, frost, snow and cold shall molest and prove
offensive and destructive to the fruits and seeds of the Earth; in fiery the
Earth shall be barren through extremity of heat and drought; in aerie there
shall be many high and tempestuous winds; in watery, abundance of waters and
many inundations; so likewise if it happen in beastial signs, the evil chiefly
will be incident to Beasts, and those especially that are of the nature and
form of the sign, etc. (as you have often heard before in delivering rules for
the judging of the Revolutions of the Years of the World) in this manner also
may thou enlarge upon all the preceding and subsequent Conjunctions;

Of the of and.
The chiefest of the lesser Conjunctions is the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars,
and this denotes many accidents and evils by rain, snow, corruption of the air,
war and bloodshed; if Jupiter be strongest in the Conjunction it will not be
so bad; if Mars, do not expect better; and if they be joined in the Ascendent
of the Revolution of the Year, mischief and misfortune will happen assuredly
unto the people in general; the nature of the evil judge from the nature of the
sign they are in, and the Planet most fortified, etc.

In the same manner judge of the rest of the preceding and subsequent
Conjuntions, if they be in the Ascendent of the Revolution, and so also
according to the signification and nature of every House wherein you find them
in the Figure or Revolution, as you have heard in other cases sufficiently
before; understand this and thou have attained a great secret.

The of the with the other Planets. Of the of the and.
The Conjunction of the Sun with any other Planet when he in his annual
Revolution enters the first point of Aries, you are to judge according to the
nature of the Planet whether good or bad, of which, as also his Conjunction
with the Moon every Month, I need say no more in this place since what has
been delivered where we treat of the Revolutions of the World, of weather and
alteration of the Air, and of Eclipses before in this same fourth Book may
suffice; wherefore let us now draw to a conclusion of this work.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Conjunction of the Planets in the twelve Signs according to
Hermes.
Endeavor thou but to understand what has been said touching Conjunctions and
this one Chapter more, and thou will soon be able to give a rational and
sufficient judgment upon any Cinjunction whatsoever.

Of the of,, and in.
When Jupiter, Venus, Mercury and the Moon are joined in Aries, they promise
good success to Mankind, and much gain and profit every where, fertile shewers,
and honor to women and Secretaries of State; also if the Moon and Jupiter
alone be joined in Aries, they denote justice and honesty amongst men.

and in
When Venus and Mars are joined in Taurus, it signifies women shall brawl and
quarrel with their husbands, and there shall be many Epidemical diseases
amongst men and Beasts, destruction and slaughter, strong and Malevolent winds,
and detriment to trees and fruits; and in.
also if Jupiter, and Venus and Mars and the Moon be joined in Taurus, there
shall be much lying and dissembling amongst men, as also treacheries,
destruction of Kings and Nobles, vile and ignoble men shall rebel and raise war
against their Prince; also it denotes Earthquakes: And if Saturn and Jupiter
and Mars be joined in Taurus, they signify the death and mortality of beasts,
and in.
and that Kings shall go out of their own Kingdoms into others; and there shall
happen many infirmities to men through choler, and grievous mortalities both to
Man and Beast.

and in.
Also when the Sun and Venus and Mercury are joined in Gemini, Scribes and
Secretaries shall suffer detriment, and such as keep Books of Accounts,
Stewards and Secretaries of State, Trustees, etc. soldiers shall be obedient
to their Commanders, and many thefts and robberies by the Highway shall be
committed, so that passengers are threatened mischief.

and the in.
So likewise Saturn and Jupiter and Mars and the Sun, and Venus and Mercury, and
the Moon in Conjunction in Cancer signifies detriment in every thing and fear
shall fall on men, and the King shall perplex men, and one man another, there
shall also be Earthquakes and detriment both at Sea and Land.

and and in.
And when Saturn and Jupiter, and Mars and the Moon are joined in Leo, Kings
shall war and kill one another, and there shall happen many great terrors and
evils to men.

and in. Eclipsed, and in. and.
When Saturn and Mars and Mercury are joined in Virgo, it signifies damage and
detriment to women, and Kings shall be deceived; also if the Sun be eclipsed in
Virgo and Mars joined unto him, there shall be slaughter between the Nobles and
Plebeans, and great dissentions; Also when Saturn and Venus are joined in this
sign, it denotes an increase of waters.

and in. and in.
When Mars and Jupiter are joined in Libra, it signifies the evil state of
Noble men and their Associates; Also when Jupiter and the Sun and the Moon are
therein joined, there shall happen mortalities to women and just men, and there
shall be much rain, clouds and malignant air.

and in
Again, when Saturn and Mars and Venus are joined in Scorpio, it signifies the
King shall be wounded, or bitten by some Beast, or stung by some Adder, or
obnoxious creature; and that Kings shall go out of their own Lands into others;
one King shall disagree and clash with another, and they shall break the league
and promise which they have made to each other; Also when the Moon is also
joined with them, it signifies much rain and increase of waters.

Moreover if Scorpio be the Ascendent of the Revolution of the World, and
Saturn be there, and Mars also joined unto him, or have any participation with
him in the Ascendent, and Venus be then Combust, and Jupiter retrograde, judge
evil in every thing, wars and quarrels, sackings and spoilings of Cities and
Towns, Earthquakes, terrors and bloodshed, mortalities and many destructive
infirmities, because Scorpio is the most unfortunate of all the signs; judge
also that Kings shall disagree and fight one with another, and Noble and Great
men shall die, and there shall happen many anxieties, tribulations and trouble
in the world: and in.
also if both the Fortunes be joined in this sign there shall many seducers be
discovered, and such as study to withdraw men from the true Worship of God.

and in.
Also when Saturn and Jupiter and Mercury and the Moon are joined in Sagittary,
it signifies there shall be many waters upon the face of the Earth, and that
Kings shall exalt themselves; also Noblemen, Scribes, Astrologers and Ingenuous
men shall be in great esteem.

and in.
Again, when the Sun and Mars and Mercury are joined in Capricorn, it signifies
destruction to Kings, causes hot and dry diseases, many Combustions and fiery,
apparitions in the air; many winds and a scarcity of all sorts of Vegetables;
and that there shall be many thefts and robberies.

and in.
Moreover when Mars and Saturn and the Moon are joined in Aquaries, it
signifies a scarcity of water and rain; damage to travelers; and that there
shall be many Snakes and Serpents.

and in. and.
Lastly, when Saturn and Jupiter and Mars are joined in Pisces, it signifies
the death, and great damage of Kings, Noblemen and Grandees; also if the Sun
and Mars and Saturn be there joined, the King shall be slain, there shall be
little or no rain, and many Fishes shall be taken in the Sea; Note, that when
Dragons Head and Saturn are joined in any Sign, The Conjunction of Dragons Head
and Saturn in any sign.
it signifies evil and damage according to the nature of the Sign; as if they
be joined in any fiery Sign, drought and damage to Beasts; if in Aries, to
Sheep and small Cattle; if in Leo, to Lions or feral Beasts and creatures of
prey; if in Sagittary, to Horses, especially in the last 15 degrees thereof; if
in Earthy, viz. Taurus, to Bulls, Cows and Oxen; in Capricorn, to Goats, and
such like, and damage to the Earth and fruits, but especially if in Virgo; if
in watery, damage in and by water, shipwracks, and the death of Fish and
creatures living in the water; if in Aerie, there shall be many tempestuous,
pernicious winds and storms, corruption of the Air, the death of many Kings and
many infirmities. etc.

And thus have I (by the blessing of God) delivered unto thee the Natural rules
and reasons of fertility, by the Revolutions of the Years of the World,
Eclipses of the two great lights and lamps of Heaven the Sun and Moon, Comets
and Blazing-Stars, the forerunners of great mutations, which we have found in
all Ages God has used to send for the reclaiming of his people from their
evil ways, before his wrath be poured on them; and lastly, by the great, mean
and lesser Conjunctions of the Celestial Planets, who next under the Great
Creator, Governor and Causer of all causes, are the Governors of the World,
and causes of all things therein, in a general and natural way.

Wherefore to him alone that orders and disposes all things according to his
Divine will, and that Created the Heavens, Earth, Celestial Planets and Stars,
and that calls them all by their names, and that makes them differ from each
other in glory, and that gives of his free will and pleasure the knowledge of
Divine and Natural things to the sons of men, he ascribed all possible Praise,
Glory, Power, Dominion, and Thanksgiving both now and for evermore, Amen.

With this Chapter I thought to have concluded, but since we have treated
already of the Natural causes of the general accidents of the World, and that
some of the Ancients have judged of all these things by the Falling of
New-Years-Day, and for that I have for some few years found them experimentally
true, I shall add this own Chapter more, for my Readers recreation and sport
when he is so disposed; yet if he diligently observe the Effects, he will find
them for the most part come very near truth, though many times on the otherside
they may deviate therefrom.

CHAP. XV. Showing how to judge of the General Accidents of the World by the
Falling of New Years Day.
YOu are herein to observe on what day of the week New-Years-Day falls; for
if it fall on Sunday, Sunday.
a pleasant Winter ensues, and a natural and kindly Summer and sufficient
fruit; the Harvest will be indifferent for weather, yet some wind and rain it
will produce, a temperate Spring and it seasonable; it denotes also many
Marriages, plenty of Wine and Honey, the death of young Men and Cattle,
robberies in most places, news of Prelates and Kings, and cruel wars toward
the end of the Year, or at lest much dissension and discord amongh men.

If it fall on a Monday, Monday.
the Winter will be somewhat uncomfortable; the Summer temperate; No great
plenty of fruit, many fancies and fables dispersed abroad, many Agues, the
death of Kings, Nobles and Great men, in most places marriages, and a downfall
of the Gentry.

If on Tuesday there follows a stormy Winter, and a wet Summer, Tuesday.
a various harvest, and moist Spring, Corn and fruit indifferent, yet Garden
Herbs shall not flourish, great sickness amongst men, women and young children,
and a mortality of Cattle, many men shall die of the Bloody Flux, and every
thing save corn shall be dear.

On Wodensday, a warm Winter in the beginning, Wodensday.
but toward the end snow and frost, a cloudy Summer, plenty of fruit, also of
corn, wine, hay, honey and other things, damage and hard labor to women with
child, death to many children, plenty of sheep, news of Kings and great wars
and bloodshed toward the midst.

On Thursday both Winter and Summer windy, a rainy Harvest and a moist Spring,
Thursday.
many Innundations toward the latter end of the Year, much fruit, and plenty
of the fruits of the Earth and honey, but flesh shall be dear, a death of
Cattle, in general, great trouble, wars and commotions, and women shall be
loose and licentious.

On Friday a stormy Winter, and no pleasant Summer, a moderate Spring, Friday.
save only it will be windy, and an indifferent Harvest, and small store of
fruit, wine and honey, corn dear, many blear Eyes, Youth shall dye many of
them, Earth quakes in many places, much Thunder and Lightning, also Tempest,
and the sudden death of Cattle.

Lastly on Saturday, a mean Winter, a very hot Summer, a late harvest, Saturday.
and a dry windy Spring, Garden Herbs shall be cheap, much burning, plenty of
honey* flax and hemp, the death of ancient people in most places, many Fevers,
but chiefly Tertians, great rumors of wars, and sudden murders in many places
for or upon little or no occasion, etc.

Thus much from the falling of New-Years-day, the which although the Illiterate
and Vulgar may make use of, for the frequent verity thereof, yet would I not
have them depend thereon, for I cannot (I must confess) find any sure ground
why the Ancients should thus conclude; wherefore here I desist with this
Conclusion.

To God alone be the Praise.

FINIS.
The Postscript.
To the Judicious and Impartial Reader.
UPon the closure of these my Labors, and when so much of the Epistles was
printed, that I could not conveniently bring in this which I am here to deliver
unto thee, appears an invective, flashy, weak, ridiculous, inconsiderate,
choleric, raving and railing Pamphlet, against one which it seems he is
displeased with for not concluding with him on the Annotations which he
published on Jer. 10.2. The which as indeed ridiculous, so should I have
smilingly passed it over in silence, and not rendered my self thus worthy of
laughter in recording his folly, but that he was so absurd and childish as to
bring me upon the Stage whom he knows not, and who is altogether a stranger
unto him save for what the Mendax Rufus Rolandus, or [his Brother] Orlando
furioso has maliciously and contrary to his own knowledge delivered unto him.

Upon the first sight thereof I perceived it to be a scurrulous Pamphlet, no
more worthy the heeding then Politicus, Phreneticus, or Walkers dissembling and
lying Occurences; as it was composed of such like paper and variety of letter
(being (I believe) by the Printer published gratis, and therefore by him not
thought worthy of better paper, letter or work, being such mean stuff) so does
it contain the like phrensies, invectives and whimsical inventions and
evasions; I shall not spend time or paper to mention any part thereof save only
where he is pleased now and then (thinking he has sufficient ground from the
malicious aspersions of the unworthy before mentioned, for his imprudent and
impudent taunts and language) to vent his washipness and froward crasiness
against me; his reason I know not, unless it were for answering a Dr. Homes,
who was when he commenced Doctor, a strong man for the Bishops, then he became
a Presbyterian, and now a most detestable Independent.
turn-coat of his own Livery, who had vainly and ignorantly attempted to beat
down that which he is altogether ignorant of; or for that none could ever yet
give me a Reply, though it has been attempted with all the vigor and rigor
that might be, but to no purpose, as appears by the first Book of this Volume.

In his 92 page he boldly tells his Reader, Sir Christopher Heydons large
discourse, and Will. Rameseys reply to Dr. Homes it sufficiently confuted. But
he does not in the least tell us how nor make it plain; it is enough for this
old man to sit at home, and hear people talk or read the title of Books, but
search no further either for want of time or judgment; for if that patch up
pretended Reply to my Book, were ever perused by him, he cannot be ignorant
that there is not any one Argument of Sir Christopher Heydons so much as
mentioned, much less discussed or confuted; and as touching mine which this old
Tom -- (if I might answer him in his own language, and show him his plain
stiling of me without being guilty of the same absurdity with him; or if I
might vindicate my self from his aspersions by casting the same dirt in his
face that he has boldly done in mine) learnedly terms a Reply, as his
learned Confutor did before him; but sober men know it is preposterous to call
that a Reply which is an Answer; but it will quickly appear (as I have said) to
the Judicious; by the first Book of this Volumne; that the main and chief
arguments therein remain at yet both by him and others unshaken, nay by Mr.
Gataker himself they are unrefelled, though much carped at as is plain by his
subsequent words, where he affirms the alligation of both Sir Christopher and
my self, that Astrology was revealed by God to Adam, Seth, Enoch and there
posterity to be frivolous and groundless, as also at the lower end of his 4
page, and at the beginning of his 168 page, he does not only hint at the same,
but passes it over with a peremptory attestation of the contrary, without
either argument, proof, rhyme or reason against it; me things he should not so
frequently have taken me up, unless he could have proved by sufficient grounds
my Allegations to be frivolous, as he is pleased to term them, and not thus
frivolousl^ to pass them over with a bare saying it is false, without any
contrary demonstration, and so deceive hoth himself and Reader; for I shall
appeal to his own conscience, whether he have ever perused by Book, or that
pretended Reply and mine together; or if so, whether he is not convinced not
only that half my discourse is wholly omitted by the rural Replyer; but also
that there is no solid and substantial reply to any particular thereof,
(laying aside his ridiculous whimseys and weak quibbles and evasions wherewith
that Pamphlet so copiously abounds) and this my appeal is not only to Mr.
Gataker, but all Ingenuous souls who impartially will judge of the matter, and
warily observe how my words are by him set down contrary to my intent and
purpose in many places, the better to make for his turn and idle conceits, by
comparing mine with his.

This I thought good to acquaint the world with, that they be not led away with
error and tradition, having at this time so opportunely the opportunity of the
Press, and not only so, but to demonstrate also to the World, that
notwithstanding what Dr. Homes, the above named Rufus, or this Mr. Gataker, can
or have said is altogether insufficient to refel the Arguments contained in
that Discourse of mine; it is not his saying Adam, Seth, Enoch, Abraham,
Solomon, and the Patriarchs were not Astrological Philosophers, (which of all
Philosophers are the chief) that will prove them not to be so; but since I have
Josephus testimony Joseph. Ant. Jud. lib. 1. c. 2.
that they were so, and Eusebius his testimony, that he was a man worthy of
credit, Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 7. Certainly I should forefeit my faith
credit reason and underst^nding, if I should believe his testimony before the
testimony of Josephus, who was by so learned and holy a Father of the Church as
Eusebius deemed so worthy and an Authentic witness; or if I should believe
that he has any ground for his other weak evasions wherewith his Book is
fraught, that dares thus (contrary to his own conscience and knowledge) asperse
so worthy a man as Josephus by questioning his credit, to whom the World is so
abundantly engaged for his authentic and unparalled works, the which neither
Mr. Gataker* Wisaker, Rufus, or a thousand such animals are worthy to carry
after him; But by this one thing is it plain to every Intelligent Reader, that
his tongue is no slander (as we say) and therefore the rather to be excused* if
in any place of his rahling patcht piece, he be found guilty of reproaching his
betters that dares thus (when he knows not otherwise how to answer ad rem) not
only lightly esteem the testimonies of the Ancient Historiographers* but also
of the Fathers, which but for brevities sake, I could show him how in
innumerable places of their Works they acknowledge themselves beholding to this
learned Josephus; but especially Eusebius in almost every Chapter throughout
his whole ten Books of his Ecclesiastical History, and in several places
therein plainly expresses in the aforenamed words, that He was a man worthy of
Credit: the which he cannot he ignorant of (certainly) being a professed
Divine. Judge thou then Reader, whether is more worthy of credit, Josephus,
that (as I have sufficiently showed) testifies Adam, Seth, Enoch, and the rest
of the Patriarchs were Astrologers and most exquisite therein, and Eusebius
that was a learned Father of the Church that testifies Josephus to be a man
most worthy of credit, or learned Rufus Rolandus, and wise Mr. Gataker, who say
they are not, and revile those who have maintained the contrary, but not able
otherwise to give any reply thereunto; but if one say, here is two to two, and
so imagine we stand upon equal terms, I must needs tell him he will find as
much difference, as is between men and asses; yet to put the matter out of
doubt, I shall give you one more, which is Gerson, one sufficient to
countervail a thousand such Rolands or Gatakers that are opposite thereunto,
who in his Preface to his. Trilogium Astrologiae Theologizatae, testifies also
that Astrology was first revealed by God himself to Adam. Nay farther Josephus
does not only testifies that this Science was studied by these Patriarchs, and
that also God first revealed it unto our first Father Adam, but that Seth was
so well skilled therein, that he foreknew thereby that the World should be
destroyed by the flood, and therefore ingraved it (with other Arts and
Sciences) on two Pillar, the one of stone and the other of brik, and that he
saw that of stone to remain in Syria in his days; Moreover he farther
testifies Joseph. Ant. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 8.
that Abraham being exquisite therein, and having learned it in Chaldea, the
place of hit birth, when he went into Egypt was the first that taught them
Astrology and Arithmetic, the which testimonies (especially carrying such
strength of probability with them) I cannot believe ever were or ever will be
questiened by the judicious and the more rational sort of men.

And as touching Mr. Gataker his rash and inconsiderate aspersion in reckoning
me with the Impostors and Juggling knaves which abuse this Noble Science, by
their illegal practices, (the which I have in the Fol. 6.3.
first Epistle, and Page 58.
first Book sufficiently declared against) in terming me Page 168.
a bird of the same feather; I might justly tell him he is no better then a
Thom-as Wisaker, thus rashly to conclude what he is ignorant off, but that I
fear I should be guilty of the like absurd language with him, and be too plain
with the old man, whom I must confess has by this his rash and inconsiderate
affirmation, most extremely over-shot himself; and were he not a Divine, I
should say he were doting or mad, thus highly to dare to affront one who he is
altogether a stranger to; and this let me tell you Mr. Gataker, and excuse your
self when and as well as you can, That it is neither the part of a Scholar, a
Rational man, a Divine, a Presbyterian, or a Christian, to assume liberty to
asperse, vilify and wrongfully accuse your brother upon the bare hearsay of
another, especially one of so mean credit as is the pretended Author of the
Reply to my Book in answer to Doctor Homes, (for I scorn to name him) who has
been of such variety of Professions, and is well known to be a time-serving
fellow, Ergo not worthy the noting; for deny it if you can that it was not that
pretended Reply that lead you thus to assume the boldness as to term me so
confidently a bird of the same feather with Impostors; for as I have before
declared in the Cap. 13. fol. 28.
first Book, I never practiced or studied it otherwise then for the
satisfaction of my mind, and for my own pleasure, and therefore good Mr.
Gataker, take notice, that I scorn to be guilty of any such mercenary
practices; as much as you scorn to be termed or accounted schismatical or
Jesuitical; and that I am as free and innocent from those abuses of the Art, as
you are guilty of abusing me by this wrong accusation, being blinded with
error, and deluded by the aspersions and lying abuses of that unworthy Rufus
Rolandu^.
fellow, and so in danger to shipwreck your discretion and judgment on the
rock of Tradition, which if guided by Reason would have been safe, which I
would have all men study to obtain, and then I question not but that they will
soon find, that I abhor longer to live then I should degenerate from my self.

Wherefore with this argument I shall conclude; Who so imputes folly or madness
to any man for his tenets, which he cannot refute that does gainsay them, does
thereby abundantly prove himself to be a malignant cavilling fool, and his
arguings frivolous: But Thomas Gataker imputes folly to William Ramesey for the
allegation aforesad with his brother Rufus, yet can not refute what they
gainsay, Ergo --

Die. 11o. Junii, 1653. William Ramesey.

FINIS.
The Contents of every Section and Chapter contained in this fourth Treatise,
entitled ASTROLOGIA MUNDA.
SECTION I. COntaining the ground work of Revolutions of the Years of the
World, considerations before judgment, and the true significators of such
things as are necessary to be judged of in this manner of work. Fol 213 CHAP.
I. Showing the groundwork on which Astrological Judgments for the judging of
Revolutions are to be built, and how many Scheams or Figures of Heaven ought to
be erected for this work. Fol 214 Chap. 2. Containing some necessary
considerations before judgment. Fol 216 Chap. 3. Showing which are the
significators of the King, People, their enemies and assistants in any
Revolution of the Years of the World. Fol 218 Chap. 4. Showing according to the
signification of the Planets, the Significators in general, of rich and Noble
men, the Kings Standard Bearer, Armor-bearer, or General of the Armies, Clergy
men, Students, Merchants, Lawyers, Women, Friars and Monks. Fol 220
SECT. II. Showing the state and condition of the King or Rulers, and their
continuation, and their durability in any Revolution, also the condition of the
people from the Positions and Fortitudes of their Significators; Also how to
know the Lord of the Year, and what is portended thereby in any Revolution,
whether in Aspect of the Planets, located in the Houses or Signs; also of the
significations of the Head and Tail of the Dragon, in the 12 Houses of Heaven
in any Revolution in the 12 signs also. Fol. 221 CHAP. I. Of the State and
condition of the King or chief Rulers, and People in any Annual Revolution.
Idem. Chap. 2. Teaching how to judge of the permanency or durability of Kings
or such as are in authority by any Revolution. Fol 225 Chap. 3. Showing the
state and condition of the common people in any Region, by any Annual
Revolution. Fol 226 Chap. 4 How to know that Planet which is Lord of the Year
in any Annual revolution of the Years of the World. Fol 231 Chap. 5. Of the
significations of the seven Celestial Planets, when any of them is Lord of the
Year, whether fortunated or impedited, and of the Aspects of the Planets with
them. Fol 234 Chap. 6. Containing the true Significations of the Planet Saturn,
as he is in any Annual Revolution accidentally placed in any of the twelve
Houses of Heaven, whether he be Lord of the Year or no. Fol 237 Chap. 7. Of the
significations of Jupiter as he is accidentally placed in any of the twelve
Houses of Heaven in any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or
no. Fol 239 Chap. 8. Containing the significations of Mars in the twelve Houses
of Heaven, in any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or no. Fol
240 Chap. 9. Showing the significations of the Sun in the twelve Houses of
Heaven in any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or no. Fol 241
Chap. 10. Showing the Signification of Venus in the twelve Houses of Heaven in
any Annual Revolution, whether she Lady of the Year or no. Fol 242 Chap. 11. Of
the significations of Mercury in the twelve Houses of Heaven in any Annual
Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Year or no. Fol 244 Chap. 12. Of the
signfications of the Moon in the twelve Houses of Heaven in any Annual
Revolution, whether she be Lady of the Year or no. 245 Chap. 13. Containing the
significations of the head and tail of the Dragon, in the twelve Houses of
Heaven in any Annual Revolution of the years of the World. 246 Chap. 14.
Showing the significations of the Planets in any of the Triplicities when any
of them is Lord of the Year in any Annual Revolution of the Years of the World.
248 Chap. 15. Demonstrating the significations of Saturn when he is Lord of the
Year in any of the twelve signs. 249 Chap. 16. Showing the significations of
Jupiter when he is Lord of the Year in any of the twelve signs. 253. Chap. 17.
Showing the significations of Mars when he is Lord of the Lord of the Year in
any of the twelve signs. 256 Chap. 18. Containing the accidents signified by
the Sun when he is Lord of the Year in any of the twelve signs. 259 Chap. 19.
Of the things signified by Venus when she is Lady of the Year in any of the
twelve signs. 261 Chap. 20. Of the significations of Mercury when he is Lord of
the Year in any of the twelve signs. 263 Chap. 21. Containing the
significations of the Moon when she is Lady of the Year in any of the twelve
signs. 266 Chap. 22. Showing what is sign^fied by the Head and Tail of the
Dragon, as they are placed in any of the twelve signs in any Revolution. 267
SECT. III. Containing some other necessary Instructions for the judging of
Events portended by any Revolution of the Years of the World, also showing how
to judge of such Years as signify fertility, sterility, wars, peace, health or
sickness, alterations of, and in the Air, and of all other things foreknown by
the Position of the Heavens at the Ingress of the Sun into the first point of
Aries. 269 CHAP. I. Showing the significations of the Planets in their
exaltations, and also in Conjunction, Square or Opposition of Saturn or Mars at
that time in any Revolution. Idem. Chap. 2. Of the significations of the
Planets and Dragons Head and Tail, as also Blazing-Stars, when they are (in any
Revolution) exalted one above the other. 271 Chap. 3. Containing considerations
from the Sun and the Moon, when the Revolution is either Diurnal or Nocturnal,
also when the Revolution happens at Sunsetting or break of Day, and from the
Lord of the Hour, Part of Fortune, the Indisposition of Saturn and Mars, and
from the Conjunction with Dragons Head and Tail in any of the twelve signs, in
any Annual Revolution. 274 Chap. 4. Teaching how to judge of the evil of any
year, the nature thereof, and when the year is most likely to be turbulent,
obnoxious and unfortunate; also what is portended by any Revolution when one
Planet transfers his light and nature to another. 278 Chap. 5. Showing how to
judge of health or sickness in any year. 280 Chap. 6. How of wars or peace.
Idem. Chap. 7. Of fertility and sterility. 284 Chap. 8. Teaching how to know
the price of any thing in any year. 285 Chap. 9. Containing some Instructions
touching the alteration of the Air, and change of weather in any year. 288
Chap. 10. Showing how to judge of the weather by the Aspects of the Moon to the
other Planets, and by the several Aspects of the Planets amongst themselves.
290 Chap. 11. Demonstrating the alteration of the Air by the Combustion,
Orientality and Occidentality of the Planets in every of the twelve signs of
Heaven. 292 Chap. 12. Containing further instructions touching the alteration
of the Air from the application of the Moon to the other Planets, having
separated from the Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun. 294 Chap. 13. Teaching
by other rules how to judge of the alteration of the air, and to know when rain
is to be expected. 296 Chap. 14. Showing Haly his judgment on weather, and the
alteration of the Air, 298 Chap. 15. Showing how to judge of weather from
common Observation of the rising and setting of the ^un, color of the Moon,
appearance of the Rainbow, Comets, Clouds, brightness of the fixed Stars, also
by the prime day, and from the time of the day wherein thunder happens. 302
Chap. 16. Demonstrating the natural causes of many Suns, of the Rainbow, Rain,
Hail, Frost, Snow, Dew, Wind, Earthquakes, Comets, Thunders, Lightnings, and
the cause of the Sun and Moons Eclipse. 303 Chap. 17 Of the signification of
the most notable fixed Stars both fortunate and unfortunate in any of the
twelve Houses in Revolutions of the Years of the World. 305 SECT. IV. Teaching
how to judge of the natural mutations and accidents of this Elementary World,
by the appearance of Eclipses, Comes, great Conjunctions and Blazing-stars.
CHAP. I. Containing Ptolomies method in judging Eclipses, and how to know the
Regions to which the Effects belong. 310 Chap. 2. Showing the time when the
Effects of any Eclipse shall begin, and how long continue. Idem Chap. 3. Of the
kinds of Events of any Eclipse. 311 Chap. 4. Of the quality of the Events of
any Eclipse whether good or evil. 312 Chap. 5. Of the Sun and Moon eclipsed in
any Decanate or Face of the twelve Celestial signs. 315 Chap. 6. Of Comets and
Blazing-Stars, what they are, the many sorts thereof, their Portences, and how
long they appear at any time. 318 Chap. 7. Showing the Physical reasons of the
horrid and terrible portencies of Comets and Blazing Stars. 320 Chap. 8.
Showing some other names of Comets or Blazing-Stars, and their Portencies. 321
Chap. 9. Of the signification of Comets and Blazing-Stars appropriated to the
seven Planets 323 Chap. 10. Showing the significations of Comets when they
appear in any of the twelve signs of Heaven. 324 Chap. 11. Of great
Conjunctions, their Number, and how to judge of their Effects. 327 Chap. 12. Of
the Conjunctions of the superiors. 328 Chap. 13. Of the mean and lesser
Conjunctions and their effects. 329 Chap. 14. Of the Conjunction of the Planets
in the twelve signs according to Hermes. 330 Chap. 15. Showing how to judge of
the general accidents of the World by the falling of New Years Day. 332

FINIS.
An INDEX, pointing to the chief matters contained in this Volume. This mark *
before any figure, points you to the folio in the first EPISTLE to the READER.
A
ABraham an Astrologer, Epist. Ded. 1 Postscript, folio 4. The first that
taught the Egyptians the knowledge of the Stars. Ibid. Abuse of any thing,
takes not away the use thereof among the Learned. * 3 Abuses cast upon the
Author by the penners of the pretended Reply to his Lux Veritatis, and he
vindicated from them all, from folio 26 to 29. their juglings and evasions
discovered. 29 Acute diseases how ruled. 11 Adam an Astrologer, notwithstanding
Mr. Gatakers evasions in his Annotations on Jer. 10. ver. 2. put forth by the
Synod. Epist. Ded. 1 Postscript: and for the clearing of the Text, to that
aforesaid Lux Veritatis, Chap. 3. Sect. 5 Ayrs alteration, how to judge
thereof, from 288 to 303 by general significators 288, 289 by opening of Gates
290 by the aspects of the Moon to the other Planets 291 by the Planets mutual
aspects 291, 292 Orientallity, Occidentallity, and combustion in the 12 signs
292, 293 by the application of the Moon to the other Planets, having separated
from the conjunction of the Sun 294, 295 Aphorisms 296 Ordinary signs and
tokens 297 by Haly his judgment, from 298 to 302 by the rising and setting of
the Sun, the color of the Moon, the Rainbow, and by the appearance of Comets
302 by Clouds, Stars, Prime day, etc. 303 Aeties, a stone so called, its
virtue. 57 Afflictions portended by revolutions, the nature thereof, and from
whence it shall arise. 275 Age decrepit prohibited physic. 166 Age of those
that are not to use Phebotomie 170 What time of the Moon it avails. 171 A
time for making of Agreements. 178 A time for any work in the art of Alchimy.
179 A time for All things under the Sun. 145 Almuten what. 111 Alterations in
the world occasioned by Ecclipses of either Luminary, and why, 308 by Comets
319 and why. 320 A time for Anointing to remove superfluous hair. 169
Antiscience of the Planets, their force, how to know them* 76 Aphorisms
conducing to the judging of Elections, from 122 to 128 showing how to judge of
the condition of Kings, People, or any other; what accidents are to happen
them, and at what time in any year, from 221 to 224 more particularly of the
People, from 226 to 230 Apishness in men reprehended. * 18 Excess of Apparel in
the vulgar condemned. * 19 A time for putting on of Apparel. 137. 156
Appearance of many Suns and Moons, the reason thereof. 303 Application what.
110 A time for Applying Medicines to all the parts of the body. 163 Aquaries,
its nature and quality 90 Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors, Places,
Regions, Cities, and part in man under its rule 91 why ruled by Saturn 68 the
number, names, nature, magnitude, latitude and longitude of its most notable
fixed stars. 294 Aries, its nature and quality, Corporature, Diseases, Angel,
Colors, Places, Regions, Cities, and part in man under its rule 86 why
governed by Mars 68 why the exaltation of the Sun, and fall of Saturn 69 the
number, names, nature, magnitude, latitude and longitude of its most notable
fixed stars 94 Armour-bearers, their significators general in annual judgments.
220 A time for buying Arms. 184 Ascendant, why so called. 107 Asia its
inhabitants, the reason of their several inclinations. 16 Aspects, names,
nature, characters, why so named and charactered, partile and platick, 92
dexter and sinister. 93 Aspects of the Planets to the Lord of the year. 235
Assistance from whence to be expected, and from what kind of men 282 to obtain
it of great men. 197 Astrology, the definition of the word *1 its scope or
definition *3 agrees with Divinity *5.4, etc. one of the Liberal Sciences,
together with Astronomy and Physics 2 how they became separated, or so
accounted ibid. how brought into contempt *1, *3 the best of studies and lawful
4, 18, 23 revealed first to Adam by God, not diabolical (as some weakly have
endeavored to persuade the world) but a great mean [rather] to acquaint us
with a Diety 4, 38 medleth not with the secrets of God 21 most useful for
Physicians 23, 28 its definition 29 Legality 38 Excellency 4 warranted by
Councels 37 not impugned by Divine Scripture from 30 to 36 useful for all the
parts of Physic. 153 Athazer what. 111 Atlas fained to be the supporter of the
Heavens and why. 4 The Author divided by the Author *20 his exhortation to this
mad world *22 how far he holds of casual Events 22 his practice or way of
living 28 denies a fatality in the Stars Influencies ibid. yet proves they
have admirable Influence in all sublunaries 4 and that they are cause of
fertility and sterility 5 how far he vindicateth it 37, 38 allows not of the
resolution of Questions, whereby many now-adays enrich themselves, and cheat
the world, and bring a scandal on the purity of Astrology; but condemns it,
with the setting of Nativities, as toys, trifles, vanities, cheats and abuses
of the purity of the Science of the Stars *3, *36, 38 the cause of his putting
pen to paper in any of his works *4, *6 what books he has hitherto wrote 4 his
manner of writing in these his Labors *25, etc. the occasion thereof and his
end therein *6 his birth, breeding and life hitherto, declared. *28, *29 Author
of the pretended Reply to my Lux veritatis discovered, and that it is not his
under whose name the Epistle thereof passes. 24
B
Barreness a curse. *13 A time for Bathing. 169 Beasts a time to purchase. 173
Beauty real defined, as vulgarly received, rejected. *9 A time for Begetting
Boys and Girls. 152 Benevolents not always Jupiter and Venus. 124 Besieging
what. 111 Birds a time to buy. 174 Blackmores why black. 14 Blood-letting when
convenient. 170 Book the first, second, third of this Volumn, their scope *2
the fourth. *3 Books published by the Author. *4 A time for Borrowing of money.
135 A time to purge the Brain. 168 A Bridle for Youth. *9 Of buying and selling
137 to profit thereby. 136
C
Cancer, its nature and quality, corporature, diseases, Angel, colors, places
87 Regions Cities, part in man under its Rule 88 why ruled by the Moon 68 why
the exaltation of Jupiter and fall of Mars 69 the number, names, nature,
magnitude, latitude, and longitude of its most notable fixed Stars. 97
Capricorn, its nature and quality, Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors,
Places Regions, Cities and Part in man under its rule 90 why ruled by Saturn 68
why the fall of Jupiter, and exaltation of Mars 69 the Number, Names, Nature,
Magnitude, Latitude, and Longitude of its most notable fixed Stars. 103
Captives a time for freeing of them. 201 Carbunkle its nature. 57 Castles a
time to build them. 143 Casualties of Cities how to judge of them. 144 Cattle
small and great a time to buy them 173 to tame them. 174 Cautions in
administering Physic laxative. 166, 168 Cazimi what. 111 Characters used in
Astrological books, explained. 49, 77, 81, 91 Charactery Astrology questioned.
*3 Childhood the vanity thereof *7, *8 Child dead to bring forth. 153 Children
born at the time of an Eclipse, or at the Partile Conjunction of the
Luminaries, live not long, and why. 12 A time to purge Choler. 168 A time to
draw choleric blood. 171 Of Christening. 154 Chronick diseases how ruled. 11
Chrysolite its virtue. 57 Churches a time to build. 145 Chyrurgery a time to
use. 169 Circles of Heaven, their number, order and motion. 79 Of Circumcision.
154 A time to bathe for cleanliness. 169 Clergymen their significators general
in Annual judgments 220 more particularly. 141 Cause of Climacterical years. 12
Clothing a time to buy. 137 Clysters, a time for administering them. 164 Why it
is Colder in January when the days increase in length, then in December when
they are at the shortest. 13 Combustion what. 111 Comet, why so called, the
many sorts thereof 318 the definition thereof 304 318 the appearance thereof an
evident token of Astrologies Legality, and that it is allowed of by GOD 36 in
what part of the Heaven they appear; Continuance, Portencies, how to judge
thereof, the birth of our Savior foretold thereby 319 Physical reasons of
their portencies 320 why seldom seen, and but in one part of heaven, at what
time of the year, the reasons of their various shapes and colors, distinct
significations 321 Saturnian, Jovial, Martial, Solar and Venerial, their
portencies 323 Mercurial, Lunar 324 significations and portencies in any of the
12 Signs, from 324 to 327 when chiefly they manifest their effects. 326
Conception when hindered 152 when farthered. 153 Vt mulier Conciplat; ut non
Concipiat. 178 Great Conjunctions, their Number; Considerations before
judgment 327 of the superiors and their effects 328 Lesser, and their
portencies 329 Hermes of Conjunctions, from 330 to 333 Conjunction its nature.
92 How to order the matter of Conquest in any war. 179 Considerations to be had
in Phlebotomie. 170 Constellations hindering and farthering Phlebotomie. Ibid.
To know the the Contents of any writing unseen. 185 Contrantiscians of the
Planets how to know them; their force. 77 Corns, a time for the cutting of
them. 134 Coronations, a time for them. 197 Covetousness most detestable. *12
What sign the Sun was in at the first Creation. 214 Critical-days whence caused
11 the true knowledge of them 162 may often be hindered by Saturn. 13 Custom
reproved* 16 a second nature 170 cannot wholly alter the Natural Constitution
of any Place or People. 15 The Customs and Laws of all Nations different, and
why. 16
D.
Dead child to deliver. 153 Debility of any Planet in any Sign to know. 66
Decrepit age prohibited Physic. 166 Degrees, how many in a sign of Heaven. 79
Delectatione cum muliere jacere. 178 Devil ignorant of the issue of future
accidents. 21 Dexter aspect, what its nature. 93 Direction what. 110 A time for
any work in the Art of Distillation. 139 Dog Days why not a like contagious
every year. 9 A time for buying of Dogs 173 of bringing them up. 174 Dragons
Head and Tail what they are; their nature 76 significations in the twelve
Houses in the Revolutions of the years of the world 247 in the twelve signs of
Heaven. 267, 268 A time for Dwelling. 179
E.
A time for husbanding the Earth. 148 Earthquakes how occasioned, signs
thereof. 304 Earths Semidiamiter. 50 Cause of the Ebbing and flowing of the
sea. 11 Eclipse of the Sun the cause thereof 304 of the Moon; why they happen
not twice every Month 305 how to judge of the mutations and accidents in this
Elementary world thereby, from 308 to 318 that alterations do follow in the
world upon the Eclipse of either Luminary, and wherefore 308 an Introduction
from 308 to 310 what is to be considered 310 when their effects manifest
themselves, Ibid. how long continue 311 to know the Lord of any Eclipse, ibid.
the kinds of the Events 312 quality, whether good or evil from 313 to 315 of
the Sun in any decanate of the 12 Signs 316 of the Moon. 317 Ecliptic Circle
what it is, why so called 79 Education not of force sufficient to alter the
natural constitution of a People or Nation. 15 Egypt how watered. 290 A time for
Electing Kings and Governors. 196 Elections ordinary, slighted. *3 Elections
by the Aspects of the Moon to the other Planets. 129 Electuaries a time to
administer. 168 A time for sending Ambassadors. 159 Enemies a time to suppress.
182 Enoch an Astrologer, vid. Postscript. A time for Enstaulings. 197 Equator
or the Equinoctial circle what it is, why so called. 79 To know when a Planet
is Essentially dignified. 65 To know the event of any war. 181 Events portended
by the Lord of the year 231, etc. where they shall be manifested 232 of Comets
319 of Eclipses from 308 to 318 To know the Evil threatened in any year to any
place 278 the cause of any evil to happen. 223 Europians why of magnaminous
spirits and given to wars and exploits. 16 To Expel a dead child. 153 Eye of
the Sun, a Stone so called its virtue. 57 A time for administering remedies to
the Eyes. 163
F.
Faces of the Planets their use, why so called 73 their significations. 74 A
time for Feasting. 156 To know if any Land be fertile. 147 Fertility and
sterility on what they depend. 10 How to judge of the fertility of any year.
284 Figure of Heaven what it is 20 how to frame it. 112 Firmament why so
called. 78 First Book its Subject. *2 First-mover why so called. 78 A time to
fish. 187 Fixed Stars no cause of plenty or scarcity 10 Tables demonstrating
the Names, Nature, Number, Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of the chiefest of
them, in every of the 12 signs, from 94 to 106 why called fixed 94 their
significations in any of the 12 houses of Heaven in Revolutions of the years of
the World, from 305 to 308 Phlegm a time to purge it. 168 Flegmatick-blood a
time to extract it. 171 A time for flitting or removing 138 Fluxes, a time to
stop them. 164 Fourth Book its subject. *3 Fortunate Planets. 127 A time to
fowl. 187 Fresh-waters why not so subject to ebb and flow. 11 Friendship
between Brethren a time to make 140 between any two 141 a time to obtain it of
any. 199 Friends how to choose them *22 prove them and keep them. *24 Frost
what it is. 304 Frustration what. 111 Friars their significators general in
Annual judgments. 220 Fugitives a time to seek. 184 Furlongs, how many in a
sign of Heaven. 79 Future accidents to know. 223
G.
Galen his admonition to the Vulgar. 161 Gall a time to purge. 168 How to win
at any game. 186 A time for administering Gargarisms. 165 Opening of Gates what
it is 299 a cause of the change of weather. 290 Gemini, its nature and quality,
Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors, Places, Regions, Cities, and part in man
under its Rule 87 why ruled by Mercury 68 the Number, Names, Nature, Magnitude,
Latitude and Longitude of its most notable fixed Stars. 96 General accidents
how to judge of them by the falling of Newyears day. 333 General Rules will not
hold in particular affairs. 128 Gentlemen their vanity in general. *20 A time
for getting of Girls. 152 A time for giving of Gifts. 155 God works by causes
*4 is the God of order ibid. clearly to be seen in the order of Nature *5, 10
seldom or never perverteth its order. *5 A time for the beginning of
Governments. 197 A time for Graffing, 150 A time for buying of great Cattle.
173 Groundwork of Elections. 122
H.
Hail what it is, how condensed. 304 Hair a time for cutting of it 133 a time
for applying medicines to remove what is superfluous 163 when to bathe for the
same purpose. 169 Haiz what. 111 An Harmony between the Celestial and
Terrestrial bodies. 122 bodies. 122 A time for administering remedies to the
Head. 163 A time to bathe for Health. 169 How to judge of the Health of any
year. 280 A time to purge the Heart. 168 Heavens power and virtue admirable 5
Gods book in which all things from the beginning to the subversion of the world
is written 18 order, number and motions 78 division into 12 Signs. 79
Heliotropion its virtue. 57 A time for buying of Heritages. 146 Hermophrodites
when begotten. 152 A time for Hiring any thing 149 servants. 172 A time for
obtaining the thing Hoped for. 199 Horizon what it is, its diversity. 80 A time
for buying Horses. 201 Houses of Heaven what, the reasons of their
significations 107, 108 division into 12 parts 109 how to judge of any thing
signified by them. 275 Houses a time for buying of them 146 for building 142
letting or hiring 149 for ridding of evil spirits. 151 A time for buying of
Hounds. 173 A time to Hunt 187 A time for buying of Land for Husbandry. 147
Hyacinth its virtue. 57 Hypocrites reproved. *15
I.
Jacob an Astrologer. 18 Impeditions of the Moon. 127 Infants prohibited
Physic. 166 Inferior what. 111 Inferiors ruled by Superiors 123 Influence
of the Stars may be found our, notwistanding the slowness of the starry sphere
in less then thirty years time 7, etc. may certainly be predicted,
notwithstanding the Revolution of the starry sphere since Ptolomies time, or
since the first Creation 8, etc. takes not away Gods government 22 may be
altered by him *4 yet it is seldom or never seen. *5 A time for acting any
thing of Ingenuity. 158 Inns of Court described. *21 A short Journey what it is
140 a time for going. ibid. A time of Iourneying and returning, and to judge of
the success therein. 191 Iris, a stone so called, its virtue. 57 Issue a
blessing *13 such as desire none, reprehended. ibid. Judicial days whence
caused 11 the true knowledge of them. 162 Jupiter, his Nature and Complexion,
Magnitude, mean and diurnal Motion, Revolution, Distance from the Earth,
Humors, Quality of men signified by him, Corporature, greatest North-Latitude,
South, Colors, Savours, Spice, Herbs and Drugs ruled by him, and part of Man
52 Trees, Birds, mineral, Stones, Fishes, Beasts, Places, Weather, Winds,
Signs, Triplicity, Diseases, Regions, Day of the week ruled by him; his
Exaltation, Fall, Detriment, Age, Angel, Friends, Enemies, Orb, Years, Month
after Conception 53 his Joy 75 why so called and charactered 77 is not always a
fortune 124, 216 significations when Lord of the year 234 in any of the 12
houses of Heaven in any revolution of the years of the world 239 etc. in any of
the 12 Signs from 253 to 256 when Lord of an Eclipse. 313 A time to obtain
Justice of Rulers. 197
K.
Kings significators in Annual Judgments, not exempt from the power of the
Stars 219 Condition in any year 221, 222 How to judge of their permanency 225 A
time to obtain their favor 197 and their Pardon. 198
L.
A time for Lanching of Ships. 195 A time for buying of Land 146 for Letting
149 if it be fertile. 147 A time to prevail in Lawsuits. 181 Lawyers their
significator general 220 reprehended. * 21 A time to Learn Sciences 195 Arts or
Occupations. 198 A time for Lending of money. 135 Leo, its Nature, Quality,
Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors, Places, Regions, Cities, and Part of man
under its Rule 88 why ruled by the Sun 68 the Number, Names, Nature, Magnitude,
Latitude, and Longitude of its most notable fixed Stars. 98 A time for
composing of Letters. 158 Lightning what it is. 304 Liver a time to purge it.
168 Lord of the Year how to know him according to the Ancients 231 according to
the Author 233 of the Aspects of the Planets to him. 235 Loss how to judge of
it. 282 To know the Love between two married, or any other 177 Low-countreymen
why they shoke off the Spaniards Government. 16 Lewdness described, its
portencies * 10 its remedy. * 11 A time to purge the Lungs. 168 Lybra, its
Nature, Quality, Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors, Places, Regions,
Cities, and Part of man under its Rule 89 why ruled by Venus 88 why the fall of
the Sun and exaltation of Saturn 69 the Number, Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and
Longitude of its most notable fixed Stars. 100
M.
Malefactor a time to make him confess Truth. 185 Malevolents are not always
Saturn and Mars. 124 Man his vanity in general * 11, * 12, * 13 subject to Gods
Government, and Angels rule, as well as to the power of the stars, and how 22
wherein he differs from a brute Creature. 23 Mansions of the Moon, their
several qualities and Elections. 130 A time for Manuring the Earth. 148 A time
for Marriage according to the Ancients 176 according to the Author 177 the end
thereof *13 forced, censured. * 17 Markets described. * 21 Mars, his Nature,
Complexion, Magnitude, Distance from the Earth, mean and diurnal Motion,
Revolution, Humors, Quality of men, Corporature, North Latitude, South, what
Savours, Colors, Part in man, Herbs, Trees and Spice ruled by him 54 what
Winds, Weather, Signs, Diseases or Triplicity, Places, Birds, Stones, Fish,
Beasts, Mineral Day of the week, Enemies, Friends, Angel, Age, Exaltation, Fall
Detriment, Orb, Regions, Places, Years 55 Joy 75 why so called and charactered
77 may sometimes be a benovolent and adjuvant Planet 124, 216 significations
when Lord of the Year 235 in any of the twelve Houses 241 in any of the twelve
signs from 256 to 259 when Lord of an Eclipse. 314 The virtue of Medicinal
things how found out. 161 A time for applying Medicines to all parts of the
body. 163 A time to purge Melancholy. 168 A time to extract Melancholy blood.
171 A time to purge any Member of the body. 168 A time to purge the Members of
Generation. ibid. Merchants their significators general. 220 Mercury, his
Nature, Complexion, Magnitude, Distance from the Earth, mean and diurnal
Motion, Revolution, Quality of Men, Corporature, greatest North Latitude,
South, Savours, Colors, and Part of man ruled by him 6^ Herbs, Drugs, Trees,
Birds, Serpents, Stones, Minerals, Fishes, Beasts, Weather, Winds, Signs,
Triplicity, Places, Day of the week, Regions, Month after Conception, Years,
Diseases, etc. under his Dominion; Exaltation, Fall, Detriment, Age, Angel,
Friends, Enemies 62 Joy 75 why so called and charactered 77 significations when
Lord of the Year 235 in any of the twelve Houses 244 in any of the twelve
signs, from 263 to 265 when Lord of an Eclipse. 314 Meridian what it is,
wherefore so called. 80 A time for sending of Messengers. 159 Method of the
fourth Book. 214 Miles how many in a sign of Heaven. 79. A time for building of
Mills. 145 Minutes in a degree how many. 79 Monarchial Government cast off by
the English, and why. 17 Monks their significators general. 220 A time for
receiving Money. 135 Moons Influence proved 11, 12 mock-moons the cause of them
303 her Nature, Complexion, Magnitude, mean and diurnal Motion, Revolution,
Distance from the Earth, Humors, Quality of men, Corporature, North-Latitude,
South, Colors, Savours, Herbs, Trees and Plants 63 Birds, Stones, Mineral,
Fishes, Beasts, Places, Weather, Winds, Sign, Triplicity, Exaltation, Fall,
Detriment, Age, Angel, Enemies, Friends, Day of the week, Regions, Orb, Years,
Month after conception, Journies, Diseases, etc. ruled by her 64 Joy 75 why so
called and charactered 77, 78 significations when Lady of the Year 235 in any
of the twelve Houses of Heaven 245 in any of the twelve signs. 266 A time to
Learn Music. 195
N.
Nails of the hands or feet a time to cut them. 134 No Nation but has good and
bad in it. * 23 Nativities Legality questioned and condemned as vain * 3. * 6
how far maintained by the Author. 38 The study of Nature and help to the
Knowledge of God * 22, 38 its course may be altered and how * 5 how often since
the Creation. ibid. No New thing under the Sun. * 25, * 26 Noblemen their
significator general. 220 A time for applying Remedies to the Nose. 164 A time
for sending Children to Nurse. 132 Northern Inhabitants why strong bodyed, rude
and fair complexioned. 15
O.
Objections against Astrology answered, from 18 to 23 Occidental what. 111 A
time for making odoriferous smells. 158 Opposite Aspect, or an Opposition why so
called and charactered 93 wherefore malevolent. 92, 93 Oriental what. 111
P.
Palaces of Kings defined, with their vanity. * 21 Pantaura its virtue. 58 A
time for obtaining pardon of King. 198 Parents Carelessness reprehended * 13
their folly in bringing up Children. * 8 Partile, Conjunction, Sextile, Square,
Trine and Opposition what. 92 Of Partnership. 178 The Patient his danger by
being in the hands of an unskilful Physician. 161 Patriarchs Astrologers, vid.
Postscript. A time of peace. 182 How to judge of peace in any year. 282 A
wonderful thing of Pease. 11, 12 People, their significators in Annual
Judgments 215 their State and Condition 222 and from 226 to 230 Peregrination
what. 111 How to know the permanency of Kings, States, Governments, or any in
Authority. 225 Philosophers-stone what 27 studied by the most refined spirits
in all ages, and why so many miss of obtaining it. 139 A time for administering
Physic to all the parts of the body. 163 Physic denied to Children and
decrepit age. 166 Physicians ought to be well versed in Astrology 153 the
error of most of them 136, 160 the Ignorant therein, accounted by the rational
rather fools then Physicians 23, 160, 280 what is requisite to perfect them in
their Art, being ignorant in Astrology, can never safely administer Physic,
nor accounted by the judicious fit to be trusted with the lives of men 161 a
time for going to his Patient. 171 Phlebotomy, what Constellations hinder it,
what farther; Considerations, when best to refrain, when to use it 170 what
time of the Moon is to be observed in all Ages and Humors of men. 171 A time
for administering Pills. 168 Pisces its Nature, Quality, Corporature, Diseases,
Angel, Colors, Places, Regions, Cities, and Part of man under its rule 91 why
ruled by Jupiter 68 why the exaltation of Venus and fall of Mercury 69 the
Number, Names, Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of its most notable
fixed stars. 150 Planets Influence proved 10, 13 Number, Names, Characters. 49
What time is best to plant or sow. 12 A time for planting of Trees. 150 Platick
Conjunction, Sextile, Square, Trine and Opposition what. 92 Plenty and scarcity
depend on the motions and configurations of the Planets. 10 How to judge of
Plenty in any Year. 284 A remarkable thing of the Pomegranate. 12 When
Preparatives ought to be administered 164 A time for Preparing Medicines. 168 A
time to give Presents. 155 To know the Price of any thing to be bought or sold.
146 To know the Price of any thing in any Year, from 285 to 288 Pride, its
Cause removed. * 14 A time for freeing of Prisoners. 201 A time for going of
Progress. 198 Prohibition what. 110 A time for obtaining Promises. 200 When to
prune and cut Vines. 12 Ptolomies method in judging of Eclipses, from 310 to
315 A time for pulling down what has been built. 145 A time for taking of
Purges. 166 A time for putting on of Apparel. 137, 156 Pyrophilus, its virtue.
57
Q.
A time for Quarrels. 179 Quartile Aspect, its nature, why so called and
charactered, why unfortunate. 92 Questions if radical agree with the Nativity,
yet both rejected as not sufficient ground-works for Elections 322 the
resolution thereof as practiced among us by Impostors, condemned. * 3, *6, 38
R.
Race-horses, a time for buying them. 173 Rain what it is, how procreated. 304
never seen in Egypt. 290 Rainbow the cause thereof 304 how to judge of the
weather thereby 302 Four Reasons why the pretended Reply to my Lux Veritatis is
not taken notice of by me 24 another reason 26 another. 30 A time to receive
gifts. 155 Reception what. 111 Regrenation what. ibid. Regions under Saturn 51
subject to Jupiter 53 Ruled by Mars 55 by the Sun 59 by Venus 60 by Mercury 62
by the Moon 64 by Aries 86 by Taurus and Gemini 87 by Cancer, Leo and Virgo 88
by Libra and Scorpio 89 by Sagittary and Capricorn 90 by Aquarius and Pisces.
91 A time for applying Remedies to all the parts of the Body. 163 A time for
removing. 138 A time for renting of Houses, Land, Fruit, or ought else. 149 A
time for obtaining Requests. 200 Retrogradation what. 110 That Birds may return
that are let fly. 173 A time for stopping of Rheumes. 164 Revolution of the
Starry-sphere, of Saturn, Sol, Venus, Mercury and the Moon 7 of Jupiter and
Mars. 8 Revolutions of the Years of the world, their portencies, the Radix or
groundwork from which they are to be judged 214 how many Scheams ought to be
set for the judging thereof 215 Considerations before judgment 216, 217
Considerations from the Sun and Moon when the Revolution is either diurnal or
nocturnal 274 at Suns set, or at break of day; Considerations from the Lord of
the hour, part of fortune, its Dispositor, the Position of Saturn and Mars, the
Conjunction of Dragons head with Saturn in Aries, in Taurus, in Gemini 276 in
Cancer, in Leo, in Virgo, in Libra, in Scorpio, in Sagittary, in Capricorn, in
Aquarius, in Pisces or of Dragons tail in any of these Signs; And of Mars in
Conjunction with Dragons head or Dragons tail in any of the twelve signs 277
from the fixed Stars in the twelve Houses, from 305 to 308 Rich-men, their
Significators general in Annual judgments. 200 Riches wherein they consist.
*12 A time for riding of Horses. 202
S.
Sagittary, its Nature and Quality, Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors,
Places, Regions, Cities, and Part of man under its rule 90 why ruled by Jupiter
68 the Number, Names, Nature, Magnitude Latitude and Longitude of its most
notable fixed Stars. 102 Saturn, his Influence proved 12, etc. removal out of
one Sign into another, cause of change of Air 9 Color, Nature, Magnitude,
diurnal Motion, Distance from the Earth 49 Humors, Profession, Coporature,
Quality of men ruled by him, Savours, what part in man, Herbs, Trees, Plants
and Birds 58 Stones, Minerals, Fishes, Beasts, Places, Weather, Winds, Signs,
Triplicity, Angel, Age, Friend, Enemies, Regions, Orb 59 is sometimes a
benovolent and adjuvant Planet 124, 216 his Significations when Lord of the
Year 234 in any of the twelve Houses of Heaven 237, 238 in any of the twelve
Signs, from 249 to 253 when Lord of an Eclipse. 313 Scarcity of any year how to
judge of it. 284 A time for setting of Children to School. 132 Scorpio, its
Nature and Quality, Corporature, Diseases, Angel, Colors, Places, Regions,
Cities, and Part of man under its rule 89 why ruled by Mars 68 why the fall of
the Moon 69 the Number, Names, Nature, Magnitude Latitude and Longitude of its
most notable fixed Stars. 011 Second Book, its subject. * 2 Seconds how many in
a minute. 79 A time for sowing of Seeds 151 Self-endedness reprehended * 14 A
time for selling to gain thereby. 137 Of selling and buying. ibid. Separation
what. 110 A time for hiring Servants. 172 Seth an Astrologer, Epist. Dedic. 1.
vid. Postscript. Sextile Aspect its nature, why so called and charactered,
benevolent. 92 A time for building of Ships. 194 When the Sick is not likely to
recover. 198 How to judge of Sickness in any year. 280 Significations of Saturn
and Jupiter when Lords of the Year in any Annual Revolution 234 when rulers of
an Eclipse 313 of Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the Moon, when Lords or
Ladies of the Year 235 Mars, Venus and Mercury when rulers of an Eclipse 314 in
any of the twelve Houses or Signs, from 237 to 268 in their exaltations or
mutual aspects 269, 270 exalted one above another, from 271 to 273 of Dragons
head and tail 247 of the Planets in any Triplicity. 248 Significators of the
King, People and their Enemies in any Annual Revolution 219 of all sorts of
People. 220 Signs what they are, why called Signs, how many degrees in a Sign,
how many Minutes in a degree, how many Seconds in a Minute, how many Miles or
Furlongs a Sign consists of 79 their Names and Characters, Divisions 81 why
so called and charactered 83, etc. why reckoned from Aries, and not placed in
the Heavens according to the order of the four Elements. 85 A time to learn to
Sing. 196 Sinister Aspect what it is, its nature. 93 A time for buying of small
Cattle 173 of taming of them. 174 A time for making sweet Smells. 150 A time for
administering Sneezings. 165 Snow what it is. 304 Southern Inhabitants, why
quickwitted. 15 A time for ridding houses of Spirits. 151 A time to purge the
Spleen. 168 Springtime the cause thereof. 9, 11 Square Aspect, its Nature, why
so called and charactered, why malevolent. 92 Standard-bearers their
significators. 220 Stars portencies what * 4 cause of sterility and fertility,
proved by the Word of GOD 5 most effectual and never perverted but by miracle *
4 both Signs and Causes warranted by the word of GOD 35 influence proved 3, 6,
10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 maintained by sacred writ in spite of its
Antagonists 23, 31, and 33 The Annual motion of the Starry-sphere. 7, 10
Stationary what. 110 Sterility and fertility on what they depend 10 how to
judge thereof in any Year. 284 A time for Storming Castles and Towns. 182 To
know the Strength of any Planet in any Sign. 66 A time for Studying divine
matters, or ought else. 141 Summer the cause thereof 9, 11 why not alike hot
every Year 9 what Physic is therein most safe to be taken. 166 Sun his
Influence proved 10, 18 his nature, complexion, magnitude, distance from the
Earth mean and diurnal Motion, Revolution, Quality of men, 56 Corporature,
Savours, Colors, Part in man, Herbs, Spice, Trees, Birds, Stones 57 Minerals,
Fishes, Beasts, Weather, Places, Winds, Sign, Triplicity, Exaltation, Fall,
Detriment, Age, Angel, Friends, Enemies, 58 Day of the week, Regions, Orb,
Month after conception, Years, Diseases 59 Significations when Lord of the
Year 235 in any of the twelve Houses 241 his Presence or Absence not alone the
cause of heat or cold 9 Mock-Suns the reason thereof 303 under the Sunbeams
what. 111 Superior what. ibid.
T.
Tables of the Number, Names, Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of the
most notable fixed Stars in every Sign, from 94 to 105 of the Essential
dignities of the Planets according to Ptolomy, or [rather] an unknown Author 95
of their fortitude and debilities 66, etc. of the Aspects of the Moon to the
other Planets and Elections thereby 129 of the mansions of the Moon. 130 A time
for Taming small Cattle. 174 Taurus, its Nature, Quality, Corporature, 86
Diseases, Angel, Colors, Places, Regions, Cities, and Part of man under its
rule 87 why ruled by Venus 68 why the Exaltation of the Moon 69 the Number,
Names, Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of its most notable fixed
Stars. 95 Term what it is, wherefore so called, and why so attributed to the
Planets 71 their use. 72 Terms of Art explained. 110, etc. A time for
apprehending Thieves 184 to make them confess truth. 185 Third book its
subject. * 2 Thirds how many in a second. 79 Thunder what it is. 304 A time for
Tilling the ground. 148 A time to cut Timber to keep long. 12 What Time is best
to use Physic 166 Phlebotomie. 170 A Time for all things under the Sun. 145 A
convenient time to set Children to a Trade. 132 Tradition in some kind
censured. * 3, *6 Translation what. 111 Translation of light among the Planets,
and what is thereby portended in Revolutions. 279 A time for planting of Trees.
150 Trine aspect, its Nature, why so called and charactered 93 why good and
benevolent. 92, 93 Triplicity what it is, how many, how nominated, by what
Planet ruled, and wherefore. 70 Tides not so apparent in the Atlantic Sea as
in others, and why in some places they are hindered. 11
V.
Venereal sports a time for them. 178 A time for applying Ventosies. 170 Venus,
her Nature, Complexion, Magnitude, Distance from the Earth, mean and diurnal
Motion, Revolution, Quality of men 58 Coporature, Part of man, Beasts, Herbs,
Spice, Trees, Perfumes, Birds, Stones, Mineral, Fishes, Weather, Winds, Places,
Signs, Triplicity, Day of the week, Regions, Years, Diseases ruled by her, her
Age, Angel, Exaltation, Fall, Detriment, Enemy, Friends 60 her joy 75 why so
called and charactered 77 is sometimes a malevolent and interficient Planet.
124, 216 Significations when Lady of the Year 235 in the twelve Houses 243 in
the twelve Signs from 261 to 263 when Lady of an Eclipse. 314 How to order the
matter for Victory. 179 How to judge of Victory in any year. 282 When to prune
and cut Vines. 12 Virgo, its Nature, Quality, Corporature, Diseases, Angel,
Colors, Places Regions, Cities, and Part of man under its rule 88 why ruled by
Me^cury 68 why his exaltation and fall of Venus 69 the Number, Names,
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of its most notable fixed Stars. 99 Virtue of
Herbs, Stones, Minerals, Drugs, and other Medicinal things how found out. 280
Unfortunate Planets. 127 A time for making of Unguents. 158 A time for
Voyaging. 195 Void of Course what. 111
W.
A time for War 179 to judge of the event 181 how to judge of it in any year;
where and when it shall hap 281 who shall be the beginner thereof. 283 A time
to bring Water to an House by pipe or otherways. 148 A time for Weaning of
Children. 133 Weather how to judge of it, from 288 to 303 A time for digging of
Wells, 148 How to know the Whisperings of any two. 185 Will of any one if to be
altered or stand in force, and how to judge of the state thereof. 189 How to
Win at any game. 186 Wind what it is. 304 Winter the cause thereof 9, 11 why
not all alike cold 9 what physic is therein best to be taken. 166 Women their
significators general 220 their Darling toys described. * 19 Word of God the
chiefest Good. *22 World how governed by GOD since he finished his six days
work * 5.4. ruled by Planets 328 the vanity thereof in general * 7 its
description and vanity more particularly from * 14 to * 19 turned topfie turvy.
* 17 Writing of Letters a time therefore. 158
Y.
Year whether likely to be turbulent or obnoxious 278 plentiful or scarce. 284
Greater Years of the Planets how known. 71 Youth and its vanity and folly
described. * 9, *10
From my Study at my Fathers House in Holborn, within two doors of the wounded
Heart, near the Kings Gate, this 17 of January 1652.
FINIS.
Reader,
AS in all Volumes you shall find the Printers faults, so in this; by reason
it is a work wherewith they are unacquainted, may thou abundantly find
their failings, which I would entreat thee heartily to pass by, and amend with
thy pen, before thou adventurest to read the same; especially or that some are
so gross and absurd, they may otherwise lead thee into an error, unless thou
art well acquainted with this manner of learning. I have put the fault all
along according as it should be amended in a different letter, that thou may
thereby the more readily apprehend where the defect lies; if there be any
other, as also literal faults or defects by me committed in the subject it
self, if thou shall show thy self so charitable as lovingly to correct, and
acquaint me therewith, I shall be for ever engaged to acknowledge my self

Thy assured Friend and Humble Servant William Ramesey.

Where in some Copies there are these faults let slip.
In the first Book.

FOlio 3. line 13. read Chap. 1. f. 4. l. 24. r. this art. l. 26. r. the
Heavens. f. 14. l. 25. r. lately published, and l. 50. r. of all things. f. 22.
l. 23. r. Lucius Bellantius. f. 26. l. 45. r. or crediting. f. 27. l. 52. r.
this a more, etc. f. 28. l. 13. r. his art. f. 30. in the contents of the 14
Chap. r. fifth reason. f. 31. l. 57. r. and conceitedness. f. 33. l. 16. after
superfluous, r. shall be satisfied, and in the same l. after matter r.
therefore. f. 35. l. 3. r. facing it. f. 38. l. 7. r. Dearth. and l. 18. r. I
mean. also l. 23. r. for since.

In the second Book.

Folio 50. in the margin. r. Saturn when well fortified, ibid. l. 39. r.
Meridional. and l. 40. r. fleshy. f. 51. l* 34. r. Chap. 27. f. 54. l. 19. r.
in two years. f. 62. l. 43. r. he is placed. f. 63. l. 15. r. her nearness. f.
65. in the table over against and after. r 24. and over against and after. r..
25. and 30. and after 25. over against. r. 30. and over against after 11. r.
16. and over against, after. 6. t. 13. f. 69. in the contents of the 11 Chap.
r. falls, and l. 25. wherein she is in her full. f. 71. in the table over
against and under. r. for 6.7. and in the same l. under. r. for 6.5. and over
against and under. for 6. r. 5. and in the same line under. for 5. r 6. and l.
41. r. him last, and l. 42. r. also him. f. 76. l. 49. r. 25. degrees of. and
l. 53. dele and. f. 79. l. 56. r. is because f 85. l. 21. r. second treatise.
f. 86. in the contents of the 26 Chap. r. quality. f. 92. l. 35. r. lighter
Planer, and l 53 r. the worst etc. f. 106. l. 50. r. 21. Chap. f. 109. l. 7. r.
second Treatise.

In the third Book.

Folio 122 l. 24 r. Omniscient Creator, and l. 37. r. of the party f. 125. l 15
for foreshewed. r. furthered. f. 127. l. 16. r. separating. f. 128. l. 11. r.
affairs for demands. f. 135. l. 19. dele and. f. 137. l. 43. r. she next. f.
141. l. 24. r. second book. f. 148. l. 50. r. in an angle. f. 161. l. 12. dele
be, and l. 32 dele then. f. 162. l. 20. r. interficient. l. 36. r. by her
swiftness. and l. 37. r. by her slowness. f. 163. l. 19 r. malevolent aspects.
f. 173. l. 14. r. aspect of. f. 179. l. 44. r. and of his houses. f. 183. l.
24. r. unto him. f. 185 l. 53. dele and before aspect. f. 201. l. 51. r. you
have been taught.

In the fourth Book.

Folio 214. l. 46. r 25. Chap. f. 215 l. 33 r. Chap. 22. and l. 50. r. Chap.
26. f. 224. l 27. r. or sixth. f. 229. l. 32. r. to those places. f. 241. l.
12. r. he is. f. 250. l. 4. r. his position. f. 251. l. 31. r. living in the
Sea. f. 258. l. 33. r. Jupiter prevent. f. 259. in the last note dele Lord. f.
261. l. 13. dele in. f. 265. l. 1. dele either. f. 282. l. 28. r. if it be
Venus. f. 284. l. 26. dele at. f. 286. l. 1. r. amplify it thus. f. 294. l. 5.
for this book. r. this Section. f. 295. l. 39. dele and. f. 298. l. 1. r* the
better and l. 10. r. these brute and l. 11. r. or at best. f. 300. l. 11. r.
seeds therefore. f. 308. l. 17. r. in the sixteenth Chap. and third Section. f.
320. l. 33. r. 16. Chap. and 3. Sect.


