The Last MEMORIAL OF THE Spanish Ambassador, Faithfully Translated into
English.
SIR,
DOn Pedro Ronquillo, Ambassador of Spain, says, That by a Memorial which he
Presented to Your Majesty the (19/29) of December, he did set forth the
Infractions which the most Christian King has made since the Peace of Nimeguen
from the month of September, after the difference was agreed about the Title of
the Duke of Burgundy, which was alleged for a Pretense to suspend the
Conference at Courtray, according to the 15th Article of that Treaty, in order
to the Adjusting in an amicable way all the Limits, Pretensions and Differences
of the two Crowns, which should result from that Treaty; And Your Majesty was
pleased by Your Royal Order of the (26 Dec./6 Jan.) to order Your Envoye
Extraordinary at Paris, to put in Execution what was contained in the said
Memorial. By the last Post, the said Ambassador received Letters of the (1/11)
instant, from the Marquis de la Fuente, who is Ambassador at Paris, in which he
gives him an Account of the Complaints he had made to the Christian King, about
the Excesses and Infractions which are committed against the Inhabitants of
Fuenta Rabia, and in the Low Countries, and particularly about a Message which
the Governor of Tournay sent to the Prince of Parma, pretending that not one
Pallisado should be laid at Bovignies, (which incontestably has been a
separated State, and comprehended in the Country of Namur.) After many violent
contestations, the Answer of the most Christian King was, That he did not doubt
but that the Catholic King would give Order to his Commissioner at Fuente
Rabia to proceed in the Treaty, leaving each Party in the possession which at
present they hold, (as if a violent Usurpation, under the surety of the good
faith of the Conference, could in one day be concluded to be an actual
possession) that for what relates to the Low Countries, he cannot abstain from
taking possession of that which he supposes does appertain to him, according to
what he shall declare at the Conference of Courtray.

To this violent, as well as undecent Answer, the Marquis de la Fuente with the
strength of the undoubtful Justice and Reason which the King my Master has,
concluding he did not receive the same, not knowing how to impart it to his
Catholic Majesty, and that he beseeched him to resolve what was Just; to which
Reply it was answered, That he would consider it. And at the same time his most
Christian Majesty has ordered his Forces to enter in the Spanish Low
Countries, to hinder the Fortifying of Bovignies.

This Proceeding does exceed all Limits, and cannot be reasonably endured; For
the most Christian King will, by Force of Arms, be Arbitrator, and command in
the Dominions of the Catholic King, thereby hindering him from fortifying a
place which is his own; when by the Article of Nimeguen it is allowed to be
done by both Parties. And when the French King himself has made use of the
same Article in order to have the course of the waters stopped, that they may
not hinder the fortifying his Towns, as it was more particularly done at
Mennin, causing the River Lisse to be lowerd, that they might with more
facility fortify that Town, a place which was wholly open, and which the
French King is fortifying and enlarging in Extent much more than it was before:
So that now, Sir, these are not Infractions, but a declared War; the Designs of
the French being public, that they intend to besiege Luxemburg, and that from
thence they will go to Namur, when the Fact of hindering the Fortification of
Bovignies (which is upon the Mose almost over against Dinant) makes it clear
and past doubt, especially the most Christian King having possessed himself of
all the Towns that are upon the River Mose from Charlemont, and of the most
part of the Territory between that River and the Sambre, in such a manner that
they have gotten almost all the County of Namur, as well as that of Luxemburg,
and thereby those two Provinces are left without Communication.

By these Infractions and clear Beginnings of War, the Underwritten Ambassador
does apply himself to Your Majesty as a Mediator, that you would cause what was
agreed by the Peace of Nimeguen to be observed; and as an Ally, that you would
defend it, and resist the Violence of France, Your Majesty being obliged to the
one and to the other by the Treaties; in which consideration he cannot omit
saying, That although the Frontiers of Spain by Cantabria and Catalogna are
Infested, and by the Treaty of Cassal between the French King and the Duke of
Mantua, the Dominions of Italy are in apparent danger, and no less the Indies,
where Count d'Estre is with a Squadron of Ships, all which are the Countries
that do compose the greatest power of the Spanish Monarchy; (notwithstanding
this, his Catholic Majesty has postpo^ed these his greatest Concerns, to the
defense of that Little which remains to him in the Low Countries, although it
be lessened of a great part of Territory, (which the French have violently
possessed themselves of, since the Peace of Nimeguen) which has been the only
cause that we have not been able to keep that Country in better posture; for
each unjust Usurpation of the French, has broken the measures which were
taken, and reduced us to seek others; and therefore his Majesty has already
sent considerable Supplies to Flanders, and appointed the Prince of Parma
Governor thereof, as an experienced Soldier, and one who has been Viceroy of
several Kingdoms, thereby to encourage those Subjects with these Endeavors, and
that they may be Governed by a Grandson, and of the same name of Alexander
Farnese, whom with so much love they reverence.

All this, Sir, has been done, in hopes that the Union and Interest of England
with Spain, will produce mutual Effects of Conveniences to both Crowns; for no
good Englishman can doubt, that if there be no opposition made to the present
great power of France, it is impossible but that in few days they should possess
themselves of the Low Countries, and that the States General should subject
themselves, by reason of the impossibility of resisting the powerful. And
afterward Your Majesty and England shall be the first in perceiving this
mischief, to remedy which, it will be then impossible; and at present nothing
is capable to suppress these Evils, but the Power of England, at this time the
only in Europe that can restrain the Torrent of France. The differences which
are at present in England, does occasion these bold Attempts of the French
King, and encourages him in the continuation of his vast Designs; upon the
whole so apparent already, that there is no clear-sighted understanding, but
will apprehend them. All the Princes and Powers of Europe, as also his most
Christian Majesty, are in expectation of the success of this Parliament, and of
the Agreement of England; the first to take measures in order to shake off the
Yoke which they are like to be made subject to: And the most Christian King
has also for a time restrained his Ambition, and at present nothing does
encourage him to deliver himself up to it, but the differences which he sees
breaking out here, giving it out as well within as without this Kingdom, That
he is assured they will not be reconciled; and that in the mean while he may
make up the Conquest of the Low Countries, which is the Master-Key of the
Universal Monarchy, and the first door which he will open with it, shall be
that of England, without further trouble than that of maintaining the
differences, with great promises, and with a small charge; and whatsoever he
shall find most for his advantage, will be first invaded by him.

That this Disunion is the chief Encouragement of the Design and Enterprises of
the most Christian King in the Low Countries, is apparent; and there are so
great proofs of this Truth, that it is Blindness not to see them: And the
Ambassador will only acquaint Your Majesty with one late Instance which does
manifest the same, which is, That his most Christian Majesty seeing the Emperor
is making considerable Levies, as also the Elector of Saxony, and other Princes
of the Empire; that the Electors of Bavaria, and Brandenburgh, have declared,
That they will not suffer his Proceedings against the Empire, and the Princes
of the same, and that they will oppose it with all their Power.

His most Christian Majesty, after so many violent Answers which he himself had
made, and also his Ministers, to all the Princes of Germany, he has now
answered the Emperor's Envoy Extraordinary, That he does agree in appointing a
Conference in one of the Imperial Cities, to decide and explain the Ambiguous
Points of the Articles of the Peace of Nimeguen, concerning the Possessions
taken in Alsatia; and that as soon as the Commissioners are met, the Chamber of
Metz shall cease its Proceedings, and all manner of Novelty, and that they will
hear such a Person as shall Treat for the Duke of Lorrain. And although it is
evident that this is intended to lay asleep the minds, as well of the Emperor,
as of the other Princes concerned, and that they may cool the vigor of their
Preparations which they are making for their Defense, it is also known that this
is in order to work with more safety against the Low Countries; for at the same
time that he offers to suspend the Attempts in the Empire, he continues in
possessing himself of all the Spanish open Country, executing Acts of open
War, by hindering the Fortification of Bovignies, which is the same thing as
blocking up of Luxemburgh and Namur; so that it is made evident, that if he saw
the differences of England appeased, and united to its own Defense, for such
ought to be reputed that of the Spanish Monarchy, and in particular that of the
Low Countries, it is infallible and certain, that he would moderate his Designs,
and limit his Resolutions, as it appears he does in Germany, seeing that the
Emperor, and all the Body of the Empire, do unite for its defense.

The Ambassador does very well know, that the Agitation of this Kingdom is
great, and that the Pretensions seem to be distant; but he is sorry, and it
makes his heart bleed to see, that there is no way opened to an Union; and as
there is nothing impossible in humane things, his pain does increase, seeing
there is no steps made to quench these Heats: If England were not so much
threatened with Ruin by the Exaltation of the French, as the Low Countries are,
the Pretensions and Rights might be followed to the uttermost Point; but
running the same Fortune with the Monarchy of Spain, because Flanders is a
Battery to England and Spain, and the Indies the Treasure of its Riches, and
the chief strength of its Commerce, beyond all places where this Nation does
Trade, and therefore it does not allow that their Interest should be considered
as a Foreigner, nor that the Distractions in which all are now involved, should
be calmed by the same methods which could be done in a secured Tranquillity; so
that the Ambassador does promise himself, that considering these Reasons, and
that France being at this time a Gangrene which does penetrate to the very
heart of England, all grounds of differences shall cease, and that it will not
with its own Ruin involve the rest of Christendom in the same Fate:

Therefore the Ambassador does pray Your Majesty, that as Mediator, or as Ally,
You would Effectually apply Your Self to prevent the Loss of the Low Countries,
and consequently of all the rest, hoping from Your Majesty's great Prudence,
that You will make choice of the most Efficacious Means to that End, and to the
Establishing the quiet of Europe.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.


