Arcana Microcosmi: OR, The hid Secrets of MAN's Body discovered; In an
Anatomical Duel between Aristotle and Galen concerning the Parts thereof: As
also, By a Discovery of the strange and marveilous Diseases, Symptoms and
Accidents of MAN's BODY.

WITH A Refutation of Doctor Brown's VULGAR ERRORS, The Lord BACON's NATURAL
HISTORY, And Doctor Harvy's Book DE GENERATIONE, COMENIVS, and Others;

Whereto is annexed a Letter from Doctor Pr. to the Author, and his Answer
thereto, touching Doctor Harvy's Book de Genetatione.

By A. R.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, and are to be sold by John Clark, entering
into Mercers-Chappel, at the lower end of Cheapside, 1652.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL and my much honored FRIEND, EDWARD WATSON, ESQUIRE, Son and
Heir to the Right Honorable, the Lord ROCKINGHAME.
SIR.
WHen I consider your proficiency in the School of Wisdom, your daily
exercises in the Temple of Virtue, for which you may in time deserve a Shrine
in the Temple of Honor; your hearty affection to true and solid Philosophy; not
that which the Apostle calls Vain and deceiving; and lastly, your sincere love
to me, I thought good not in way of retaliation, but of a thankful recognition
of your favors, to present this piece to you, wherein you may perceive how
many strange wonders and secrets are couched up within the Microcosme of our
body; and with what admirable artifice the base and infirm materials of this
our earthly Tabernacle are united and composed.

Likewise you may see how much the Dictates and Opinions of the ancient
Champions of Learning, are slighted and misconstrued by some modern
Innovators; whereas we are but children in understanding, and ought to be
directed by those Fathers of Knowledge; we are but Dwarfs and Pigmies compared
to those Giants of Wisdom on whose shoulders we stand, yet we cannot see so far
as they without them: I deny not but we may and ought to strive for further
knowledge, which we shall hardly reach without their supportation. I dissuade
no man from inventing new; but I ^ould not have him therefore to forget the
old, nor to lose the substance whilst he catches the shadow. Women and Children
love new wine, because pleasant to the palate; but wise men choose the old,
because wholsomer for the stomach. As I abridge no man of his liberty to invent
new ways; so I hope they will not debar me of the like liberty to keep the old
paths, so long as I find them more easy and compendious for attaining the end
of my journey. Sir, I will not trouble you with any larger Discourse on this
subject. I wish an accumulation of all vertue^ and happiness on you, and
withal the continuation of your love to him who professes himself

Your humble servant, Alexander Ross.

The Contents of each Chapter in these four Books.
CHAP. I.
1. The Hearts dignity, situation, priority, necessity, and use. 2. The Heart
first formed, not all the parts together. 3. The Galenists Objections answered.
4. How the heart is perfect before the other members, and how nourished. 5. All
the temperaments united in the Heart. 6. Three ^entricles in some Hearts. 7. The
Heart nervous. 8. No parts more spermatical then others. 9. The Liver, not the
first that is formed. 10. The Heart the seat of Blood and nourishment. 11. The
heat of the Matrix not generative. 12. The right Ventricle nobler then the
left. 13. The vital and nutritive faculties are the same. 14. Heat the cause of
the Hearts motion. 15. The Heart was first formed and informed. 16. There is
but one principal member in the body, not many.

CHAP. II.
Blood begot in the Heart, not in the Liver, why? 2. The Heart is the original
of the Veins and Nerves, of nutrition, and sense, and motion. 3. Why the nerves
and veins do not beat, and the cause of Hydropsies. 4. All blood is not
elaborated in the heart; how it is the original of the veins. 5. The arterial
blood must waste, or else it would infinitely increase. 6. Why the blood
thickneth not in ^the. heart till death. 7. The heart is the seat of passion.
8. Why the heart a fitter seat for the soul then the liver. 9. A double unity,
to wit, of the matter, and of the form.

CHAP. III.
1 Why the heart the original of sensation, and how it feels. 2 The brains
being cold cannot beget sensitive spirits: Why the animal spirits most active
where is most heat. 3. There can be no generation of the animal spirits out of
the vital, without the corruption of the vital, which is impossible: The
animal spirits are not begot of the air. 4. Neither are they conco^ted or
generated in the ventricles of the brain, nor are they wasted. 5. The brain is
not the original of sense and motion, although these fail upon the hurt of the
brain. 6. Why upon the distemper of the heart, there is no failing of sense and
motion. 7. The nerves are not from the brain, though they be like; but indeed
they are not like the brain. 8. Why the nerve of the heart loses sense and
motion beneath the knot, not above it. 9. The brain is the coldest of all the
parts how void of veins and blood, how hot, and the cause of hairs. 10. The
blood and spirits alter not the brains temper. Why its coldness is not fel^:
the pith in the back bone hor. 11. Why the brain and heart at such and stance:
by the spirits they work on each other. 12. Why both the brain and lungs were
made for refrigeration. 13. The man's brain larger then the woman's: why man
hotter then Lions. 14. The testicles ignobler then the heart and brain. 15. The
heart, not the testicles, the cause of sensation and generation; the testicles
not chief because necessary, or because they cause an alteration in the body,
from whence is the distinction of sexes. 16. The seed receives its specificall
form from the heart 17. Why Eunuchs fatter, weaker, and colder.

Lib. II. CAP. I.
1. Man's Body fitted only for man's Soul. Tritons are not men. 2. How Man's body
is more excellent then all others. 3. How the Soul is most in the Brain and
Heart. 4. A twofold heat in us. 5. What Creatures nourish most. 6. The Woman's
imagination cannot alter the form.

CAP. II.
1. The Stomach and Lungs not necessary for life. 2, How the limbs are moved:
the spirits are bodies more required for motion then sensation: the spirits are
light: how they are the souls instruments: how the Muscles move. 3. Seven
properties of the brain. 4. Twelve properties of the eye. 5. Its substance
warrish. 6. Why but one sight. 7. The eye how an agent and patient. 8. Its two
lights and its colors. Light gives the second act.

CAP. III.
1. A twofold Heat in living things. 2. The Primitive Heat where, and how
tempered. 3. Our spirits are not celestial, several Reasons. 4. Our natural
heat, what? it is no substance, in six Reasons, 5. Many excellencies of man's
body. 6. The Head, why the noblest part, and highest, as Galen thinks.

CAP. IV.
1. What the spirits are. 2. They differ in seven things. 3. The Woman is only
passive in generation: Her Testicles, Arteries, etc. not spermatical parts; the
males seed evaporates, why the child resembles the parents; the blood may be
called seed. 4. Adeps how generated. Of the Lungs, they are hot.

CAP. V.
1. The prerogative of the heart. 2. The actions of our members. 3. There are
no spermatical parts. 4. The bones, nerves, veins, etc. why not easily
reunited. 5. The spermatical parts hotter then the sanguineal. 6. The brains
and scull, bones and teeth compared.

CAP. VI.
1. Two sorts of blood; the heart first lives, and is nourished, and the
original of blood, not the liver. 2: The hearts action on Vena cava; the cause
of sanguification. 3. Blood caused by the heart. 4. How every part draws. 5.
Heart the first principle of the nerves. 6. Nerves, how instruments of sense
and motion. 7. The same nerves serve for sense and motion.

CHAP. VII.
1. How the spirits pass through the nerves: their swift and various motions,
even in sleep: motion and sense not still together. 2. Sense and motion in
phrensies, epilepsies, leprosies, caros. 3. Muscles, how, when and where the
causes of voluntary motion. 4. How the fibers and tendons move the muscles. 5.
The muscles of the tongue, abdomen, diaphragma, ribs, bladder. 6. The organs of
tact, its medium.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Blood, milk, etc. No integral parts. 2. How the parts draw their aliment.
3. And expel things hurtful. 4. Of the intestines and faeces. 5. The intestines
retentive faculty. 6. Of the stomach and its appetite or sense. 7. Whether the
stomach is nourished by Chylus or blood.

CHAP. IX.
1. The Livers heat inferior to that of the Stomachs. 2. Of the natural
Spirits in the Liver, and how it is cherished by air. 3. Of the Gall, and how
it is nourished. How the Choler is conveyed to it; of its two passages, and one
membrane.

CHAP. X.
1. The use of the Gall, and Spleen, its obstructions, its Veins and Arteries
without concavity. 2. Vas venosum. 3. How the Spleen purges it self. 4. The
Veins and its humors. 5. Why the stone causes vomiting and numbness in the
thigh. 6. The bladder, its attraction and expulsion.

CHAP. XI.
1. The Heart and Testieles, how the noblest parts: Generation without
Testicles, they corroborate the Heart, their sympathy with the breast: 2. And
with the brain. 3. Different vessels in the Male and Female. 4. The Matrix
sympathizeth with the Head, Heart, Breasts, etc. 5. Affected with smells. Its
twofold motion.

CHAP. XII.
1. Distinction of sexes: the male hotter then the female. 2. The seed no part,
nor aliment of the body: derived from all parts, how. 3. The menstruous blood
no excrement, how it is: The cause of the small pox: Its evacua^ion. 4. The
uses of the matrix. 5. Its vitiosity, the cause of Monsters: Mola, what.

CHAP. XIII.
1. The Heart lives first, not the Liver. 2. The outward membranes first
formed by the heat of the matrix. 3. Vrachos, what. 4 The similitude^ of the
parents on the children. 5. Twins, how b^got, and why like each other. 6.
Infants, how fed in the matrix. 7. Supersetation. 8. No respiration in the
matrix. 9. The Child's heart moves in the matrix.

CHAP. XIV.
1. Childbearing how caused. 2. Why the eight months birth not lively. 3. The
sensitive Soul how derived, and the reasonable introduced: when it exercises
its functions: it brings with it all its perfections. The Embryo not capable of
three specifical forms.

CHAP. XV.
1. Why about the fourth month milk is engendered, and of what. 2. The effects
of the Diaphragma inflamed. 3. Pericardium. 4. The Hearts Flesh, Fibers, and
Ventricles. 5. The Heart why hot and dry. 6. The vital faculty. 7. The vital
spirits how engendered. 8. Systole and Diastole. 9. The Hearts motion. 10. How
caused.

CHAP. XVI.
1. The Lungs how moved; the air is not the spirits nutrime^t. 2. Respiration
not absolutely necessary. 3. The Lungs hot and moist. 4. Respiration a mixed
motion, as that of the bladder and intestins. 5. No portion of our drink
passes into the Lungs.

CHAP. XVII.
1. All the senses in the brain. 2. How made for refrigeration only, how hot,
cold, and moist; and why; its actions. 3. How void of sense and motion. 4. The
animal spirits, what, and how begot. 5. Why more vital then animal spirits;
where perfected, and prepared, the ventricles of the brain.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. The eye both watrish and fiery, imperfect vision. 2. Why the eye is
watrish, its action, spirits, and species. 3. Spirits of the eye proved: two
eyes, but one motion; why the object appears double sometimes, no colors in
the eye. 4. The optic nerves soft, where united, and why. 5. The Chrystalline,
and glassy humors, and white of the eye.

CHAP. XIX.
1. Five things required to hearing. 2. Not the real but intentional sound is
heard: Hearing fails last in drowned men. 3. The innate air no organ of
hearing: no spirit, or part of the body. 4. The cause of the sympathy between
the ear and the mouth.

CHAP. XX.
1. How we excel the beasts in smelling. We smell real^ odours. 2. Smells
nourish not. 3. The nose, not the brain is the organ of smelling.

CHAP. XXI.
1. Wherein consists the organ of taste. The tongue potentially moist: no
external medium of taste. 2. How the skin is the medium of taste. The prime
qualities, both objects and agents. No creature without tact. It is most
exquisite in man. Tact and taste different.

CHAP. XXII.
1. The use of the common sense: It is but one sense: The different judgment
of this sense, and of the soul. How different from other senses. Its in the
brain and heart. 2. Imagination or fantasy, what: disturbed compoundeth. The
Estimative. Its work and seat. 3. Memory, how a sense. It is twofold.
Reminiscence, what? Old men and childrens memories.

LIB. III. A Refutation of Doctor BRO^WNS Vulgar Errors.
CHAP. I.
1. Of Eels voided by a maid, and of other strange generations. 2. A woman
voided in three days, six quarts of milk. 3: Of women, who have eat men's flesh.
4. Of women that have lived some years without food. 5 Of one that lived some
years without a brain^ another without a Spleen. Of one that lived with a knife
in her skull. 6. Of some that have swallowed knives, glasses, etc. 7. Of some
shot in the forehead, and the bullet found in the hinder part of the skull.

CHAP. II.
Of one who wanted the pericardium. 2. Of hairy hearts. 3. Of one that walked
and fought after his heart was wounded. 4. Stones found in the heart. 5. And
worms found there. The heart may putrify, while we are alive. 6. Worms in the
brain.

CHAP. III.
1. Epilepsie. 2. Incubus. 3 Vertigo. 4. Of a stone in the tongue. 5. One of
nine years old brought to bed. 6. Bodies turned to Stones. 7. Sleep-walkers. 8.
Superfetation. Ventriloques. 9. A strange stone found in the matrix.

CHAP. IV.
1. Some without Lungs. 2. Impostumes voided in Urine. 3. Worms the cause of
many diseases. 4. No change of sexes. 5. Giants. 6. Some without livers. 7.
Fleshy bladders. 8. Stones, hairs, worms, etc. Begot in our Urine. 9. A woman
without a matrix.

CHAP. V.
1. Strange but not miraculous births. 2. Strange and strong imaginations. 3.
Poison inward and outward. 4. Poison of mad Dogs. 5. Cantharides. 6. Poison how
it works. 7. Why birds not poisoned as men. 8. Amphiam, Opium, Mandrakes. 9.
The Plague no Hectic nor putrid Fever. 10. Epidemical diseases.

CHAP. VI.
1. Antipathies to some meats. 2. The force of Fear. 3. Blood voided by the
Gums and Navil. 4. Black hairs suddenly gray. 5. Violence of passions. 6.
Defects in nature recompensed. 7. A Fly voided by Urine. 8. Monthly blood in
men. 9. The causes of Monsters. 10. Horns on men's heads and heels.

CHAP. VII.
1. The effects of blood being drunk. 2. Some strange diseases. 3. Plie ca
Polonica. 4. Some eat poison without hurt. 5. Stones in th intestines. 6. Old
men come young. 7. Some strange monsters.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Of diverse and strange spleens. 2. Black urine. 3. One lives without sleep.
4. The Tarentula's effects and cure. The force of Music. 5. Serpents begot of
dead brains. 6. Of Tiberius his sight, Alexanders sweat. Strabo's eyes.

The Second Book Of the strange diseases and Accidents of MAN'S Body.
CHAP. I.
1. Diverse ways to resist burning. 2. Locust eaters, the lousy disease, the
Baptist fed not on Locusts. 3. Man's flesh most subject to putrefaction, and the
causes thereof; How putrefaction is resisted. Mumia. 4. The strength of
affection and imagination in dying men. Strange presages of death. 5.
Difference of dead men's skuls, and why.

CHAP. II.
1. The benefits of sleep, and reasons why some sleep not. 2. Why dead bodies
after the ninth day swim. Why dead and sleeping men heavier then others; why a
blown bladder lighter then an empty. 3. Strange Epidemical diseases and deaths.
The force of smells. The Roses smell. 4. Strange shapes, and multitudes of worms
in our bodies. 5. The French disease, and its malignity. The diseases of Brasil.

CHAP. III.
1. C^ntaurs, proved what they were. 2. Why the sight of a Wolf. causes
obmutescency. 3. Pigmies proved. Gammadim, what. 4. Giants proved: they are not
monsters. 5. The strange force of Fascination. The sympathies and antipathies
of things. The Loadstones attraction, how hindered. Fascination, how cured.
Fascination by words.

CHAP. IV.
1. Strange stones bred in men's bodies. 2. Children nourished by Wolves and
other Beasts. 3. Poison taken without hurt. Poison eaters may infect, how. How
Grapes and other Plants may be poisoned. 4. Of strange Mola's. Bears by
licking, form their Cubs, the Plastic faculty still working.

CHAP. V.
1 Diverse privileges of Eunuchs: The Fibers, Testicles. 2. D^ versities of
Aliments and Medicaments, the virtue of Peache^ Mandrakes, the nature of our
aliments. 3. A strange story (...) a sick Maid discussed, and of strange
vomitings, and Monsters and Imaginations. 4. Men long lived; the Deers long
life (...) serted. 5. That old men may become young again, proved.

CHAP. VI.
1. Of many new diseases, and causes thereof. 2. Different colors i^ our
bodies: the causes of the Ethiopian blackness. 3. The (...) Unicorn with his
horn and virtues asserted. 4. Some born blind and dumb, recovered: A strange
Universal Fever: A strange Fish, and strength of Imagination.

CHAP. VII.
1. The diversities and virtues of Bezar stones. 2. A woman conceived in a
Bath: of an Incubus. 3. Strange actions performed by sleepers, and the causes
thereof. Lots Incest in his sleep. 4. Some Animals live long without food: The
Camelions food is only (...); the contrary reasons answered: Air turns to
water, and is the^ pabulous supply of fire.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Diverse animals long-lived without food. The Camelion lives on air only. 2.
Diverse creatures fed only by water. 3. Chilification not absolutely necessary.
Strange operations of some stomachs. The Ostrich eats and digests Iron. 4. How
Bees, Gnats, etc. make a sound. Of Glowworms: and Grains bit by Pismires: the
vegitable Lamb, and other strange plants. 5. The Tigers swiftness. The Remora
stays ships.

CHAP. IX.
1. Lions afraid of Cocks: Antipathies cause fear and horror in diverse animals.
2. Spiders kill Toads; the diversities of Spiders. 3. The Cocks Egg and
Basilisk: Diverse sorts of Basilisks. 4. Amphisbaena proved, and the contrary
objections answered. 5. The Vipers generation by the death of the mother
proved, and objections to the contrary refuted.

CHAP. X.
1. Moles see not, and the contrary objections answered. 2. The opinions of the
Ancients concerning diverse animals maintained. 3. The right and left side
defended. 4. The true cause of the erection of man's body, and the benefit we
have thereby. 5. Mice and other vermin bred of putrefaction, even in men's
bodies. 6. How men swim naturally; the Indian swimmers.

CHAP. XI.
(...) The Pictures of the Pelican, Dolphin, Serpent, Adam and Eve, Christ,
Moses, Abraham, and of the Sybils defended. 2. The Pictures of Cleopatra, of
Alexander, of Hector, of Caesar with Saddle and Stirrops maintained.

CHAP. XII.
1. The Picture of Iephtha sacrificing his daughter maintained. 2. The Baptist
wore a Camels skin. 3. Other pictures, as of S. Christopher, S. George, etc.
defended. 4. The antiquity, distinction and continuance of the Hebrew tongue,
of the Samaritans, and their Letters.

CHAP. XIII.
1. There is not heat in the body of the Sun. 2. Islands before the Flood
proved. 3. The seven Ostiaries of Nilus, and its greatness. The greatness of
old Rome diverse ways proved. Nilus overflowing, how proper to it: the
Crocodiles of Nilus; its inundation regular.

CHAP. XIV.
1. The cause of Niles inundation. 2. Lots wife truly transformed into a salt
Pillar. 3. Hels fire truly black: brimstone causes blackness. 4. Philoxenus a
glutton, and his wish not absurd: How long necks conduce to modulation.

CHAP. XV.
1. Heavy bodies swim in the dead sea: and the Ancients in this point defended.
2. Crassus had reason to laugh at the Ass eating Thistles: Laughter defined: in
laughter there is sorrow; in weeping, joy. 3. That Christ never laughed,
proved. 4. Fluctus Decumans, what?

CHAP. XVI.
1. Epicurus, a wicked and wanton man, impious in his opinions. Seneca's
judgment of him. 2. Twelve of his impious and absurd opinions rehearsed.

CHAP. XVII.
Epicurus his Atoms rejected by nineteen reasons.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. That Crystal is of water, proved, and the contrary objections answered how
it differs from Ice. 2. The Loadstone moves not; its Antipathy with Garlic. Of
the Adamant, Versoria, Amber, etc.

CHAP. XIX.
What the Ancients have written of Griffins may be true. Griffins mentioned in
Scripture. Grypi and Gryphes, Perez and Oss^frage, what?

CHAPr XX.
1. The Navigation of the Ancients by the stars: they knew not the compass. 2.
Goats blood softneth the Adamant. Gold loses its virtue and gravity with its
substance. Iron may grow hot with motion. Coral is soft under water, and
hardened by the air. Viscum or Missletoe, how it grows. The shade of the
Ash-tree, pernicious to Serpents.

CHAP. XXI.
1. The existence of the Phoenix proved by diverse reasons: and thcontrary
objections refelled: the strange generation of some birds 2. The Ancients
cleared concerning the Phoenix, and whether the Phoenix be mentioned in
Scripture. Diverse sorts of generation in diverse creatures. The Conclusion, with
an Admonition not to slight the Ancients opinion and Doctrine.

The fourth Book. Containing a Refutation of the Lord BACON, Doctor HARVEY, and
others.
CHAP. I.
1. Fishes breath not: the Reasons thereof, and the contrary objections
answered. 2. Fossil or earth-fishes. 3. Fishes delight in the light. 4. Fishes
of Humane shapes. 5. Fishes are cunning and d^cible creatures. 6. Why some
Fishes have Feet and Wings. 7. Many monstrous fishes.

CHAP II.
1. Public and private calamities presaged by owls. 2. By dogs. 3. By ravens,
and other birds, and diverse other ways. 4. Wishing well in sneezing, when and
why used. 5. Diverse strange things in thunder^struck people.

CHAP. III.
1. The Female has no active seed of generation. Doctor Harvies and Fernelius
reasons refutaed. 2. A Discourse of the Cholick. 3. The same soul in a
subventaneous and prolificall egg. Doctor Harvies reasons to the contrary
refuted. 4. Blood not the immediate instrument of the Soul, Doctor Harvies
reasons answered. 5. Doctor Harvies way of conception refuted.

CHAP. IV.
1. My Lord Bacon's opinion confuted concerning the French disease. 2.
Concerning the expulsion of pellets out of guns. 3. Of the wax candle burning
in spirit of wine. 4. Of the parts most nutritive in animals. 5. Of the spirits
in cold bodies. 6. Of air, fire, water, oil, whiteness, the hands and feet. 7.
Of souls and spirits. 8. Of visible objects and hearing. 9. Of sounds and
music. 10. Of singing birds, descending species, light. 11. Ingrate objects,
and deafness, with other passages.

CHAP. V.
The Lord Bacons opinions refuted. Of holding the breath when we bearken. Of
time. Of long life. Of making gold. Of stars. Of oil. Of indisposition to
motion. Of death, diseases and putrefaction. Of stuttering. Of motion after the
head is off. Of sympathies and antipathies of the Vine and Colewort, the
Fig Tree and Rue. Of white color. Of the Oak bough in the earth. Of
transmutation of species. Of Incubus. Of grain in cold Countries. Of
determination and figures. Of accretion and alimentation. Of the period of
life. Of sugar, leaves, roots, snow, and putrefaction.

CHAP. VI.
The Lord Bacons opinions confuted concerning Snow, Ephemera, gravitie, the
sperme of Drunkards, putrefaction, teeth, bones and nails, thick and thin
mediums, Nilus, hot Iron, broin, sudden darkness, dry and moist bodies, fish,
corns, hunger, liquifaction, hardness, moisture, accidents, light, right side,
spungy bodies, stonewalls, imagination, the cramp, hedghog, mummy, salt,
Cominus and others refuted concerning motion, qualities, colors, forms, the
Epilogue.

Arcana Microcosmi: OR, The hid Secrets of MAN's BODY discovered. WITH A
Refutation of Doctor BROVVNS VULGAR ERRORS, My Lord BACON'S Natural History;
AND Dr HARVEY's Book De Generatione.
CHAP. I.
1. The Hearts dignity, situation, priority, necessity, and use. 2. The Heart
first formed, not all the parts together. 3. The Galenists Objections answered.
4. How the heart is perfect before the other members, and how nourished. 5. All
the temperaments united in the Heart. 6. Three ventricles in some Hearts. 7. The
Heart nervous. 8. No parts more spermatical then others. 9. The Liver, not the
first that is formed. 10. The Heart the seat of Blood and nourishment. 11. The
heat of the Matrix not generative. 12. The right Ventricle nobler then the
left. 13. The vital and nutritive faculties are the same. 14. Heat the cause of
the Hearts motion. 15. The Heart was first formed and informed. 16. There is
but one principal member in the body, not many.

AS in all States and Kingdoms there have ever been factions and sidings, so
have there been still oppositions in the Commonwealth of Learning; amongst
many others, there are two great factions concerning the fabric of Man's Body;
namely, the Peripateticks and Galenists; so that in Rome there was not greater
emulation between the Pompeians and Caesarians, then there is between the
Philosophers and Physicians in the points of Anatomy: I stood as neuter a long
time, but at last being evinced by the multitude and strength of Aristotelian
reasons am forced to side with them against the Galenists; but so, that I do
what I can to reconcile them in some things, and to make peace; for, Nulla
salus bello.

I. I will therefore briefly set down the reasons that have induced me to side
with the Aristotelians. And first concerning the Heart: I find that it is the
first member that lives and is formed in our bodies; and consequently the
noblest and chiefest of all our members, whatsoever the Galenists say to the
contrary. For 1. The Heart is placed in the midst of the breast, as the Sun in
the midst of the world, that it might impart its vital heat and motion to all
parts: So the seed is in the midst of the fruit. 2. Where there is a medium
there must needs be extremes; but we find in man's body this medium; to wit,
that there are some parts which both give and receive life and motion;
therefore there must be some that receive but give not; and consequently some
that give but receive not; and this must be the heart, or brain, or liver: for
to make more originals then one, is needless, seeing Nature always tends to,
and aims at unity. Now that the heart is this principal, appears by these
reasons. 3. First, that is most likely to be the original of life, sense, and
motion in other members, which is most apt and capable of these; and so, that
had first life and motion, which had the greatest inclination and aptitude to
receive them; but the heart of all other parts is most apt to receive these
from the formative faculty: Therefore doubtless this faculty in the seed, would
first produce the heart, as being a matter prepared to receive first the
impressions of the formative. 4. What the heart is in Animals, that the root is
in Vegitables; but the root is the first thing the plant thrusts out; therefore
the heart is first formed. 5. The heart dies last, therefore it lived first:
for this method Nature observes, that the parts which are last made, decay
first, as the eyes and teeth; and consequently that decays last, which was
framed first. 6. They that have been curious by inspection into eggs, to
observe Natures progress in the generation of the chick, have found a red spot
the third day, which had a motion like palpitation; this could be nothing else
but the heart. 7. The other members cannot live without the heart, but the
heart can live without the other members, as I have seen a Monkeys heart live a
great while after it has been taken out of the body: If then the life of the
other members depends from the heart, and not the heart from them, the heart
must needs be the first that lives.

8. The heart imparts the vital heat to the other parts, it must therefore
have existence before the other parts; for operation follows the existence. 9.
The formative power of the seed does not operate but by the vital heat of the
heart; therefore this must be first, before that can operate. 10. The matter
cannot be disposed, to receive the form of the members, nor can the parts be
distinguished one from another, without the heat and motion of the heart. 11.
Nature in her operations aims at an end; but where there is an end, there is
order; and where there is order, there is priority, and something that was
first.

II. There are some who hold that the heart is not first generated, but that
all the members are at the same time begot and formed together: But this cannot
be so; for in the Embryo we see that all the parts are not equally articulated
and figured, but some sooner, some later. 2. We see this in art, which imitates
Nature; for the artificer carves and figures one part before another. 3. We see
the teeth are begot long after the other parts; for nature produces the
members as there is (...) of them; the infant needs no teeth whilst it feeds on
milk. 4. If all the parts are at the same time framed and articulated, then all
the body is at the same time perfected; but this is not Natures work, which
proceeds by degrees to perfection, having imperfect beginnings.

III. The Galenists object, that Nature had to no purpose made the heart before
the rest of the body, seeing there is no use of the heart till the body be
formed. I answer, there is a twofold use, namely, of Animation, and of
preparation; the heart could not animate the body before it was, but it could
prepare the matter by its vital heat and motion to receive the impression and
influence of the formative power, working by the heart on the matter; the heart
then is useful, not only to the body after it is generated but also whilst it
is in Fieri; and in generation, the heart is the foundation of the whole
corporeal Fabric; we cannot say the foundation is needless, because it is laid
before the house is built; for though it does not support the superstructure
before it be, yet it is ready and sitted to support it, when it shall be:
Neither will it follow, that because the house before it is built needs, no
foundation, therefore the foundation must not be first laid. There is need of
priority and order; the building needs it, when it shall be, and the builder
needs it before it be: though the body not yet formed needs not the heart, yet
the formative power needs it. Secondly, they object that the formative power is
common to all the parts alike, having no more relation to one then to another;
and therefore works upon them all alike, and produces them together. I answer,
God is the common and universal cause of all his creatures; yet he did not
create them all in one day; the universality of the cause, excludes not the
order of casuality; nor is the common relation it has to the effects, any
reason of producing them all at one time. Again, though the formative power
has an equal relation to all parts, as they are parts; yet it has a nearer
relation to the heart, as being its organ, by which it works on the other parts.

IV. If it be asked whether the heart be perfect or imperfect before the other
members be articulated. I answer; It is perfect, if it be compared with any
other member, but imperfect if compared with the whole compositum. Again, it is
imperfect to what it shall be, when it shall be fitted with all necessary Organs
for animation. 2. If again it be asked, how the heart can live without
nutriment, seeing the liver by blood feeds it. I answer, though the liver be
not yet formed, yet the heart is nourished by some adjacent matter, as the
chick is by the yeolk of the egg; and this nourishment suffices the heart,
till blood, a perfect nutriment be prepared. Again, the nutritive faculty does
not flow from the liver, as the vital from he heart, but it is inherent and
implanted into every part, as well in the heart as in the liver; whereas the
vital is implanted only in the heart, and from thence flowing into every
member. Lastly, we may say that the heart needs no food, till there be a
dependition, or wasting of its substance.

V. The unity of the vegetive soul cannot be preserved in so many different
temperaments; or the body, (for there are as many as there are parts) if it
were not for the common temperament of the heart, in which all the others are
united, receiving from thence heat and spirits: It was needful then that the
heart should be first formed, as being the common original of all the other
parts, all which may be said to have but one common temperament, and one soul,
because there is but one heart.

VI. Though the Galenists affirm that the heart has but two ventricles; yet
the Aristotelians in affirming three in bigger creatures, seem to speak more
reason: For if in bigger animals there is greater store of spirits, and a
greater elaboration of them, then in the lesser, it stands with reason that
their hearts being bigger, should have also more receptacles for containing the
vital blood and spirits, then the less.

VII. It stands also with reason, that the substance of the heart, is nervous,
that it might be the more firm and solid. 2. Because the heart is the original
of motion, which is performed by the nerves. 3. Because the substance of the
veins and arteries, whereof the heart is the original, is nervous.

VIII. The parts which the Galenists call Spermaticall, are not made of the
Sperma, or Seed, more then any other parts are, but of the dryer and more solid
parts of the blood, as the Sanguineall are of the thinner parts thereof. 2: The
males seed is only active, the woman has no other seed then the menstruous
blood, which is merely passive; in both which seeds there is a power or
potentiality of generation; the active in the male, the passive in the female,
both which are from the heart. In this also I subscribe to Aristotle.

IX. I cannot assent to the Galenists, in affirming the liver rather then the
heart to be the first that lives in us, and therefore the original of other
parts, because it is bigger, and nearer to the matrix, then the heart; for the
Aristotelians say well, that the original of things consists not in bulk, but
in virtue; the seeds of trees and plants are least in bulk, and yet are the
originals of great bodies. 2. The vicinity to the matrix is not the cause of
priority; for the matrix is the place of, but not an agent in generation; the
agent is only the formative faculty in the seed.

X. Both Aristotelians and Galenists affirm, that the child at first lives the
life of a plant; but from hence the Aristotelian concluds, that the heart is
the first members begot in us, because it is answerable to the root in plants,
which is first generated; but the Galenist infers, that the liver must be the
first member, because the child living the life of a plant, has no other
faculty but nutritive, which is the faculty of the plant, the seat whereof is
in the liver. But here I side with Aristotle, because the liver is no more the
seat of nutriment then the heart: And because the heart is as the root; but it
is by the root the plant lives and is nourished: And if the liver be the seat
of nutriment, because of the blood thereof; I should rather say the heart is
this seat, because we find blood there out of the veins, as in a cistern; but
in the liver there is no other Blood, then what is in the veins: Neither can
the liver be the original of the nutritive power, because there is the sense
of indigence or want; for so the stomach should rather be this original,
because there is the most exquisit sense of want.

XI. The liver cannot be generated without heat and spirits; But the seat of
heat and spirits is the heart, therefore this must be first. If any will say
that the heat of the matrix is sufficient; I deny it; for that heat is only
conservative, not generative; it hardens and consolidateth the outward parts,
but does not produce the inward.

XII. Aristotle will have the right ventricle of the Heart the nobler; Galen
the left; but I subscribe to Aristotle; because I find that the right
Ventricle lives longer then the left. 2. That the Pulse in the right side of
him that is dying, is more valid then in the left side. 3. The right ventricle
leans upon the lungs as upon a Cushion or supporter, Nature showing as it were,
a greater care of this then of the other. 4. The right parts are nimbler and
stronger then the left, because they are hotter. 5. Though the spirits receive
their completion in the left ventricle, yet they are prepared and fitted in the
right; and therefore there needs not so great a heat in the left ventricle, as
the Galenists speak of; for a moderate heat will suffice to perfect that which
is already begun. 6. The left ventricle is but a servant to the right, in
finishing that work which was begun by the right, and distributing it into the
body, being finished.

XIII. The Aristotelians make the vital and nutritive faculty the same; the
Galenists make them distinct; but the Peripateticks reason prevails with me,
which is this; That where there are distinct faculties, there must be distinct
operations, because the faculty is for the operation; But there are no distinct
operations of the vital faculty, from that of the nutritve; for accretion,
diminution, and generation are actions of the vital or nutritive: Sense and
motion are actions of the animal faculties. 2. Life is the presence of the soul
in the body; this presence consists in action, this action is nutrition; for
when this action fails, life fails; because the chief and first action of the
living creature is to preserve it self, which cannot be without nutrition;
seeing nutrition is not without tact in the sensitive creature; but when tact
fails, animality must needs fail.

XIV. The Aristotelians make heat the efficient cause of the hearts public
motion: Others will have the soul; Others, the vegetive faculty; but Aristotle
is in the right; for the soul works by its faculties, and these by heat; so
that heat is the immediate cause of this motion, and the souls instrument; yet
not such an instrument as works nothing but by the force of the principal
agent; for the heat works by its own natural force, though it be directed and
regulated by the soul; the heat then of the heart rarifying the blood into
vapors, which require more room, dilate the heart; but by expelling some of
these vapors into the arteries, and receiving also some cold air by the lungs,
the heart is contracted, this is called Systole, the other Diastole: And as
heat is the efficient cause, so it is also the end of this motion. For
therefore does the heat move the heart, that it by this motion might impart
heat to the body. But I understand not here by heat, a bare quality, but that
which is called [ Calidum innatum] If it be objected, that there is in Plants a
vegetive faculty and heat, but not this pulsifick motion, nor yet in effects. I
answer; the reason is, because there are not instruments fit for such a motion,
nor is there any use of it. 2. This motion of the heart is local not totally,
but partially; for not the whole heart, but the parts thereof change their
place or seat, and so in this regard augmentation and diminution are local
motions.

XV. That the heart is not only first formed, but is also first informed, and
first exercises the action of life, is plain by this reason drawn from the
Peripateticks: the heart was made at first an Organical member; but that could
not be, if it was not first informed by the soul, which is the first act of the
organical body: and if it was made organicall, it had been made to no end, and
nature had been idle, to have made an useless member, which could no more
deserve the name of heart, then a blind eye, the name of eye: But the soul
that I speak of here, is the vegetive or sensitive resulting out of the matter,
which is first prepared in the heart for reception of it; and not the
reasonable soul, which with all its perfections is created and infused by God,
into the whole body after it is articulated, and made capable of such a noble
Guest.

XVI. The Aristotelians are more rational in placing but one principal member
in the body, then they who place either three or four: For it is nedless to
make so many principals, when as one will suffice: Nature aims always at
unity; for all the five senses are united in one common sense; all the members
in one body; all the different specificall parts of the world into one common
nature; so all the members into one heart, which has in it the natures of all,
or their temperaments: Nor could the soul being but one, work upon so many
different temperaments, if they were not united into one temperament: Besides,
we should be forced to run in infinitum, if we should hold more principles then
one; for avoiding of which inconvenience, we must stay in one chief principle.
If it be objected, that the nerves, veins and arteries are of different
temperaments, therefore must proceed from different principles. I Answer, that
from one principle in which diverse temperaments are united, may issue different
temperatures. 2. I deny that the temperature of the veins, nerves and arteries
are different, otherwise then Secundum magis, and minus.

CHAP. II.
Blood begot in the Heart, not in the Liver, why? 2. The Heart is the original
of the Veins and Nerves, of nutrition, and sense, and motion. 3. Why the nerves
and veins do not beat, and the cause of Hydropsies. 4. All blood is not
elaborated in the heart; how it is the original of the veins. 5. The arterial
blood must waste, or else it would infinitely increase. 6. Why the blood
thickneth not in the heart till death. 7. The heart is the seat of passion. 8.
Why the heart a fitter seat for the soul then the liver. 9. A double unity, to
wit, of the matter, and of the form.

I. IF blood were begot in the liver, there should be some Cavity in it, that
the blood there might be concocted, and receive its form; for in the stomach,
Heart, Gall, bladder, etc. there are sensible cavities for generation and
reception of the Chylus, vital blood, choler, urine, etc. but in the liver
there is no such receptacle; and to say that the blood is begot in the
substance of the liver, is to make penetration of bodies: Therefore it is more
likely, according to Aristotle's Doctrine, That blood is begot in the heart. If
it be objected, that if blood were not begot in the liver, to what end did
Nature fasten the gall-bagg to the liver, if it were not to purge the blood,
and receive its excrementitious' choler, as the spleen does its melancholy? I
answer, The gall and spleen do not purge the blood made by the liver, but that
matter which was to be prepared by the liver, for the heart; the heart then
makes the blood; which was prepared by the liver* and purged by the gall and
spleen, that the matter might be the fitter to receive the form of blood in the
heart, being purged before from its gross humors.

II. Because the heart is the original of the nutritive and ^uctive faculties;
it must also be the original of the veins, through which these faculties are
conveyed through the whole body. The liver then has not so much heat as is
requisite for ^utrition, auction, and generation; Therefore the original of
these must be in the heart, which is the fountain of heat. ^. And because the
heart is the seat of Passions, it must be also the original of sense and
motion, without which there can be no passion; and consequently it must be the
first organ of the nerves. 3. The heart and veins have the same essential form,
which is nutritive or vital; the same essential work and end also which is to
nourish the body, or to give it life and vegetation. The like may be said of
the nerves; therefore it must follow, that the matter of the heart, veins and
nerves is the same; and that from the heart they have their beginning.

III. The Galenists will not have the heart the original of the nerves and
v^ins, because they do not beat, as the arteries do, which they grant proceeded
from thence; but rather will have the liver to be the original of them, as also
of blood, because when the liver is corrupted, sanguification fails, and so
arises Hydropsies. I answer; though the nerves and veins arise from the heart,
yet they beat not, as the arteries do, because the blood in the veins is
grosser, less hot, and spirituous then that in the arteries; and the nerves
beat not, because they have not those ^umes which by the motion of the arteries
must be expelled; their heat also is tempered by the frigidity of the brain;
and if there were any motion in the nerves, it could not be so easily
discerned, because of the thickness of the nerves, and their lying deeper
within the body; as for Hydropsies, they are caused, not because the liver does
not sanguisie, but because it does not prepare fit matter for the heart to
sanguifie. And indeed, if the liver did sanguisie, the Hydropick would
presently die upon the cessation of that action; for life cannot subsist
without nutrition, nor this without sanguification. Therefore doubtless in
Hydropsies, the heart being found, converts some part of that inconcocted
matter into blood, which the corrupted liver could not prepare; and by this
means the hydropick lives a while.

IV. All the blood in the veins is not elaborated in the heart, but only that
portion which is by the arteries distributed into al parts of the body; and
has a formative power over the veinal blood. The heart blood then is not
conveyed by the ( Vena cava) into the body; but by the arteries* 2. When the
heart is called the original of the veins, we do not mean, the efficient cause,
for that is the formative power joined to the heart; but the place in which
they are formed: And there is no place so fit for this generation, both of
blood, veins, and other parts, as the heart; because it is the fountain of
heat, whose action is the first, and the most common of all actions in the
body; for without the action of heat, there can be neither nutrition, motion,
sensation, nor understanding, as it works by the fantasy.

V. If the arterial blood were not the nutriment of the body, and so wasted,
being converted into the substance of the body, what becomes of it all, it must
infinitely increase, being it is continually generated, and not wasted; neither
can the veinal blood nourish, but as it is perfected, and receives its form, by
and from the arterial blood.

VI. That the heart is the proper seat of the blood, appears by this, that the
blood never thickneth in the heart, as it does in other places, being out of
the veins. But whereas the blood is found curdled in the heart of dead bodies,
and thin in the veins of the liver, it is plain that the blood had received its
full concoction and perfection in the heart, but not in the liver, as being not
so fibrous, and therefore more thin and watrish.

VII. Because the heart is the seat of passions and appetite, it follows that
it must be also the seat of sensation; for without this there can be no
appetite in the sensitive creature; and if of sensation, then also of
nutriment, for the sensitive includes the nutritive faculty; and if it be the
original of the nutritive, it must be also of blood, by which we are nourished,
and consequently of the veins which conveyeth the blood, chiefly of Vena Cava,
which arises from the superficies of the heart; and so fastened to it, as to
its principle, that it cannot be parted from it.

VIII. Because the heart is an organical body, being distinct into diverse
dissimular parts, it is a fitter place for the soul then the liver, which is
altogether simular, seeing the soul is the act of an organicall body: and
therefore the nutritive faculty must be rather in the heart then the liver; and
though sensation be by the simular parts, yet motion requires dissimular and
organicall parts, because diverse bendings and turnings require diverse organs.

IX. All sensitive creatures have a double unity; to wit, of the matter, and of
the form: The unity of the matter consists in the unity of the parts and
temperaments, which is to ^e found in the heart only; the unity of the form
consists ^n the sensitive soul, containing in it the vegetive and the
par^icular forms of each part.

CHAP. III.
^Why the heart the original of sensation, and how it feels. 2 The brains
being cold cannot beget sensative spirits: Why the animal spirits most active
where is most heat. 3. There can be no generation of the animal spirits out of
the vital, without the corruption of the vital, which is impossible: The
animal spirits are not begot of the air. 4. Neither are they concocted or
generated in the ventricles of the brain, nor are they wasted. 5. The brain is
not the original of sense and motion, although these fail upon the hurt of the
brain. 6. Why upon the distemper of the heart, there is no failing of sense and
motion. 7. The nerves are not from the brain, though they be like; but indeed
they are not like the brain. 8. Why the nerve of the heart loses sense and
motion beneath the knot, not above it. 9. The brain is the coldest of all the
parts? how void of veins and blood, how hot, and the cause of hairs. 10. The
blood and spirits alter not the brains temper. Why its coldness is not felt:
the pith in the back bone hot. 11. Why the brain and heart at such a distance:
by the spirits they work on each other. 12. Why both the brain and lungs were
made for refrigeration. 13. The man's brain larger then the woman's: why man
hotter then Lions. 14. The testicles ignobler then the heart and brain. 15. The
heart, not the testicles, the cause of sensation and generation; the testicles
not chief because necessary, or because they cause an alteration in the body,
from whence is the distinction of sexes. 16. The seed receives its specificall
form from the heart. 17. Why Eunuchs fatter, we aker, and colder.

THough the organs offense be in the brain, yet the original of sensation is
the heart, because it is the original of the spirits, the chief causes of
sensation, and without which the organs were no organs: But the frigidity of
the brain is not the cause of sensation, nor of the sensitive spirits; it only
tempers the heat of the heart and vital spirits, that they may become animal.
Neither is softness and hardness any thing to sensation, seeing this is no
material but a spiritual and perfective quality. Now the heart is sensitive,
not by the animal spirits derived thither from the brain; for these spirits in
the heart would quickly lose their temper, by reason the heat of the heart is a
more active quality then the coldness of the brain; but it feels by its own
spirits, whether we call them vital or animal, or both. For the spirits being
turned from vital to animal, receive only an alteration, but not a substantial
change. For that only is in the aliments, which is transubstantiate into our
bodies.

II. The brain being cold and moist, uses to convert superfluous vapors into
those humors which most resembles it self in these qualities, to wit, into
watrish Catharrs, and cold distillations: therefore it is likely that the brain
can transform the vital spirits into other more excellent then themselves;
especially seeing coldness is a quality hurtful to nature, which consists in
heat and moisture, and has no other use in our bodies, but to condensat and to
temper the activity of our natural heat; therefore we find the animal spirits
most active and copious in those creatures that abound most in heat, as in Men,
Lions, Birds, etc. and in young men more then in old men.

III. If there be a substantial mutation of the vital spirits into the animal,
the generation of the one must be the corruption of the other; and so the vital
spirits must die, that the animal may receive the essential form. But how can
the animal spirits subsist without the vital? Or how can that be called an
animal or sensitive creature, whose vital spirits are dead, seeing there can be
no sense where there is no life, nor life where the vital spirits are dead? 2.
The animal spirits are not generated of the air, which we draw in by
breathing; for there can be no generation without mixtion, nor mixtion but of
diverse bodies: Now the air is but one simple body, which cannot make a perfect
mixtion without the other elements. If it be objected, that the air is impure,
and not simple, I answer, Though the air be not pure, yet it is not a mixed
body Physically and properly, but only by apposition, as Wheat and Barley may
be said to be mixed when they are joined together, which is no Physical
mixtion, wherein the elements lose their forms.

IV. The animal spirits cannot be generated in the ^entricles of the brain,
because there the excrementitious phlegm is concocted: Nor can they be said to
receive concoction there, seeing what is concocted is thickened, but the animal
spirits are attenuated: now the cold brain is not fit to attenuate. Again,
^eeing there is continual use of the animal spirits, they must be continually
generated; but if they be continually generated, and never wasted, where will
there be room enough for them? And that they are not wasted is plain, because
they are not consumed by nutrition, as not being fit to nourish; nor by
sensation, seeing this is a spiritual and perfective not a material or
destructive act. Nor lastly by transpiration; for nothing is exhaled but
excrements. Lastly, how can the brain be without feeling, seeing it is full of
sensitive spirits, by which all other parts of the body feel?

V. When the brain is hurt and distempered, there follows a defect in
sensation and motion, which is not a sufficient reason to prove that the
nerves, sense, and motion have their original from the brain; no more then that
the brain should have its beginning from the stomach, or other nervous parts:
for we know that the mouth of the stomach being hurt, the brain by consent is
made ill affected by reason of the sympathy and union of the nervous parts: so
motion is hindered upon the ill affection of the brain, because of the many
nerves united to the brain and backbone: the brain then is not the principal
agent of sense and motion, but instrumental only, in that by its frigidity it
tempers the vital spirits, and so makes them apter for sense and motion: so
upon the defect in the pen, follows the faults in writing; and yet not the
pen, but the penman, is the chief agent in writing.

VI. The reason why upon the distemper of the heart, sensation and motion do
not cease, as they do upon the distemper of the brain; because though the heart
be distempered, yet it makes spirits, which spirits being refrigerate by the
brain, and conveyed through the nerves, cause sensation and motion, which could
not be if the brain were hurt, this being the immediate agent and instrument,
without which the heart does not operate in sensation.

VII. To conclude the nerves to have their original from the brain, because^of
their similitude, is a weak argument: For 1. Many children are not like their
parents from whom they have their original, but like strangers many times, to
whom they have no relation. 2. There is no similitude between the brain and
nerves; for that is soft and moist, these hard and dry. 3. Nor is the nerve in
its medullary part like the brain; for this is cold, the marrow is hot. 4. If
the nerves are from the brain because their inward parts are soft and marrowy,
then the bones should be derived also from the brain, for they have much more
marrow in them. 5. If the nerves are from the brain because they have two
tunicles^ as it has; by the same reason let the Arteries also have their
beginning from thence; for these also are double tunicled. 6. All nerves have
not this med^llary substance within them.

VIII. Though the heart has but one little nerve, which being tied, loses
its sense beneath the knot, but above retains it; though this, I say, be so,
yet from hence it cannot be proved, that the brain is the original of the
nerves, or of sensation; but rather the heart; for the upper part of the nerve
is sensible, because it is joined with other nerves, whereas the lower part is
joined to none. 2. The spirits in the upper part are tempered by the frigidity
of the brain, whereas the lower part has no refrigeration; and though the
faculty or power of sense is from the heart, yet the act of sensation is not
exercised without a temperate heat, or refrigeration. 3. I think this is rather
a conjecture of the Galenists, then an experiment: for who did ever find this
nerve in a living creature.

IX. Aristotle's reasons for the coldness of the brain, are to me not
improbable, or easy to be answered: for if the brain were hot, we should never
sleep, seeing coldness causes sleep. 2. There are more moist humors and phlegm
engendered in the brain, then any where else. 3. There is not blood in the
brains, as in other parts of the body; for it is the blood that warms the body.
I say there are not veins incorporating themselves into the substance of the
brain, and terminating there, as they do in the flesh and skin; which is the
cause that every part of the flesh or skin being pricked, bleeds; so does not
the brain, whose substance is white and bloodless; therefore though there be
veins in the brain, yet they are distinct from the substance of the brain, and
not ending in them; neither is that heat which is in the brain, its own, but
adventitious and external, to wit, of the arteries and veins, as also of fumes
and vapors: so then the brain is the coldest of all the parts of man's body,
yea colder then the bones, because the bones are dry, the brain moist: but cold
with moisture is greater effectively then with siccity, so the water is colder
then the earth. If it be objected that the brain is hot, because the head is
more hairy then any other part of the body, and because the brain stands
continually in need of ventilation by the nostrils, and transpiration by the
seams of the skul; I answer, That hairs are engendered by the adventitious heat
of the brain, out of the excrementitious humors of the head, and fumes which
ascend thither; and therefore the brain stands in need of ventilation, because
of the many hot fumes and vapors continually ascen^ing thither.

X. The blood and spirits which are in the brain, alter not ^ts natural
temperament which is cold, especially seeing the blood is sent thither for
nutrition; but nourishment is to che^^sh the part nourished, being converted
into its substance, and not to alter its temperament. Now the reason why we
^eel the moisture of the brain, but not its frigidity, is, because ^here is
nothing to hinder the tact from discerning its moisture, ^eing in a soft
substance (for where the substance is hard, there ^he tact is hindered from
feeling the moisture) though it be ^oist, as when we touch ice; but the tact is
hindered from dicerning the frigidity of the brain, because of the veins and
^rteries within it, containing warm blood and spirits; yet though the brain be
cold, the pith in the backbone which is ^oyned to the brain, is hot, because
we find no phlegm a^out it, as about the brain; it is harder then the brain,
therefor more apt to receive and to retain heat: it is begot of blood, which
is hot; and it was fit that this warm pith should be joined to the cold brain,
for moderating the brains frigidity.

XI. The brain was made cold to temper and moderate the ^eat of the heart; but
not to diminish or destroy it; and for the same cause the heart was made hot to
temper, but not to destroy the brains frigidity: therefore nature has placed
them at a proportionable distance: for had they been nearer, their actions upon
each other had been more violent. 2. Though the organs of the sense be in the
brain, yet the original of sen^ation is not there, but in the heart: for the
brain with its organs are helps and instruments, not the efficient causes of
sensation. 3. The mutual action of the heart and brain upon each other, is not
done immediately, but by the intercourse of the spirits.

XII. Though nature does not make two members specifically different in the
same body, for the same operation, therefore fishes want Lungs, because they
have gills for refrigeration; yet she has made both the brain and lungs too in
our bodies, for the same end and work, namely, to refrigerate the heart; and
yet in this she is not superfluous, because the heart stood in need of a double
refrigeration, as being subject to a double heat; the one is natural, for
tempering of this the brain was made, that so the animal spirits might be
generated; the other is adventitious, caused by hot fumes: for clea^^ of these,
and of cooling the heart, the lungs were made, a^^ so were the arteries too. As
for the two eyes, and two ears and other double organs in our bodies, they are
not specificall^ different.

XIII. As the male has a hotter heart then the female, (...) he has a larger
brain for the most part, that there may be the more refrigeration. I say for
the most part, because the work of nature admit diverse times exceptions; so
Lions, though ho^ter then men, yet have lesser brains then men; but that heat
i^ the Lion is more terrestrial, ^, and therefore needs lesse^ refrigeration
then that which is more aerial; yet it may be supposed that man abounds more in
heat then Lions, because he has a strait body, which is caused by the
abundance of hot blood and spirits in man's body more then in other creatures.

XIV. That the testicles are not of such absolute necessity as the heart, even
in respect of generation, is plain, because many creatures, as plants and
insects have the faculty and power of generation without testicles. 2. The
heart and brain in dignity far exceed the testicles, because these do not
communicate to all parts the power of generation, as the heart and brain do
impart life and sense. 3. Creatures that have lost the testicles, can live long
without them, but no creature can live long without the heart and brain.

XV. In sensitive creatures that does originally communicate the generative
faculty, which imparts the sensitive, because this includes that; but it is the
heart not the testicles, which imparts sensation, and consequently the heart
not the testicles, causes generation. If it be answered that the power of
sensation is derived from the heart to the testicles, and consequently of
generation; then we must know, that this very answer confirms the Aristotelian
opinion, namely, that the heart not the testicles, is the original of the
generative. 2. It is a weak argument to prove the principality of the testicles
from their necessity, for every part of the body, though never so base, is
necessary, and yet there is but one principal member* And as weak is it to
argue the principality of the testicles from the change that is caused in the
body upon the loss of them; for so there is upon the loss of any other member,
and many times death it self. 3. The distinction of Sexes proc eeds from the
formative power, but this has not its original residence in the testicles, but
in the heart, as being the perfectest member, and chief receptacle of heat and
blood, and spirits, by which the formative power operates.

XVI. The seed receives its specifical form and essence in the heart, not in
the testicles, in which it receives indeed concoction, that it might be made
fitter for generation: but concoction causes only an alteration in the
quality, not a mutation in the substance. So the fruit receives its maturity
or ripeness immediately from the bough on which it hangs; but its generative
power from the root alone; so that the testicles are but the hearts
instruments, working by its heat, and concocting the seed that it may be the
fitter for generation.

XVII. The bodies of Eunuchs are fatter, weaker, and colder then of other men,
not because the testicles do corroborate the body, as the Galenists think, but
because the seed wanting evacuation, is turned into fat, and many vapors or
excrements, which with the seed are evacuated in other men, are retained in
Eunuchs, which oppress the natural heat, and consequently cause debility; and
because of this coldness, Eunuchs are less hairy; for hairs are begot of hot
fuliginous vapors.

Finis Libri Primi.
BOOK II. GALEN in some things maintained; in some things rejected, or
reconciled to ARISTOTLE.
CAP. I.
1. Man's Body fitted only for man's Soul. Tritons are not men. 2. How Man's body
is more excellent then all others. 3. How the Soul is most in the Brain and
Heart. 4. A twofold heat in us. 5. What Creatures nourish most. 6. The Woman's
imagination cannot alter the form.

I. AS GOD has bestowed upon Man the most excellent Soul of all others; so
has he fitted him with a Body answerable to such a Soul, of which no other
Body is capable; and if it were, yet for want of fit Organs, the Soul could not
exercise her functions; as we see in that Fiction of Apuleius, whose soul being
in the body of an Ass, could neither speak, nor write, nor do any thing but
what was proper to an Ass; yet I have read of Tritons, or Fishes having the
face, lineaments, and shape of man's body; One was seen in the days of Tiberius,
another in the time of Augustus, a third under Nero: Pliny, AElian, Theodor
Gaza, Trapezuntius, Alexander ab Alexandro, Scaliger, and diverse others affirm
the truth of this; yet these Tritons or Nereides, cannot be called, nor are
they men, though they have the outward shape: for it is not the matter, not
outward lineaments, but the form that gives essence and denomination.

II. Man's body is of all others the most perfect and excellent; though he has
not wings like a bird to fly, nor can see so far as an Eagle, nor hear so
quickly as a Fox, nor smell so well as a Dog, nor taste so well as Poultry, nor
has so quick a tact as Oysters and Spiders; yet his hands, speech, and reason,
do countervail all these: for celerity and reception his senses yield to the
beasts; for variety and judgment they must yield to him.

III. Though man's soul in respect of understanding and will, be inorganical,
and therefore not properly resident in any particular member more then in
another, yet accidentally, because the brain is the seat of the fantasy, from
which the intellect receives its objects, and the heart the seat of the
affections, subservient to the will; the brain is the seat of the intellect,
the heart of the will.

IV. There is in us a twofold heat, the one celestial, the other elementary:
that preserves us, this destroys us: that concocts our food, and turns it into
nutriment, this corrupts and putrifies it, and turns it into noxious humors
and excrements, as we see in burning Fevers. It is not then every heat that
chylifieth or sanguifieth, or assimulateth, but this celestial heat: Neither is
it the quantity, but the quality thereof, and affinity it has with the things
concocted: For there is more heat in a Lion, then in a Pigeon, and yet the
Pigeon will concoct that which the Lion cannot; yet this celestial heat is
helped by the elementary heat if it be temperate, and by the crasis,
temperament, or constitution, if it be sound.

V. Nothing by way of food can cherish our natural heat, and maintain our life,
but what had life and heat it self; and the more perfect life it had, the
better it nourishes, as having nearer affinity with us. Hence animals nourish
more then vegitables, because the matter of their bodies and spirits, are more
consonant to ours then of herbs or fruits, which if they be contrary to us in
their nature and qualities, they destroy us, as poisonable herbs do. Purging
medicaments are of a middle nature, as having some similitude with the humors
of our bodies, which they attract; as Agary with Phlegm, Rubarb with Choler,
etc. and some dissimilitude with our bodies, upon which they work by weakening
them, especially if they have any delatory quality.

VI. Though the woman in conception, or afterward, can by the strength of
imagination impresse some note or mark upon the seed or Embryo: yet she cannot
alter the sex or form as she pleases, because this is not the work of
imagination, but of a diviner power, to wit, of the external formative agent;
for which cause a man cannot beget any other then a man, for that his seed is
not capable of any other form, neither does the formative agent work otherwise
the^ as the seed is inclinable to.

CAP. II.
1. The Stomach and Lungs not necessary for life. 2, How the limbs are moved:
the spirits are bodies more required for motion then sensation: the spirits are
light: how they are the souls instruments: how the Muscles move. 3. Seven
properties of the brain. 4. Twelve properties of the eye. 5. Its substance
warrish. 6. Why but one sight. 7. The eye how an agent and patient. 8. Its two
^ights and its colors. Light gives the second act.

THough the Stomach and Lights be two noble parts of the body for those that
are to live long; yet life can consist without them or their action: For 1.
Some have lived without chilification and respiration: the meseraick veins can
draw some portion of the clysters to the liver for sanguification, by which
life can be preserved. 2. Diverse creatures live all the Winter, as Swallows,
Cuckows, Dormise, etc. without any chilification or action of the stomach. 3.
Women that are hysterical, can live only by transpiration, without respiration
at all. 4. The arteries can draw air to the heart, though there were no lungs
at all, yet not with that convenience, because the lungs temper and qualify
the frigidity of the air before it comes to the heart. 5. Fishes breath not at
all, nor have they any lungs, yet they live.

II. In the motion of our bodies the limbs are moved by the muscles, these by
the nerves, the nerves by the animal spirits, and these by the soul, which
produces neither sense nor motion in the body without these spirits: for if
the nerve be cut or obstructed, or bound, motion cease; which shows that
the soul works by these spirits, and that in the nerve there is more then a
bare faculty of sense and motion required to make it move and feel: for in the
obstructed nerve there is the faculty still, but not the motion, because the
spirits are intercepted, which have their original from the brain as well as
the nerves, but their action from the soul. 2. These spirits are bodies, as
appears by their generation, fatigation and dissipation: for when these spirits
fail, motion cease, and we grow weary. 3. In the nerve though one and the
same animal spirit causes both sense and motion; yet a greater vigor is
required for motion then for sensation, because the perfection of this consists
in reception only, but of that in action chiefly. Now more force is required
for action then for passion. 4. In the animal spirits there is a light or
splendor, because they are a very attenuated substance, warmed by a celestial
heat: This light is perceived in the eye being shut, in the other senses it is
not seen, because their organs are not transparent: Now the spirit of the eye
is the same with that of the ear, etc. 5. The spirits are not properly the
instruments of the soul, because the soul is the form which works immediately
upon its matter; and the spirits are parts of this matter, but they are called
instruments, because they convey to the members the faculties of the soul. 6.
Though the will moves the muscles in men, and the will moves according to
knowledge and election; yet in infants the muscles are moved by a natural
instinct, and so they are in beasts who have not election and reason.

III. Man has a larger and more capacious brain then other creatures have;
because the soul of man being endowed with more faculties, required a larger
habitation. 2. The brain is void of sense and feeling, because it is the Judge
of all the senses. Thus the eye which sees all colors, has no color it
self, nor the tongue and palate any taste, which judges of all tastes;
experience shows, that the wounded brain being cut or pricked, feels not.
3. Though the brain feels not, yet it has a natural faculty to expel things
hurtful; so there are antipathies and sympathies in insensitive things. 4. The
brain has no animal motion, though it be the original of this motion; yet it
has a natural motion of Systote and Diastole for the generation of the
spirits, and expulsion of noxious things. 5. The brain is cold and moist; cold
naturally, but hot accidentally, by reason of the spirits and arteries in it:
cold, otherwise the attenuated animal spirits in it would quickly wast and
consume with heat; and with often study and cogitation, it would soon be
inflamed, and so into phrenzies we should be apt to fall. 6. Though the brain
be cold, and the heart hot, yet the animal spirits are more attenuated then the
vital, because these are generated immediately of the gross blood, whereas the
animal are begot of the vital spirits, and are refined by the arteries of the
brain. 7. The brain is moist, 1. That it may the more easily receive
impressions: 2. That it may the better resist inflammation: And 3. That the
nerves may by its moisture be the more pliable, which otherwise would be
stiff.

IV. The Eye is the most noble of all the senses: 1. Because its action is
quickest, apprehending its object in an instant: 2. Though the object be never
so far distant, it is perceived by the eye, as the stars are. 3. Because light,
which is the object of the eye, is of all accidents the most noble. 4. The eye
has more objects then any other sense; for besides light and color of all
sorts, its particular objects, it has also number, magnitude, state, motion
and figure, which are common objects. 5. None of the senses has such a curious
fabric: for the eye has six tunicles, three humors, six muscles, two nerves,
the optic and motory, many veins and arteries. 6. It is the first and chief
organ of knowledge; for at first men got their knowledge by observation and the
eye, though now we have it by instruction and the ear. 7. The eye has the
highest place of all the senses in the body. 8. And it has the perfectest
figure, for it is almost round, that it may move the easier and swifter. 9. It
has a liberty and command of it self which the other senses have not; for it
can enclose it self within its casements, and open them when it pleases. 10.
It has a peculiar light within it self, besides that light which is in the
air, and it has more spirits then any other of the senses, and these spirits
are more subtle, nimble, and quick then any other animal spirits are. 11.
Without the eye no living creature could find out its food, in which
consists the life of the creature. 12. Without the eye men could not have
naturally attained to the knowledge of God, and of Divinity; for by the
contemplation of the Heavens, and their light and motions, men came to have the
knowledge of their Maker: For the invisible things of him from the creation of
the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, Romans
1.20.

V. The eye is of a watrish not of a fiery substance, as may be seen, 1. By
the water that flows from it when it is hurt: 2. By the fat which is about it;
this would consume if the eye were fiery: 3. By the watrish humor which is in
the cavities of the face in the new formed Embryo: 4. By the reception and
conservation of the species; for the fire can neither receive nor confer any
image or species, as the water does.

VI. Though there be two eyes, there is but one sight, or one object seen; 1.
Because the optic nerves are united in one before they reach to the eyes: 2.
Because there is but one fantasy, and one common sens which judges of the
external object.

VII. The eye in respect of its gross and solid parts, is a patient in seeing,
by receiving the species or shape, (not the substance) into the chrystalline
humor; but in respect of the spirits in the eye, it is an agent by perception
of the species, and partly a patient: for there is some impression in the
spirits, or else by them the species could not be conveyed into the common
sense and fantasy: The spirits then are agents, not outwardly upon the
object, but inwardly upon the spirits received from the object: and when they
are employed about some other thing in the fantasy, the eye sees not its
object, though the species be impressed in the chrystalline; because there is
required for sight, not only the impression in the chrystalline, but also a
perception and apprehension in the spirits; in which action properly and
formally vision consists. And though the spirits be no part of the eye as it
is a solid substance, yet they are part as the eye is the instrument of sight.

VIII. There are in the eye when it sees, two lights, the one from without,
whereof there is greatest quantity in the white of the eye; the other from
within, which is most prevalent in the chrystalline, disposing it to receive
the species, as the outward light disposes the air. The outward light, if it
be not proportionable to the inward, makes this unfit for vision, not by
extinguishing, or destroying it, for one light cannot destroy another; but by
too much extending or destroying the mean and proportion of the inward light.
There is besides these two, a third light in the eyes of owls, cats, and such
creatures as live by preying in the dark, which light is not immanent in the
eye, but transient into the air, that the medium being illuminate, the species
of the object might be raised.

IX. The eye has not such colors as are made by the mixture of the four
elements, or prime qualities, but such only as are made by the mixture of the
light and the diaphanous or perspicuous body. The first sort of colors are in
the dark in respect of their existence or quality: the second sort has no
existence at all in the dark: And though the light give not the first act or
being to colors, yet it gives the second act in making them visible, and
actuating them, to work upon the eye, by sending their species thither.

CAP. III.
1. A twofold Heat in living things. 2. The Primitive Heat where, and how
tempered. 3. Our spirits are not celestial, several Reasons. 4. Our natural
heat, what? it is no substance, in six Reasons. 5. Many excellencies of man's
body. 6. The Head, why the noblest part, and highest, as Galen thinks.

THAT there is in living creatures besides the elementary heat, another called
celestial, is manifest, because the fire or elementary heat, neither in part,
nor in whole, is the cause of generation. 2. Because the elementary heat
remains after the celestial is gone, as may be seen in spices, which retain or
rather increase their elementary heat, as they grow drier, being separate from
the Tree; and yet they want that celestial heat by which they did live and had
vegetation; for now being dead, nutrition, attraction, vegetation, growth, and
other functions of life cease, which were the effects of the celestial heat. 3.
Because in Mandrakes and other cold herbs, there is this celestial heat, by
which they live; and yet no elementary heat at all; for they are cold both
actually and vertually.

II. As in living creatures there be diverse dissimular parts, so there be
temperaments, and diversity of heat; all which are united in the heart, the
fountain of heat, which it communicates to all parts by the blood and spirits;
this primitive heat is in perfect creatures compacted within the heart; in
Trees and Plants, within the root; in Insects it is diffused through all the
body, without any union in one part more then another; which is the cause that
when snakes and worms are cut in pieces, every piece moves, which is not so in
the hand or foot of perfect animals if they be cut off; so we see in some
twigs of Trees, that being set in the ground, grow and take root; which shows,
That the original heat and substance of the root, is in every part of the Tree;
and that the primitive heat of the creature might be brought to a temper,
refrigeration is required, which in terrestrial animals is performed by the
air, in fishes by the water, in herbs by the earth moistened, by which they are
nourished and refreshed.

III. The animal and vital spirits in our bodies are not a celestial substance,
as some have thought. For 1. The Heavens are not subject to generation and
corruption as these are. 2. The Heavens are a quintessence, but these are
elementary or aerial. 3. The Heavens cannot be diminished, which they must
needs be if our spirits be heavenly bodies; for they are as they say, pieces of
that great body, which at last will be quite spent, except they be repaired
either by a new addition, or by the reuniting of the same spirits to it again.
4. Seeing the Heavens have but one motion which is circular; how can any part
thereof come down into our bodies, except it has also a strait motion? 5.
Gravity and levity are elementary qualities, whereof the Heaven is not capable,
and therefore cannot descend. 6. Our spirits must either be united to the
bodies of the Heavens, and so continuated bodies with them, or else separated
and divided; both which are absurdities. 7. These spirits did either move them
selves downward, or else they had some other mover; the first we cannot grant,
except we make the celestial bodies, living creatures, for only such move
themselves; neither can we grant the second, except we know what this mover
should be; it cannot be natural, for the motion is violent; nor can the mover
be violent, for the work of generation is natural; it remains then that these
spirits are aerial in their nature and substance, but the instruments of the
soul in regard of their function, in which regard only we consider them as they
are in our bodies; for many actions proceed from them, as they are the souls
instruments, which cannot be effected by the air, as air.

IV. The natural or primogenial heat in living creatures, is not a substance
made up of seed and menstruous blood, as Galen thought: For, 1. In Trees and
Herbs there is this natural heat, yet no menstruous blood; in insects begot of
putrified matter, there is this heat, but neither seed nor the foresaid blood.
2. This heat must diffuse it self through all the least parts of the body,
without which they cannot live; but if it be a body, there must be penetration
of bodies; if there be this diffusion; if there be only an agglutination of
this heat to the parts of the body, then these parts have not life in
themselves, and consequently neither nutrition, or attraction which are the
effects of life, and by which it is preserved, and so the Fibers which are
given for attraction are in these parts in vain. 3. If this body of our natural
heat did live before it was articulated and distinguished into membe^s, then
the heart is not the first thing that lives; besides it will follow, that the
soul may be the act of an inorganical body, which is against the definition of
the soul. 4. Nor can the blood in the veins be this body, because this blood is
the effect of concoction and nutrition, and it is blood only: but that body of
Galens, is the effect of generation, and the mixture of seed and blood. 5. If
this natural heat has no life in it, then it will follow that the chief part
of the living creature is without life. 6. This heat then is a quality, in
children more vigorous and intense then in men, because its work in these is
only to concoct and nourish; but in those to extend the body also, which is a
greater work, and therefore requires more heat. Besides, children cannot endure
hunger so well as men, because their heat being greater wastes the body
sooner, where it has not food to work upon: children then are more hot
intensively, but men extensively, because their bodies are larger, according to
the dimension of which, their heat is diffused. And although they can eat
harder and more solid meats then children, it argues not that their heat is
greater then that of childrens, but that their instruments of mastication
(which is the first concoction) are better and stronger.

V. That man's body might be a fit habitation for the Soul, it was made of all
bodies the most 1 temperate, and 2 proportionable, 3 the most copious of
organs, so that it may well be called a Microcosm, containing as in an epitome,
the parts of the great world. 4. It was also made naked, as needing no other
arms or defense, then what man was by his reason, tongue and hands, able to
furnish himself with. 5. It was made not of an heavenly, but of an elementary
substance, because man was made for knowledge, this is got by the senses; these
are grounded on the proportion of the 4 prime qualities, of which the Heavens
are not capable. 7. It was made strait that 1 man may be put in mind of his
original that he came from heaven in respect of his soul! 2 That he might
affect and seek after the things above, not here below. 3. He abounds more in
spirits and heat then other creatures, and the heat and spirits raise the body
upwards toward their own proper place. 4. If man had not been of a strait
body, his hands which were made for many excellent uses, must have been
hindered, and employed with the feet, for motion and supporting of his body. 6.
He was made with long feet, that his body might be the more steady and
strongly supported: with feet forward, because all his actions and motions tend
that way. 7. He was not made with wings to fly, because he had hands to make
him fly on the water in ships; and he had knowledge to make him fly to Heaven in
contemplation; with the wings of Faith we can fly swifter and farther, then
David could have don with the wings of a Dove.

VI. Man's head is of all parts in the body the noblest, therefore it is placed
in the highest Region, and nearest Heaven, which it resembles both in figure
and use; it is almost round, 1. That it may be the more capacious of spirits
and of brain, of which is more in man then in any other creature, because in
him is more variety, and perfection of animal spirits then in other creatures.
2. That it may be the fitter for motion. 3. That it might be the stronger and
more able to resist injuries. Again for use: It is like Heaven, for this is the
seat of the Angels or Intelligences, and that is the seat of the Intellect; so
far forth, as it is the seat of the fantasy by which the intellect works,
and of the senses by which the fantasy is informed. And as all sublunary
bodies receive life, sense, or motion from the Heavens, so do all our members
from the Head; so that if our brain be wounded, sense and motion in the body
presently cease. The head is that by which man is Lord over the beasts,
therefore deserved to have the highest place in the body: it is the Citadel of
this little world, in the safety of which consists the safety of the body;
therefore hands, feet, arms, and all, are ready to protect the head when it is
in danger. Hence anciently the head and brains were honored above the other
members: they used to swear by the head, [ per caput hoc juro, per quod pater
ante solebat.] When any sneezed, they were wont to bless them with a prayer,
because the brain is affected in sneezing. Men use to uncover their heads to
their superiors, intimating that they discover and present to their service
the noblest part of their bodies; and for honors sake the Priest abstained
from eating of the brains.

CAP. IV.
1. What the spirits are. 2. They differ in seven things. 3. The Woman is only
passive in generation: Her Testicles, Arteries, etc. not spermatical parts; the
males seed evaporates, why the child resembles the parents; the blood may be
called seed. 4. Adeps how generated. Of the Lungs, they are hot.

THE Animal and Vital Spirits are so called, not only because we have sense and
life by them, but also because they first have life and animation in
themselves; for otherwise how could the soul give life and sense to the body by
these which are not (as some think) capable of either. 2. These spirits are
parts of our bodies, parts, I say, not solid and containing, but fluxil and
contained. 3. They are one with the vessels and members, to which they do
adhere; one, not specifically, but quantitatively; so the grisle is one with
the bone that ends in the grisle. 4. These spirits are not the same with the
vapors that are in our bodies: For the vapors are excrements, and hurtful to
us, therefore nature strives to expel them; but the spirits are parts, and
helpful to us, therefore nature labors to retain them. 5. These spirits sometimes
are extinguished by violence, sometimes are wasted for defect of food and
maintenance; he that is drowned has his spirits extinguished, he that dies of
sickness, has his spirits wasted. Thus the flame in the candle by the wind is
extinguished, by the defect of wax it is wasted: the quantity remains in that,
it is lost in this.

II. The Animal, Vital, and Natural spirits are distinct in their originals;
for the animals are from the brain, the vital from the heart, the natural from
the liver. 2. In their Vessels; for the animal are in the nerves, the vital in
the arteries, the natural in the veins. 3. In their operations; from the animal
we have sense and motion; from the vital, life; from the natural auction and
nutrition. 4. The vital spirits remain when the animal and natural are gone. In
a Palsy there is neither sense nor motion; in an Atrophy there is neither
auction nor nutritition; and consequently, neither animal, nor natural spirits,
and yet there is life and vital spirits. 5. The Natural spirits are in every
part of the body, so are not the Animal and Vital, but in their proper vessels.
6. The motion of the Animal spirits is voluntary, and in our power, so is not
the motion of the other spirits. 7. The Animal spirits rest in sleep, the Vital
and Natural are then most active. 8. The Animal spirits are subject to
fatigation and cessation, the others not. 9. In Vegitables there are Natural
and Vital spirits, but not Animal; in imperfect Animals there are all three,
but grosser and colder, therefore not so apt to be dissipated.

III. That there is no active seed in the female for generation, but that she
is merely passive, in furnishing only the Matter or Menstruous blood with the
place of conception, is according to Aristotle manifest; because if the females
seed were active, she may conceive of her self without the help of the male,
seeing she has an active and a passive principle, to wit, seed and blood; and
where these principles are, there will be action and passion. If the Galenists
object, that the females seed is colder then the males, and therefore not
procreative without it; I answer, That though it be colder then the males, yet
it is hotter then the blood, and therefore active, the blood being merely
passive. Again, the heat of the males seed is but an accident, no ways
concurring essentially to generation, but only by way of fomenting and
cherishing the females seed, as the heat of the Hen does to the generation or
production of the Partridg; whereas the whole power and faculty of generation,
was in the Egg, not in the Hen: and so by this opinion, the males seed affords
nothing but heat or fomentation. 2. If the females seed be active, and the
males too, it will follow, that two efficients numerically different, and
having no subordination to each other, do produce one effect, which is absurd.
3. It will follow, that there are three material causes, to wit, the males
seed, the females, and the blood, and therefore must be three forms; for one
form has but one matter. 4. It will follow, that the female is perfecter then
the male, as having more principles of generation, to wit, the seed, the blood,
and the place or matrix. 5. And in this respect, that the male will stand more
in need of the female, then she of him, he being more indigent of these
principles of generation then she, and having a greater desire to perpetrate
the species then she. 6. The Galenists are mistaken, in thinking those
glandulous substances in the female to be testicles containing seed, whereas
they are kernels to receive the superfluous moisture of the matrix. 7. The
arteries, nerves, and veins, are not spermatical parts; for of the seed no
parts are procreated, but they are sanguineal, as the flesh differing from the
flesh in this, that being cut, they do not unite again, as the flesh, because
of their hardness and dryness, and want of that moisture which is in the
flesh. 8. The males seed being received into the menstruous blood, does
evaporate and turn into spirits, animating the informed mass. 9. The child
sometimes resembles the Father, sometimes the Mother, according to the
predominancy of the seed or the blood. 10. As the blood nourishes the nerves,
veins, etc. so it may be transformed into them. 11. The blood may be called
seed, because the seed is begot of it; and as in Vegitables, Herbs and Trees
are begot of seed, so in animals, procreation is of the blood. Hence Christ is
called the Seed of the Woman.

IV. The Adeps or fat in our bodies is generated, not by heat, for heat
dissolves and melts it. 2. Coldest temperaments are fattest, as Women are
fatter commonly then men, in Winter* creatures are fatter then in Summer, in
cold more then in hot Climats men are fatter; English and Dutch are fatter then
Italians or Spaniards. 3. Fat adheres only to the colder parts, as the
membranes: Nor is it generated by cold; For, 1. No part of our body is actually
cold, but hot. 2. The Kidneys and heart, which are very hot, have far adhering
to them. 3. Melancholy men, and old men, who are cold, have little or no fat.
It remains then, that the Adeps is begot of a temperate heat, which in respect
of a greater heat may be called cold; as the brain in respect of the heart. And
nature has placed the fat next to the cold membranous parts, for cherishing of
them; so the far of the Cawle was chiefly ordained for fomenting of the
stomach, which is oftentimes wasted by the excessive heat of the liver. Hence
it is, that a hot liver is accompanied with a cold stomach: for the hot liver
like a cupping glafse, sucks and draws the heat of the neighboring parts to it.

V. When we consider the cold phlegm with which the lungs are still infested. 2.
The office of them, which is to refrigerate the heart. 3. Their color, which
is whitish; we would think that they were of a cold constitution. On the other
side, when we 1. look upon their light and spongy substance; 2* on their
office, which is to temper and warm the cold air, that it may not offend the
heart: 3. On their nutriment, which is the choleric or bilious blood, we would
think they were hot of constitution; and indeed so they are, and cold only by
accident, by reason of the external air, and water from the brain, and other
parts.

CAP. V.
1. The prerogative of the heart. 2. The actions of our members. 3. There are
no spermatical parts. 4. The bones, nerves, veins, etc. why not easily
reunited. 5. The spermatical parts hotter then the sanguineal. 6. The brains
and scull, bones and teeth compared.

THE Heart has diverse prerogatives above other members: 1. It is the Fountain
of our natural heat. 2. Of the Vital spirits, from whence the Animal have their
Original. 3. It is placed in the midst of the breast. 4. It is the first that
lives, and the last that dies. 5. It is of that absolute necessity, that the
welfare of the sensitive creature depends on it; therefore Nature preserves it
longest from diseases, and as soon as the heart is ill-affected, the body
droopeth. 6. Sensitive creatures can live* some without Lungs, some without a
Spleen, some without Kidneys, some without a Gall, some without a Bladder, but
none can live without the Heart, or something answering to the Heart, as
bloudless animals. 7. The Heart is admirable in its motions, if either we
consider the manner or perpetuity thereof, or that it is of it self not
depending upon our will or pleasure.

II. The actions of our members, depend originally from the temperament of the
^imular parts; but in respect of perfection and consummation, from the
conformity and right situation of the Organ, so the temperament of the
Chrystalline humor is the efficient cause of sight; but the situation and
conformity of the parts of the eye, is the perfecting or consummating cause:
For if the Chrystalline, or other parts of the eye, were otherwise situated, we
should either not see ^o well, or not at all.

III. That there are no spermatical parts, as Nerves, Bones, Veins, etc. but
sanguineal only, is plain by these reasons, ^. To make more material causes
then one, is to multiply entities needlessly, whereas the menstruous blood is
sufficient matter for all the parts; which because it is the matter of our
bodies, it had an inclination, disposition, or potentiality to all parts: and
because the work to be produced, was Heterogenious, and the form heterogenious,
therefore the matter had an heterogenious potentiality, as well to those parts
which the Physicians call spermatical, as to the sanguineal. 2. I would know
which be the spermatical parts of an Egg: not the white; for of that they
grant the whole Chick is formed: not the yelk; for that is, they say, the food
of the Chick, and yet we see the Chick has bones, and other spermatical parts,
as they call them. If then Bones and Nerves are no seminall parts in a Chick,
neither are they in a Child, the reason being alike in both. 3. The
spermatical parts are nourished by the blood, then doubtless they were
generated of blood: for [ iisdem nutrimur ex quibus constamus] and there can be
no nourishment without transition and transinutation of the blood into the
parts nourished. Now to say, that the blood which nourishes these parts,
becomes seed, or spermatical, is to employ the testicles in continual working
of seed for nutrition of the spermatical parts* how can so much seed be
generated, and by what vessels shall they be carried to the upper parts of the
body. 4. The heart and liver are sanguineal parts: then doubtless the nerves,
arteries, and veins which are from them, be sanguineal.

IV. The Bones, Nerves, Arteries, Veins and Grissles being cut or broke, are
not so easily reunited as the fleshy parts: not because they are spermatical,
but because they are harder and drier then the fleshy: for in children, while
they are soft and moist, they are easily reunited; and the Veins which are
softer then the Arteries, are sooner healed: for the hardness, thickness, and
perpetual motion of the Arteries, hinder its coalition. 2. Likewise where there
is defect of natural heat, as in old men, these are hardly knit together: For
heat is the chief Artificer or Agent in the body. 3. And where there is defect
of matter, or radical moisture, the cure is difficult, as in old men. 4. If
there be not a sufficient time given, the cure will never be effected: Thus the
heart being wounded, is never united, because life flies before the cure can
be performed.

V. The spermatical parts by most are counted colder then the sanguineal; which
cannot be: for we find by experience, that there is more heat in the stomach,
then in the liver; for it is a greater heat that turns bones, or such hard
meats into a liquid substance, then this which turns our liquid substance into
another: to wit, the Chylus into blood: If it be objected, that those
creatures, whose stomachs are encompassed with flesh concoct best: I answer, it
is true, not because the flesh is hotter then the stomach, but because it keeps
in the heat: thus though our clothes keep in our heat, no man will say, that
they are hotter then we; for this cause our bones and nerves are wrapped about
with flesh, and yet these are hotter then the flesh, in their opinion that call
them spermatical; for they con^efs, that the seed is hotter then the blood,
therefore that which is generated of seed must needs be hotter, then that which
is begot of blood. If it be objected, that the seed is hot in respect of its
spirits, but cold in respect of its matter: I answer, that if the matter of the
seed were not hot, it could not so much abound in spirits, for by the heat the
spirits are begot, and not heat by the spirits: therefore when the heat fails,
the spirits fail: Hence it is, that the animal spirits in the nerves move not
the hand, when it is benumbed with cold: but let the hand be warmed, and then
the spirits have life again* 2. Those parts which they call spermatical, are
more sensible of the cold, and sooner offended by it then the sanguineal parts,
and therefore must needs be hotter: for one contrary is most sensible of
another: thus are we more sensible of a little cold in Summer, when we are hot,
then of a great deal in Winter* Southern people, whose bloods are hot, are
sooner offended with cold, then the Northern, whose constitution is colder. 3.
The heat of the bladder, which they call a spermatical part, is so great, that
it can bake the slimy substance of the urine into a hard stone, which argue s
its heat above the sanguineal parts. Some Physicians answer, that this is done,
not because of the heat, but by reason of the long stay, and sliminess of the
matter: but they must know, that the slimy matter is merely passive, and that
it is the heat which is the agent, and artificer of the stone: as for the long
stay, that is but a help, for time is no agent. 4. That the bones are hot, is
manifest, for they have much fat in them, as we see in bones when they are
burned, and a greater heat was required to bring them to that hardness, then
the ordinary heat of the sanguineal parts.

VI. The brain was not made for the skul, but the skul for the brain, therefore
it is like they were formed both together, and that the skul was proportioned
to the bigness of the brain, and not this to the bigness of the skull. 2. The
brain and skull were placed uppermost, for the eyes, which were to be near the
brain, because of the spirits: and optic nervs, which by reason of their
softness, were fittest to be implanted in the eye, otherwise they had been too
hard; for the nerve is harder, as it is farther from the brain: and no place
was so fit for the eyes, which were to watch over the body, as the upper place;
neither could the eyes be so secure any where, as within these concavities of
the skull. 3. The skull being a bone, feels not, for bones have no other
sense, but what is in the membrans or Periostium; neither can there be sense,
but where there be nerves, but there be none in the bones: except in the teeth,
which therefore feel, because the nerves are incorporated in them, and
communicate the sensitive spirits to all parts of them, and the sensitive
faculty with them: yet they are more sensible of the first, then of the second
qualities. 4. The teeth are still growing, because there is continual need of
them, and are harder then other bones, because they were made to bruise hard
meats. 5. They are more sensible and sooner offended with cold then with heat;
and yet heat is the more active quality, which shows, that the constitution
of the teeth is hot, for if they were cold, they should not be so soon
troubled with cold, being a friendly quality.

CAP. VI.
1. Two sorts of blood; the heart first lives, and is nourished, and the
original of blood, not the liver. 2. The hearts action on Vena cava; the cause
of sanguification. 3. Blood caused by the heart. 4. How every part draws. 5.
Heart the first principle of the nerves. 6. Nerves, how instruments of sense
and motion. 7. The same nerves serve for sense and motion.

I. THERE are in our bodies two sorts of blood, the one arterial, begot in the
heart, for the exciting of our heat; the other venal, begot in the liver, for
nourishing of the body: ^o according to Aristotle, the heart; and according to
Galen, the liver may be called the fountain of blood. 2. As the heart is the
first thing that lives in us, so it must needs be first nourished, for life
cannot be without nutriment, and nutriment cannot be without blood, therefore
there must needs be blood in the heart before there was any in the liver. 3. As
the heart first lives, so it first operates, for life consists in operation:
but the proper work of the heart is to beget arterial blood and vital spirits,
therefore the blood was first in the heart. 4. Though blood resemble the liver
in color, it will not therefore follow that blood has its first original from
the liver, but only that it is the receptacle and cystern of blood; so the bag,
in which the gall lies, has the same color with the gall, and yet this is
generated in the liver, and only contained in the bag; and its a question,
whether the liver colors the blood, or the blood the liver. 5. In fear and
sadness, the blood retires into the heart, which is by means of the spirits
recoiling thither with the blood, as to their original. 6. In the brain we
find four sensible concavities for the animal spirits; in the heart two, for
the blood and vital spirits; but in the liver none, for the blood; in the
resticles none, for the seed; nor in the breast for the milk; which makes me
doubt, whether the blood, seed, and milk, have any concoction in these parts,
if they have, it must be surely in a very small quantity. 7. I find pure blood
no where but in the heart and veins; by which I gather that there must be a
greater commerce between the heart and veins, then some do conceive, which
appears also by the implantation of the vena cava in the heart, which cannot be
separated without tearing of the heart or vein; and that either the blood is
perfected in the heart, and prepared in the liver, or else prepared in the
heart, and perfected in the liver: besides, that the arteries do all along
accompany the veins.

II. I see no reason why we may not affirm, that the heart is continually in
its Diastole, drawing blood out of the vena cava; and in its Systole or
contraction, refunding blood into the same vein: for this continual motion of
the blood, is no more impossible then the continual motion of the heart and
arteries; neither is it more absurd for perfect and imperfect blood to be
mingled in this motion, then for choleric, melancholic and phlegmatic blood,
to be mingled with pure blood in the veins. 2. When the liver is vitiated,
sanguification fails, and so hydropsies follow, which does not prove that the
liver is the sole cause of sanguification, but that it is subordinate to the
heart: so when the Chrystalline humor is vitiated, the sight fails, and yet
this humor is not the sole cause of fight, but is subordinate to the op^ick
nerve and spirits. The heart then by the liver distributes blood to the
members. 3. The veins have their radication in the liver, their office and
distribution from the liver and the heart: their original from neither* in
respect of matter, but in respect of efficiency from the heart; for this first
lives, and therefore the fittest place for the formative faculty to reside in.

III. The Chylus is turned into blood, not by the substance of the Liver, for
the Chylus comes not near it, and there can be no alteration or concoction
without contact: nor by the veins, for their office is to convey and distribute
the blood, not to make it. So the arteries do not make the arterial blood,
which they convey: besides tha^ the form, temperament, and color of the blood
is far different from that of the veins; therefore the blood is made by the
power of that celestial heat by which we receive life, growth, and nutriment:
for the same heat produces diverse effects in the diverse subjects it works
upon; in the stomach it turns our meat into a white Chylus; in the veins into
red blood: in the ^eminal vessels into seed, in the breasts into milk, etc.

IV. The same Meseraick veins which draw the purest pare of the Chylus from the
intestins, that it might there receive sanguification, contain also pure blood,
which the intestines draw for their nutriment, for every part draws that food
which it most delights in. Thus from the same mass of blood, the Spleen draws
melancholy, the gall choler, the kidneys, water.

V. The Peripateticks will have the heart to be the first original of the
nerves, and of the sensitive motion: The Galenists will have the brain; but
this contention is needless: For the heart is the first principle, because it
is the first that lives and moves, whereas the brain moves not but by the
heart. In a Syncope, or swowning fit of the heart, all sense and motion
suddenly fail, which could not be if these had not their original from the
heart: the brain may be called the secondary or subordinate cause or principle:
for this by its cold, tempers the vital spirits, and so they become sensitive
or animal. Hence it is that in an Apoplexy there is a sudden failing of sense
and motion. If any say, that the body can move after the heart is taken out,
and that therefore the heart cannot be the first principle of motion: I answer,
so can the body move after the head is off, as we see in Poultry. This motion
then excludes neither the head nor heart from being originals: for it is caused
by the remainder of the spirits, which are left in the nerves and arteries. As
for the Apoplexy, I take it to be an affection, not of the brains alone, but
of the nerves also.

VI. The common opinion is, that the nerves are the instruments of sense and
motion: and yet we see sense and motion where there are no nerves: for in every
part of the body there are not nerves, and yet every part feels and moves: this
sense and motion must needs proceed from the spirits in the blood, which is in
every part of the flesh and skin, where there are no veins. If it be replied,
that upon the obstruction, or binding of the nerve, sense and motion fail: I
answer, the like failing there is of sense and motion, when the arteries called
Carotides, are bound up; for as the animal spirits will not work without the
vital, neither will the spirits in the blood and flesh work, if they fail which
are in the n^rves, such is the union amongst them, that this failing, all
action cease.

VII. Seeing the sensitive and motive Spirits differ not specifically, there is
no need why we should assign different nerves to sense and motion; for the
same neve serves to both; it is true, that there be some hard, some soft
nerves, because some have their original from the soft brain, and some from the
harder pith of the baek bone; and that the soft nerve is fittest f^r sense,
which consists in reception, for soft things are aptest to receive
impressions; as the hard nerve is fittest for motion which consists in
action; therefore the same nerve conveyeth sense to all parts capable of sense,
and motion to the parts apt to be moved: Hence the nerves inserted in the
muscles, move them; but the nerves inserted into the mouth of the stomach,
moves it not, because the stomach has no muscles, yet it communicates to it,
an exquisite sense.

CHAP. VII.
1. How the spirits pass through the nerves: their swift and various motions,
even in sleep: motion and sense not still together. 2. Sense and motion in
phrensies, epilepsies, leprosies, caros. 3. Muscles, how, when and where the
causes of voluntary motion. 4. How the fibers and tendons move the muscles. 5.
The muscles of the tongue, abdomen, diaphragma, ribs, bladder. 6. The organs of
tact, its medium.

I. ALTHOUGH the nerves are not sensibly pervious as the Veins and Arteries
are, which were purposely made hollow for the passage of the venal and arterial
blood; yet the animal spirits being subtle and sublimated bodies can freely
pass through the soft and spungy substance thereof, as well as sweat through
the pores of the skin. 2. Though in the Palsy the animal spirits cannot pass
through the thick, clammy and glassy phlegm, which by reason of its coldness,
deads the spirits, which without the natural heat, have no vigor or motion,
yet they can freely pass through the nerves by help of the native heat. 3.
Though the spirits by reason of their specifical form or aeri^l nature should
only move upward, yet as they are instruments of the soul, they move which way
the soul will have them move. 4. Though no gross body can move in an instant,
yet their spirits can, being moved by the soul immediately, and being such
sublimate and subtle bodies, that they come near to the nature of spirits. 5.
Though in sleep the senses are tied up, yet there is oftentimes motion; as we
see in those that walk and talk in their sleep, and yet feel not; because the
fore ventricles of the brain are affected, in which is the common sense, so is
not the pith in the back, from which the most of the motory nerves have their
original. 6. In one and the same nerve ofttimes motion fails, and the sense
remains, because more spirits are required, and greater force for motion
being an action, then for sense, which consists in reception or passion. 7.
Sense does sometimes fail, the motion remaining sound; when the nervous
branches which are inserted into the skin, are hurt or ill-affected, at the
same time the nerves inserted into the muscles may be sound.

II. In phrensies the motion is strong, but the sense weak; because the brains
being inflamed, the nerves are heated and dried, therefore fitter for motion,
but the less apt for sense, which requires a soft nerve. 2. In the falling
sickness sense fails, but not motion, because the fore ventricles of the
brain being ill-affected, the common sense is intercepted; but the pith of the
back bone from whence the most nerves are derived, is not hurt, therefore
motion not hindered. 3. In leprosies the sense is dulled, but not the motion,
because the nerves and skin are dried, by which sense is hindered, but not
motion. 4. In a deep sleep or Caros, there is respiration without sense,
because the forepart of the brain is hurt, but not the nerves and muscles of
the breast. 5. Oftentimes the eye loses its sight, but not its motion, because
the optic nerve by which we see, is not the same with the nerves, by which the
eye is moved.

III. All spontaneous motions are caused by the spirits in the brains, nerves
and muscles in the creatures that have them, but where these organs are not,
the animal spirits move the body without them, as we see in worms. 2. All
muscles are not the organs of voluntary motion: for the three little muscles
within the ears move them not to hear when we please, for many times we hear
what we would not. 3. In those parts where there be nerves without muscles,
there is no voluntary motion, because the nerves convey only the spirits, which
the muscles receive, and by them immediately move the body. 4. Respiration in
sleep is a natural, not a voluntary motion, caused notwithstanding by the
muscles of the breast. 5. Sleep-walkers are moved by the muscles, which motion
then cannot be voluntary, for the walker has not knowledge of his walking, or
of the end thereof. 6. Beasts are moved by their muscles, which motion in them
cannot be called voluntary, but spontaneous only.

IV. All muscles have not tendones, but such as are appointed for a strong and
continual motion: hence the muscles of the tongue, bladder, and anus, have no
tendones. 2. The muscle is moved not only by the nerves and tendones, but also
by the fibers within its own fleshy substance: and indeed the fibrous flesh is
the chief instrument of spontaneous motion; and where they are wanting, there
is no such motion: Hence it is that beasts can move their skins, which men
cannot, because beasts skins adhere close to a fibrous substance, whereas that
of man's is nervous; only the skin of the face in us is movable, because
musculous and fibrous.

V. Though the substance of the tongue be not a musculous or fibrous flesh, yet
it receives its diverse motions from diverse muscles. 2. The muscles of the
abdomen are chiefly made for pressing of the same, when nature desires to expel
the excrements, and in the next place to move the breast with the other muscles
appointed for respiration. 3. The muscle of the bladder called Sphincter, was
made partly for opening a passage for the urine to pass away, which it does by
dilating and extending it self; and partly for shutting up of the bladder by
contracting it self, lest the urine should pass from us in sleep, or against
our wills whilst we are awaked. 4. The muscle called diaphragma, or the
midriff, was made for exspiration and inspiration; in inspiration, it dilateth
it self, but in expiration, it is contracted upward, as we see in dead bodies.
6. The muscles of the ribs called Intercostals, are some of them external,
which distend the breast for inspiration, some internal, which contract the
breast for exspiration.

VI. Aristotelians will have the flesh, Galenists the skin to be the organ of
tact: but I think both are; for I take the skin to be nothing else but the
outward superficies of the flesh, a little dried and hardened; and differing no
other way from the flesh, then the outward skin of the apple, from the softer
substance thereof; so then the flesh, both as it is a soft substance, and as it
is hardened in its outward superficies, is the organ of tact, by means of the
nerves and fibers diffused into it; and whereas vision, hearing, and smelling,
have the air for their medium, tact and taste, which are the two absolutely
needful senses, without which we cannot live, (whereas without the other three
we may) have no medium at all.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Blood, milk, etc. No integral parts. 2. How the parts draw their aliment.
3. And expel things hurtful. 4. Of the intestines and faeces. 5. The intestines
retentive faculty. 6. Of the stomach and its appetite or sense. 7. Whether the
stomach is nourished by Chylus or blood.

I BLOOD, Milk, Fat, Marrow, are not properly integral parts of our bodies, for
the body is perfect in its limbs and members, without these; and these in time
of hunger, nourish the body, whereas one part cannot be the aliment of another;
besides every part has its figure and shape, but these have none; yet in a
large sense they may be called parts, as they help to make up the whole.

II. As the Loadstone draws Iron, and Plants nutriment from the earth, so
does every part of our bodies draw that aliment which is most proper for it:
some by the help of the fibers, as the heart in its Diastole draws blood from
Vena cava into its right ventricle by the help of the fibers: some without
their help, as bones, grissles, and ligaments. So the Intestines draw without
fibers, the Chylus from the Ventricle, with which they are delighted; and they
draw blood from the Meseraick veins, with which they are nourished; and the
same veins draw the purer part of the Chylus from the Intestines for
sanguification.

III. The same part that draws things needful, expels the same things when they
grow superfluous or hurtful: thus the ventricles expel the Chylus into the
Intestines, and these expel their gros^er and excrementitious parts out of the
body: so the heart expels by its transverse fibers, blood, and spirits, and
hurtful vapors too. And indeed nature is more solicitous in expelling of
things hurtful, then in attracting of things needful. Thus we see in dying
people, that expiration is stronger then inspiration, nature being more willing
to be rid of hurtful vapors, then to receive fresh air: so when the
intestines are affected with inflammations, obstructions, or ulcerations, that
they cannot send the excrement downward, they force it upward into the stomach
again, and so expel it by the mouth, as in the Iliaca passio.

IV. The expulsion of the Foeces is partly the natural or peristaltick motion
of the intestines, and partly the voluntary motion of the muscles of the
Abdomen; which muscles being contracted, press the intestine. 2. There are
straight Fibe^s in the intestine, called Rectum, not so much for attraction, as
for strengthening the circular Fiber^. 3. The Colon is s^ated uppermost near to
the bottom of the stomach, and hollownesse of the liver, tha^ by the touch of
these parts, the remainders of the meat which are in the cells of the Colon,
might be better concocted. 4. The stink of the foeces proceed partly from the
superfluous humidity, which is the mother of putrefaction; and partly from the
heat of the intestin, which though it be natural to the aliment which it
concocts, yet it is external to the excrement which it expels. 5. The length of
the intestins, which are seven times as long as the body, and ^he many winding^
or folds of them, besides the Val^ula or shutter in the end of the Coecum, do
show that the injections by the fundament can ascend no higher then the blind
intestine, except there be any of those three distempers in the guts, which I
mentioned but now, or else the stomach be distempered by Bulimia; for in such a
case it will draw the foeces to it. 6. Clysters are sometimes carried to the
liver by means of the meseraick veins, which suck some part of it from the
intestins.

V. The substance, temper, and color of the intestines and ventricles, is the
same; therefore the Chylus is not only concocted in the ventricle, but in the
intestins also; and as the one of these members is affected, so is the other.
2. As in the intestines there is an attractive, concoctive, and expulsive
faculty, so there is also a retentive; for all these affections are in the
ventricle which is of the same substance with the intestines. To what end are
stiptick or restringent medicaments, used in Fluxes, but to corroborate the
retentive faculty of the intestins; in the lientery the meat passes away
without concoction, because the re^^ntive facul^y both of the ventricle and
intestins is hurt.

VI. The mouth of the stomach being united to the Diaphragma, and this to the
breast bone, is the cause that we find much pain about this bone, when the
mouth of the stomach is ill-affected. 2. In the mouth of the stomach is the
^ea^ of appetite, by reason of the two stomachical nerves th^re, which when
they are refrigerated or obstru^t^d, the appetite is dissolved: as in B^limia,
where there is a continual attraction from the stomach, but no sense or
appetite; but when the stomach is molested with cold and s^wre humors, there
is a continual sense or appetite, though there be no inanition of the part, as
in the disease called the Dogs appetite. 3. By reason of the sympathy that is
between the mouth of the stomach, and the heart, they had of old the same name,
and they have the same symptoms. 4. The appetite being an animal faculty, ^ath
its seat in the brain originally, in the stomach subjectively; the faculty is
in both, but the action only in the stomach.

VII. Though the stomach be delighted and satisfied with the meat it receives;
yet it is not thereby immediately and properly nourished, but by the blood;
therefore nature has furnished it with diverse veins: neither can the Chylus be
fi^ nutriment, till it be turned into blood, and the choleric, melancholy and
watrish excrements be separated from it. Besides, how can the stomach be
nourished with Chylus, when the body is red only by Clysters, which the liver
sanguifies: or how are those creatures fed with Chylus, which eat not, but
sleep all the Winter. The animal or sensitive hunger therefore of the
ventricle, is satisfied upon the receiving of meat; but its natural hunger is
not satisfied till the blood be converted into its substance.

CHAP. IX.
1. The Livers heat inferior to that of the Stomachs. 2. Of the natural
Spirits in the Liver, and how it is cherished by air. 3. Of the Gall, and how
it is nourished. How the Choler is conveyed to it; of its two passages, and one
membrane.

THough sanguification and the separation of the three excrementitious humors
from the blood, be the work of the Liver, not of the Stomach, yet it will not
follow, that the Liver is hotter then the Stomach: for this work is done not so
much by heat, as by the temper and constitution of the Liver: although I deny
not, but heat has in this its action, which cannot be so great in separating
the parts of the blood, which is a liquid substance, as that of the stomach and
intestins concocting hard and solid substances into liquid, and separating the
ear^^hy excr^ments from the purer parts.

II. The Liver sends by the Veins into all parts of the body, these spirits
which they call natural: for to send up the force of the innate spirits, which
are in every part of the body: these natural spirits are grosser then the vital
and animal, therefore contained within the thin walls of the veins; and they are
begot of blood, and thin vapors, therefore are preserved and cherished by the
blood and air; which air cannot come to the Liver by inspiration, but only by
transpiration, which is performed in the hollow of the Liver by arteries in the
unequal or gibbous part of the Liver, by the continual motion of the Diaphragma.

III. Nature has fastened a little vessel to the Liver, for rec^ption of the
choler, which because it is noxious to the Liver, it is thrust out by it; and
because of the sympathy it has with that little vessel, it is drawn in by that
by a secret instinct, as Iron by the Lodestone; with which notwithstanding it
is not fed, being a pure excrement: the Lungs indeed are fed with choleric
blood, the Sple^n with melancholic blood, the Kidneys with watrish: but not
with pure excrementitious choler, melancholy, and water. That Vessel then is
fed by blood, communicated to it by its two veins called Cisticae, which were
not placed there in vain. And though this humor be pernicious to other parts
of the body, yet it does no way hurt this little vessel, which argues the great
sympathy and familiarity that is between them. 2. The obliquity of the passage
by which the choler is carried from the Liver to the Gall, is no hindrance to
its motion, seeing this motion follows not its Elementary form, but the
attractive faculty of this vessel: thus the wa^rish blood which is heavy, is
drawn upward by the brain. 3. The Gall has two passages, one from the Liver,
by which it draws the choler, the other from the Duodenu^, by which it thrufts
out the choler into the intestins, when it becomes offensive, either by its
quantity, or by its acrimony, which it may contract with long stay in each of
these 2 passages; there is a Valvula, or shutter, the one is to keep the reflux
of the choler from the gall to the Liver; the other that it may not recoil from
the intestine into the gall. 4. They in whom the passage of the gall reaches
to the bottom of the stomach* are troubled with often vomiting of choler; but
they in whom this passage reaches below the Du^denum, are troubled with
choleric dejections. 5. The Gall, as also the Bladder, have but one membrane,
whereas the stomach and in^estins have two, because these were appointed for
concoction, whereas the Gall and Bladder were only made to contain for a time
the choler and urine.

CHAP. X.
1. The use of the Gall, and Spleen, its obstructions, its Veins and Arteries
without concavity. 2. Vas venosum. 3. How the Spleen purges it self. 4. The
Veins and its humors. 5. Why the stone causes vomiting and numbness in the
thigh. 6. The bladder, its attraction and expulsion.

AS nature has made the Gall to receive the ^holer, that the blood may not be
there with infected, as sometimes it is when the Gall is obstructed, whence
comes the yellow ^aundise; so it has ordained the Spleen to receive the gross
and melancholy blood, that the purer blood may not be infected with it, as it
is in the black Jaundise. 2. There is no member so much subject to
obstructions, as the spleen, which cannot proceed from its vessels, for they
are capacious; nor yet from its substance, for that is spungy: therefore it
must be caused by the feculency and thickness of blood. 3. It was fitting that
the Spleen should abound in arteries, that the gross blood thereof might
receive the vital faculty, and that it might be the more attenuated and
purged, and the languishing heat there* of excited. 4. It was not requisite that
there should be any sensible capacity in the Spleen, as there is in the Gall
and Kidneys, because the melancholy humor is much less then the choler or
watrish, neither was it to be sent away in that plenty as the other are:
Besides, in stead of cavity, it abounds in Veins and Arteries.

II. There is a short vessel called Vas venosum, reaching from the Spleen to
the bottom of the Stomach, and conveying some part of the melancholy blood
thither, for exciting the appetite, and binding of the bottom of the stomach
the closer for helping of concoction, which it does being of a cold, sour, and
stipick quality.

III. The Spleen oftentimes purges it self, by the internal Hemorrhoids, which
arise from the Splenetical vein: and sometimes by the urine, not through the
emulgent veins, which are far distant from the Splenetical; these having their
original from Vena porta, the emulgent from Vena cava; but through certain
arteries made purposely large, not so much for carrying of the spirits, as of
this humor, which is still accompanied with much water for attenuating the
thick humor, therefore melancholy men are much given to spitting, sweating,
and urine, chiefly in a quartan Fever. Hence melancholy is called water
sometimes.

IV. The Kidneys were made to draw and contain for some time the serous ^r
watrish excrement of the blood, which by the Uriters it sends away to the
bladder: but the crude humors which critically are evacuated by urine, are not
drawn in by the Kidneys, but sent thither by the veins; neither is the
liquefaction of the solid parts in a Hectic, sent by the veins being weakened,
nor drawn in by the reins being against nature, but of it self is conveyed
thither thorough the capacious vessels.

V. Such a sympathy there is between the stomach and the reins, by reason of
the nerves common to both, and of the outward tunicle of the reins arising from
the Peritonaeum which is joined to the bottom of the stomach, that in fits of
the stone, we are troubled with vomiting. 2. By reason of the muscle on which
the Kidneys lean, which muscle is inserted in the inward part of the thigh, and
by reason of the nerves inserted in that muscle, which nerves are pressed by
the hardness of the stone in the Kidneys, we find a stupidity or numbnesse in
the thigh, in fits of the stone.

VI. The Bladder draws the urine to it, not to be fed by the urine, for it is
fed by blood; as appears by its veins, but that it may retain it till by its
quantity or quality, it grow offensive, and then it is sent away, which action
both of retention and emission, is partly natural, partly animal: as the urine
is retained by the oblique fibers of the bladder, it is natural; as it is
retained by the muscle sphincter, it is animal; so as it is expelled by the
faculty of the bladder, this action is natural; but as it is expelled by the
muscles of the Abdomen, the action is animal.

CHAP. XI.
1. The Heart and Testicles, how the noblest parts: Generation w^^hout
Testicles, they corroborate the Heart, their sympathy with the breast: 2. And
with the brain. 3. Different vessels in the Male and Female. 4. The Matrix
sympathizeth with the Head, Heart, Breasts, etc. 5. Affected with smells. Its
twofold motion.

ARistotle will have the Heart, Galen the Testicles, to be the noblest parts of
man's body: both are in the right; for if we consider the individual person, the
Heart is the noblest part; but if the propagation of the Species, the Testicles
have the prerogative: for without them there can be no generation in perfect
creatures. 2. The Testicles are not of such absolute necessity for propagation
of the Species, as the Heart is for conservation of the individuum. For diverse
creatures, as Fishes, do propagate without Testicles. 3. The Testicles, as
Aristotle affirms truly, were not made only, or principally for generation, but
for corroboration of the Heart by a secret sympathy and communication of
spermatical spirits and heat; therefore Eunuchs lose much of their vigor,
courage, and masculine heat. 4. By means of the Nerves, Veins, and Arteries,
there is a great communication between the breast, and the parts contained in
it, and the testicles; for oftentimes the tumor of the testicles end in a
cough, and so the cough sometimes ends into the Testicles: And hence it is that
the voice begins to grow big and hoarse in young men, as soon as they begin to
have puberty and seed; because the heat of the Testicles increasing, dilates
the passages of the breast and windpipe.

II. As there is a great sympathy between the seminal vessels and the breast, so
there is between them and the brain; hence it is that imagination of venereal
objects causes erection, and upon the exuberance of seed, there arise
lascivious imaginations. 2. Erection is partly animal in respect of the
muscles, the imagination and delight; and partly natural in respect of
flatulency, heat, and seminal spirits, which cause distension; and of the
natural end, which is procreation.

III. The vessels of generation in the male and female, are not the same, as
some have thought, supposing they differ only in situation, the one being
inward, the other outward; which is not so, for they differ in figure, number
and situation, as may be seen in Anatomies. Therefore these stories which tell
us of maids turned into boys, are false and ridiculous, except they mean
Hermaphrodites, in which are the vessels of both sexes, which are not discerned
while they are young, because of the weakness of heat in them; so at first some
young boys have been taken for maids, because the yard and testicles for want
of heat, have not appeared outward.

IV. Such a sympathy and combination there is between the matrix and the head,
by reason of the nerves; that when the matrix is ill-affected, the head and
brains are ill-disposed; and oftentimes the sensitive, animal, and motive
faculties are overthrown; hence convultions, stupidities, and strange
disturbances of the imagination. 2. By reason of the arteries, such a sympathy
there is between the heart and the matrix, that swouning fits, and suffocation,
with a cessation of pulse, and respiration follow upon the distemper of the
matrix. 3. Such a consent there is between the matrix and breasts of women, that
sometimes blood has flowed from the breasts instead of milk, and milk has
been voided downward instead of blood. 4. By reason of the consent between the
liver and the matrix: the veins and matrix, the bladder and the matrix: the
evil disposition of this is the cause of distempers and diseases in them.

V. The matrix is much affected with smells; not that the sense of smelling is
there, which is in the brain, but because of the consent that is between the
matrix, and the membranes of the brain; they being both of the same substance;
and because with the smell the thin vapors are conveyed thither, on which the
spirits are fed. 2. Sometimes abortions are caused by bad smells, because the
maternal spirits which the child attracteth by the umbilical arteries are
infected. 3. Sweet smells do cause in some women histerical passions, because
they stir up the pernicious vapors that lay lurking in the matrix, which vapors
are conveyed by the arteries to the diaphragma, heart and brain; whereas by
stinking smells nature is stirred up to the expulsion both of them, and withal
of the naughty humors in the matrix. 4. There is a twofold motion of the
matrix; the one is natural by its straight and circular fibers, so it is moved
downward toward the reception of the seed, and expulsion of the child and
secundine: the other motion is convulsive, proceeding from too much inanition
or repletion; and sometimes of venomous vapors, whence are suffocations, and
want of respiration, the diaphragma being pressed.

CHAP. XII.
1. Distinction of sexes: the male hotter then the female. 2. The seed no part,
nor aliment of the body: derived from all parts, how. 3. The menstruous blood
no excrement, how it is: The cause of the small pox: Its evacuation. 4. The
uses of the matrix. 5. Its vitiosity, the cause of Monsters: Mola, what.

I. AS nature has appointed generation for continuing of the species, so it
has appointed distinction of sexes, aiming as well at the female, as the male,
and not at the male alone, as some think, who would make the female an
imperfect thing, and aberration of nature: for the one sex is no less needful
for procreation then the other. 2. The male is hotter then the female, because
begot of hotter seed, and in a hotter place, to wit, the right side; and
because the male has larger vessels and members, stronger limbs, a more porie
skin, a more active body, a stronger concoction, a more courageous mind, and
for the most part, a longer life; all which are effects of heat. Besides that,
the bodies of males are sooner articulated and conformed, to wit, by 10 days,
in the womb, then the females are; the motions of the male in the womb, are
quicker and stronger, then of the female. The fatness, softness, and laxa^ie of
the woman's body, besides the abundance of blood, which cannot be concocted and
exhaled for want of heat, argue that she is of a dol'der temper then the man:
She indeed has a swifter pulse, because of the narrowness of the arteries* and
her proneness to anger and venery, argue imbecility of mind, and strength of
imagination not heat. 3. The male grows flower then the female, because he
was to live longer; therefore nature proceeds the flower, as we see in trees
and plants; a Cherry-Tree grows up sooner then an Oak, and decays far
sooner. Besides, the soft and loose flesh of the female is sooner extended,
then the solid and harder flesh of the male: We may then conclude, that the
male is hotter intensively; but the female by reason she has more blood, is
hotter extensively.

II. The seed is no part of the body, because the body is not more perfect by
its presence, nor malmed by its loss or absence; nor is it the aliment of the
body, because then the body would not part with it: nor is it properly an
excrement peccant in the quality; but it is the purer part of the blood, or
quintessence of it, unuseful for the body when it is peccant in the quantity.
2. Because the blood is in every part of the body, and the seed is the
quintessence of the blood; therefore the seed may be said to be derived from
all parts of the body, for all parts of the body consume upon much evacuation
of seed; and as it is from all parts, in respect of its material and grosse^
substance, so it is principally from the head, heart, and liver, in regard of
its more aerial parts.

III. Though the menstruous blood may receive corruption by its long
suppression, or by the moisture of some bad humors, yet in sound women, it is
as pure as any other blood in the body: For it is appointed by nature for
nutriment of the infant, whilst it is in the womb; and after birth it is
converted into milk, neither does it differ from other blood in its material
and efficient causes; besides that, it is as red, and coagulates as soon, as
the purest blood of the body: Neither does nature send it away because it is
peccant in the quality, but because it is exuberant in the quantity. 2. By
reason the menstruous blood is infected with ill humors, on which the child in
the womb feeds; hence it is, that there are few or none, but one time or other
are infected with the small pox; which as diverse other poisons, does not
presently show it self, but lies a long time lurking in the body: And if at
the first time, the venom of this disease is not thoroughly purged out, it
returns: Hence it is, that some have this disease diverse times. 3. The
menstruous blood is not the cause of the small pox, whilst it remains in the
vessels, but when it is converted into the substance of the body; hence it is,
that women whose months are stopped, are not infected with this malady. 4.
This blood is evacuated once in a month ordinarily, at such time as the Moon,
which has dominion over humid bodies, is most prevalent: Nature also observes
her own periods, and times of evacuation, of which we can give no reason. But
this is certain, that if the evacuation of this blood were as frequent as of
other excrements, there would be no conception.

IV. The chief uses of the matrix are to draw the seed to it, to mingle it with
the blood, to contain it, to excite its faculties and spirits, for it is not
actually animated till now, and so the seed by its spirits is made capable of
animation, and shortly after being incorporated with the blood of articulation:
These forenamed functions of the matrix are performed, not so much by its
heat, as by its natural temper.

V. Oftentimes the vitiosity of the matrix is the cause of monstrous births; so
likewise is the imagination, the defect or exuberance of seed; the unlawful
permistion of seeds, the heat of the body, and the formative faculty. 2. The
false conception called Mola, is begot when the seed is faulty, weak or
deficient, and the blood predominant; which is known from a true conception,
because there is no milk in the breasts, when there is a false conception,
neither does it move after the fourth month, as the child does; sometimes it
is moved by the matrix, but not by it self, as the child: besides it remains
after the eleventh month, which is the time prefixed for the birth of the
child.

CHAP. XIII.
1. The Heart lives first, not the Liver. 2. The outward membrans first formed
by the heat of the matrix. 3. Vrachos, what. 4. The similitude of the parents
on the children. 5. Twins, how begot, and why like each other. 6. Infants, how
fed in the matrix. 7. Superfetation. 8. No respiration in the matrix. 9. The
child's heart moves in the matrix.

I. ARISTOTLE will have the heart to be the first member that lives in us,
Galen the liver; but indeed Aristotle is in the right; for how can any thing
live, till the heart which is the fountain of heat and spirits live; and how
can the soul frame to her self a fit habitation for exercising of her
functions, ^ill first she has framed the heart, by whose heat and spirits she
may work: If it be objected, that the heart cannot live without nutrition; but
nutrition is by blood, and this by the liver, therefore the liver must first
live: I answer, that there needs no nutrition, till the body be complete and
perfected; for we see imperfect creatures can live long without food: I have
kept a Spider nine months alive in a glass without food: Again, there needs no
nutriment, but when there is deperdition and wasture of the substance, which
cannot be of the heart, before the body be perfected. And although the body
live at first the life of a plant, it will not therefore follow, that the heart
is not first framed; for even in plants there is a principle of life, which is
the root, and nature works methodically, by quickening that first, which must
quicken the rest.

II. As the heart is the first member that is framed by the formative faculty,
so the outward membranes are first formed by the heat or natural temperament of
the matrix, as we see the outward skin of fruits by the heat of the Sun. For
nature providently fences the seed with these walls, that the inward spirits
may work the more powerfully, and be the less subject to dissipation.

III. Besides the umbilical vein and the two umbilical arteries, nature has
made a vessel called Vrachos, by which the child in the matrix conveys the
urine into the membran, for it reaches from the bottom of the bladder to the
navel; and in those in whom the navel is not well bound at first, and this
Vrachos dried, upon any stoppage of the bladder, the urine will flow out by the
navel.

IV. The similitude of the parents is impressed on the children, partly by
reason of the formative power in the seed, and partly by the imagination of the
parent moving the spirits, which being mixed with the blood on which the child
is fed; makes the impression upon the tender flesh of the infant. 2. The child
resembles the grandfathers or grand-mothers sometimes, as the Lodestone
communicates its power to the third or fourth needle, so does the formative
faculty of the grandfather, which is potentially in the seed of the
grandchilde, oftentimes show it self.

V. Twins are oftentimes begot, partly because of the abundance of seed, partly
by reason of the scattering thereof into diverse parts of the matrix, which
^oments each part of it; for though the matrix has no cells, yet it has a
right and a left side; in the right, males; in the left* females are begot; or
if the seed be strong, vigorous, or masculine, males, if weak and feminine,
females; if one part masculine, the other feminine, then male and female are
engendered; but the female is seldom strong or lively, because the time of
conformation is not alike in both, ^0 days being required for the forming of
the male, and 40 for the female. 2. Twins are like each other, because they are
wrapped within the same membran, are conceived at the same time, they feed on
the same blood, and enjoy the same maternal spirits.

VI. The infant in the womb is not fed by the mouth, but by the navel* for
there are no vessels that reach to the mouth, neither is there need of
chylification, or sanguification; neither is there any other excrement found in
the intestins of new born infants, except the excrement of blood; therefore as
they breath by the umbilical arteries; so they are fed by the umbilical vein.

VII. Sometimes there is superfetation; for we read of second births, some
days, weeks, and months, after the first; which shows, that the matrix after
conception, is not so fast bound, but that it opens again in copulation, but
seldom is the second birth either strong or lively; because the first
conception grows strong and big, drawing the blood or nutriment to it, by
which means the second conception is starved.

VIII. The infant does not, cannot, should not breath whilst it is in the womb,
but is content with transpiration by the umbilical arteries. For if there were
inspiration, there must be air within the membrane where the child lies, but
there is nothing except the child, and that watrish substance in which it
swim^; this must needs be ^uck'd in with the air, and so the child be choked.
Besides, the redness and grossness of the lungs, whilst the child is in the
womb, shows, that it breaths not; for the lungs of those creatures that breath,
are of a whitish color, and of a ratified substance, for the better reception
of the air.

IX. Whilst the child is in the womb, the heart is not idle, as some Galenists
imagine, but according to Aristotle, it then moves and gives life to the
body: otherwise the child should live all the while the life of a plant, not
of an animal, if it had no other life then what it has from the mother by the
umbilical arteries. 2. How could the heart, having no air to refresh it within
that narrow membran, in which the child lies, receive refrigeration, if it did
not move; some answer, that the heart is refrigerate by the water in which the
child lies. I should like this answer well, if that water were cold; or if the
child were a fish, which with its gils might receive water for refrig^ration of
the heart. 3. The arteries of the child mov^, but how can they move without the
heart move also. If they say, that they are moved by the Arteries of the
mother, I would know how they can move after the mother is dead; for some
children have been cut out alive from the dead mothers womb. 4. Although the
umbilical arteries* convey the material spirits ^o the child, yet they give not
life, no more then the air which we breathe, till they be refined by the heat
and motion of the heart. 5. The animal spirits of the child are begot in its
brain, whilst it is in the womb; but the animal spirits have their original
from the vital.

CHAP. XIV.
1. Childbearing how caused. 2. Why the eight months birth not lively. 3. The
sensitive Soul how derived, and the reasonable introduced: when it exercises
its functions: it brings with it all its perfections. The Embryo not capable of
three specifical forms.

THE birth o^ the child is caused partly by its calcitration, breaking the
membranes in which it lies, having now need of more food and spirits, by
reason it is grown bigger and stronger; and partly by the contraction of the
matrix, endeavoring to be rid of the burden; if either of these fail, the
birth will be the more painful and difficult; but the Mola having neither life
nor motion, and not standing in need of air and food, remains in some many
years together before it be expelled. 2. The causes of difficult childbearing,
are partly the ^igness of the child, partly the narrowness of the neck of the
matrix, or the weakness of the child, or the mother, or inflammations, or
tumors, and such like infirmities, whether natural or adventitious.

II. The reason why the child which is borne the seventh month, is for the
most part lively, whereas that which is born in the eig^th month is not,
because the seventh month the child having attained the perfection of parts,
and so much strength as to break the membrans, does live; but if it cannot
break the membran till the 8 month, all the time i^ remains from the first
attempt it made of going forth, it does not prosper, but decays in str^ngth;
being as it were against its will kept in prison.

III. The sensitive Soul is derived with the seed from the parents; which soul
is potentially in the seed, but actually in the Embryo, where the members are
formed. But in the fourth month after the heart and brain are perfected, the
reasonable soul is introduced; which if it were taken out of the matter, it
should in reasoning and understanding depend altogether on the matter, which
were absurd to think. 2. The rational soul does not exercise its functions,
until the superfluous moisture of the body, by the natural heat, be exhausted,
and the organs made drier. 3. The bodies of other creatures, are not capable of
man's soul, because they are not of that fabric, temper, and constitution. 4.
The faculties of the animal soul have not their original from the gross and
earthy part of the seed, but from the aereal, by means of its celestial heat.
5, The rational soul bringing with it all its perfections, the former faculties
of sense and vegetation which were in the Embryo, give place to it; so that now
it alone works by its faculties. 6. The seed brings with it from the parents,
its own heat, by which the formative faculty works; the heat of the matrix is
not operative, but conservative of the other heat. 7. The seed consisting of
grosser, and aereal parts, cannot be called uniform; and if it were, yet it may
have diverse operations and faculties ad extra; so has the Sun, and other
uniform bodies. 8. The Embryo is not capable of three specificall forms or
souls; for so it should be a threefold compound specifically distinct; but it
is capable of diverse generical forms and subordinate, the superior being
preparatives for reception of the inferior and ultimate specificall form, which
gives name and entity, as the rational soul does to the child being perfected.

CHAP. XV.
1. Why about the fourth month milk is engendered, and of what. 2. The effects
of the Diaphragma inflamed. 3. Pericardium. 4. The Hearts Flesh, Fibers, and
Ventricles. 5. The Heart why hot and dry. 6. The vital faculty. 7. The vital
spirits how engendered. 8. Systole and Diastole. 9. The Hearts motion. 10. How
c^used.

AS soon as the child grows big, about the fourth month, the menstruous blood
flows upward to the breasts, and when the child is born, it flows from
thence; and being sucked by the child, the veins of the breasts do avoid
vacuity, draw the blood upward for generation of new milk. 2. In the breasts of
Virgins, and of some men also, there is sometimes found a whitish liquor, which
is not milk, because it has neither the taste, nor thickness, nor nutritive
quality of milk. 3. The breasts, or paps, are glandulous bodies, principally
ordained for generation of milk; and in the second place for reception of
excrementitious humors, and guarding of the heart. 4. The reason why about the
fourth month the blood flows upward into the breasts, is, that the child
growing big, and wanting sufficient food, might struggle to get out, which it
would not do having sufficient nutriment. 5. It is not fit that the child out
of the womb, should feed on blood as it did in the womb, because then the mouth
of the veins being opened, the blood would run out, and so nature be
overthrown; neither would God accustom man to blood, left he should become
cruel and bestial.

II. Upon the inflammation of the diaphragma, follow oftentimes phrensies, by
reason of the society it has by the nerves with the brain, to which it sends
fumes and hot vapors: which frenzy is known from that of the brain, by the
shortness of the breath, the chief organ of breath being ill-affected, so that
the breast cannot freely move it self: and because the Diaphragma is united to
the Pleura, and Peritonaeum, which contains all the organs in the inferior
belly: hence all these parts are drawn upwards by the motion of the Diaphragma.

III. The tunicle of the heart, called Pericardium, has within it a water for
refrigeration and moistning of the heart, which is begot of vapors, condensate
by the coldness of the membrane, as some think, or else it sweats through the
tunicles of the veins and arteries: they that have hot hearts have but little
of this water, and it abounds most where the heart is colder; but whether the
defect of this water be the cause of the heat in the heart, or the heat the
cause of this defect, it is uncertain, as it is with the seawater, which is
turned into vapors by the suns heat, and these vapors turned into water again
by the coldness of the middle Region: so the heat of the heart turns this water
into vapors, and the membrane converts these vapors into water again, and so
this circulation continues till the heat of the heart be extinguished by death,
then is found water only.

IV. The heart has a peculiar hard flesh of its own, that it might be the
better able to undergo its perpetual motion, to contain the spirits and
lifeblood, and to resist external injuries. 2. This flesh is not musculous,
because the motion of the muscles is voluntary, but the hearts motion is
natural. 3. The heart has both straight, transverse, and circular fibers, for
attraction and expulsion; and oblique fibers also for retension; but these
fibers are of the same substance with the heart, and not of a different, as the
fibers of the Muscles, which are parts of the nerves and Tendons. 4. The heart
is fed with gross blood, answerable to its own gross substance, by the vein
called Coronaria, compassing the Basis of the heart. 5. The heart has two
ventricles, whereof the right is hottest extensive, as Aristotle will have it,
for it contains the lifeblood; the left is hottest intensive, as containing
the vital spirits, and so Galen says. 6. If we consider the situation of the
right ventricle, which is in the right side, and the privilege it has in
living longer then the left; we may with Aristotle say, that the right
ventricle is the more noble of the two; but if we consider that the left
ventricle contains the vital spirit, which in dignity excels the blood which
is in the right, we must with Galen give the pre-eminence to the left: and so
these two may be reconciled.

V. The heart is a hot and dry substance, that it might be the fitter both to
beget and to preserve the vital spirits; to attenuate the venal, and to
procreate the arterial blood: And though the spirits be hotter extensively, yet
the substance of the heart is hotter intensively; as burning coals are hotter
then flaming straw.

VI. The vital faculty by which the vital spirits are engendered for animating
the body, and preserving the natural heat, is an effect of the soul, as all
faculties are, and not of the heart; yet here it chiefly resides, because of
the soul which here exercises her chief functions of life. 2. This vital
faculty differs from the animal, because it is not subject to fatigation, nor
rests in sleep, nor does it accompany the imagination or apprehension of the
object, as the animal does. 3. It is different from the pulsifick faculty,
because this is subservient to the vital; neither does the pulsifick beget
spirits, or is it diffused every where as the vital is. 4. The vital differs
from the vegitive faculty, because the vegitive is in plants and insects, but
not the vital, as it is procreative of spirits: for the dull heat of insects is
not so soon spent as to need reparation by generation of spirits. 5. It differs
from the animal motive faculty, because it is necessary and perpetual; the
animal is voluntary, and sometimes cease.

VII. The vital spirits are engendered in the left ventricle of the heart,
partly of air prepared in the lungs, and conveyed to the heart by the Arteria
venosa; and partly of the purest blood, powered out of the mouth of Vena cava
into the right ventricle, where it is prepared and attenuated, a part whereof
is conveyed for nourishing of the lungs by the Vena arteriosa, the other part
sweats through the partition that divides the heart, and in the left ventricle
is mingled with the air, and turned into spirits by its excessive heat.

VIII. The Diastole and Systole, that is, the dilatation and contraction of the
heart and arteries, is all one and at the same time: for the heart and arteries
are so united, that they make but one body; so there is but one pulsifick
virtue in both, and the end of their motion is the same, to wit, the vegitation
and life of the body; the suddenness of the motion in the remotest arteries
from the heart, and the strong beating of the pulse and heart in Fevers and
anger, do show the identity of motion in both. 2. The arteries are moved by the
spirits of the heart, conveyed by their tunicles rather then their cavity; for
upon the pressing of the tunicles the pulse cease; but not when the cavity is
stuffed, or stopped. They are not then moved by their heat and blood, but by
the heart; as may be seen by binding the arteries, whose motion beneath the
binding saileth, the commerce between it and the heart being intercepted. 3.
The heart is first dilated by receiving the air, then it is contracted by
expelling the fuliginous vapors. 4. The heart strikes the breast in its
dilatation, not in its contraction or Systole, because the left ventricle,
which is the original of the Arteries, is distended in the Diastole, and so
touches the breast about the left pap.

IX. The motion of the heart is not voluntary, because we cannot command it;
nor sensitive, because it is not performed by the nerves and muscles; nor
simple, because there are two motions; nor compounded, because they are
contrary; and of contrary motions can be no compositions* nor is it violent,
because it is not repugnant to its nature; nor is it caused by an external
agent, as the trembling of the heart is by distempers, vapors, or humors; but
the hearts motion is natural, yet not caused by the elementary form, for so
there should be more agents in our bodies then one, and its motion should be
^it^e^ upward or downward, but it is natural in respect of the soul, which is
the chief nature that works in animal bodies; and in respect of the fibers
heat, and spirits of the heart, which are natural organs; and in respect of the
natural use or end of this motion; for the heart dilates it self to receive
air and blood; it contracts it self to be emptied of its fumes, and to
communicate its spirits to the nerves; which ends are natural.

X. When Aristotle says, that the motion of the heart is caused by heat and
cold, he contradicts not the Physicians in affirming the soul, or its vital
faculty to be the cause of this motion; for heat and cold are subordinate
instruments to the soul, which by the heat of the blood and spirits, dilates
the heart, and by the attraction of the cold air contracteth it, as we see
water by the heat of the fire swel and dilate it self, but upon the breathing
of cold air, to contract and fall down again.

CHAP. XVI.
1. The Lungs how moved; the air is not the spirits nutriment. 2. Respiration
not absolutely necessary. 3. The Lungs hot and moist. 4. Respiration a mixed
motion, as that of the bladder and intestins. 5. No portion of our drink
passes into the Lungs.

ARistotle differs from the Galenists about the motion of the Lungs; he will
have them moved by the heart, whose heat lists up the Lungs, upon which
motion the air enters for avoiding vacuity; which being entered, the Lungs fall.
The Galenists will have their motion to depend on the motion of the breast, but
both are in the right: For the motion of the Lungs is partly voluntary, and so
it depends on the moving of the muscles of the breast; and partly natural, and
so it is moved by the heart. 2. When Aristotle denies that the air is the
nutriment of the spirits, which the Galenists affirm; his meaning is, that the
air does not properly nourish the spirits, as meat does our bodies; for there
is no assimilation or conversion of the substance of the air into our spirits,
which are properly nourished by blood, but only a commixtion of the air and
spirits for refrigeration: And indeed if the spirits were properly fed by the
air, there would not come out the same air that went in: For the spirits would
not part from their food; the air then nourishes the spirits, as it does the
fire, by refrigeration, and preserving it from suffocation.

II. Respiration is not so necessary for preservation of life, as the motion of
the heart: for histerical women can live without that, but they cannot live
without this: Neither is the motion of the arteries of absolute necessity; for
the member is not deprived of life, though the artery be stopped or tied, and
deprived of its motion. 2. The motion of respiration is more noble then the
motion of the heart, because this is merely natural, that is also animal and
voluntary; yet as the motion of the Lungs is subservient to the motion of the
heart, that is more noble then this: for the end excels the means.

III. The Lungs are hot and moist: hot, that they might temper and alter the
cold air, therefore the substance is fleshy, light and spongy, and fed with hot
and spirituous blood from the right ventricle of the heart. It is also moist,
as appears by its soft and loose substance: It is also moist accidentally by
receiving the phlegm and rhumes that fall from the brain. 2. The Lungs
refrigerate the heart, not because their substance is cold, but because the air
is cold which they attract.

IV. Respiration is a motion partly voluntary, as it is performed by the
muscles, nerves, and diaphragma, which are the organs of voluntary motion, and
as it is in our power to breath or not to breath; to hasten or retard it: And
it is partly natural, as it is performed by the Lungs, which are organs of
natural motion, as it is not subject to fatigation, as it is performed in our
sleep, when we have no command over our selves, and the sensitive faculties
then cease; as it is not performed by election, or apprehension of the object,
as voluntary motions are: And lastly, as in Apoplexies, when the senses fail,
the brains and nerves are hurt, yet respiration continues; it is then a mixed
action, as the expulsive actions of the bladder and intestines are. So is the
motion of coughing; for as it is performed by the muscles, it is animal, but
as it is stirred by the expulsive faculty, it is natural; and as it proceeds
from some morbifick cause, it is preternatural. So deglutition or swallowing is
an animal action as it is performed by the muscles, and is some times hindered
by imagination; for we swallow with much ado, those things of which we have no
good conceit. It is also natural, as it is performed by the attraction of the
fibers which are in the external tunicle of Oesophagus. Now attraction is
subservient to the nutritive faculty, which is natural.

V. That no portion of our drink can pass into the lungs, is plain; because we
cough if the least drop of rhume fall from the head upon the lungs: besides,
our breath and voice should be presently stopped, the light and spongie
substance also of the lungs, would be hurt and corroded when we drink any sharp
or sour liquors, or medicamen^s: Therefore in swallowing, the Epiglottis, or
little tongue of the windpipe covers the La^i^^ or top of the Aspera arteria,
that nothing may fall into it; yet the si^es of Aspera arteria are moistened by
syrrups, which somewhat ease our coughing.

CHAP. XVII.
1. All the senses in the brain. 2. How made for refrigeration only, how hot,
cold, and moist; and why; its actions. 3. How void of sense and motion. 4. The
animal spirits, what, and how begot. 5. Why more vital then animal spirits;
where perfected, and prepared, the ventricles of the brain.

AS the heart is the first, remote, and mediate original of motion and sense,
because the spirits and heat are originally from thence, so the brain is the
secundarie, proximate, and immediate organ of the senses, which have their
particular seats there; to wit, the ^ external senses, and the 4 internal,
namely, the common sense, the imagination, the discursive, and memorative
qualities, which have their distinct cells. The common sense is placed in the
substance of the brain, the imagination in the fore cel, the discursive in the
middle, the memorative in the back cell; the fore cell is softer, the back cell
somewhat harder, the middle is of a middle temper; sometimes the one is hurt,
when the other is sound, a good memory may accompany a bad imagination; and
contrarily.

II. When Aristotle says that the brain was made only for refrigeration of the
heart, his meaning is not as the Galenists think, that the brain was made for
no other use, but that neither the brain nor heart could be any way useful, if
the heat of the one were not tempered by the cold of the other; for all our
frame is out of order, when the brain is overheated or inflamed; and though the
brain be not actually cold, yet by its moisture and weak heat, it tempers the
excessive heat of the heart and vital spirits, by means of the arteries which
are common to both these organs; therefore it is that the brain has not blood
and veins* 2. The innate temperament of the brain is cold, the adventitious is
hot; that is, i^ is hot by means of the spirits from the heart, but cold in its
own substance. 3. It was made cold and moist, that being the seat of
imagination, and of the attenuated animal spirits, the one might not be
distempered with heat, nor the others dissipated. 4. It is moist, that it might
be the fitter for generation of the nerves, for receiving the images and
impressions of things with the more facility, and the more ap^ for sensation,
which consists in passion. 5. The actions and functions of the brain depend
both upon its right fabric and conformation, as also upon its temper; for if
either of these be hurt, the actions of the brain are vitiated.

III. The brain is void of sense in its own substance, but senfitive in its
membranes; nor was it fit that the brain should feel, seeing it is the common
receptacle and judge of all the senses; and seeing it is in the highest place,
and receives all exhalations from the inferior parts, it should be continually
molested, if it were sensible of all these vapors. 2. As it is void of sense,
so it is of motion in it self, it is indeed moved by the arteries, for the
feeding, purging, and tempering of the animal spirits; but the brain being the
original of motion, ought to be immovable in respect of self motion, neither
are there any fibers in the brain b^ which it should be moved, as there are in
the heart; neither could ever the motion of the brain be observed, other then
what is caused by the arteries.

IV. The animal spirits are so called, because they are the chief organs of the
soul, for her chief actions of sense and motion without the brain: of
imagination, discoursing, and remembering within the brain; therefore these
spirits receive from the senses, the images and species of things, and convey
them to the brain, where they retain them for the soul, by the fantasy to
work upon. 2. These animal spirts are begot of the vital, but are cherished and
refreshed by the external air, drawn by the nostrils to the brain; so that
without air, and vital spirits, the animal cannot long subsist; and because blood
is the remote matter of the animal spirits, they grow feeble when much blood is
evacuated.

V. Because there is more need of the vital then of the animal spirits,
therefore more plenty is required of them then of these; for nothing is begot
of the animal spirits, therefore they waste not so fast as the vital, of which
the animal are engendered; besides, the vital spirits are perp^tually employed
even in sleep, so are not the animal, but they rest then, nor is there any part
of the body which has notlife; but diverse parts have not sense, which is an
animal function, as the bones and ligaments. 2. The animal spirits are pr^pared
in the intricate labyrinth of arteries within the brain; but they receive their
perfection in the cells ther^of. 3. Though the faculty of sense be an
inseparable property of the soul, yet it does not always operate, but where
there is a fit organ; in sleep the soul is in the eye, but then sees not. 4.
The ventricles of the brain serve not only for generation of the spirits, but
for purging out also of superfluous excrements.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. The eye both watrish and fiery, imperfect vision. 2. Why the e^e is
watrish, its action, spirits, and species. 3. Spirits of the e^e proved: two
eyes, but one motion; why the object appears double sometimes, no colors in
the eye. 4. The optic nerves soft, where united, and why. 5. The Chrystalline,
and glassy humors, and white of the eye.

THough the substance of the eye be watrish, as we showed before, yet the
visive spirits are fiery, as may be seen by their light in the dark, their
mobility, and their resistance to cold, for they are not molested with it as
other members are* 2. When the imagination is vitiated, or the spirits
subservient to the same are disturbed, or an opac vapor is interjected between
the Cornea and chrystalline humor, we seem to see things and colors in the
air, which are not there, but this is an imperfect vision, because there is no
reception of species from the air, nor is the organ distinct from the medium
and object, nor is there that distance between the organ and the object, as is
required in perfect vision.

II. The eye should be of a watrish substance, not fiery; because water is
dense and diaphonous, fit to receive the species as it is diaphonous, and to
retain them as it is dense, so is not the f^re; for though it be diaphonous, it
is not dense, therefore not fit to retain the species. 2. The species being
spiritual or immaterial, do not affect or hurt the eye, but the colors only
hurt the eye more or less, as they participate more or less of the light,
which dissipates the visive spirits, these being lucid, spend themselves on
lucid objects, by reason of their cognate quality. 3. Sometimes the eye is
wearied with seeing, not as vision is a reception, and so a passion, but in
respect of the visive spirits which are agents. 4. The eye in an instant
perceives its object, though never so far distant, because the visible species
are in the air contiguous to the eye, though the object be distant.

III. That there are spirits in the eye, is apparent by the dilatation of the
Ball of one eye, when the other is shut; which is caused by the spirit passing
from one eye to the other, and by reason of these spiri^s the eye is more
cheerful at one time then at another. 2. Though there be two eyes, and diverse
m^scles, yet they are moved but with one motion, because otherwise one object
would appear as two. Thus by lifting up one of our eyes with our finger, the
object we look upon, appears double, because the two Balls of the eyes are not
upon the same ^uperficies, nor do the beams of both eyes equally reach the
object. Thus it is with d^u^kar^s and goggle eyes, and in con^uls^ons of the
muscles of the eye. ^. There are not properly any c^lou^s in the eye, because
then the object would seem to be of the same color that the eye is of; yet the
eyes seem to be colored, because they are visible.

IV. The optic nerves seem of all others the most soft and spongy, that they
^ight be the less offensive to the eye the most tender of all other members,
and that they might convey the g^eater quantity of optic spirits. 2. They are
united into one, about the middle way between the brain, where they have their
beginnings, and the eyes into which they are inse^ted, that by this union they
might be the stronger, and that ^hey might be ^qually implanted into the same
superficies of both eyes, lest the visive spirits being unequally communicate,
should occa^ion the object to appear double.

V. The Chrystallin^ humor is a part of the eye, because it has its life,
nutriment and function; as other par^s have; it is also both a similar part in
its temper and substance, and it is organical in its s^tuation and figure. 2.
The glass^e humor is also a part for the sa^e re^sons; therefore the
Chrystalline does not feed upon it, for no part^feeds upon another, but it
prepares the blood, and alters it for the Chrystalline, left it should be
infec^ed with a red color; it affords then the same service to the
Chr^stalline, which the stomach does to the liver. 3. The white of the eye is a
part thereof, and no excrement, for Nature ex^ludes excrements; but if this
white should perish, sight fails, for it is as a Bulwark to the Chrystalline,
and conveyeth the species to it.

CHAP. XIX.
1. Five things required to hearing. 2. Not the real but intentional sound is
heard: Hearing fails last in drowned men. 3. The innate air no organ of
hearing: no spirit, or part of the body. 4. The cause ^f the sympathy between
the ear and the mouth.

I. FOR the sense of hearing are required, 1. A sound, which is caused by the
collision of two solid bodies, or of the air and of another body. 2. Air which
is the medium that receives and carries the sound, whereas the water in
respect of its thickness carries the sound but imperfectly and dully. 3. The
ear containing in it the thin and dry membrane called the drum, which if it be
thick, or too much moistened, hinders hearing. 2. Three little bones called
Incus, malleus, and Stapes. 3. An innate and immovable air. 4. A winding
labyrinth, that the external air and sound may not too suddenly rush in upon
the nerve of hearing. 5. This auditory nerve carries the sound to the brain,
that there the common sense and fantasy may judge thereof.

II. The sound which is carried into the ear is not real, but intentional and
spiritual, or the species and image of the real sound; for how can a real sound
pass through a thick wall, or multiply it self in a thousand ears, in an
instant, or in so short a time, reach twenty miles from any canon to the ear.
2. The winding labyrinth in the ear is the cause, why men that are drowned lose
the sense of hearing last, because the water cannot pass through that winding
Meander.

III. The innate air of the ear is not the organ of hearing, but a medium, for
it differs not from the external air, nor can that be an organ which is no part
of the body, either spermatical or sangui^eal, as Physicians use to speak,
neither is it animated by the soul, for the soul is the act of organical bodies
only: Nor is it a spirit either animal or vital, because it is not contained
within the nerves or arteries; and being it is not a mixed, but a simple body,
it can be no part either similar or dissimilar.

IV. By reason the auditory nerves do impart some branches to the tongue; hence
it is, that there is such a sympathy between the ear and mouth. That this is a
help or hindrance to our hearing, and this to speaking, so that if the auditory
nervs be stopped or deficient, not only deafness but dumbness is caused; and
we find that those who hear hardly, speak little, and such as are born deaf,
are born dumb too: and if we hold a musical instrument with our teeth, and stop
our ears, we shall hear the sound perfectly.

CHAP. XX.
1. How we excel the beasts in smelling, We smell real odours. 2. Smells
nourish not. 3. The nose, not the brain is the organ of smelling.

I. THOUGH the beasts excel us in the sense of smelling in respect of celerity,
and way of reception, yet in respect of, dijudication, and differencing the
diversities of smells, we exceed them: for our brains being bigger, colder,
and moister then those of beasts, cannot so quickly receive the smell. But
because of the reasonable soul, we judge better of the differences. 2. Though
the species of colors and sounds are received into the eyes and ears, yet real
odours are received into the nose; for the head, heart, and spirits, are
diversely affected with smells; some men have been cherished a long time with
them; some women are suffocated with smells; some beasts are driven away; some
are allu^ed by them; which could not be if these were not real smells, and in
that smells are carried to and fro with the winds: And that we smell better in
hot weather then in cold, do show, that these are not the species, but real
smells. 3. Odours being accidents, cannot be conveyed to the organ, but in
vapors or exhalation, which are substances; for bare accidents cannot be
transported with winds to and fro, nor can they affect the brain, or comfort
it, or drive away beasts and vermin.

II. When Aristotle says that smells cannot nourish, he is in the right; for
nothing nourishe^h, but compounded bodies, now smells are hare accidents.
Nutriment have their excrements, smells have none; nutriment is converted into
the substances of the body nourished, and has a peculiar place where it is
concocted; as the stomach is the place for the Chylus; which cannot be said of
smells: Therefore Galen was in an error, when he said that men can he nourished
with smells, except by smells he understand odoriferous exhalatio^s, which yet
nourish not properly, but for a while only recreate the spirits, because of the
nearness of their substance, which spirits being the immediate organs of the
soul, for a while can perform their functions in the body.

III. Galen is injurious to Aristotle, in upbraiding him, for making the nose
the organ of smell; whereas Galen will have the brain to be the organ; which is
ridiculous, and against his own tenants, in affirming that the brain is no ways
sensitive; neither indeed can it be, seeing it is the original of the senses;
and how can the same member be both the original and organ of the senses.
Therefore not the brain, nor that part thereof which they call ( processus
mamillares) reaching to the nose, can be the organ of sense, but the nose
itself; for they that want the nose, smell not; and a short nose smells not so
well as a long* and if any part of the brain were the organ of smell, we should
smell the meats in our mouth, and the vapors of the stomach* which are still
mounting up to the brain: Yet we never smell them till we belch them out, and
then we smell them as soon as they ascend into the nose, which is indeed the
true organ of smell in that nervous membrane thereof. And how can the smell be
an external sense, if it have not as well as the other four, an external
organ, by which the external senses are distinguished from the internal. 2.
Though the real smell is conveyed to the nose, and not the species, as the
species of colors and sounds are to the eyes and ears, yet not the real, but
the intentional smell, or species is carried by the nerve into the common sense
or fantasy.

CHAP. XXI.
1. Wherein consists the organ of taste. The tongue potentially moist: no
external medium of taste. 2. How the skin is the medium of taste. The prime
qualities, both objects and agents. No creature without fact. It is most
exquisite in man. Tact and taste different.

THe organ of taste consists partly in the nerves of the tongue, palate, and
throat, and partly in the skin thereof, except we make the skin the medium; for
when the skin of the mouth or tongue peeleth, the taste fails; and so it does
fail also when the tongue is dry without moisture or spittle; therefore the
spittle or saliva may be called the medium of taste. 2. Because the organ must
be potentially, what the object is actually; therefore the tongue must be
potentially moist; for moisture, not dryness, is the object of taste. I say the
tongue must be potentially moist; for if it were actually moist, it could not
judge of moistures; for the sense should be void of that which it apprehends
by sensation; therefore there is no moisture nor relish in the tongue, for when
it abounds with moisture, or has in it any relish, it loses its taste. 3. The
taste has no external medium as the other three senses, and in this it agrees
with touching. 4. Though sapors work materially upon the tongue, yet the act of
sensation is by reception of the species, for real qualities cannot be received
into the animal spirits, and judged by the common sense and fantasy.

II. The sense of tact either has no medium, or else we must make the skin the
medium; and the flesh, membranes and nerves the organ; but indeed the skin is
both the organ of tact, as experience shows; and the medium in respect of the
flesh and nerves. 2. The four prime qualities, chiefly heat and cold, are not
only the objects of tact, but agents upon them, by warming and cooling the
organs; so are not the second qualities, to wit, hardness, softness, asperity,
etc. For these are not active at all, except levity in a spiritual or
intentional way. 3. Though there be many particular objects of tact, as the
first and second qualities, yet there is but one general object, to wit, the
tactile quality. 4. Though this be true, that the sensible object put upon the
sense, hinders sensation, in these senses that have the air for a medium, yet
it is not true in the sense of tact, which has no such medium. 5. The
sensitive creature can subsist without any of the five senses except the tact;
because this consists in the proportion and harmony of the prime qualities,
which if it fail, sense also fails, and consequently animality. 6. Of all
creatures, the sense of tact is most exquisit in man, because his body is most
temperate; but tact consists in the temper of the prime qualities. 7. Though
taste be accompanied with tact, yet they are distinct senses both in the
organs, media, and faculties; and tact is diffused through all the body,
whereas taste is only in the mouth.

CHAP. XXII.
1. The use of the common sense: It is but one sense: The different judgment
of this sense, and of the soul. How different from other senses. Its in the
brain and heart. 2. Imagination or fantasy, what: disturbed compoundeth. The
Estimative. Its work and seat. 3. Memory, how a sense. It is twofold.
Reminiscence, what? Old men and childrens memories.

AS there be three actions of the soul, to wit, dijudication, composition, and
retention, so there are three internal senses; to wit, the common sense, the
fantasy and the memory. The common sense apprehends and judges the objects of
the outward senses, in which, as in the Center all these objects do meet; the
eye cannot put difference between colors and smells, but the common sense does;
and though the eye see, yet it does not know it self to see, that is the work
of the common sense; therefore mad men in whom this sense is hurt, see, but
perceive it not, nor do they difference the objects which they fee, but either
confound them, or mistake the one for the other. So when the sensitive spirits
are employed by the fantasy, though we see oftentimes the object, yet we
perceive it not. 2. Though the common sense apprehends diversity of objects,
yet it is but one sense, because its actions in judging or differencing these
objects is but one: So the eye has but one action, though it sees many
objects. 3. The act of judging in the common sense, is not that of the soul,
which extends it self to things also spiritual and universal, and belongs
only to man, not to the beasts, as the judging of the common sense does. 4. The
external senses apprehend their objects only present, but the internal senses
apprehend them being absent. 5. The common sense is in the brain subjectively,
for there are the animal spirits and nerves, so says Galen; but in the heart
originally, and in its cause; for from thence are the vital spirits, which are
the matter of the animal, and so is Aristotle to be understood.

II. The second internal sense is the imagination, so called from the images or
species, which it both receives from the common sense, and frames to it self:
If the brain be sound and undisturbed, it receives species from the common
sense only, and judges more distinctly of them then the common sense does; it
compoundeth also and uniteth, and in beasts it serves in stead of reason to
direct them to their operations; in man it is subservient to the intellect in
ministering species to it, therefore it is called fantasy, from (...), to
shine, or show; For as the eye discerns its objects by the light, so does the
intellect whilst it is in the body, work and speculate by the fantasy. 2. In
disturbed brains by phrensies, fevers, or inordinate sleep, the fantasy makes
other objects to its self then were represented to it by the common sense. 3.
The fantasy compoundeth that which the common sense apprehends in a divided
way; as I see a horse and a man, and the common sense apprehends the species
of both apart; but to conceive them united in a Centaure, is the work of the
fantasy. 4. The estimative is not a sense distinct from the fantasy, but
the very same, whose office is to esteem what is good or hurtful to the
creature, and so to follow or avoid it, therefore this sense stirs up the
appetite. 5. The common sense does not work but when the outward senses are
working; but the fantasy works without them, to wit, in sleep. 6. The fore
part of the brain, in which is the common sense, is humid, as being fittest for
reception, which is the common senses work; the hinder part is dry, as fit^est
for retention, which is the work of the memory: but the middle part is
temperately humid and dry, as fittest for reception and retention, both which
are performed by the fantasy. 7. For a right and orderly fantasy, or
imagination, there are required clear spirits from vapors, a temperate organ,
straight nerves and passages, and a moderate heat from the heart; if any of
these be deficient, the fantasy is disordered.

III. The third internal sense is the memory; not so much to be called a sense,
as it retains the species; (for in this the nature of sensation consists
not,) but as it receives them, for sensation is properly in reception. 2. This
sense is the treasury, in which are laid up that species of things past, which
have been apprehended by the external senses. For as these consider things
present, and hope things future; so does the memory, things past: it is the wax
receiving and retaining the stamp of the seal, and it is a faculty of the
sensitive, not of the intellective soul; for beasts and birds have memories. As
for the intellective memory, it is all one with the passive intellect, which is
the keeper of the intelligible species; for it belongs to the same faculty to
understand and to remember. 3. Though in brutes there is memory, yet
recorda^ion or reminiscence is only in man, because it is joined with
discourse and deliberation, which are operations of the intellect; for memory
is the retention of the species, but reminiscence is a recollecting by
discourse and comparing of circumstances, the species which he had forgot;
therefore a nimble wit and reminiscence which consists in discourse, go
together commonly, but seldom a good wit and a good memory: this requiring a
dry organ, the other that which is temperately moist. 4. Children have bad
retentive memories, because their brains are moist, and old men have had
receptive memories, because their brains are too dry: therefore there is
required for memory a brain temperately moist to receive, and temperately dry
to retain the species.

Finis Libri Secundi.
BOOK III.
Of man's rare Infirmities, or admirable Diseases.

CHAP. I.
1. Of Eels voided by a maid, and of other strange generations. 2. A woman
voided in three days, six quarts of milk. 3: Of women, who have eat men's flesh.
4. Of women that have lived some years without food. 5. Of one that lived some
years without a brain; another without a Spleen. Of one that lived with a knife
in her skull. 6. Of some that have swallowed knives, glasses, etc. 7. Of some
shot in the forehead, and the bullet found in the hinder part of the skull.

HAving briefly discoursed upon the fabric, parts, and passages of man's body,
I will as briefly touch some rare and extraordinary infirmities, with which the
bodies of some men have been molested, and will point at such causes, as I
conceive may stand with the grounds of Divinity and Philosophy. As for ordinary
diseases, with their causes, symptoms, and cures, I leave to Physicians.

I. I read in Cornelius Gemma, in his Divine characterismes, l. 2. c. 4. and in
Marcel. Donatus, his admirable Histories, l. 2. ca. 1. of a Maid that voided
Eels by the stool, which I conceive may proceed from a natural cause: For, if
by the heat of the Sun diverse forms are educed out of putrified matter, as Eels
out of mud, why may not Eels also be generated in man's body by its heat, there
being a disposition and preparation in the matter, for reception of such a
form. Thus Bees are begot of Calves flesh, Waspes and Hornets of Horses and
Asses, and diverse sorts of Worms in our bodies. I have read of a Bird found in
an Oyster, which was presented to Francis the first of France. I will not speak
of the Barnecles in the Scottish Seas, begot of old rotten planks of ships; nor
of him that had a golden ^ooth, which if it were not perfect gold, it might in
some qualities resemble it; as pins that have been voided in Impost^umes: For
stones begot in the bladder and kidneys, and chalk in the joints of gouty
bodies, are not so rare.

II. I read in Martin Wienrich, in his book of Monsters, of a woman whose milk
did so abound, that in the space of two or three days she voided a gallon and
an half, of which was made very savory Butter and Cheese. Though this be rare,
yet it is no miracle; for that woman abounding much in blood, must also abound
in milk: And some Livers are of that constitution and temper, that they
sanguifie much more then others; especially in constitutions that are inclined
to cold and moisture; for hot and dry bodies have but little blood, and
therefore little milk; and where there is much sweet phlegm, or rhume it is
easily converted into blood.

III. I read diverse stories of women with child, who have lusted after, and
have eat men's flesh, and for that end have fallen violently upon them, and bit
them. This is also a dis^ase proceeding of natural causes, as that infirmity of
ea^ing chalk, coals, dirt, tar, ashes in maids, and some married women, called
by Physicians, Pica or Malacia, and is caused by the distemper of the
fantasy, and sour malignant melancholy humors in the mouth and concavity of
the stomach, and impacted in the runicles of the ventricle, proceeding partly
from the suppression of the flowers, whereby the appetite is vitiated, and the
fantasy disturbed; and partly from the malignity of the humor, cove^ing after
such things as are like to it in malignity, yet contrary to it in some of the
prime qualities, heat, cold, humidity and siccity; for Nature looks in the
contrary quality to find remedy.

IV. I read of diverse maids, one in Colen, another in the Palatinate, a third
in the Diocese of Spira, and diverse more, who have lived without meat and
drink two or three years together. This indeed may seem strange, yet it is not
against nature; for naturally such bodies as have in them little heat, and much
humidity, can subsist longer without food, then hot and dry bodies can; as we
see in women and old people, who can fast longer then men and youths. And we
know, that diverse creatures for many months together, can subsist without
food: therefore these maids having much adventitious moisture and little heat
to waste the radical humidity, might continue a long time without food; for
where there is little deperdition, there needs not much reparation: besides,
the moisture of the air is no small help to them.

V. But that is more strange which Zacutus in his Praxis Admiranda, lib. 1.
obs. 4. mentions of a Boy, who lived 3 years without a brain: if he had
brought an example of one who had lived 3 years without an heart, I should have
subscribed to Galen against Aristotle, that the heart in dignity is inferior
to the brain. But I suppose that he was not altogether without a brain: For
that water which was found within the membrans of the skull, when his head was
dissected, was doubtless his brain converted into water, or else it had some
analogy with the brain, by which the heat of the heart was for a while
^empered, and the animal spirits generated, but weakly, therefore life could
not subsist long in him. So I have read in Laurentius or Parry, of one who
lived many years without a spleen, but there were found some kirnels in the
place of the spleen, which supplied its office. As for that woman mentioned by
Zacutus, Ob. 5. who lived eight years together with the half of a knife in her
head, between the skull and Dura Matter, do^btlesse that knife touched not the
substance of the brain, therefore could be no hindrance to the animal functions.

VI. It is strange, that whereas Anacreon was choked with a Resin stone, yet
some, as Forestus in his observat. records, l. 15. obs. 24, 25, etc. have
swallowed iron, lead, long sticks, glass, points of knives, and of swords, and
other incredible things, without hurt, and have voided them by the stool. This
^partly impute to the wideness and capacity of the passages; and partly to
witchcraft, or juggling; for the eye in such cases is often deluded, although
nature sometimes by imposthumes c^sleth our such stuf^e; for points of knives,
and pins, have been this way ejected: and some have perished, and have been
choked, whilst they have in their madness attempted such things. And
provident nature has in some without hurt sent away needles and pinnes by the
urine, abo^t which have been found hard crusty stuff, which was the matter or
glassy slime that was gathered about these pins, and baked by the heat of ^he
body.

VII. I have read of a certain Soldier in the Wars of Savoy, Anno Dom. ^589.
who was shot in the forehead with a Mus^ue^ b^lle^, he was cured of the wound,
but the bull^^ remained: Afterward falling from a Ladder, whil^st he was
scaling the walls of a Town, he was stiffled in the Ditch, into which he fell;
his head being dissected, the bullet was found in the hinder part thereof: But
I believe this removal was by the fall; for otherwise it could not have been
removed by the heat or spirits of the head.

CHAP. II.
Of one who wanted the pericardium. 2. Of hairy hearts. 3. Of one that walked
and f^ught after his heart was wounded. 4. Stones found in the heart. 5. And
worms found there. The heart may putrify, white we are alive. 6. Worms in the
brain.

COlumbus in his Anatomy, l. 16. speaks of a young man in Rome, whom he
dissected, and in this found that his heart had no Pericardium; the want of
which, was doubtl^sse the cause of his death; and for want of it, he fell into
diverse swouning fi^s, and was often troubled with the Syncope, by reason the
heart wanted refrigeration, which it has from the water in the Pericardium.
For some whose Pericardium has b^^ne but slightly touched by the sword in the
wound of the breast, have fallen into swouning fits, cold sweats, with a
cessation of the pulse, so needful is this membran, and its water for the
heart. Yea, I have read of some hearts quite dried and shrunk to nothing, for
want of this water; such was the heart of Casimire, Marquess of Brandenbourge,
of whom Melancthon speaks, l. 1. de anima.

II. I have read of diverse hairy hearts, bes^des those of Leonidas,
Aristomenes, and Hermogines, which is also the work of nature; for hairs are
produced of ^uliginous and gr^sser excrements of the humors, where the skin is
hottest and driest, for hairs seld^me grow where the skin is cold and moist;
now if these caus^s be found in the heart, the same effect will be produced
there; but this is seldom seen, and in such only as are of a fierc^,
truculent and audacious disposition.

III. Ambrose Parry speaks, l. 9. c. 23. of a Gentleman, who in a duel being
wounded d^eply in the very substance of the heart, did notwithstanding for a
good while lay about him with his sword, and walked two hundred paces before he
f^ll down; this is likely enough, for though the heart was wounded, yet the
vital blood and spirits, and heat of the heart, which did abound in him, did
not presently spend, so long as they continued, he lived; when they failed, he
fell down dead.

IV. What Wierus records in his work of Impostures, l. 4. ca. 16. concerning
some stones found in the heart of Maximilian the second, is not incredible; for
the same heat of the body that breeds stones in the bladder, kidney, and
joints, can also produce stones in the heart, if there be the same matter, and
disposition for such a production, and this may be the work of nature alone,
without sorcery.

V. Nor is it incredible, what is recorded by diverse, of worms found in the
heart; which cause consumptions, and strange distempers in our bodies, which
oftentimes deceive Physicians: For the heart is no more privileged from worms,
then other members, save only that its substance is hard and solid, and by
reason of its spirits and heat, it is not so much subject to putrefaction, as
parts more soft and loose, and consequently not so often infested with worms
and imposthumes, as other members are; yet it is not altogether exempted. For I
have read of one whose heart being opened, there was found in it a white worm
with a sharp beck, which being placed on a table, and a circle of the juice of
Garlic made about it, died, being overcome with that strong smell; by which it
is plain, that the use of Garlic is wholesome and needful for such as are
subject to worms, as being their destroyer.

VI. Fernelius is deceived, when he says that the heart does not putrify in
us whilst we are alive, because it is of a solid and hard substance, and is
the last that dies in us; but it is not more hard and solid, then the bones,
which notwithstanding putrify whilst we are alive; and it is true, that it is
the last thing that dies in us, for it does not totally putrify till we be
dead, because all the heat, motions, and functions thereof cease not till then.

VII. And not only in the heart, but in the brains also worms are engendered,
as Avicenna, Hollerius, and others do witness. And I have read of black and
round worms, that by sneezing powder of Castoreum and Pepper have been voided
by the nose; and of ear-worms also.

CHAP. III.
1. Epilepsie. 2. Incubus. 3 Vertigo. 4. Of a stone in the tongue. 5. One of
nine years old brought to bed. 6. Bodies turned to Stones. 7. Sleep-walkers. 8.
Superfetation. Ventriloques. 9. A strange stone found in the matrix.

THe Epilepsie and malignant fevers oftentimes end in deafness; and this is
held a good sign of recovery; the reason is, because nature thrusts out the
malignant humor from the brain into the next passages, which are the ears.

II. Some take the nightmare or Incubus for a spirit, but indeed it is a
feculent humor adhering to the vital parts, and with its black or melancholy
fume troubling the Diaphragma, Lungs, and Brain, and distempering the
imagination with horrid shapes.

III. Nature is very skillful and provident in helping her self when art
fails; for many diseases have been cured by nature, which the Physicians have
been forced to give off. Zacutus Obs. 15. mentions one who being every month
vexed with a terrible Vertigo, which for a time made him stupid and senseless,
was cured by a flux of blood gushing out of his eyes, without any inflammation
at all, or redness of the eyes; by those veins that fed the eyes, nature found
out a way to ease her self, which veins were opened by the violent motion of
the spirits in the head, and the abundance of blood pressing into those veins,
which made an eruption.

IV. And it is no less strange what he records, Obs. 72. of one, upon the tip
of whose tongue was found a stone as big as a filbert nut, which grew there
within a swelling caused by a great flux, doubtless of slimy matter into that
part, and baked into that consistence by a preternatural heat; for he was much
subject to Catharrs.

V. That is not incredible which is recorded by Iaubert in his Vulgar Errors,
l. 2. c. 2. of young women, who have been brought to bed at nine or ten years
of age, for nature is more pregnant and forward in some then in others; this we
see in some trees, and other vegitables; but these women give off childbearing
betimes, to wit, about one or two and twenty: for, [ quod cito sit cito perit]
and as we say, soon ripe, soon rotten; for such hasty and precipitate works of
nature are not permanent: hence it is that women who sooner attain to their
growth then men, decay sooner then men.

VI. For stones to be bred in the Lungs, which are oftentimes the causes of
dry coughs, is no great wonder, for diverse times such stones have been voided
by coughing: but for a man's body to be converted into a stone, as is Recorded
in the memorials of Lions in France, is more strange, yet not impossible, and
therefore the conversion of Lots wife into a Salt Pillar is not incredible,
although this was the sole work of God. Neither is that incredible which is
written of the lake that turns the sticks cast into it, into stones: nor that
Cave in Scotland, where the water-drops are turned to stones; I have kept an
apple til it grew to that hardness, that no wood could be harder, for scarce
could a knife cut it. I will not say this was a perfect stone into which this
body was thus turned, but it might be as hard and dry as a stone; for the
bodies that are found in the sands of Egypt, are very dry and hard.

VII. Horstius, and others record diverse examples of sleep-walkers, who do
strange things in their sleep; but this is also the work of nature; for I find
that they are most subject to this infirmity, whose animal spirits are most
active, subtle and fiery; and whose imagination is strong; so that by the
strength of their fantasy, and agility of their spirits, the muscles are
moved, though the Will does not then concur to this motion, nor reason make any
opposition, which it would do if they were naked, and not suffer them to
undergo such dangers.

VIII. I have read diverse Stories of women who have had seven children and
more at a birth, and likewse of superfetation; both which are credible, and
possible in nature, as I have showed in the former book, c. 13. sect. 5. and 7.
But that the infant should cry in the mothers womb, as some have done, is more
strange; seeing it does not breath, neither is there any air in the matrix,
without which there can be no sound; therefore either this cry was imaginary
in the party that heard it, for sometimes we think we hear a sound when we hear
none; or else this sound might proceed from wind in the mothers womb, which
might resemble the crying of a child, or else these mothers might be
ventriloque.

IX. That may seem a miracle which is recorded by Monsieur John Alibaux a
Physician, of a woman of Sens in Bourgundie which went 28 years with a dead
child in her womb; this woman being dead, and her belly opened, there was found
a stone having all the limbs and proportion of a child of 9 months old. This
was no miracle, but an extraordinary work of nature; for the child being dead,
and the slimie matter of its body having an aptitude by the extraordinary heat
of the matrix to be hardened, might retain the same lineaments which it had
before; If any wonder, how within the soft and liquid humors of the matrix,
such a hard substance should be engendered; let him as well wonder at the
generation of hard bones within soft flesh, of hard stones within soft plums,
Peaches, and other fruits, of stones and hard thunderbolts within watrish
clouds.

CHAP. IV.
1. Some without Lungs. 2. Impostumes voided in Urine. 3. Worms the cause of
many diseases. 4. No change of sexes. 5. Giants. 6. Some without livers. 7.
Fleshy bladders. 8. Stones, hairs, worms, etc. Begot in our Urine. 9. A woman
without a matrix.

I Have read of diverse bodies of men without lungs, and I believe it; for
oftentimes the lungs are putrified and corroded with corrupt and acrimonious
matter, and wasted with burning heat; but hence it will not follow, that a man
can live without lungs any time, seeing the heart stands in need continually of
refrigeration; yet some do live a great while with half of the lungs, after the
other half is putrified and spit out.

II. I find that when impostumations and corrupted matter in the breast cannot
be evacuated by spitting, or coughing, or vomiting, or by Phlebotomy, or the
stool, it is notwithstanding purged out by urine, naturally, without the help
of art; by which we see, how cunning and industrious nature is to help her
self, and that she is more careful to thrust out noxious, then to draw in
profitable things, hence sick men's expiration is stronger then their
inspiration: and hence also we see that there are many porous and pervious
passages unknown to us, which doubtless are in our bodies being alive, which
cannot be found being dead, because shut by the cold.

III. I find that many Physicians are mistaken in the causes of diverse
diseases, and therefore their remedies prove oftentimes fruitless, or hurtful:
For I have known Ap^plexies, Convulsions, Coughs, Consumptions, Fevers,
Cholicks, and other Diseases proceed from Worms, which when they have been
voided, either dead or alive, the sick partys have recovered: Nay, I have read
of some who have had worms crawle out at their navels: and some whose organs of
voice and speech having been assaulted and hurt by worms, have become
speechless; how careful then should we be of our diets, not to delight so much
as we do in sweet meats, sauces, and drinks, or in such food as breeds sl^my
matter, whereof worms are engendered: and Physicians should be as careful to
prescribe such things to their patients, as may kill and evacuate these enemies
of our health and life.

IV. That maids have become boys, I have read in diverse Stories: but I have
showed in the former Book, that there is no such change in nature, because the
organs of generation in the two sexes, differ, both in number, form, and
situation: and that therefore such transformations are meant of Hermaphrodites,
or of such boys, in whom the vessels of generation have not at first appeared
outwardly for want of heat and strength, which afterward have thrust them out.
Dr. Brown admits the change, and yet shows that the vessels are different, both
in form and situation, which is a contradiction.

V. That there have been Giants, and men of stupendous stature in all ages, is
not to be doubted, seeing there are so many witnesses extant: and the reason of
their bigness can be none else, but the abundance of seed and menstruous blood
of which they are begot, the quality and pliableness of the matter, ^apt to be
extended, the strength also of the heat and formative power: and that these men
should have rapacious stomachs to devour incredible quantities of meat and
drink, is not to be wondered at, if we consider the bulk of their bodies, the
capacity of their stomachs, and rapacity of their heat.

VI. Nature is not deficient in necessaries, nor abundant in superfluities,
there is not any one member in our bodies that can be spared; for if there be
any one defective, our life proves short and miserable. I have read of some who
have been found without Livers, but such had a fleshy lump in stead thereof,
which not being able to sanguifie, or turn the Chylus into blood, the parties
lived but a short while, and died of Tympanies or Hydropsies; and others whose
Livers have been found full of stones, have died of the same disease; and so
have those whose spleen has been found stony. A woman who died of an
Hydropsie, I saw dissected, whose spleen was full of stones, of a bluish and
green color.

VII. Not only are stones of great bigness bred in the bladder, by which the
passage of the urine is intercepted, and so death and many tortures are
procured; but also there have been found in some bladders, great lumps of
flesh, yea all the internal side of the bladder filled up with fleshy
excrescences, that there could be no room for the urine; but I doubt whether
this were true flesh or not, seeing no flesh is begot but of blood; I think
therefore that this was an excrementitious substance res^mbling flesh in color
and shape.

VIII. It is manifest that some with their urine evacuate stones, gravel,
matter, hairs, little crawling creatures of diverse shapes, which doubtless are
begotten of putrefaction, according to the disposition of the matter, and heat
of the bladder, or kidneys; if the matter be adust and b^rned, hairs are begot
sometimes as big as hogs brissles: and sometimes the stones of the kidneys are
so big that they stick in the yard, and cannot be evacuated without incision;
upon the stoppage of the urine by these stones, malignant vapors ascend from
the corrupted urine into the noble parts, that convulsions, syncopes, and other
dangerous effects are procreated.

IX. As a man can live without testicles, so can a woman, without the matrix,
these being members given by nature not for conversation of the individuals,
but for continuation of the species: Therefore Zacu^u^ speaks of a woman who
lived thirty years after her matrix was cut out; which by a fall that she had
from a high tree, had slipped out of its place, and could never be again
replaced. Obs. 76. l. 2.

CHAP. V.
1. Strange but not miraculous births. 2. Strange and strong imaginations. 3.
Poison inward and outward. 4. Poison of mad Dogs. 5. C^ntharides. 6. Poison how
it works. 7. Why birds not poisoned as men. 8. Amphiam, Opium, Mandrakes. 9.
The Plague no Hectic nor putrid Fever. 10. Epidemical diseases.

THat a boy of nine years old should beget a child, is rar^, but much more
strange it is that a child should be born with all his teeth, and another with
a long beard, yet such have been: and these are but the effects of nature,
which though in her ordinary course ^he observes a tim^ for the growth,
perfection, and decay of things: yet sometimes she is furthered and hindered,
according as the matter is disposed, the heat proportioned, and her instruments
fitted: Why should not Nature have the same privilege that Art has; but we
see that herbs and fruits can be produced and perfected before their time, by
the Art of man, therefore such works are merely natural, not miraculous: for
sublunary bodies are not like the ^elestial, which are not su^ject to
alteration, but ^till keep the same constant tenor.

II. What force the imagination has in women, to make impressions of the
things imagined on the tender infant in the womb, is known by many Stories, and
daily Examples: Hence it is that so many children are born with such variety of
strange shapes and marks. Besides, we know how forcible the fantasy, is, both
in curing and procuring of diseases; yea, oftentimes of death. Thus one having
eat of a Rabbit pie, imagining she had eat of a cat, fell a vomiting and died.
Another having passed over a dangerous bridge in the dark, and returning the
next day to look upon the place, was struck with such an horror, that he went
home and died. A third being in jest made believe that he must lose his head,
swouned and fell down dead. Multitudes of such Examples th^re are; but the
imaginatio^s which proceed from hypochondriacal melancholy, are most strange,
whereby one supposes himself to be dead, therefore will not eat. Another is
persuaded that he has never a head. A third, that his breech is made of glass,
therefore will not fit down for fear of breaking. Anoth^r thinks the heaven
will fall upon him, therefore must have a Target born over him. Another will not
piss for fear he should drown the world: And many more such strange conceits
are some men troubled with by reason of their imaginations which are distorted
by the black and malignant fumes that disturb the animal spirits, subservient
to the fantasy. Such are the imaginations of those who think themselves
wolves, and therefore run into the woods, and bite men and cattle they meet
with. I have read of one who thought himself to be a cock, and therefore fell to
crowing. And doubtless the Lycanthropie so much spoken of, is nothing else but
the strength of a distempered imagination, whatsoever Bodin writes to the
contrary.

III. The cause of many extraordinary distempers in us, is poison, whether
inte^nal, bred within our selves by the corruption or putrefaction of the seed,
blood, or humors of our bodies, by which pestilent and venomous fumes assault
the heart and brains: or external, as the biting of mad dogs, or cats, or other
creatures: For I have read of some that never were bitten, and yet have been
subject to the same kind of raging and fury that they ar^ who are bit by mad
dog^; but their fits were milder, because the constitution of dogs is more
melancholy then that of man's, therefore their venom more dangerous; and who
would think there were such poison in a mad cock, who being angered, struck one
in the h^nd with his beck, upon which blow the man fell distracted and died,
neither could any physic cure him.

IV. The madness that is caused by the biting of mad dogs, is not in all men
alike, bu^ upon some the poison works sooner, upon some later, according to
the degree of madness in the dog, or the deepness of the wound, or disposition
of the body wounded: for foul bodies, melancholic and choleric constitutions
are aptest to receive the venom; therefore in some the poison appears
quickly, in others not in a long time, to wit, not in a year, or more; for the
malignity does not presently assault the s^irits, heart and brains. And
Capivacceus observes, that this poison is of a fiery quality, and hot in the
fourth degree, as he shows by one who was thus bit; his body being opened,
there was found no water in his Pericardium, but a part of it was burned up,
and being touched, fell into ashes; the ventricles also were dried up, and had
no blood at all.

V. It is strange that some do piss blood upon the applying of the Flies called
Cantharides to the neck, hands, or feet, so remo^e from the bladder: by this we
see that the malignant virtue of these flies, has a particular influence upon
that member. This action of the bladder cannot be by the first or second
qualities of the Ca^tharides: ^or then they should work first upon the next
members: therefore this action must be performed by an occult quality, of the
specifical form of the fly. And much more strange is it, that the body of this
^lie should be poison, and the wings thereof a counterpoyson, which in the
living fly are a^ concord, by reason of the specifical form or soul of the fly
ruling all the parts, and keeping them in unity; but when that is gone in the
dead fly, the one part destroys the other. Who can give exact reasons of
Natures secrets?

VI. And no less stran^e is it, that Euphorbium and Mustard are equally hot, to
wit, in the fourth degree, and yet the one is poison, not the other; and
Treacle which is hot in the first degree, heats more then Pepper which is hot
in the fourth degree; this shows that the form of the one is not so a^^ive as
the form of the other; and therefore four times so much heat in the one, is not
so prevalent as one degree of heat in the other; which shows that poisons do
not work by their temper which consist of elementary qualities, but by their
substance or form, whose qualities are occult to us.

VII. Why Napelius, or Wolfe-bane, Hyosciamus, or Henbane, and other herbs
which are poison to man, are nutriment to birds, can have no other reason, but
that birds have a greater heat in their stomachs to subdue the malignity of
these herbs to send away the noxious and excrementitious part, and to convert
the rest into their own substance, which substance notwithstanding is not
poysonable to man, because the poison was consumed by the heat of the bird. Now
the heat of man's stomach is more temperate, and therefore less able to master
such malignant herbs; yet Scaliger ( Exerc. 175.1.) speaks of a man who was
fed with poison from his infancy, whose flesh at last became so venomous, that
the flies which sucked his blood swelled and died.

VIII. That Amphiam, or Opium, should stir up venery, and cause a tickling in
the skin, and yet stupifie the members, and cast them into a dead sleep, is not
without admiration; but doubtless either the Amphiam, or Opium, are different,
that being made of the white, this of the black Poppies, or else in the Opium
there be different substances, the one being very c^ld, which causes
stupidity; the other very hot, by causing a tickling in the skin: which heat is
also perceived by its bitterness; but cold is most predominant, or else we may
say that it ex^ites venery accidentally, by temperating the excessive heat of
the body, which is an enemy to Venus: The like effect is wrought by Mandrakes,
which perhaps was the cause that Rachel so much desired them. Nor must we think
it strange that the Opium produces contrary effects; for we know that the same
Rose in some part of it has a stiptick, in other parts a laxative quality.

IX. The plague to which our bodies are subject, is an occult poison, killing
us by the breath or touch, and not an Hectic Fever, beca^se this dries and
burns up the heart by degrees, the plague kills sudd^nly. 2. The Hectic is
not infectious, as this. 3. In a confirmed Hectic there is no recovery, in the
Plague diverse recover: nor is the pestilence a putrid Fever, because, 1. the
pulse is more remiss, the urine clearer, the head ach, thirst, and agitation of
the body less in the plague then in a putrid Fever. 2. Because a pestilential
fever follows upon a (...) this is ^on, that begins.

X. Epidemical diseases, whereof pestilential are the most perhitious, are
conveyed to us by the air, which we are continually attracting to the heart and
brains, 1. either when the air is infected with the impression of malignant and
occult qualities from the influence of the Stars, or, 2. when it is poisoned
with putrified, corrupt, and pernicious vapors exhaled out of pits, caves,
ditches, putrified lakes, etc. Or, 3. When the prime qualities of the air, to
wit, heat, cold, etc. are intensive beyond ordinary; but we must not think that
the substance of the air is at any time putrified: for being a simple body, it
is not subject to putrefaction.

CHAP. VI.
1. Antipathies to some meats. 2. The force of Fear. 3. Blood voided by the
Gums and Navil. 4. Black hairs suddenly gray. 5. Violence of passions. 6.
Defects in nature reco^mpensed. 7. A Fly voided by Urine. 8. Monthly blood in
men. 9. The causes of Monsters. 10. Horns on men's heads and heels.

AS there are diverse temperaments of men, so there are diverse sympathies and
antipathies to certain meats and drinks: some cannot endure the sight or smell
of Cheese, others abhor eggs, others flesh, others bread, some cannot abide
wine, others abhor piggs, and all kind of swines flesh, many cannot endure the
smell of apples, others detest all kind of sweet meats; and which is most
strange, tha^ the smell of Roses so pleasing to most men, is odious and deadly
to others. Cardinal Carafa during the time of Roses, used to enclose himself in
a Chamber, not permitting any to come near him that had Roses, as Wierus
Valerian shows in his Hieroglyphics, the smell of a Rose would cause a certain
Jacobin swoun, and be like a dead man, as Amatus Lusitanus records in his
second Centurie; the like is written of diverse others. This must either proceed
from an occult quality, or from the distemper of the fantasy and prejudicate
opinion that some have of such things, that they are hurtful to them; or else
it is in some an hereditary infirmity proceeding from the parents: for Forestus
writes, that in a certain family the sons could not ear Che^se, but the
daughters could eat it with a good appetite, becau^^ the mother did love
Cheese, but the father could not abide it. See his Annotations on the fifth
Observation, lib. 4.

II. Fear is more powerful in curing of diseases, then any Physicians in the
world: for Zacutus l. 2. Obs. 86. speaks of a woman whose matrix had fallen,
and hung out of its place two years together, neither could any Physic or Art
replace it again, till a sudden fear attracted it, she feeling the mice running
up her thighs, which she had purposely (holding them by a thread) let run
toward the part; the matrix suddenly slipped into its own place again.

III. Nature is more skillful then any Physician to cure her self; and if she
cannot find a way for evacuation of her superfluities, she will with Hannibal
make a way, though it be through Rocks: for he shows that the ordinary passage
of the menstruous blood being stopped in a certain woman, Nature made her a
passage through the gums, out of which monthly for two days together great
store of blood was voided. He speaks of another who on the like occasion had a
vent for the blood through the navel, lib. 2. Obs. 91, 92.

IV. That black hairs should become suddenly white, may to some seem
incredible; yet we have stories of this sudden change. Scaliger ( Exercit.
212.) tells us of one Francis Gonzaga, who being imprisoned upon suspicion of
treason, in one night his black hair turned white. Vives in his Preface on
Scipio's Dream, and Hadrian Iunius in Comment. de Coma. c. 10. speaks of a
young Spanish Gentleman, who in a night became as white as one of 80 years old,
Caelius Rodiginus in his 13 Book Antiq. lect* speaks of another who searched
after young Hawks upon a high steep Rock, and fearing the rope would break
with which he was held, became instantly white. Diverse other examples I could
alledg, but these are sufficient to let us see that the change of our hairs
which is performed by nature in space of time ordinarily, is upon an
extraordinary fear effected suddenly in some; the roots of the hairs being
deprived of that heat and radical moisture between the flesh and skin of the
head, by which they were fed, the spirits and blood flying suddenly to the
heart, leave the other parts destitute. This we see in trees, when blasted with
a piercing cold wind, their leaves suddenly change color, and of green become
yellow, their natural heat and moisture being extinguished and dried up.

V. There is no passion in our bodies more violent then fear, which distempers
the fantasy, troubles the other senses, causes our hairs to stand an end,
makes us dumb; all which the Prince of Poets expressed in one verse: Obstupui,
steteruntque comae, and vox faucibus haesit; and indeed the fear of death, has
upon some brought sudden death: the spirits, heat, and blood, flying suddenly
to the heart, by which this is oppressed, and the senses left destitute. Others
by sudden fear have lost their judgment, and become distracted; strange
effects also are produced in us by excessive anger, and joy; ^o that some have
suddenly died, with immediate anger, and excessive joy, the spirits and heat
flying suddenly from the heart, into the exterior parts, by which means
syncopes, swoundings, and death follow: As I could instance in many examples.

VI. I observe that where Nature is defective in one part, there is a
recompense made; for they who are born blind, exceed us in memory; and they who
are born deaf and dumb, excel us in apprehension; they who are born without
hands or arms, perform with their feet, what we do by our hands. Phil.
Camerarius in his Historical meditations, c. 37. speaks of one who could make
pens and write with his toes, cut, carve, and feed himself, as well as we with
our hands, but his toes were longer then ordinary^, and proportioned like our
fingers: Montague in his Essays, l. 1. c. 22. writes of another, who with his
toes could discharge a Pistol, take off his hat, play at cards and dice, and
handle his sword as well as we with our hands, by which we see how custom
becomes another nature.

VII. Though it be rare, yet it is natural for a fly to be engendered in man's
body, the matter being disposed to receive that form; for Zacutus, Obse. 101.
writes of one who being pained in his yard, at last voided a sly by his urine.

VIII. As there be some masculin women, so there are some feminate men; such
was he who from twenty to forty five, had his monthly vacuation of blood, as
women have; by which it seems his constitution was altogether feminine, moist
and cold; therefore was smooth skinned, having no Beard, nor hair at all on his
body. Zacut. Obs. 102. l. 2. prax. mir.

IX. Of the many moustrnous shapes which are begot of women, We may read in
Winrichius, Parrie, Rumelinus, Levinus, Lemnius, and diverse other Physicians,
Philosophers and Historians, whose Testimonies and Examples I allege not,
because I would be brief: the cause of these Monsters cannot be the mothers
imagination, as most think; for the imagination makes not impression on the
Embryo, but of such things as the mother earnestly desires; as she that lusted
earnestly for a rose, which having with much difficulty got* (for it was not
rose time) she greedily smelled to it, and laid it up in her bosom; upon
which, the impression of a rose was made in the child's skin. But what mother
will lust to have a child with a dogs head, or of any other monstrous shape,
seeing they abhor such conceptions? Therefore such monstrous shapes are the
effects of the formative faculty in the seed, which if it be peccant either in
quantity or quality, or if there be any fault in the place of conception, or in
the menstruous blood of the mother, then the formative aiming at the specifical
shape, but missing of it by reason of these impediments, rather then it should
be idle, and do nothing, it brings in the generical form of an animal, either
perfect or imperfect, as the matter is disposed; though I deny not the
influence of the heavens; but this is only a remote and universal cause.

X. I have read of one who had a horn grew upon his heel a foot long, which
being cut off, did grow again; and doubtless would have still renewed, if the
tough and viscous matter which fed it, had not been diverted and evacuated by
issues, purges, and phlebotomy; for when Nature has found a passage for
evacuation, thither she sends the supersluities. But more strange it is that
children should be born with horns on their heads. Of such I have read.
Hildanus writes that he saw a man on whose head grew a horn, crooked like a
rams horn; in his Chirurgical observations. Gent. 2. Obs. 25. The story
therefore of Jupiter Amon, may not be incredible.

CHAP. VII.
1. The effects of blood being drunk. 2. Some strange diseases. 3. Plica
Polonica. 4. Some eat poison without hurt. 5. Stones in the Intestines. 6. Old
men become young. 7. Some strange monsters.

I Have read of one who was poisoned with drinking bulls blood; of another who
grew mad by drinking of man's blood, of a third who by drinking of his wi^es
mon^hly blood, was so enamoured with his own wise, that he hated in respect of
her, all other women; some from hence have concluded, that there is poison in
these creatures blood; but I am not of their mind; for doubtless if the flesh
of these creatures be found and wholesome, the blood out of which the flesh is
made, cannot be venomous. 2. The blood of a Bull is gross, fibrous, stopping,
and hard of concoction, and so to weak stomachs may prove accidentally hurtful
or deadly, but not to a strong stomach. 3. It may kill even a strong body, if
it be taken in too great a quantity, and so may any meat, and the best wines in
this respect prove poisonable. 4. If man's blood were poisonable, then Catalin
and his companions had been poisoned, when they drank man's blood at the taking
of their solemn Covenant against the State, as Salust shows. Then Polyphemus
had been poisoned by Vlisse's fellows, Dum visceribus miserorum and sanguine
vescitur atro. What will become of the Canibals? 5. The menstruous blood of
women, is as sound as any other blood in the veins, if the body be found: but
if it be imperfect or corrupted with malignant humors, it may be poisonable;
but I deny, that there is any such virtue in blood, as to procure love; this
may be an illusion of Satan, who delights in blood.

II. Strange are the diseases that some bodies are subject too; I have heard of
one who being troubled with a burning fever, had his veins opened, out of
which with the blood there slipped out a worm of a foot long: another had a red
spot, which did rise in his foot the breadth and color of a red rose, which did
now and then remove from one place to another; and in what place soever it was,
caused an intolerable burning, which could be nothing else but a scalding blood
carried up and down by hot and fiery spirits; of these two Zacutus speaks, l.
3. and of a third whose skin grew as hard and rugged as the bark of a Tree.

III. Some uncouth and strange diseases have appeared in this latter age of the
world, not heard of heretofore; one is mentioned by Rodoric. Fonseca, cons. 1.
in his consultations, called Plica Polonica, because in Poland it rages most;
this diseas suddenly weakneth the body, curleth the hairs of the head, and
intangleth them so, that they represent the shape of snakes, and being pricked
drop with blood, and swarm with lice, and make a loathsome smell. This disease
proceeds doubtless from the corruption of the air, the grosseness of the diet,
their frequenting of close stoves, the infection of the blood, and the
abundance of viscous humors, and gross vapors which nature sends to the skin
of the head, and to the hairs. I will not speak here of the Scurvy, the French
disease, the English sweat, and others too well known among us.

IV. Strange is the variety of tempers and constitutions among men; Arnoldus de
villa nova in specula, c. 77, speaks of a maid who familiarly did eat spiders,
which shows, that either spiders are not venomous, or else her body was of
the same temper that Monkies are, who eat spiders. But that is more strange
which is mentioned by Galen, l. 3. c. 18. Simpl. Of an old woman that ate
Henbane plentifully, without hurt; it seems she had the stomach of swallows,
which feed upon this poisonable weed. I have read of some that have eaten
Scammony, others Opium, others Hellebor, and of some that without hurt have
swallowed quicksilver; that must be attributed to their particular tempers,
and strength of heat by which they mastered these poisons.

V. As stones are engendered in the kidneys, bladder, and other parts, so are
they also sometimes bred in our intestins, for there are some that void stones
familiarly by the stool: and I have read of one who was killed by a stone that
grew and stuck fast to his colon, the bigness of a ches-nut; this sure must
proceed from the extraordinary heat of the intestins, and viscous matter
impacted there; for the heat baked the matter to the consistence and hardness
of a stone, by drying up the watrish moisture thereof.

VI. I have read of some old men and women, that have become young again: that
is to say, after they had lost their teeth, strength, and beauty, have
recovered all at 80 or 100 years of age; their veins filled with blood, new
teeth, a fresh color, their white hairs turned black, and in women their
monthly flowers fresh and orderly. This is not unlikely; for if after a fever,
or other great sickness, nature recovers her lost beauty, vigor, color, and
decayed spirits and senses, why may not she do the like in some people, seeing
there is not in old age, a total privation of these perfections there, but a
decay; and we may observe, that many who are old, weak and sickly, when they
are young, are young, lusty, and healthy, when they grow old.

VII. I have read of men that have had milk in their breasts, which is likely,
if they were of a cold, moist, and feminine complexion, abounding in blood; of
women also who have had four breasts, all full of milk: which is probable,
seeing there be many monsters, that have superfluous members, according to the
superabundance of the parents seed and prolifical blood; but of all monsters,
that which is mentioned by Buchanan in his History of Scotland, is most
wonderful, which had beneath the navel, one body, but above two bodies; when it
was hurt beneath the navel, both bodies felt the pain; if hurt above, the body
felt only that was hurt: These two would sometimes differ in opinions and
quarrel, the one dying before the other; this pined away by degrees, it lived
28 years, could speak diverse languages, and were by the Kings command taught
Music. Doubtless nature aimed at twins, but failed in the lower part. Neither
was this one Individuum, but two, because they were two souls, as appears by
their different wills; and it is the form, not the matter that is the cause of
individuation.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Of diverse and strange spleens. 2. Black urine. 3. One lived without sleep.
4. The Tarentula's effects and cure. The force of Music. 5. Serpents begot of
dead brains. 6. Of Tiberius his sight, Alexanders sweat. Strabo's eyes.

FAllopius in his Anatomical Observations, ( l. 1.6.) writes, that he has
found three Spleens in one man, Gemma in his Cosmocritick speaks of two Spleens
that he found; and he writes of one who had the Spleen in the right side, and
the Liver in the left, in l. 1. Cyclognomonick, p. 75. Some have Spleens of
incredible bigness and weight: others have them fastened to their breasts:
others loose and swimming up and down: others again have had no Spleen at all,
and such have died of the black jaundice: for the blood and skin could not but
be infected with that melancholy humor, wanting the Spleen, which is the
proper receptacle of it.

II. For a man in a burning fever, or one that is oppressed with melancholy
humors, to void black urine, is no wonder; but for one that is sound all the
days of his life, to piss black urine, as Petraeus shows, is somewhat
strange, Disput. 5. de urinis, number. 22. But doubtless the constitution of that
man was melancholic: for the black color in any thing, is caused by the
predominancy of earth: therefore ater quasi a terra: And earth is most
predominant in melancholic tempers; besides, the watrinesse of natural heat
may be the cause of black Urine.

III. Whereas the animal spirits and strength of our bodies are wasted by
watching; therefore sleep is ordained to repair and refresh the decayed
strength and spirits. Yet Fernelius (in his Pathology, lib. 5. c. 2.) speaks of
one who lived without sleep 14 months. But this man was possessed with
madness, whose brain being heated with adust melancholy, did beget animal
spirits without much wasting of them. Thus we see that hot and choleric
constitutions can endure longer without sleep, then cold and moist complexions.

IV. The effects of the Tarentula in men's bodies are strange and various, and
no less strange is the cure: for their sting and poison cause some to laugh,
some to weep, some drowsy and stupid, and some jovial and merry: These diverse
effects must proceed from the diversities of poison that is in them: for it
seems these venomous creatures are not all of one kind; or else these do
proceed from the different constitutions and tempers of those men that are
stung with them: Thus we see what different effects drunkenness does cause in
men, and so does music; but whether this poisonable humor be cured by the
music, or by their dancing, and labor, by which the pores are opened, and the
poison by sweat expelled, is questionable; but I think by both; for even in
music, there is great power over the mind and affections, and consequently
over the diseases and humors, which are mitigated or exasperated according to
the mind and affections. This we see in Saul's melancholy, which was cured by
David's Harp. Such force there was in Timothy the Milesian, that when he pleased
he could by the power of his music, make Alexander take up and lay down Arms.
Not to speak of that Dane, who by his music could make men mild, sad, and
merry at his pleasure.

V. That a Serpent should be in gendred of a dead man's brain, is no more
impossible then for Snakes or Eels to be begot of Horse hairs; or for diverse
sorts of beasts to breed in women upon depraved conceptions. And doubtless as
Satan in the form of a Serpent, brought mortality upon mankind, so he does
sometimes triumph in that shape over man's mortality; God in his judgment
permitting sometimes that dead brain to be turned into a Serpent, which when it
was alive, did hatch so many Serpentine plots and imaginations.

VI. I read in Suetonius, that Tiberius the Emperor could see perfectly in the
dark. And Curtius writes, that Alexander did smell sweetly when he sweat. I
have read of men and women who can fascinate and hurt others with their eyes.
Pliny and Solinus write of one Strabo, who from a Promontory in Sicily, could
see the ships that went out of the Harbor at Carthage, which is 55 Leagues.
These are strange and rare privileges, in which God does manifest his power,
and sh^weth, that he is not tied to the Laws of nature. Yet there is no
necessity, that we should call these miracles: for as it is no miracle for a
Cat to see in the dark, nor for a musk-Cats sweat to smell sweetly, nor for a
Basilisk to kill with his eye, or rather with the poisonsome vapor of his eye
or breath of his mouth; nor is it a miracle for an Eagle or Raven to see at
such a distance; these effects flowing from the natural temper and constitution
of these creatures, of which temper might these men now mentioned be. I could
allege many other strange qualities of men, as of one who could move his ears
like an Horse, of another whose spittle was poison, and of one who never
laughed, etc. but these are sufficient to let us see the power and wisdom of
God, and the dexterity of his Handmaid Nature, both in the fabric and diverse
temperaments of men's bodies.

FINIS.
The Second BOOK. Of the strange Diseases and Accidents of MAN'S BODY; Wherein
diverse of Dr. Browns vulgar errors and assertions are refuted, and the ancient
Tenants maintained:
CHAP. I.
1. Diverse ways to resist burning. 2. Locust eaters, the lousy disease, the
Baptist fed not on Locusts. 3. Man's flesh most subject to putrefaction, and the
causes thereof; How putrefaction is resisted. Mumia. 4. The strength of
affection and imagination in dying men. Strange presages of death. 5.
Difference of dead men's skuls, and why.

THAT some men's bodies have endured the fire without pain and burning, is not
more strange then true; which may be done three manner of ways: 1. By divine
power, as the bodies of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, received no hurt or
detriment in the fiery furnace. 2. By a Diabolick skill; so the Idolatrous
Priests among the Gentiles, used in some solemn sacrifices to walk securely
upon burning coals, as the Prince of Poets shows. AEn. lib. 11. -- Medium freti
pietate per ignem,
Cultores multa premimus vestigia pruna.


And as the men in the Sacrifices of Apollo, so women in the Sacrifices of
Diana, used to walk upon burning coals, as Strabo witnesses, lib. 12. Of this
custom Horace also speaks, (Her. 1. Od. 1. Incedis per ignes suppositos cineri
doloso. So Propertius [Pro. El. 5. l. 1.] Et miser ignotos vestigia far per
ignes. And so it was used as a Proverb, (...), to walk upon coals when a man
undertook any dangerous business. The Scripture also shows, that the
Gentiles used to make their sons and daughters pass through the fire: They
used also in swearing, to take a burning Iron in their hands without hurt, as
Deliro shows in his Magic. Pliny and Sueton write, that Pyrrhus his thumb,
and Germanicus his heart, could not be burned. 3. The body is made sometimes to
resist fire by natural means, as by unguents; so those Hirpiae, or Hirpini in
Italy, of whom Pliny, Varro, and others make mention, used to anoint the soles
of their feet with this unguent, that they might walk on the fire. Bushequius
[Epist. 4.] was an eyewitness at Constantinople, of what was done in this
kind by a Turkish Monk, who after dinner took an hot burning iron out of the
fire, held it in his hand, and thrust it in his mouth, so that his spittle did
hiss, without any hurt; whereas one of Busbequius his men, thinking this Monk
had only deluded the eye, takes the same iron in his hand, which so burned his
palm and fingers, that he could not be healed again in many days. This was done
by the Monk, says Busbequius, after he had put some thing in his mouth when he
went ^orth into the Court, pretending it was to seek a stone. The same Author
witnesses, that he saw at Venice one who washed his hands in scalding lead;
and why may not the body be made to resist the fire, as well as that kind of
Linum, called therefore Asbetinum, by the Greeks, and Linum vivum by the
Latins, [ Pancerol. de Lin. vivo.] in which they used to wrap their Emperors
bodies when they buried them, that their ashes might not be mingled with the
ashes of their fire; this Linum being incombustible. The Salamander also lives
sometime in the fire, though not so long as some have thought. [ Pyraus^^ are
gendred in the fire; So Aristotle and Scaliger.] Nor must we think it fabulous
(as Dr. Brown too magisterially concludes, Of Errors, 7. Book c. 18.) What is
written of the Spartan Lad, and of Scaevola, the Roman, who burned their hands
without shrinking; he doubts of the truth of this, and yet makes no doubt of
that which is more unlikely, to wit, of Saint John's being^ in the Chaldron of
scalding oil without any hurt at all. [ Book 7. c. 10.] he that will question
the truth of Scaevola's burning his hand, and of Gurtius, leaping into the
burning gulf, may as well question the broiling of Saint Lawrence on the
Grediron, or the singing and rejoicing of other Martyrs in the midst of their
flames.

II. That in Ethiopia there is a people whose sole food are locusts, is
witnessed by Diodorus and S^rabo, [ l. 4. c. 16.] these from their food are
called Acridophagi; they are a lean people, shorter and blacker then others;
they are short lived, for the longest life among them exceeds not 40 years:
Their Country affords neither fish nor flesh, but God provides them locusts
every Spring, which in multituds are carried to to them from the Desert by the
West and South-west winds: these they take and salt for their use. These
wretched people die all of one disease, much like our lousie sickness: A
little before their death, their bodies grow scabby and itchy, so that with
scratching, bloody matter and ugly lice of diverse shapes, with wings, swarm out
of their belly first, then from other parts, so that they pine away and die in
great pain. This disease doubtless proceeds partly from the corruption of the
air, and partly from the unwholesomnesse of their diet, which turns to putrid
humors in their bodies, whence the disease is Epidemical. This vermin breeds
most in those who are given to sweat, to nastinesse, and abound with putrified
humors, between the flesh and skin, whose constitutions are hot and moist, as
children; and according as either of the four humors are predominant, so is
the color of lice, some being red, some white, some brown, some black;
sometimes they burst out of all parts of the body, as in Herod, and in that
Portugal, of whom Forestus speaks* [ l. 4. de vitiis capitis] out of whose body
they swarmed so fast, that his two men did nothing else but sweep them off, so
that they carried out whole baskets full. Sometimes they breed but in some
parts only, as in the head or armpits. Zacuta mentions one who was troubled
nowhere but in his eie-lids, out of which they swarmed in great numbers. Some
have voided them by boils and imposthumes. Forestus speaks of one who had them
only in his back, whom he advised to hold his naked back so close to the fire,
till it blistred, out of which blisters they came, and so he was cured. Salt is
an enemy to them, yet they are bred in those AEthiopians by the frequent eating
of the salt locusts: But perhaps it is not the eating of the salt meat so much,
as the nastinesse, and sweat, unwholesom waters, and corrupted air that breeds
them. And it is certain, that wild and savage people are most given to them,
because of their careless uncleanlinesse, using no other remedy against them,
but shirts died with Saffron, which some wild Irish do wear six months
together without shifting. But sometimes this disease is inflicted by the
immediate hand of God, as a punishment of sin and tyranny. Examples we have
in Sylla, Pherecides, Herod, Philip the second of Spain, and others who died of
this malady. Now because Locusts are such an unwholesome food, I cannot think
that John Baptist did feed on them; and therefore it is no vulgar error, to
hold, that (...) in Matthew. 3. does signify the tops of herbs rather then
locusts, both because these were an unwholesome food, and unpleasant to the
palate and nose, used rather for Physic then diet, as Dioscorides and Galen
show, that Locusts are good against the Cholick and Stone, and may be more
safely given then Cantharides to provoke urine. And although the AEthiopians
did eat them for food, yet this is no argument to prove, that John did eat
them; which is all the reason that Beza and Casaubon bring to prove their
assertion: neither can it be proved, that Locusts were a food ever used in
Iudaea: For Pelusiota, who lived an Eremite many years in those Deserts, never
knew any such food used there. But whereas they allege, that in Levit. [c. 11.
v. 22.] Locusts are set down for clean food: I answer with Munster [on Levit.
11.22. who though an excellent Hebrician, yet confesses, that neither he, nor
the Rabbis themselves, do know the true meaning or signification of the
proper terms there used. Therefore the Hebrew word Harbe, which we translate
Locust, the Septuagints call Bruchus, which is another kind of Insect. And the
French in their Bibles have left the Hebrew word untranslated. And so did
Luther before, as not knowing what that word meant, nor the other three Hebrew
words. Dr. Brown then had done well rather to have reckoned the Baptists eating
of Locusts among the Vulgar Errors, then his feeding upon herbs in the Desert.

III. There is no flesh so much subject to putrefaction, as man's body, because
it abounds in heat and moisture, so that oftentimes some parts of it do
putrify before the soul leave it, which cannot so long preserve it from
corruption, as salt, spices, the juice of Cedar, and other means by which the
Egyptians used to embalm their dead bodies. For indeed heat and siccity are
enemies to putrefaction; therefore where the ambient air (which is properly
moist) is excluded, there the bodies remain unputrified. Hence the bodies which
are dug out of the hot and dry sands in Egypt, have there continued many
hundreds of years uncorrupted. Alexanders body lay many days unburied and
unbalmed, yet stunk not, but smelled odoriferously, because he had dried up the
superfluous moisture of his body, by continual drinking of strong and fragrant
wines. There be also some wines that preserve dead bodies uncorruptible, by
reason of their cold and exsiccating quality. So we read in the Indian stories,
that upon the Mountains of Chily, bodies have been found dead there, which have
many years without corruption continued. The first detectors of those Countries
found it so by experience; for many of them were killed by the piercing subtle
quality of those winds, and preserved from putrefaction by the excessive
dryness thereof. I have read of Horsemen sitting on Horseback, with their
bridles in their hands, yet dead many months before without any corruption. It
is also the opinion of some, that bodies thunderstruck do not putrify. I am
apt to believe, that either they putrify not at all, or not in a long time,
because of the exsiccating quality of the sulphurous vapor which comes from
the thunder and lightning. But there is nothing more apt to preserve dead
bodies from corruption, then the juice of Cedar, therefore much used among the
Ancients, both in preserving of their books and bodies; which by reason of
their extreme bitterness and driing quality, gives life to the dead, and death
to the living, extinguishing the temporary life of the body, and in recompense
giving it immortality. So then we see that siccity is the main enemy to
putrefaction, which is the cause the Peacocks flesh is not fo apt to putrify
as of other creatures, because of its dryness, as Saint Augustine in the City
of God shows, who speaks of a Peacock which in a whole year did not putrify.
The diet also is a great help to further or retard putrefaction; for they that
feed plentifully on flesh, fish, or other humid meats, which breed much blood
and humors, are apter to putrify then those who feed sparingly on hard and
dry meats. In the siege of Amida, by Sapor the Persian King, this difference
was found; for the European bodies, who lay four days unburied, did in that
time so putrify, that they could scarce be known: but the Persian bodies were
grown hard and dry, because of their hard and dry food, having contented
themselves with bread made of Naesturtiu^^, which we call Cresses, or nosesmart,
an hot and dry herb. Concerning the stone Sarcophagus which consumes flesh in
forty days, as Pliny witnesses, l. 36. c. 17. is no fable; for Scaliger
writes, ( Exerc. 132.) that in Rome, and in the Town where he then was, the
dead bodies were consumed in eight days. But the stone Chernites is a preserver
of flesh from corruption; therefore the Tomb of Darius was made of it. The like
is written of the herb Clematis, or Vinca pervinea, which resists
putrefaction; therefore of old they used to bind the heads of young men and
maids deceased with garlands of this herb. And Korrimanus (de mirac.
mortuorum) speaks of a dead head so crowned with this herb, which in the year
1635. being taken out of the grave, was found uncorrupted. And as dead bodies
embalmed with spices, are preserved from corruption; so by the fame dead
bodies, men are oftentimes preserved alive: for that stuff which proceeds from
them, called by the Arabians Mumia, is an excellent remedy against diseases
arising from cold and moisture. Francis the first carried always some of it
about him. It was found in the Tombs of those Princes who had been imbalmed
with rich spices; but that which is found in ordinary graves, is not the true
Mumia, but false, useless, or rather pernicious for the body, as not being of
the same materials that the true Mumia was.

IV. That the presence of a dear friend standing by a dying man, will prolong
his life a while, is a thing very remarkable and true, and which I found by
experience: for about ten years ago, when my aged Father was giving up the
ghost, I came toward his beds side, he suddenly cast his eyes upon me, and
there fixed them; so that all the while I stood in his sight, he could not die
till I went aside, and then he departed. Doubtless, the sympathy of affections,
and the imagination working upon the vital spirits, kept them moving longer
then otherwise they would have done; so that the heart the seat of affection,
and the brain the house of imagination, were loath to give off, and the spirits
in them, to rest from their motion, so long as they had an object wherein they
delighted. The like I have read of others: And truly the sympathy of
affections, and strength of imagination is admirable, when the mind is able to
presage the death or danger of a friend though a great way off. This also I
found in my self: For once I suddenly fell into a passion of weeping, upon the
apprehension I took that my dear friend was dead whom I exceedingly loved for
his virtues, and it fell out accordingly as I presaged; for he died about the
same hour that I fell into that weeping fit, and we were at that time 60 miles
asunder, nor could I tell certainly, that he was dead till two days after. Thus
to some the death of friends is presaged by bleeding at the nose, and sudden
sadness, by dreams, and diverse other ways, which the learned Poet was not
ignorant of when he says,

Agnovit long gemitum praesaga m^li men's. AEn. l. 10. So by the Greek Poet the
soul is called (...), a soothsayer of evil: The cause of this the Gentiles
ascribed to the Sun, which they held to be the Soul, and our souls sparks of
that great Lamp* A Plato^^cal conceit which thought men's souls to be m^terial^
we were better ascribe this to the information of that Angel which attends us.

V. That which Herodotus (in Thalia c. 3.) writes of this difference between
the Persian and the Egyptian skuls, may be no fable; for in the wars between
them such as were killed on either side, were buried apart: after their bodies
were putrified, it was found that the Persian skuls were soft, but the
Egyptians so hard, that you could scarce break them with a stone. The reason
of this might be, because the Egyptians used from their childhood to cut their
hair, and to go bareheaded; so that by the Sun their skuls were hardened. Hence
it was, that few among them were found bald; but the Persians who wore long
hair, and had their heads always covered, must needs have had soft skuls, by
reason the humidity was kept in, and not suffered to evaporate, nor the Sun
permitted to harden them.

CHAP. II.
1. The benefits of sleep, and reasons why some sleep not. 2. Why dead bodies
after the ninth day swim. Why dead and sleeping men heavier then others; why a
blown bladder lighter then an empty. 3. Strange Epidemical diseases and deaths.
The force of smells. The Roses smell. 4. Strange shapes, and multitudes of worms
in our bodies. 5. The French disease, and its malignity. The diseases of Brasil.

WHereas Sleep is one of Natures chiefest blessings for refreshing of our
wearied spirits, repairing of our decayed strength; moistning of our feebled
limbs, as the Poet speaks, fessos. sopor irrigat artus, (Virg. AEn 3. and 4.)
for easing of our diurnal cares, Positi somno sub nocte silenti, lenibant c^r^s
and corda oblita laborum. And therefore is, as Euripides calls it, (...), the
remedy of our evils. And whereas in sleep the heart is at rest, as Aristotle
rightly said, (though Galen who understood him not, checks him for it) from
feeling, understanding, and inventing, though not from life and motion; I say,
whereas by-sleep we have so many benefits, it is a wonder that any should be
found to live a long time without sleep. Yet I read in Fernelius (Pathalog. l.
5. ca. 2.) of one who lived fourteen months without any rest. And it is more
strange what Heurinus (Praxis, l. 2. c. 7. records of Nizolius, that painful
Treasurer of Cicero's words and phrases, who lived ten years without sleep.
Mecaenas was sleeplesse three years, says Pliny. Laurentius in his Tract of
Melancholy, knew some who could not sleep in three months; the reason of this
might be, 1. The heat and dryness of the brain, as is usual in decrepit and
melancholy men: 2. The spareness of (...), so that no vapors could be sent up
to moisten the brain or nerves. 3. The want of exercise and motion; for
sedentary men are least given to sleep. 4. Continual cogitation and intention
of the fantasy. 5. And adust melancholy humors. 6. Accompanied with
continual fears, horrid and distemperate phantas^es, representing to the mind
unpleasant objects.

II. Why dead bodies after the ninth day swim upon the water, may seem strange,
seeing till then they lie hid under the water. Cardan (de subtle. l. 8.) gives
this reason, Because between the Peritoneum and Omentum flatulent matter is
engendered, as appears by the great swelling of the belly. Now this flatulent
matter is begot of humidity dissolved by heat, which heat is procreated of
putrefaction. Besides, we see that putrified bodies, as eggs, fruit, wood, grow
light, because their solid parts being consumed, what remains are porous and
full of air: for experience teaches us, that the more porous and aereal the
body is, the lighter it is, and less apt to sink; and perhaps may be the
reason why that body which wants the Spleen swimmeth, not being a porous light
substance: And those men who have capacious lungs to hold much air, can dive
and live longer in the water then others. And surely some people whose bodies
are active, subtle, and quick, will not sink so soon as men of duller spirits.
Such were the Thebii, a people which could not sink; so that it is a vain way
to conclude those to be Witches, who do not presently sink. Hence also it is
plain, that dead bodies are heavier then living, though Dr. Brown (of Errors,
l. 4. c. 7.) contradict this, because he found no difference between a Mouse
and a Chick being dead and alive, in respect of gravity. A weak reason to
reckon a received truth among his vulgar errors; for though there were no
sensible difference in such little animals, which have but few spirits, yet in
men which are of a greater bulk, and in whom do abound vital and animal
spirits, to say there is no difference of gravity in their life and death, is
to contradict sense and reason; for every woman that attends upon sick men,
knows that they are more pondrous when dead, then when alive, being used to
lift and turn them. Reason also grounded on experience, teaches us, that those
bodies are lightest in which air is predominant; therefore doubtless where
there is store of such pure and refined air as the spirits are, there must be
less gravity, then where they are vvanting: his Error is grounded on a false
supposition, in thinking there is gravity in the spirits themselves, because
they participate of corporeity, as if gravity v^ere an essential property of
bodies, whereas there is no gravity in the pure fire, nor in the Stars and
Heavens, and yet these are bodies. Besides, if the spirits had any gravity in
them, it must follow, that living bodies are heavier then dead carcasses, which
is absurd to think. Again, I would know, why inebriated Apoplectical and
swouning persons are heavier then others; is it not because their spirits fail,
and they resemble dead men? And so in sleep the brother of death the body is
heavier; every Nurse that carries her child in her arms will tell him this.
Why does a man fall down in his sleep, who stood upright when he was awaked, If
he be not heavier then he was? The Scripture acknowledges, that even the
Apostles eyes were heavy when they were sleepy. And whereas he proves the
spirits to add weight to the body, because a man that holds his breath is
weightier while his lungs are full, then upon expiration: And a bladder blown
is heavier then one empty. I answer, that I could never find this experiment
true, though I have made trial. 2. It seems to be false, because the blown
bladder will swim when the empty one sinks. 3. If I should yield him this,
yet his sequel is naught, except he can prove the animal spirits in a man's
body, to be as thick and course as the gross vapor which is blown into the
bladder, which is neither air in name nor purity, much less to be compared to
those subtle spirits, which are so pure and apt to vanish, that nature was
forced to enclose them within the thick walls of the nerves. So likewise the
air retained in the lungs, may perhaps add weight to the body, because the
longer it stays there, the more it degenerates into a thick vapor, by reason
of the bodies moisture, and so may become ponderous.

III. God is pleased many times to punish whole Nations by extraordinary
epidemical diseases, for the sins of the people. So was England visited with
a sweating sickness; so was Poland with that disease called Plica, of which
we have spoken; so was Ethiopia (as is already said) visited with the Lousie
disease. Forestus (Observe. medic. part. 3.) records, that in Syracusa, there
was an universal disease, called the hungry sickness, in which people did
continually desire to eat, and were never satisfied. Of this multitudes died;
at last it was observed, that this disease proceeded of Worms, which were
expelled by Bolarmenick and Treacle. And Hollerius reports, that at Beneventum
many died of intolerable pains in the head, caused by Worms engendered there,
who also mentions one Italian, who by smelling much to the herb Basil, had a
Scorpion which bred in his brain, and killed him; this is not impossible if
we consider, that according to the disposition of the p^trified matter, and
the preparations made for introduction of the form, diverse shapes of creatures
are begot; and it seems there is a great sympathy between the Basil and the
Scorpion, which did facilitate the generation: neither are we ignorant what
force there is in smells, both to breed and expel diseases; and even to prolong
and shorten life; as appears in diverse Histories, of some that have died with
the smell of coals, others of new vvort or ale, as those two Monks recorded by
Forestus (Observe. medic. part. 1.) although I suppose it was not so much the
smell as the smoke of the coals and vapors of the air that suffocated the
spirits; yet such is the force of smells, that some have been purged by passing
by or entering into Apothecaries shops, vvhilest they were preparing purgative
medicaments; And diverse with the smell of the purges which they carried in
their hands, have been as much purged, as if they had taken the whole
substance. But this I ascribe not so much to the smell (which is a mere
accident, and cannot pass from one substance to another, but is in some
subjects wherein it is inherent) as to the subtle vapors which from the
physic being smelled, convey the smell to the body. The same reason may be
given why some are offended with smells which to others are pleasant; so I have
read of Francis the firsts Secretary, who was forced to stop his nosthrils with
bread when there were any apples at table: and so offensive was the smell
thereof to him, that if one had held an apple near his nose, he would fall a
bleeding. Marcel. Danat. adm. hist. l. 6. c. 4.

And Cardinal Carafa did so abhor the smell of roses, which of all smells is
most delightful to man, that during the rose time he durst not go out of his
doors, for fear of encountering with that smell; nor did he suffer any to come
within his palace that had a rose about him. This I adscribe to the fantasy
and natural antiphathy between him and the rose: Such power there is in
smells, that the Ancients ascribed a Divinity to them; and because good smells
do so cheer the spirits, hence they were used in Temples both amongst Jews,
Gentiles, and Christians. Homer describes his Juno by the sweetness of her
smell, and so does Virgil his Venus: Ambrosiaeque comae divinum vertice odorem
spiravere; the like does Plutarch his Isis, and so does Ovid: Mansit odor,
possis scire fuisse Deam. But for the Rose there may be some manifest causes
why its smell may be offensive: for some brains are extraordinary cold, some
extraordina^y dry, and whose olfactive passages are wider then usually; to such
the smell of Roses may be hurtful, because the ^ose has but a weak heat, or
rather is refrigerative, as Dioscorides thinks which may comfort the hot, but
not the cold brain. And if the brain be dry, and the passages wide, the smell
does too suddenly affect it, which may procure an aching. but why Hysterical
women, and such as are troubled with the Mother, are apt to swoun at the smell
of Roses and Lillies, and other sweet odours, is, because the Matrix delights
in these smells, and therefore rises toward them, to the danger of
suffocation; whereas it is suppressed by strong and unpleasant odours. There
are indeed in the rose different parts, which have different qualities, but the
predominant are moistning and coldness; whence to cold and moist brains, the
smell is not proper, but to hot brains the rose is comfortable: therefore the
Ancients in their drinking matches, used to wear rose garlands, and to lie upon
beds of rose-leaves for refrigeration. Mitte sectari rosa quo locorum sera
moretur. Horat. l. 1.

IV. It is almost incredible, what is written of the multitudes, diverse shapes,
and length of worms bred in our bodies, if we had not the testimony of so many
grave Physicians to prove this. Forestus out of Hostim (Obs. Med. part. 1. Obs.
2.) shows, that at Beneventum in Italy, there was a great mortality, which much
troubled the Physicians, not knowing the cause thereof, till they opened one of
the dead bodies, in whose brain they found a red worm yet alive: This they
tried to kill by diverse medicaments, such as are prescribed against worms, but
no^e of them could kill it. At last they boiled some slices of Radish in Malago
wine, and with this it was killed. He shows also, that one being cured of the
French malady, was notwithstanding still tormented with the headache, till his
skull by advice was ^p^n^d; under which, upon the Dura matter, was found a black
wo^m, which being taken out and killed, he was cured. Brasavola records, ( in
16. Aphoris. l. 3. Hippocr.) that an old man of 82 years, by a potion made of
Scordium and sea-moss, voided five hundred worms, which was the more strange in
so old a man, whose body must needs have been cold and dry; yet it seems he
wanted not putrified matter enough to breed them Alexander Benedict speaks of
a young maid, who lay speechless eight days with her eyes open, and upon the
voiding of forty two worms, recovered her health, (lib. de verit. and rerum.)
Carda^ records, that Erasmus saw an Italian, who spoke perfect Dutch, which he
never learned, so that he was thought to be possessed; but being rid of his
worms, recovered, not knowing that he ever ^pake Dutch. It is not impossible in
ecstasies, phrensies, and transes, for men to speak unknown tongues, without
witchcraft or inspiration^ if we consider the excellency and subtilty of the
soul, bein^^ sequestered from corporeal Remora's, and so much the rather, if
with Plato, we hold that all^onr knowledge is but reminiscency. Ambrose* Parry
(lib. 19. c. 3.) shows, that a woman voided out of an imposthume in her
belly; a multitude of worms about the bigness of ones finger, with sharp heads,
which had pierced her intestins. Forestus (l. 7. Obs. 35.) tells us of a woman
in Delph, who in 3 several days voided 3 great worms out of her navel; and not
long after was delivered of a Boy; and then seven days after that, another:
Thad. Dunus, speaks of a Switzer woman, who voided a piece of a worm five else
long, without head and tail, having scales like a Snake. After this she voided
another bred in her bowels, which was above twenty else long. This poor woman
was tortured so long as she was fasting; but when she ate, she had some ease. I
^ould set down here many other stories of Worms, voided out of men's bodies,
some having the shape of Lizards, some of Frogs, some hairy and full of feet on
both sides, some voided by the eyes, some by the ears, some by vomiting, some
by the stool, some by urine, some by imposthumes, but I will not be tedious;
these may suffice to let us know of what materials this body of ours, which we
so much pamper, is composed, and how little cause we have to be sollicitous
for the back and belly; and vvithal let us stand in awe of God, who when he
pleases can for our sins, plague us with vermin in our bodies vvhiles we are
yet alive.

V. I said before, that diverse Countries had their peculiar diseases; the
French sickness as we now call it, was peculiar to the Americans, and not
known to this part of the world; but Christopher Columbus, brought it from
America to Naples. Now it is become common, and yet no disease more pernicious,
and which breeds more dangerous symptoms and tortures in the body. This is
that great scourge with which God whips the wantonness of this lascivious age:
not without cause is this called the Herculean disease, so hard to be overcome,
and the many headed Hydra: the poison of it is so subtle, that not only it
does wast the noble parts, and spoils the skin even to the loss of all the
hairs both of head, beard, and eyebrows, besides the many swellings and
bunches it causes, it pierces also into the very bones, and rots them, as
Fernelius fully describes. (De abdit. rer. causis, l. 2.) I have read of some
who have been suddenly struck blind with the infection thereof. Zacuta mentions
one who was so blinded that he could never recover his sight again. And another
who was troubled with an Ophthalmy, the poison of which was so vi^lent and
subtle, that it infected the Chyrurgion that cured him; ( Prax. mira. l. 2.)
by which it appears this disease is infectious at a distance. There is another
peculiar disease in Brasile, called the Worm, which comes with an itch and
inflammation of the fundament: if this be taken in time before the Fever comes,
it is easily cured by washing the place affected, with the juice of Lemmons,
whereof that Country abounds; but if it be neglected till it come to a
Carbuncle, it is harder to be cured, and not without the juice of Lemmons and
Tobacco. But if this by carelessness be omitted, no help will then prevail; and
so the party dies with a thirst or fever, which is strange. Not unlike to this
is that disease which Zacuta speaks, of one who was tortured with a terrible
pain in his Hip and Fundament, with a violent Fever: upon this he opens the
outward ancle vein, out of which gushed scalding blood, and with it a living
Worm, the breadth of ones palm, and so the party was cured. It seems the poison
of this Worm had reached into the Hemorrid veins in the fundament, which caused
that pain. Linscho^en (in his voiages) makes mention of another disease
familiar to the Brasilians, called Pians, proceeding from their letchery; it
makes blisters bigger then the joint of a man's thumb, which run over the whole
body and face.

CHAP. III.
1. Centaurs, proved what they were. 2. Why the sight of a Wolf causes
obmutescency. 3. Pigmies proved. Gammadim, what. 4. Giants proved: they are not
monsters. 5. The strange force of Fascination. The sympathies and antipathies
of things. The Loadstones attraction, how hindered. Fascination, how cured.
Fascination by words.

THat there have been Centaurs, that is, Monsters, half Horses, and half Men in
the world, I make no question, though Dr. Brown, (Book 1. c. 4.) reckons this
among his Vulgar Errors, who should have made a distinction between. Poetical
fictions, and real truths: For Centaurs are Monsters, and aberrations from
nature; not the common nature of all things, which intends and effects
Monsters, to show Gods wrath against sin: but from the particular nature of
those creatures of which they are engendered. Therefore S. Jerome in the life of
Paul the Eremite, speaks of a Centaur seen by Paul. Pliny Not. Hist. l. 7. c.
3. was an eyewitness to this truth: For he saw in Thessaly a Centaur, which
was brought out of Egypt to Claudius Caesar. Ambrose Parry. (l. 15. de
Monstris) speaks of a Centaur which in the year ^254, was brought forth at
Verona: there is no doubt then but Centaurs as well as other Monsters, are
produced, partly by the influence of the stars, and partly by other causes, as
the ill disposition of the matrix, the bad temperature of the seed, the
perverse inclination of the woman, the commixtion of seeds of diverse kinds,
sudden fear, bad diet, unwholesome air, and untimely Venus. But we must not
think that these Centaurs were men, or parts of men; for they had not a
reasonable soul, and therefore not capable of the resurrection. Neither must we
think that these had two natures and essential forms in one body, to wit, of a
Man and a Horse: for as every entity has but one specifical essence, so it
has but one form which gives that essence; so that one and the same thing
cannot be under diverse species in the predicament of substance. And as there
cannot be two distinct forms, so neither can there be a mixtion of them in the
Centaur: For the form or essence admits neither intention nor admission: Ex
duobus entibus per se, non fit unum ens per se; yet I deny that there were ever
a generation of people called Centaurs, as they are described by the Poets; for
by this fiction they understood voluptuous and lascivious men, who by Hercules,
that is, men of courage, wisdom, and strength, were subdued and brought to
civility, as we have showed elsewhere ( in Mist. Poetico) which fiction was
occasioned by the first sight of men on Horseback in Thessaly.

II. That some men have become speechless at the sight of a Wolf, is no fable,
if either we consider the antipathy that is between a Man and a Wolf, or the
malignity of that vapor which proceeds from the Wolf, or the violence of a
sudden fear which presently brings obmutescency, as the Prince of Poets
shows, ( AEn. 2.) Obstupui steteruntque comae and vox faucibus haesit.
Camerarius the Father ( Prob 1. Dec. 7. medit. Histor. part. 2. Cent. 40.)
shows in his Problems, (which is confirmed by Philip his son) that one who
had caught a Wolf in a Gin, by coming too near him, was so poisoned by his
breath, that his hands and face which were naked, did swell to a monstrous
bigness: so that in a long time he could scarce be cured. And what wonder is
it, that the sight of a Wolf should make a man speechless, when the shadow of
the Hyena, will make a Dog dumb; when a Horse, if he smell but the foot-step or
the guts of a Wolf, will kick and fling as if he were mad, and a Mare will cast
her Colt, as they witness who write the Natures and Histories of beasts;
therefore the Proverb, Lupus in fabula, was not grounded upon a fable. Dr.
Brown then did unadvisedly reckon this among his vulgar errors* (3 Book c. 8.)
for I believe he would find this no error, if he were suddenly surprised by a
Wolf, having no means to escape or save himself; and yet I do not hold that
every one who is seen by a Wolf, is dumb, because some are of undaunted spirits,
and some have the advantage of the Wolf, and some are not apt to be infected by
his breath; yet it will not follow, that it is a vulgar error; if I hold a man
grows silent at the sight of a Wolf, or that he has an infectious breath: For
it is no vulgar error, to hold the plague an infectious disease, and yet all
are not infected by it.

III. That there have been Pigmies in the world, that is, people of a cubit or
two high, so called from (...) a cubit, and Troglodits from (...) an hole, for
they dwelt in holes, as Aristotle shows; and Spithamei from their small
stature, scarce exceeding 2 foot and a quarter: I say, that there have been
such, I make no question, when I consider the multitude of eminent Authors who
have writ of them, and that no reason was ever yet alleged to deny them.
Nay, it stands with reason there should be such, that Gods wisdom might be
seen in all sorts of magnitudes: For if there have been Giants, why not also
Pigmies, Nature being as propense to the least as to the greatest magnitude:
Besides, the reasonable soul^ is not extended in the body of a Giant, nor
contracted in the body of a Pigmi^; but can inform the one and the other
without augmentation and diminution. Nicephorus (lib. hist. Eccles. c. 37.)
affirms, that in the time of Theodosius, was seen in Egypt a Pigmie so small of
body, that he resembled a Partridg; he exercised all the functions of a man,
and could sing tunably. Pliny (lib. 7. c. 16.) speaks of Co^pas, whom Iulia the
Niece of Augustus kept still by her; he was not much above two foot long. He
also affirms, that under Augustus there lived Pusio and Secundilla, whose
bodies were preserved as miraculous in a monument within the Salustian Garden;
they were not much above half a foot. Card^n relates ( de subtle.) that there
was in Italy a Pigmie of a cubit long, kept in a Parrets Cage. Many more of
these Pigmies I could alledg, but these shall suffice to show there have been
such. And that there have been a Nation of Pigmies, Aristotle, Pliny,
Pomponius, Mela, Aulus Gellus, Solinus, Albertus magnus, and many others will
witness. It is true that Strabo, Scaliger, and some others have denied them;
and therefore Dr. Brown reckons the opinion concerning Pigmies, among his
Vulgar Errors: But if the incredulity of two or three Writers be enough to make
a Vulgar Err^r, what a multitude of Errors will there be? For what truth is
there in the world which by some or other has not been doubted or denied? But
they say, that the Assertors of this opinion, do not agree about the place of
the Pigmies abode; some placing them in India, some in Ethiopia, some in
Scythia, some in Greenland. I answer, Circumstantial differences cannot
overthrow the substance of a truth. Much difference there is about Ophir, where
it stood, some placing it in Sumatra, or Aurea Chersinesus, some in Africa,
some in Peru. So men cannot agree about Tharsis, some making it a Town in
Cilicia, others Carthage in Africa, some Tartasius in Spain; shall we hence
infer that there were never any such places? I am of opinion, that because they
differ in the place of the Pigmies, and not in the thing it self, that there
were Pigmies in all the forementioned places. Buchanan speaking of the Isles of
Scotland, amongst the rest, sets down the Isle of Pigmies, in which there is a
Church where are yet dug up diverse small skuls and bones, answering to the
report of the Pigmies little bodies; so that the inhabitants and neighbors
make no question, but that Pigmies of old dwelt there. Re^. Scot. l. 1. Now
Aristotle is so confident of his Pigmies, that he plainly tells us it is no
fiction, but a manifest truth, Hist. animal. l. 8. c. 12. (...). And it is like
that these Pigmies were all one with the Nabae or Nubae; a people that dwelt
about the Springs of Nilus, and so they are called (...), both these people are
said to dwell about the Springs of Nilus, both were Troglodits, or dwelt in
holes. And Nonnesus in Photius is said to have lighted upon these Pigmies in
his Navigation about those places where the Nubae dwelt. Neither is it a
sufficient reason to deny Pigmies, because some ridiculous things are written
of them, as that they fight with Cranes upon the backs of Rams, or Goats,
though this be ridiculous, yet it may be true; for there are some ridiculous
truths, and some serious lies. But if this were a fable, yet that there were
Pigmies, may be a truth: there be many fictions made of Saturn, Jupiter, Ianus,
and other Heathens, Likewise of S. Christopher, S. George, S. Francis, and many
other Christians; shall we therefore conclude there were never any such men?
Neither was Homer the first that makes mention of Pigmies: for Ezechiel long
before spoke of them ( Ezekiel. 27.11.) for the word Gammadim is translated
Pigmies by Aquila, Vatablus, Lyra, Arias Montanus, the vulgar Latin, and
Munster, who affirms that all the Hebrews expound the word thus. Besides, the
Italian and Spanish Translations use the word Pigmie, and do not retain the
textuary word, as the Doctor thinks, though the French and English Translations
do. Now why the Septuagints translated the word Gammadim into Watchmen, I know
not, except they meant those three thousand Pigmies which a certain King of
India did entertain for his Guard; for though they were small of stature, yet
they were good Archers.

IV. That there have been Giants, that is, men of extraordinary strength and
stature, is not to be questioned, since they are mentioned in so many Stories
often in the Scripture: For what were Og, Sampson, Goliath, and the Anakims, but
Giants? It is written that Pallas, the Son of Evander, whom Turnus killed, was
higher by the head then the Walls of Rome: For eight hundred years after
Christ, his body was found near the Walls, which being set upon its feet, the
shoulders thereof touched the Pinacles of the Wall. S. Augustine (de Civit.
Dei, l. 15. c. 9.) saw a man's tooth bigger then his fist. Ios. Acosta (Hist.
Ind. l. 7.) shows there were Giants in new Spain: For he saw, at Mexico, a
tooth as big as a man's fist. About the Straights of Magellan there are Giants
ten or eleven foot high. ( Acost. l. 1. c. 9.) The bones of Giants found in
Peru, are thrice as big as the Indians. Cambden tells us of two teeth sound in
Essex, which would make two hundred of ours. And if you will believe Nunesius
the Jesuit, ( de rebus Iapan) the King of China was guarded with Giants, which
are also the Porters of his chief City. I will say nothing of the Giants
mentioned by Pliny, Plutarch, Herodotus, and others. Before the Flood there
were greater store of them then since, because the vigor of the Sun, the
fertility of the earth, the goodness of food, and the feed of generation did
decay. But we must not think that Giants and Pigmies are Monsters, seeing they
are not the errors of nature, which aims at their generation, according to
the proportion of seed, which admits of extension and remission: But if the
quantity be such, that the functions of man are hindered, such may be called
Monsters, as that young Giant at Millan, which Scaliger saw, ( Exerc. 263.)
which was so tall, that he could not stand, but lie along, extending his body
the length of two beds joined together. What the Greeks have feigned of the
Giants, I have spoken elsewhere, Mystag. Poet.

V. That diverse diseases are procured by fascination, that is, by a malignant
look, or aspect, is manifest by innumerable testimonies of good Authors. Now
fascination is twofold, Diabolical and Physical, or Natural: Of the former I
do not speak, but of the latter, which causes diseases, not by the look, or
sight it self, which consists rather in reception with Aristotle, then in
emission with Plato, (although I deny not some kind of emission there is), but
I say, fascination causes diseases three ways: First, when the horrid and
truculent look of a malicious deformed Hag affrights children and tender
natures; upon which proceeds an agitation and sudden commotion of the spirits
and humors, whence ensues diseases. Secondly, by some malignant vapor,
breath, or spirit from the eye or mouth. Thirdly, by a secret antipathy: so
there are who will swoun and sweat at the sight of certain meats which they
abhor: And indeed sympathies and antipathies there are almost in every Simple
which we receive for physic, as Fernelius (de abdit. rer. cause. l. 2. shows:)
hence it is, that some things purge only the Spleen, some the Liver, some the
Breast only. Hence also the Cantharides are offensive to the Bladder, Lepus
marinus to the Lungs: But that History is strange which is recorded by Francis
Mendosa (lib. 4. de Flor. Philos. Problem. 11.) of the Duke of Brigantia's
one-eyed servant, who with his eye could make any Falcon or Sparrow-Hawk in
their ^light ^all down to the ground as if they were dead: this could not be
by any malignant vapor that did reach so high: it must be therefore a strange
antipathy, of which we can give no more reason, then why the Lodestone draws
Iron, or draws it not when touched with Garlic. Why the stone Selenites, as
Fernelius shows, touching the skin, should stay bleeding in any part of the
body: or why the Ring in which it is set, being put on the third finger, stays
the Dysentery within an hour: Why Rhubarb and Scamony purges choler;
Epithemium, Polypodium and Sena, melancholy; Agarick phlegm: and why
Quicksilver delights so much in gold: Why the shadow of the Fraxinus or
wilde-Ash is so pernicious to Serpents. Why there is such antipathies and
sympathies among Herbs and Trees. I know what I said but now ( Book 2. c. 3.)
of the Garlic in hindering the Load-stones attraction, is contradicted by
Doctor Brown, and before him by Baptista Porta; yet I cannot believe that so
many famous Writers who have affirmed this property of the garlic, could be
deceived; therefore I think that they had some other kind of Lodestone, then
that which we have now. For Pliny and others make diverse sorts of them, the
best whereof is the Ethiopian. Though then in some Load-stones the attraction
is not hindered by garlic, it follows not that it is hindered in none; and
perhaps our garlic is not so vigorous, as that of the Ancients in hotter
Countries; yet I find, that not only by garlic is this attraction hindered,
but also by fire, rust, oil, and other fat things, also by the presence of
another Lodestone; and that as it draws the Steel with one end, so it repels
it with the other. But to return to our Fascination, that it is caused by an
occult quality, is plain, because it is cured by another occult quality: For
Mendosa (Prob. 11.) shows, that it is known by experience how Fascination is
cured by the foot of a Mole or Wont laid to the childs forehead, which can be
nothing else but a natural antipathy: and that Fascination is caused by a
contagious breath infecting the air, is plain, by the story of the Basilisk
killing with his look or breath rather, at a distance. There is also a
Fascination by words, which the Poet mentions, Ecl. 11. Qui ne ultra placitum
laudarit, Bac^^are frontem
Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro.
We know there is great efficacy in words to move the affections, upon which
the spirits and humors of the body are disturbed, which causes oftentimes
diseases.

CHAP. IV.
1. Strange stones bred in men's bodies. 2. Children nourished by Wolves and
other Beasts. 3. Poison taken without hurt. Poison eaters may infect, how. How
Grapes and other Plants may be poisoned. 4. Of strange Mola's. Bears by
lieking, form their Cubs, the Plastic faculty still working.

THERE is nothing more strange in man's body, then the generation of stones,
whereof there be so many and diversely shaped* in the joints stones are bred by
the gout, called therefore Lapidosa Chiragra; stones are bred ordinarily in the
kidneys and bladder, of slimy matter by the heat of these parts; some are
engendered in the Liver and Spleen; some also in the heart. Hollerius speaks (
Com. 1. in lib. 6. Sect. 2. Aphor. 4.) of a woman which died of an imposthume
in the heart, wherein were found two stones; in the heart of Maximilian the
second Emperor, were found three stones, which afflicted him very much, with a
trembling of the heart, as Wyerus witnesses, ( l. 4. c. 16.) In the intestins
also sometimes stones have been found. Zacutus speaks ( lib. 3. de prax. ad
obs. 124.) of a young man disordered in his diet, who used to void by the seed
diverse stones, and at last died of a stone that was found in his Colon, in form
like a Chestnut, and as big; this could not be voided whilst the party lived,
neither by Glysters nor Purges, nor any other physic: some have thought that
these stones in the intestins are hardened by cold, which cannot be; for though
intense cold does harden as well as heat, which we may see in frosts hardening
water and dirt, and in the generation of crystal: and though we should yield
to Galen, that the intestins being membranous and spermatical parts are colder
then the sanguineal, yet we cannot yield that in a living body, there is actual
cold; for all parts are hot, yet some more, some less; therefore these stones
are not engendered by cold, but by a pre^ernatural heat in the body. The same
Zacutus (Obs. 135. l. 3.) speaks of a strange stone found in a man's bladder; it
was round like a Ball, but had issuing from it diverse pyramids, and between
each of them a sharp prickle like a needle, ( l. 1. Obs. 96.) I have read of
some who with coughing have voided stone^ out of their Lungs. One ( l. ^. Obs.
95.) by coughing voided a stone out of his Lungs, hard and long like a Date
stone, so heavy that it weighed almost twenty one grains: But no stone so much
to be admired was ever known, as that which was found in the matrix of a dead
mother, of which we spoke before, to wit, a dead child that had continued
there twenty eight years, and was turned to a stone.

II. That some children have been nourished by wild beasts, many histories do
assure us: Plutarch, Cicero, and others tell us of Romulus and Remus, who were
nourished by a she Wolf. Justin assures us, that Cyrus sucked the duggs of a
Bitch. Pausanias in his Corinthiacks, writes, that AEsculapius was educated by
a Hind. AElian in his various Histories, speaks of a Bear which gave suck to
Atalanta, being exposed; of a Mare that nursed Pelias; of a she-goat whose
duggs AEgystus sucked; and of Telephus that sucked a Hind. Diverse others I
could alledg, but these are sufficient to let us see the cruelty of some
parents, and the kindness of some beasts far more merciful then man. Besides,
the special care and providence of God toward tender and impotent infants: Yet
I know Livy contradicts the story of the Wolf, that nursed Romulus, and so does
Dr. Brown, having no other inducement but that of Livies authority, whereas the
other Historians and Monuments of Rome affirm it. Besides, it is no more
incredible for a Wolf to nurse a child, then for a Raven every day to feed
Elijah. But besides ancient stories, there be diverse late Records of some
children who have been nourished by Wolvs within these few years in our
neighbor Countries. In the Lantgrave of Hesse his Country, was found a Boy
who had been lost by his parents when he was a child, who was bred among
Wolves, and ran up and down with them upon all four for his prey. This Boy was
at last in Hunting taken and brought to the Landgrave, who much wondering at the
sight, caused him to be bred among his servants, who in time left his Wolvish
conditions, learned to walk upright like a man, and to speak, who confessed,
that the Wolves bred him, and taught him to hunt for prey with them. This story
is rehearsed by Dresserus in his Book of new and ancient Discipline, Hist. Med.
part. 1. c. 75. The like story has Camerarius of two children, which had been
bred among Wolves, and taken in the year 1544. I have read of a man bred among
Wolves, and presented to Charles the ninth of France. And a strange story is
extant, written by Lewis Guyon Sieur de la Nauche, (l. 2. Diverse. Lection. c.
34.) of a child that was carried away in the Forest of Ardenne by Wolves, and
nourished by them. This child having conversed with them diverse years, was at
last apprehended, but could neither speak nor walk upright, nor cat any thing
except raw flesh, till by a new education among other children, his bestial
nature was quite abolished. We see then it is not incredible for children to be
nursed by Wolves; of which perhaps the old Irish were not ignorant, when they
prayed for Wolves, used them kindly, as if they had been their own sons, as we
may read in Cambden (Hist. Hiber.) out of Goade.

III. That some can take poison without hurt, is plain by the story of
Mithridates, who could not be poisoned. Profecit poto Mithridates saepe veneno,
Toxica ne possint saeva nocere sibi.
This story is confirmed by Pliny, Gellius, Caelius, and others. There is a
story of the King of Cambaia's son, who by constant eating of poison, he had so
invenomed his body, that the Flies which sucked his blood swelled and died.
Solinus speaks of a people called Ophyophagi, because they fed on serpents.
Avicenna speaks of one in his time, whose body was so venomous, that whatsoever
touched it died. I have read also in Aristotle, of a Maid who was nourished
with poison. The like story is mentioned by Avicen. Alb. Magnus speaks of a
Maid who delighted to eat Spiders. S. Augustine (de morib. Mon. S. 2. c. 8.)
speaks of a woman who drank poison without hurt. Many other examples there may
be alleged; but these may suffice to let us see, that either by Art or by
Nature men's constitutions may be fortified against the malignity of poison, as
well as other animals which feed upon poison, as Vipers do upon Scorpions,
Stares on Hemplock, Ducks on Toads, Quails on Hellebor, Poultry and Monkies on
Spiders. Not to speak of miraculous power, by which many Martyrs have been
preserved from poison, as was foretold in S. Mark chapter 16. If they drink any
deadly poison, it shall not hurt them. Besides, men's complexions according to
their ages do vary, so that what has been poisonable at one time, is not at
another. Thus some that could not abide cheese in their youth, have eaten it in
their age: We see also how custom becomes another nature: for hot Climats to
Northern men at first, prove pernicious, but afterward by custom become
familiar and natural: Therefore Dr. Brown (Book 7. c. 17) has no reason to
reject that story of the Indian King, that sent unto Alexander a fair woman fed
with poison, purposely to destroy him by breath or copulation; because says
he, that poisons after carnal conversion, are so refracted, as not to make good
their first and destructive malignity. I answer, They are not so refracted, but
that they leave behind them in the flesh, a venomous impression and quality:
For if the ordinary food we take, is not so mastered by the stomach, but that
by way of reaction (^or omne agens natural in agendo repatitur) it alters the
body; much more must poisons, which are more active. Hence hot bodies are
cooled by Lettice, Sorrel, and other refrigerating meats; and cool bodies are
heated by the frequent use of Spices and Wines, and other heating viands: we
see that neither our stomach nor liver, can so master and re^ract garlic,
onions, radishes, and diverse other things we feed on, but that the urine will
retain the smell thereof. The flesh of the Thrush, that feeds on Juniper
berries, retains the re^ish thereof: The milk of the beast that feeds on
Hellebor or Scammony, will purge the body. If an infectious breath or smell,
can destroy another body; why may not the same be effected by those who are
accustomed to eat poison? Galen tells us, ( l. II. Simpl.) that by long use the
^lesh may be infected by aliments. And Capivaccius affirms, that they are in
danger to be poisoned, who touch the dead bodies of those who have been
poisoned. Therefore Plato reports, l. de veneno in Phaedra) that their bodies
who were condemned to die by poison, were washed before they drank the poison,
not after, left the Washers might be infected. Cardan (Se Subtle. l. 9^) tells
us, that though all vipers be poisonable, yet those are more venomous which
feed on Toads: And which is more strange, Simon Gennensis assures us, that
Grapes will become poisonable, if whilst the Vine is inoculating and graffing,
poison be put in it; and the Wine will prove laxative, if Scammony be inserted
in the Vine; which also Reynaldus de villa nova, proves may be effected in
other plants. Lastly, that which is poison in one Country, is not poison being
transported into another Climat, as it is known of the Peach, which in Persia
is venomous, but being transplanted, loses the deletorious quality.

IV. Levinus Lemnius tells us, that the Belgic women are much subject to false
conceptions, ( l. 1. de occultis mir. c. 8.) chiefly that which is called Mola;
being as Laurentius writes, ( Anato. l. 8.) a [sleshy infirm lump witho^t
motion, begot in the matrix of the woman, of imperfect seed.] These are most
subject to those conceptions, who are most addicted to disordered copulation,
not regarding the manner, time, or measure thereof. Nature indeed aiming at the
eternity and propagation of the species, begins to elaborate a child; but
being hindered by the abundance, weakness, and other vitiosities of the seed,
and menstruous blood, besides the ill disposition of the matrix, is forced to
leave the work imperfect. Hence this lump remains inarticulate, and sometimes
is cast our the ninth month, sometimes sooner, and in some it remains three or
four years: in some it is bred without the help of man, only by the strength of
imagination, and mixture of the female seed with the blood. But this is denied
by Laurentius, who also affirms the Mola to be without motion, which Zacuta
contradicts ( Prax. Mir. l. 2. Obs. 144. and 140. and 147.) For he speaks of
one which being put into a vessel of water, moved it self like an Hedgehog, and
lived two days. It was bigger then a man's head, and so hard, that scarce could
a knife cut it. In the midst of it were three eyes, beset round with long black
hairs. He speaks of another which being cut, was like an Onion, full of
tunicles or menibrans within one another. He writes also of a woman who in the
space of fifteen days was delivered of 152 small Mola's, or ^^eshy lumps. Now
it is observable, that no creature is subject to this fa^se conception but
women, partly because of sin, partly by reason of their humid constitutions,
idleness, and moist food: Yet we read that Bears cast forth their cubs
unshapen and unformed, which afterward they form by licking them. Dr. Brown (3.
Book c. 6) places this among his Vulgar Errors: I conf^sse in his Book he
shows much reading and learning, yet he might have spared many of those which
he calls Errors, and not fasten upon those ancient Sages from whom we have our
knowledge, more Errors then they were guilty of. For this and many more which
he calls Errors, being brought to the Test, will be found Truths: But he is not
guilty of this fault alone; some have showed the way before him. It is then
most certain, that the Bears send forth their young ones deformed and unshaped
to the sight, by reason of the thick membran in which they are wrapped, which
also is covered over with so mucous and phlegmatic matter, which the Dam
contracts in the Winter time, lying in hollow caves without motion, that to the
eye it looks like an unformed lump. This mucosity is licked away by the Dam,
and the membran broken, and so that which before seemed to be informed, appears
now in its right shape. This is all that the Ancients meant, as appears by
Aristotle ( Animal. l. 6. c. 31.) who says, that in some manner, the young Bear
is for a while rude, and without shape. Now upon this to infer, that the
Ancients meant the young Bears were not at all formed or articulated, till they
be licked by their Dams, is ridiculous: For who will say those wise men were so
ignorant, as to think the outward action of the tongue could perform that which
could not be effected by the plastic and formative power in the matrix?
Doubtless the Ancients were no less curious in searching into the natures of
things, then we are at this day; but if I should yield that the cub is not
perfectly articulated or formed, till it be excluded, no Error will arise
hence; for the plastic faculty which has its original from the sperm, cease
not to operate after the generation of the young animal, but continues working
so long as it lives: For what else is nutrition but a continual generation of
the lost substance, though not in whole, yet in part, and consequently it
introduces still a new form by changing the aliment into flesh. As the same
Mason can build an house and repair it when decayed: so can the same plastic
faculty produce the animal by generation, and repair it by nutrition. I
confess it is not called the Plastic, but Omoiastick, or assimilating faculty
in nutrition, yet it is the same still, though under different names: nay, it
does not cease to produce those parts after generation out of the matrix, which
it could not do within it; as may be seen in the production of teeth in
children, even in the seventh year of their age, which can be nothing else but
the effect of the formative faculty. We see also how new flesh is generated in
wounds; not to speak of the nails and hairs which are produced by the same
faculty, not being properly parts. Besides, the faculty cannot perish so long
as the soul is in the body, being an essential property which cannot be
separated from the soul. Moreover, we see in some creatures, that this faculty
does not work at all in the matrix, but without: For the Chick is not formed of
the Egg whilst it is within the Hen, but when it is excluded. Hence then it
appears, that if the Ancients had held the young Bears to be ejected without
form, which afterward they received by the Plastic faculty, had been no Error:
and though some young Bears have been found perfectly formed in the womb of the
Dam, it is a question whether all be formed and shaped so.

CHAP. V.
1 Diverse privileges of Eunuchs: The Fibers Testicles. 2. Diversities of
Aliments and Medicaments, the virtue of Peaches, Mandrakes, the nature of our
aliments. 3. A strange story of a ^ick Maid discussed, and of strange
vomitings, and Monsters, and Imaginations. 4. Men long lived; the Deers long
life asserted. 5. That old men may become young again, proved.

THE Testicles were made for propagation of the Species, not for conservation
of the Individuum: for Eunuchs, or such as are emasculate, have diverse
privileges which others want: First, they are longer lived, because they have
more radical moisture, which is not wasted by Venery: Secondly, they have
taller bodies for the same reason: Thirdly, they are not troubled with so much
hair, because they have not much siccity; and consequently not so much heat,
which begets siccity. Fourthly, they are not subject to baldness, because
their brain is not dried with Venery as others. Fifthly, they are not afflicted
with the Gout, which is the daughter of Venus, who begets crude humors,
weakness of joints, and of them the Gout: But Capons are more gouty then
Cocks, because they have less heat, and are more voracious, says Scatiger.
Sixthly, they are fitter for spiritual exercises; therefore some, says Christ,
have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of Heaven; which words were
mis-construed by Origin, such as emasculated themselves, against whom are both
the Canon and Civil Laws. Seventhly, they are fitter to be Counselors and
Chamberlains to Princes; for they are wise, therefore Eunuchs is as much as
(...), as Scaliger has it, (...); because they had care of the Princes
bedchamber. Eighthly, the flesh of castrated animals is more delicate, because
there is in them more benign juice, neither is their flesh infected with the
ungrateful and rankish relish of the Testicles. Ninthly, but the greatest
privilege of all is, that they are not infected with the venomous vapors of
that cave near Alepo or Hierapolis, which as Dio shows in the place of
Trajan, poisons all creatures except Eunuchs. Scaliger gives no reason of this,
nor can I, but that it is a secret in nature, or else because the Eunuchs
bodies have very few bad humors, are the less apt to be infected with ill
vapors. Tenthly, that as among men, so among beasts, there be some which
castrate themselves; such is the Fib^r, called Castor a castrand^, and the
Pontick Dog, for th^re be store of them, who makes himself an Eunuch, says
Iuvenal.

Dr. Brown, ( sect. 12.) checks the Ancients for this opinion, but without
cause; for all agree, that they bite off the two bags, or bladders, which hang
from the groin in the same place where the Testicles of most animals are. If
these be the true Testicles or not, is doubted^ because there is no passage
from them to the yard, and that the true Testicles are less, and l^e inwards
toward the back. However, this can be no Error, because they are a kind of
Testicles, both in form and situation, and so they are called Testicles by
Dioscorides, and the best Physicians: if then this be an error, it is nominal,
not real.

II. As our bodies are still decaying, and subject to many infirmities, so God
has provided for us all sorts of remedies, partly, by aliments, partly, by
medicaments, some whereof are hot, some cold, some moist, some dry, some
restringent, some la^ative, some diuretic, some hypnotick, some sp^rmatick,
some increasing or diminishing the ^oure humors of our bodies, blood, choler,
phlegm, and melancholy.

Now those aliments are called Spermatick, which either increase blood, for of
this the Sperm is begot, or which convey the Spermatick matter to the Seminal
vessels; or which add vigor to the languishing Seminall Spirits; such are
sharp, biting, salt, aromatic and ^^atulent meats: or lastly, such as cause
secundity, by bringing the matrix and Seminall parts to a temperature by their
contrary quality: So cooling things correct the heat, and hot things the
coldness of those parts: among such the Mandrakes are to be rec^^^ed, called
by Plutarch, Anthropomorphoi, and Semihomines by Colu^ella, because the forked
root represents the lower parts of man, the upper parts are commonly carved out
by circumforaneous Medacasters. These Mandrakes are of a narcotick quality;
therefore a dull, heavy, or melancholic man of old was said proverbially to
have eaten Mandrakes: These procure secundity by correcting the hot matrix with
their frigidity.

Now if we say, that Rachel finding her barrenne^^e to proceed from excessive
heat, did cove^ these Mandrakes to cool (...), and make her ^r^itful, this can
neither be thought immodesty in her, nor an error in us to think so, seeing the
best and most Interpreters are of this opinion, and the Text seems to intimate
so much.

Dr. Browns reasons are not sufficient to prove this a vulgar error, ( Book 7.
c. 7.) For, 1. Though our Mandrakes have not so pleasant a smell as those of
Judea, it will not follow they are not the same; for plants according to the
climat alter their qualities; and yet Lemnius says, they have a pleasant smell
in Belgium. 2. Nor will it follow, that Dudaim is not Mandrakes, [because it is
by the Chaldee Paraphrast interpreted in the Canticles, Balsam] for all
Interpreters upon Genesis, expound the word Mandrakes. Nor 3* Is that sequel
good [the Mandrakes did not make Rachel fruitful in three years after,
therefore they did her no good at all in way of secu^dity] for the best Physic
does not produce the wished effect always in a short space; sometimes the
contumacy of the disease, sometimes the mis application, sometimes the difusing
of the remedy, sometimes bad diet, besides other things, may hinder the
operation. Nor 4. Is this consequence valid [Many Simples in Scripture are
differently interpret^d, Ergo, the word Dudaim may not signify Mandrakes.] I
answer, they may signify as well as they may not; nay, they do signify
Mandrakes, as both the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French,
English, and other Texts have it, besides the general consent of Expositors
upon that place, except the Genevans, who would seem to be singular in this,
and therefore will have the word Dudaim to signify any lovely or delightful
fruit; but then it may signify Mandrakes, which are every way lovely both in
smell and color; and lovely they are in that they procure love; for they have
been used for Philters: And what a weak reason is this, Dudaim signifies any
pleasant fruit, therefore it is a doubt, whether it signifies Mandrakes? As if
we should say, Pomum signifies any kind of fruits, therefore it may be
doubted, whether it signifies an Apple. To be brief* I would know, whether it
be a greater error in me to affirm that which is doubted by some, or in him to
deny that which is affirmed by all.

But to return to our aliments, there are in them two things strange; first,
that they are opposite to our natures, both privately, in that they have not
our form; and positively, in that they have a contrary form; as we see in
marrow, which is the aliment of the bones, the one being soft and moist, the
other hard and dry; and if it were not so, there could be no action: But this
is to be understood before assimilation; for afterward the same becomes both
our aliment in repairing what is lost, and a part of our bodies in assuming the
form of our substance, which is no less strange then the other.

III. Zacuta ( de Prax. mir, l. 3. Obs. 139.) reports a strange story of a Maid
which fell into convulsion fits, upon the pricking of her Image by Witches, and
their whispering of some magic words to it; the Physicians were sent for; they
supposing these fits to proceed from some malignant vapor or humor in the
Matrix, gave her physic, which made her worse then before; hereupon they left
her, concluding that she was bewitched. Afterward she fell to vomiting of black
stuff mingled with hairs, thorns, and pins, and a lump like an egg, which
being cut, was full of Emmets, which stunk horribly: at last, she vomited out a
black hairy creature, as big as ones fist, with a long tail, and in shape like
a Rat, which ran up and down the room a while, and then died. Upon this a
Wizard is called, who by whispering some words in the maids ear, and by shaving
of her head, on which she put a piece of white paper, having these two letters
written on it, T.M. did withal lay on her head an As^es hoof half burned, and
so the Maid recovered.

I observe here, 1. That there might be much ^uggling in this business; for
there is no relation or sympathy in nature between a man and his effigies, that
upon the pricking of the one, the other should grow sick, no more then there is
between the sword and the wound, that the dressing of the one should be the
curing of the other. This is a fancy without ground, and yet believed by some
whose faith is too prodigal. I think rather that after the Maid fell sick,
these Jugglers made her Image, and then pricked it, so that the wounding of the
Image did not make the maid sick, but her sickness made both the Image and the
wounds therein.

2. This vomiting also might be an illusion; for I have seen in Holland the
like forgery: It was given out that a maid in Leyden did vomit buttons, pins,
hairs, peblestones, and such stuff; and I went and saw the materials; but it
was found out that the parents had first made her swallow these things in meat,
and then presently forced her to vomit all up again.

3. These convulsions and vomited stuff might be merely natural, without any
Witchcraft; for we have seen what strange sorts of vermin are bred in man's
body, and voided by purging, vomiting, and boils; what unshapen and monstrous
creatures have been produced by some women.

Parry tells us ( l. 25. de monstris) of a Monster with an horn on his head,
two wings, a childs face, one foot only like a birds leg, with one eye on the
knee, born at Ravenna 1512. Lemnius speaks of a woman that was his patient, (
l. 1. de mir. c. 8.) who first was delivered of an unshapen mass of flesh,
having on both sides two hands like a child's arms; and shortly after there fell
from her a Monster with a crooked snout, a long neck, fiery eyes, a sharp tail,
and man's feet, which ran up and down the room, making an horrible schrieching
till it was killed by the women.

I could speak of that German child, in whose head grew a golden tooth, and of
many other strange effects of nature; but these may suffice to let us see all
is not Witchcraft which is so called.

4. This imaginary cure of the Wizard was effected after the humors were
spent, and the malignity of this disease gone; at that time a piece of paper,
or a straw, may do^ more then all the sons of AEsculapius; but had the Wizard
used this spell in the beginning of the disease, it had done the maid no good
at all: when nature has mastered a disease, that which is last applied, be it
but a chip, carries away the honor of the remedy.

5. The maids imagination might be a great help toward her recovery, the force
whereof is powerful both for curing and procuring of diseases. Montague in his
Essays ( l. 1. ca. 21.) tells us of one with whom the Clyster pipe applied to
the fundament, would work as well as if he had taken the Clyster it self: And
he speaks of a woman, who imagining she had swallowed a pin, as she was eating
a piece of bread, cried out of a great pain in her throat, and a pricking, when
there was no such thing but her own imagination, nor could she have any rest,
till she had vomited up all in her stomach; then searching the basin, she found
a pin, which the Physician had conveyed ^hither; and so the same conceit that
brought the pin, removed it.

IV. In some Regions men live longer then in others, because the air is more
temperate, the influence of the stars more benign, and the food wholesomer, by
which the radical moisture and natural heat are longer preserved. In the Torrid
and Frigid Zones men are short lived, because the natural heat of the body is
drawn out by the ambient heat of the one, and extinguished by the cold of the
other: but this is where the heat and cold are in the excess.

So likewise in the same Region we find some men longer lived then others,
because they abound more in radical moisture and natural heat then others;
besides, temperance in diet, exercise and passions are great helps for
prolonging of life.

In Orkney, Sh^tland, Norway, and other Septentrional places, men live till
they be six or sevenscore years of age. And Lerius ( in Navigat. Brasil) shows,
that in Brasil, which is a hot country, some do attain six score years
without gray hairs. Pliny l. 7. c. 49.) speaks of diverse in Vespasians time in
Italy, of 120, 130, 140, 150 years old: and it stands with reason, that man
should not be shorter lived th^n other animals, being of a more excellent
temper then they, having also dominion over them, and being made for a more
excellent end, to wit, contemplation, wisdom, knowledge, for the finding out
of Arts, and Sciences: Therefore God permitted the Patriarchs before the Flood
to live so long as they did.

Now we find, that diverse beasts lived beyond an hundred years; AElian, Pliny,
and others affirm, that Elephants live two hundred years: Deer exceed an
hundred years, as Pliny shows by those Staggs that were found with Brass
collars about their necks, which Alexander had put on an hundred years before.

This story is rejected by Dr. Brown, ( Book 3. ca. 9.) upon w^ak grounds: 1.
[Because Deer attain to their full growth at six years, therefore their state
and declination which ought to be proportionable to the growth, cannot be of
long continuance. 2. Their immoderate salacity in the Month of Sept^mber. And
3. Their loss of teeth between twenty and thirty, which is a^ infalible mark
of old age.]

These are feeble reasons to deny an ancient story, or matter of fact: For, 1.
Nature does not observe that imaginary proportion between the growth and decay
of things; for some tame birds which attain^ their full growth in three or four
months, have lived twenty years after: and men, who have their full growth at
25 years, have lived two or three hundred years. 2. Salacity for one month in
the year, cannot argue a short life, as it does in Sparrows, who are salacious
every hour; ^ay, almost every minute: For Scaliger observed a Cock-Sparrow
tread the Hen ten times in a few minutes. 3. Nor is the loss of teeth an
argument of short life; for many after this loss have lived 60 or 70 years.
And it is observed by Scaliger, that the drinking of cold water, which is an
enemy to the nerves, causes the falling away of the teeth: therefore I will
content my self with the report of Pliny concerning the Deers age, till I have
better reasons then these.

V. It may be questioned, whether old men may become young again* and I am of
opinion they may: not that the years past can be revoked, or that which is
done, undone; for Evanders prayer in the Poet was in vain: O mihi praeteritos
referat si Jupiter annos.
But that the decayed nature may be so renewed and repaired, as an old man may
perform the functions of a young man, and may say with Tully, Nihil habeo quod
accusem senectutem meam. This the Poets expr^sse under the fiction of ^acchus
his Nurses, and of old AEson made young again by Medea. It stands also with
reason: For,

1. Serpents by casting off their old skins, renew their youth and vigor; and
Stags do the like by eating Serpents, Languescunt in juventutem, Tertul. de
Pa^^^o. Why then may not man be renewed?

2. Every fit of sickness is like old a^e: men in a long Ague differ nothing
from the most d^crepid and aged persons that are: But being recovered, they
obtain a youthful vigor and agility.

3. The radical moisture when it is much decayed, either by famine or
sickness, may be again repaired, and consequently the youthful v^g^ur of the
body.

4. Dav^d says, ( Psalm 103.5) that his youth is renewed like the Eagles. Now
the Eagl^s, as Saint Austin observes on that place, when with age the upper
Bill is so overgrown, that they cann^t feed, they u^e by ^ea^ing their Bill
against a rock, to break off the excrescence, and so by feeding recover their
strength and youth again.

5. For this end God created the Tree of Life in Paradise, that when man's
radical moisture fails, it might be repaired again, and his youth be renewed by
eating thereof.

6. Diverse examples we have of this renovation. Del Rio ( de Mag. l. 2.)
shows out of Torquenda, that in the year 1511, was an old man at Tarentum of
an hundred years old, who having lost his strength, hairs, nails, and color of
his skin, recovered all again, and became so young, and lusty, that he lived
fifty years after: Another example he brings of a Castilian, who suffered the
same change; and of an old Abbatesse in Valentia, who being decrepid, suddenly
became young, her monthly courses returned, her rugged skin grew smooth, her
gray hairs became black, and new teeth in her head.

Massaeus in his Indian History, ( lib. 1.) speaks of a certain Indian Prince,
who lived 340 years, in which space his youth was three times renewed. Besides
Cardan, Langius in his Epistles, ( Epist. med. 79.) speaks of a Well in an
Island called Bonica, the waters of which being drunk, makes old men become
young.

Ambrose Parry, ( l. 24, 17.) speaks of a woman who being 80 years old, lost
her hair and teeth, which grew again. I have read of diverse women whose
intermitted courses have flowed when they were 70, 80, 90, 100 years old.

CHAP. VI.
1. Of many new diseases, and causes thereof. 2. Different colors in our
bodies: the causes of the Ethiopian blackness. 3. The true Unicorn with his
horn and virtues asserted. 4. Some born blind and dumb, recovered: A strange
Universal Fever: A strange Fish, and strength of Imagination.

THAT in all Ages some new diseases have invaded men's bodies, may appear by
these testimonies: Thycides (l. 2. de Bell. Pelopon.) speaks of a new pestilence
in Athens never heard of there before.

Agitharchidas (de mari rubro) writes of the inhabitants about the red Sea, in
whose flesh vermin was bred like little dragons, which consumed their flesh;
sometimes they would thrust out their heads, and being touched, pull them back
again: they made great inflammations in the musculous parts: This mischief was
never heard of before; one amongst them being troubled with a Dysury, voided at
last a stalk of Barley: At Athens a youth with his urine voided a little beast
with many feet.

Pliny tells us, that the Mentagra, or Tetter of the Chin and Face, was not
known in Rome till the time of Tiberius: The Carbuncle came to Rome in the
Censorship of L. Paulus, and I. Marius: The Leprosy called Elephantiasis,
appea^ed first in Italy in the time of Pompey; He speaks also of other
diseases, which not long before his time sprung up in Italy: A kind of Fever,
called Coqueluche, by the French, invaded their country, anno 1510. England was
plagued with a new sweating sickness, anno 1529* The French malady appeared
first at Naples, anno 1492. The Scorbutus is but a new disease in those parts.
Many strange kinds of vermin have been bred in men's bodies in this last Age,
not known before in this part of the world: Of these and many more new diseases
Fernelius, Fracostorius, Sebizius, and others do write.

Now it is no wonder, that there are new diseases, seeing there are new sins.
2. New sorts of foods and gluttony devised. 3. New influences of the Stars. 4.
New Earthquakes and pestiferous exhalations out of the Earth. 5. New
temperaments of men's bodies. 6: Infections of waters, malignant meteors, and
diverse other causes may be alleged for new diseases; but none more prevalent
then the food which is converted into our substance: therefore in eating and
drinking, we should regard the quantity, quality, and seasons.

II. It is strange to consider the diversity of colors caused in the same
Individual body of man by the same heat; the chylus, milk, sperm, and bones,
are white; the blood and liver red; the choler yellow; the melancholy green,
the spleen blew, a part of the eye black, the hairs of diverse colors, and yet
none blew or green. And as strange it is, that in some the skin is tauny, in
others white, and in others black, all which is effected by one and the same
Sun, which as it produces all things by its heat, so it gives color to all
things; for what gives the essence, gives also the consequences; yet Dr.
Brown (Book 6. c. 10.) will not have the Sun to be the cause of the Negro's
blackness, 1. [Because the people on the South Side of the River Senaga, are
black, on the other only tauny. 2. Other animals retain their own colors in
that clime. 3. In Asia and America, men are not so black.] I answer, that it
will not follow, that the Sun is not the cause of blackness; for he does work
upon each Subject according as it is disposed to receive his impression, and
accordingly produces diversity of colors. Hence in the same hot climat men
are black, Parrets and leaves of trees are green, the Emmets as some report,
are white, the Gold is yellow* and every thing there has its own peculiar
color, and yet all are produced by the same Sun; nay, the same man that has a
black skin, has white teeth; the same Sun at the same time in the same Garden,
does cloth the Lily in white, the Rose and Cherry in red, and diverse fruits in
black: it is observed, that the Sun whiteneth those things which are inclined
to be hard, and blackneth soft things; so he makes the Ethiopians teeth white,
the skin black; he makes the green corn turn white and hard with his heat, and
at the same time makes the plumb black and soft; women that blanch or whiten
their linen in the Sun, know that he can ^an their skins, but whiten their
cloth.

^gain, the air may be more temperate, and greater store of refreshing winds
and exhalations on the one side of the river Niger, then on the other, and so
the Suns operation may be hindered, which is the cause that in America and
Asia, under the same parallel, men are not so black as in Africa, where there
is more heat and greater drought: For it wants those fresh Winds, and great
Lakes and Rivers which are in Asia and America. The Suns heat then is the cause
of blackness in such as are capable of it, whether the clime be torrid or
frigid. Hence in cold countries we find black crows, and in hot white Swans.
Besides, this narration is suspicious; for on both sides of the River men have
been se^n equally black; and there be some in Asia as black as in Africa. He
objects again, [That Nigro's transplanted into cold countries, continue their
hue, therefore the Sun is not the sole cause of this blackness.] Ans. The
question is not if the Sun be the sole cause, but whether a cause at all; which
the Doctor in his former objections seemed to deny. 2. I say, that the Sun is
the sole primary cause; if there be any other causes, they are sec^ndary and
subordinate to the Suns heat and influence. 3. He may as well infer, the Sun
is not the cause of greenn^sse in leaves, grass, or plants in the Torrid Zone,
because these being transplanted into cold climats, retain their hues, [ Book
6. c. 12] And indeed he seems to make the spirit of Salt peter in the Earth the
cause of viridity, because [in a glass these spirits project orient greens.] I
should like his reasons well, if the verdure of the plant were not more real
then that of Saltpeter in the glass; but what will he say to that Earth where
is no Saltpeter at all, and yet the ^earbs are green? Or is there Saltpeter
in a glass of pure water, where I have seen green leaves bud out of the stem
of an herb. Besides, I find urine out of which Saltpeter is made, to spoil
the greenness of the herbs. 4. If the impression of black, which the Sun
causes in a hot clime, must alter in a cold, then may the other qualities also
which the Sun by his heat procures, be lost in a cold country; and so what is
hard in Ethiopia, must be soft in England, and the heat of Indian spices must
here grow cold. He objects again, [that there are Negroes under the Southern
Tropic, and beyond which are colder countries.] I answer, that these Negroes
were colonies out of hotter countries, and not Aborigines or Natives at first:
And he confesses there be Plantations of Negroes in Asia, all which retain
their original blackness. Lastly, he objecteth, [That in the parts where the
Negroes possess, there be rivers to moisten the air; and in Lybia there are
such dry and sandy deserts, as there is no water at all, but what is brought on
camels backs; and yet there are no Negroes; therefore dryness cannot cause
blackness.] I answer, 1. It cannot be proved, that the Ne^ groes who dwell
near rivers, had their original there. 2. Though there may be some moist
exhalations, yet it seems they are not so abundant as to qualify the Suns
heat. 3. Though the deserts of Lybia be dry, yet they are not so hot as under
the Line: It is the excess of heat and siccity together, that causes
blackness, and not one of these alone. 4. We see men grow tauny here by
conversing much in the Sun; And further South more tauny, and still as the heat
increases, the degrees of blackness increase also: to deny this, were to deny
our senses; and we see dead bodies hung in the Sun, grow black; the same would
befall to living bodies, if they continued still in the Sun, yet not in so
short a time, because the continual generation of moisture, and the supply of
the decayed parts would make some resistance; yet Pausanias tells us, that the
Lybian vipers are black by the Suns heat; therefore says Cardan, there is no
more reason why men should be black there then vipers, l. 10. de subtle.

III. Men's bodies are obnoxious to many dangers, by reason of the many sorts of
poisons in the world, some killing by occult, some by manifest qualities; but
God out of his goodness to mankind, has ordained as many remedies and
antido^es as there be poisons, whereby their malignity is either prevented
expelled: Among all these Antidotes, there is none more wonderful then the
Un^corns horn, which has been so much questioned and doubted by diverse
Writers, some denying the existence of the Unicorn as it is ordinarily painted
and described; Others denying that there is any such horn, and some disallowing
the virtues thereof; among whom is Doctor Brown (Book 3. c. 23.) in his Vulgar
Errors: But that there are Beasts with one Horn in the Indies, as Bulls, Asses,
Horses, etc. I think none will deny. 2. The Unicorn or Mon^ceros, is not the
same with Rhinoceros or Naricorn: for this is of an Elephantine bigness, with
short legs, whose body is covered with shells, the Elephants enemy, which he
overcame at Lisbon, in that public combat exhibited by Emanuel of Portugal,
anno 1515. he has a short Horn on his shoulders, another longer on his nose;
but that Rhinoceros, whose picture Scaliger saw, ( Exerc. 205.) had an head
like a Hog, with two horns, one upon his nose, the other upon his forehead,
called by Martial, (in Amphit. Epig. 22.) Vrsus gemino cornu gravis. But the
true Unicorn has the proportion and bigness of a Horse, the head, legs and
feet of a Stagge, and the mane of an horse; he has a horn in his forehead,
says Cardan (de subtle. l. 10.) three cubits long; two of these Unicorns were
seen at Mecha, of which see Parry in his 21 Book of poisons, Munster and
Fernandus de Cordova, [l. 5. didas. c. 9.] 3. The reason why the Unicorn is
differently described, is, because diverse Authors confound him with the
Naricorn, or else because the^e be diverse species of Unicorns, as there be of
Dogs and other Animals, or else because they vary the color and bigness of
their horn according to their age and climat wherein they live, as other beasts
do: but from variety of descriptions and circumstances, we must not infer a
nullity of the substance, as Parry does; for so we may deny the Rhinoceros,
which is diversely described; Strabo makes him like a Bear, [ li. 16. de sub. l.
10.] Cardan, like a Bull, others like an Elephant. [See Parry, Cardan, Fern. de
Cord. Pausanias, Scaliger, Munster, Pliny, Solinus, Caesar, AElian,
Polyhistor.] Some give him but one horn, some two, which with some is crooked,
with others straight. I therefore make no question of the true Unicorn, as he
is commonly painted, because Vertomanus saw two of them, as Scaliger
witnesses, and so did Lewis Ba^thema, who as some say, is the same with
Vertomanus, Justin Martyr, Basil, and other of the Fathers; Yea, the holy
scriptures seem to favor this description, Job 39.9. Will the Unicorn be
willing to serve thee, etc? The Hebrew word Rem is by Hierom, Montanus, and
Aquila, translated Rhinoceros; but by the 70 Monoceros. Yet in another place
Hierom and Montanus translate the word Unicorn: and in this place it cannot
signify Rhinoceros, because this beast has been oftentimes subdued by man,
and bound, as we read in the Roman stories, but so was never the Unicorn
brought into subjection, as God shows to Job: And when David says, He shall
be exalted like the Horn of an Unicorn, he cannot mean the Rhinoceros, who of
all cornuted Animals, has the shortest Horn; but the true Unicorn, whose Horn
is the highest of all others; for else David's comparison had been childish. Now
for the Horn it self, and virtues thereof, they are rejected by Rondeletius,
Parry, Brown, and some others. Rondeletius, [ l. 21. de venenis, c. 61.] found
no more virtue in this Horn then in an Elephants Tooth. Parry found no virtue
in the French Kings Horn. Brown rejects the Horn, [because it is diversely
described. 2. The Ancients adscribed no virtue to it. 3. It cannot resist
Arsenick, and poisons, which kill by second qualities.] To these I answer, 1.
If it be sufficient to deny an Horn, for that it is differently described, we
may deny the Hearts Horns, for there are great differences of them, some bigger
and higher then others, some more branchy, some harder, some are clothed with
a soft Down, others are not; and they have not all of them exactly the same
color. Neither do I allow, that all which are called Unicorns horns, are true;
for some are fictitious. 2. If the Ancients adscribed no virtue to this horn,
why was it of such account among them? Why did the Indian Princes drink out of
them, and make Cups and Rings of them, which either they wore on their fingers,
or applied to their breasts, but that they knew there was in them an antidotal
virtue against poison, as Andreth Baccius [l. de Vnicor.] shows, and the
Doctor denies not [an Antidotall efficacy, and such as the Ancients commended
in this Horn] and yet two lines before, [he denies that the Ancients adscribed
any virtue to it.] But sure it is apparent, that not only there is an occult
quality in it against poison, as in the Elks Hoof against the falling
sickness, but also by manifest qualities it works; for Baccius proves it to be
of an excessive drying quality, and therefore good against worms and
putrefaction. And that Riccius the Physician did use sometimes the weight of a
scruple, sometimes of ten grains thereof in burning fevers with good success.
3. That it can resist Arsnick, the same Baccius proves, by the experiment which
the Cardinal of Trent made upon two Pigeons, [ l. de Vnic.] to which he caused
some Arsenick to be given: shortly after he gave some scrapings of his Unicorns
horn to one of them, which after some symptoms recovered and lived, the other
died two hours after it had eaten the Arsenick: The same Horn cured diverse
pestilential Fevers, and such as were poisoned. Hence then it appears, that
this Horn was both commended by the Ancients, namely, by AElian, Philostrates,
and diverse others, as also by modern Physicians, as Ficinus, Brasavolus,
Matthiolus, Mandella, and many more. It is true, that some might not find the
virtue of it, either because it was not the true Horn, or the true dosis was
not exhibited, or due time was not observed, or else the malignancy of the
disease would not yield: For Interdum d^cta plus valet art malum. But from
hence to deny the Horn or its virtue, were all one as to deny Rhubarb, Agarick,
Sena, or other Simples, because they do not always produce the wished effect,
or work upon all bodies at all times alike. The means to discriminate the true
Unicorns horn from the false, are two, to wit, if it cause the liquor in which
it is put, to bubble; and secondly, if it sweat when the poison is near it, as
Baccius tells us.

IV. I have read of some who were born blind and dumb, and yet have been cured,
[ Seidelus de morb. incur.] but in these there could not be a total privation
of the organ or faculty of sight and speech; for such cannot be cured by Nature
nor Art. And so John 6. it was held impossible for one born blind to see. In
those then was only a privation of the act, and so the eyelids only shut up
and agglutinated, which by Art might be cut and opened. And so the strings by
which the tongue is tied, are often cut. I have also read [ in Seidelius] of
one who lived till he was an old man, and every year from his birth till his
dying day, had a fever which took him still upon his birthday: This
anniversary Fever held him still fourteen days, and at last killed him. The
seeds of this Fever he got doubtless in his mothers womb: and what impressions
the seed or Embryo receives then, can never be eradicated; such is the force
of the formative power upon our first materials. S^^liger speaks of a certain
Fish in the Island of Zeilam, which if one hold fast in his hands, puts him in
a shaking fit of an Ague: This effect I suppose proceeds from the excessive
cold of the Fish, which by the hand being communicated to the muscles and
nerves, causes shaking and convulsion fits. And no less strange is that which
is mentioned by Libavius, of one who hearing his kinsman being in a remote
country, was dead of the plague, fell sick himself of the same disease, though
the place where he was then dwelling, was free from any infection. [ Libavius
de veneno, c. 8. Corollarii] This proceeded from a deep apprehension, or sudden
fear, a weakness in nature, and an aptitude to fall into that disease; and how
powerful apprehension, fear and fancies are upon our bodies, may be seen in
that story mentioned by Libavius [de veneno. c. 8.] of one who ate a snake in
stead of an Eel without any hurt, till a good while after he was told it was a
Snake; and upon this he fell sick and pined away.

CHAP. VII.
1. The diversities and virtues of Bezar stones. 2. A woman conceived in a
Bath, of an Incubus. 3. Strange actions performed by sleepers, and the causes
thereof. Lots Incest in his sleep. 4. Some Animals live long without food: The
Camelions food is only air; the contrary reasons answered: Air turns to water,
and is the pabulous supply of fire.

MOnardes [ in historia Bezoaris] speaks of some who were poisoned by drinking
out of a puddle where Toads, Snakes, and other virulent vermin had laid their
spawn, but were cured by taking Bezar two or three times. Bauhinus, [ c.
34.36.] speaks of diverse diseases cured by this stone; and it is known by daily
experience, that it is used with good success in pestilential Fevers, as
Synertus shows, Syn. l. 4. de Feb. c. 8. It is also good in diverse other
maladies both to cure and prevent them: Yet Doctor Brown thinks [ we are daily
gulled in the Bezar, whereof many are false, Book 3. c. 23.] I deny not but
some adulterat Bezars there are, yet we must not think all falls, or that we are
gulled, because we do not see the wished effects: For Synertus (l. 4. de Feb.
c. 8.) shows, that the best Bezar fails, if the just dose be not given. For
some out of fearfulness give but a grain or two, whereas he has given eight or
ten grains with good success. Again, the operation of it is hindered oftentimes
by mixing it with other Simples: It proves also ineffectual, if any thing else
be given too soon after, or if the stomach be not clear when it is exhibited.
For as the spirit of Tartar and Vitriol by themselves will work powerfully; but
being mixed, lose their operative qualities and taste: so does Bezar many times
mixed with other things. Now this stone is bred in a bag under the stomach of
some beasts, which in form resemble our Goats: In the E^st-Indies they have
horns, but in the West none: The Oriental stones are the best, a grain whereof
has been sold for four Ducats. Some of them are as big as a Goose Egg: they
have diverse forms, and diverse colors, some yellow, some green, some black; the
best are bred in those beasts that feed on the hills, and on aromatic herbs,
which are not found in the valleys: they grow like Onions wrapped about with many
tunicles or crusts. Acosta (l. 4. c. 42.) shows, that in the midst of some of
them are sound pins, straws, or sticks, about which matter does gather, which
by degrees increases and hardneth till it come to a just magnitude. In the
midst of those stones are found sometimes odoriferous herbs. Mathiolus and
Renodaeus hold those for the best stones in the midst of which are found dust
or gravel. The Indians use the powder of Bezar, not only against inward
diseases, but also with it they cure their wounds and Carbuncles, or Boils.
Acosta (l. 4. c. 42.) relates the observation of the Peruans, who say, that
the best stone is bred in a beast called Vieugne, which feeds upon a
poisonable herb, by which it preserves it self from the grass, and waters
that are poisoned by venomous beasts. He that will see more of this stone, let
him read those above named, and likewise Boutius, Baccius, Toll, and others.

II. That story is strange of the Woman which conceived in a Bath by
attracting the man's sperm who bathed in the same place: This is affirmed by
Averroes (Anat. l. 8. quaest. 11.) but denied by Laurentius, del Rio, and some
others, whom Doctor Brown in this follows. He that denies a matter of
fact, must bring good witnesses to the contrary, or else show the impossibility
of the fact, which they do not. For we shall find this conception possible, if
either we consider the nature of the Matrix, which by a strange instinct and
appetite attracteth the sperm to it (for which cause Plato calls it ((...))
even as the stomach attracteth meat and drink, though in some distance from it:
Or if we consider that the seminal spirits in the vvarm water might be a
while preserved from evaporating; and therefore what they say of the longitude
of the organ in which the seed is refrigerated, is not to the purpose, except
they could prove it to be so in all: But the contrary is found in the long
organ of great breasts, wherein the sperm is no vvays damaged. Besides, the
heat of the bath might have some proportion to that of the Matrix; whereas the
organ of emission is not so hot, as consisting most of nervous and spermatical
parts. Again, we see that the sperm of Fishes, in which there are seminal
spirits, is not prejudiced by the water where it is shed; but the male fishes
cast their seed upon the spaw^ which the females leave in the water, as
Aristotle, Pliny, AElian, Albertus and others, do show. Lastly, we must not
think all the stories false which are written of the Incubi, which were evil
spirits conveying the masculine seed to the place of generation, of which
there have been conceptions. For to deny this, says Augustine, (lib. 15. de
Civit. Dei, cap. 23.) does argue impudence, considering the many testimonies
and examples of the same: yet I deny not but the imagination is sometimes
deluded, but not still, as Wierus thinks; and I know also, that Incubus is the
same disease with Ephialtes; yet it will not follow, that there are no evil
spirits called Incubi and Succubi: For, to deny such, were to accuse the
ancient Doctors of the Church, and the Ecclesiastic Histories of falsehood,
which affirm that the Catecbumeni were much troubled with these Incubi. This
were also to contradict the common consent of all Nations, and experience.
There is then a double Incubus, the one natural, called (...), which is caused
in sleep by a frigid gross vapor filling the ventricles of the brain, and
prohibiting the animal spirits to pass through the nerves, whereby the
imagination is hurt, so that they think they are oppressed with a great
weight. This disease is much like the Epilepsia, but somewhat mild. The other
Incubus is Diabolical.

III. That some men can in their sleep perform those actions which they neither
could nor durst do when awaked, is known by Histories and experience. Marianus
(cap. ad audientiam) witnesses, that he had a Maid, who in her sleep could
rise and make bread, as if she had been awaked. Francis Mendoza, (l. 6. de
Flor.) knew one who would rise in his sleep, and in the night time vvalked
out with his naked sword, with which he struck some of the City guard; but
at last being vvounded, was awaked. Tirannel (in Mendoza) speaks of an English
man in Paris, who rose in his sleep, went down toward the river Seen;
where, having met with a Boy, he killed him, and so returned (being all this
while asleep) to his bed. Horstius (de noctambulis) writes of one who in his
sleep usually would arise, go up and down the stairs, lock and unlock his
chests. He speaks of another, who dreamed he was to ride a Journey, rises,
puts on his clothes, boots and spurs, gets up into the Window, where he sat
stradling, beating the walls with his spurs, till he was awaked. And he
shows, that at Helmstad one rose in his sleep, went down the stairs into a
Court; from thence toward the Kitchen, near which was a deep Well: into this
he went down, holding fast to the stones by his hands and feet; but when he
touched the water, with the cold thereof he was awaked; and finding in what
danger he was, gave a pitiful outcry, which awaked those in the house, who
having found him, got him out, and brought him to his bed, where he lay many
days speechless and immovable, being extremely weakened with fear, cold, and
crying. Another story he has no less strange then this, of a young Gentleman
who in his sleep arose naked, carrying his shirt in his hand, and by the help
of a rope clambers up to a high Turret in the Castle where he then was: Here he
finds a nest of Mag-pies, which he robs, and puts the young ones in his shirt;
and so by the same rope comes down again, and returns to his bed: The next
morning being awaked, tells his brother how he dreamed that he had robbed a
Pies nest; and withal wondering what was become of his shirt, rises and finds
it at his beds feet, with the young birds wrapped up in it. To these examples,
we may add that of Lot, who in his sleep begot his two daughters with child:
This Dr. Brown (Book 7. c. 6) will not admit, though he has a direct Text of
Scripture against him: For there it is said, Genesis 19. That Lot neither knew
when his daughters lay down, nor when they rose up. Which words are expounded
by Irenaeus ( c. 51. cont. Haeres.) That Lot had neither pleasure, nor consent,
nor sense, nor knowledge of this act: Chrysostom affirms the same, expounding
these words, Lot (says he, Hom. 44. in Genes.) was so intoxicated with wine,
that he knew not at all what he did, lest he should be guilty of so great a
crime; acting in this neither wittingly nor willingly. S. Austin is of the same
mind, ( Cont. manic. l. 22.) and other Expositors. Now if one ask, how
sleeping men can do such things? I answer, it is partly by the strength of
Imagination, which is more active in sleep then when we are awake. 2. All
sleepers are not apt for such actions; but such whose natures are melancholy or
choleric, whose spirits are more fervent, subtle, and agile then others,
moving the bmuscles, and by them the body, though the outward senses be ound up
by sleep. 3. They catch not that hurt in their sleep, which they would do if
awaked; because their senses are not avocated by other objects, they have no
apprehension of fear, their imagination is more intent in sleep; and withal
their Genius or good Angel is careful of them.

IV. I read of diverse both beasts and men; which have lived a long time without
meat or drink: We know that Swallows, Cuckows, Dormice, and diverse other
animals, sast all the Winter: The like is recorded of Lizards, Serpents,
Water-Crocodiles, Bears, and other ravenous beasts, whose bodies by reason of
their humidity and rapacity, are full of crudi^les, by which they are fed in
the Winter. Mendosa (d^ Flor. Philos. Probl. 24.) speaks of a Hen in his time,
which lived eighty days without food and water. Cardan (de subtle. l. 10.)
writes, that the Indian bird called Manucodiata, lives only in the air upon
dew as Grasshoppers do. Rond^letius (l. 1. de Piscib. c. 12.) shows, that his
wife kept a fish three years in a glass, without any other food but water; and
yet the fish grew so big, that the glass could not at last contain it. And I
have kept Spiders my self in a glass, which I dismissed after they had fasted
nine months. The Camelion also lives upon the air, Oscitans vescitur,
follicans ruminat, de vento cibus, says Tertullian ( in Pallio.) I have seen a
Camelion which was brought hither from Africa by sea, and kept in a box, which
all the while was never seen to feed on any thing else but air. Yet D. Brown
(Book 3, c. 21.) will not have air to be his food for these reasons: 1. Because
Aristotle and AElian speak nothing of this. Ans. Neither do they speak any
thing against it, which likely they would have done, if they had thought their
feeding on air had been fabulous. They do not speak of what food each animal
is sustained: and though they do not speak of this airy food, yet Pliny, and
others do. 2. Scaliger writes, that Claudius saw a Camelion lick up a fly from
his breast. And Bellonius upon exenteration found flies in the Camelions belly.
Answ. So I have seen Dogs and Cats eat Flies; Monkies and Turkies eat Spiders,
and Dogs eat grass; yet it will not follow, that they feed on these, but
rather eat them out of wantonness, or for physic; so does the Camelion
sometimes eat flies; and so does the Ostridge eat Iron, and diverse birds
swallow stones. 3. There are found in this animal the gu^s, the stomach, and
other parts for nutrition, which had been superfluous if it feed on air only.
Answ. These parts are not superfluous, though they feed on air, but necessary;
because the air on which they feed, is not pure, but mixed, and therefore
nutritive. Again, they were to eat sometimes flies, for pleasure or physic,
therefore the stomach was necessary. Moreover, we must not think every thing in
nature superfluous, whereof we can give no reason; for so we may accuse her
for giving eyes to Wonts, tears to Men, Goats, and Dogs, whereof they make no
use. And why she is so bountiful to the Fox, and so niggardly to the Ape, in
giving the one too great a tail, the other none at all. 4. He reasons From the
bigness of the Camelions tongue, and the slimy matter in it, that air cannot
be its nutriment. Answ. Its tongue was made to catch flies, but not for
nutriment, as is said: and that slimy matter is given as well for its prey, as
for the destruction of Serpents its enemies: for it uses upon the sight of a
Serpent, to let fall that slimy matter on his head, with which he is presently
killed. 5. The air cannot nourish, because it has no taste. Ans. Taste belongs
not to nourishment; for they who have lost their taste, are not therefore the
less nourished. Again, though the pure air be tastlesse, yet air thickened and
moistened, is not so as we may perceive by the diverse tastes in waters. Besides,
though the air be tastlesse to us, it may be otherwise to the Camelion. 6.
There can be no transmutation of air into the body nourished, because there is
no familiarity of matter between air and a living body. Ans. This may be true
of pure air, but not of mixed, and of our bodies, not of the Camelions.
Besides, diverse creatures live on dew, which is but watrish air; and how many
in Arabia are fed with Manna, which is both begot of and in the air. 7.
Nutriment is condensated by the natural heat, but air by the bodies heat is
rarefied. Ans. The contrary of this is seen continually by the air we breath
out, which is still thicker then that we take in: For though the heat does
rarifie the air, yet by the moisture of our bodies it is thickened. 8. All
aliment must remain some time in the body; but air is presently expelled. Answ.
The air which is attracted by the Lungs, and serves for refrigeration of the
heart, is quickly again expelled, because it is to stay no longer then it
performs its office, which is to refrigerate; but that air on which the
Camelion and other creatures feed, must and does stay longer. 9. Air in regard
of our natural heat, is cold, and so contrary; but aliment is potentially the
same. Ans. All aliment is contrary at first, or else there could be no action,
and so no nutrition. Again, what is cold, is potentially the same with our
bodies, in respect of the substance, not of the quality. Besides, how many
sorts of cold meats, fish, fruits, herbs, sallets, do men eat in Summer,
which notwithstanding are the same potentially with their bodies. 10. Some
deny air to be an aliment, or that it enters into mixed bodies, and its not
easy to demonstrate, that it is convertible into water; and we doubt that air
is the pabulous supply of fire, much less that flame is properly air kindled.
Ans. Some have denied Snow to be white, or fire hot, therefore no wonder if
some fantastical heads deny air to be an element, or that it enters into mixed
bodies. Danaeus indeed thinks air and water to be all one, because water is
quickly turned into air, and because they have great affinity: but this is
against himself; for what can be turned into another substance is not the same,
nothing is convertible into it self: and if air be water, because this can be
turned into that, then water is earth; for in many caves water drops turn to
stones, and so we shall make but one element. Again, if air enter not into mixed
bodies, what is that unctuous humidity or oil which we find in all perfect
mixed bodies? It cannot be fire nor earth; for these are neither unctuous nor
humid: nor can it be water; for though that be humid, it is not unctuous, it
must needs then be air. Again, when the Doctor says, It is not easy to
demonstrate the conversion of air into water; he denies both sense and reason:
for this conversion is as demonstrable as our respiration in winter, when the
air which a man attracteth, is turned into water drops on his beard, sheets,
rugs, and blankets: reason also shows this; for if water can be turned into
air, why cannot air be turned into water, both communicating in the symbolical
quality of humidity. Lastly, his doubting, and the Lord Verulams denying air to
be the pabulous supply of fire, is causless: For I ask, what is it that
substantially maintains the fire? They answer, It is combustible matter in the
kindled body. But in this they trisle: for I ask what this combustible matter
is? Earth it cannot be; for earth, 1. as earth, is not combustible; and we see
that after the fire is spent, earth remains in ashes. Nor can it be water; for
that maintains not the fire, but extinguisheth it. It must then necessarily be
air: for we see by daily experience, that the more of this unctuous or aereal
humidity is in the fuel, the more apt it is to burn. And when this is spent,
the fire dies, as we see in candles, lamps, torches, links, and whatsoever
has pinguedinous matter in it. Fernelius indeed gives a threefold food to the
fire; to wit, combustible stuff, smoke, and air; but all this may be reduced
to air: For nothing is combustible, which has not in it aereal humidity: and
smoke is nothing else but air clothed with the fiery quality of siccity and
calidity, wanting nothing but light to make it fire. Therefore we see how
quickly smoke is turned into flame, and this into smoke again. To conclude, air
is the very life of fire, which would quickly die, if it received not animation
by ventilation. This we see in cupping-glasses, how nimbly the fire, when
almost extinguished, will upon a little vent suck the air to it.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Diverse animals long-lived without food. The Camelion live, on air only. 2.
Diverse creatures fed only by water. 3. Chilification not absolutely necessary.
Strange operations of some stomachs. The Ostrich eats and digests Iron. 4. How
Bees, Gnats, etc. make a sound. Of Glowworms: and Grains bit by Pismires: the
vegitable Lamb, and other strange plants. 5. The Tigers swiftness. The Remora
stays ships.

THAT diverse animals, even men and women. can subsist without food, is plain by
these examples: A certain maid in the Diocese of Spire, anno 1542. lived three
years without meat or drink. In the year 1582. in the Palatinat there lived a
maid nine years together without food, who afterward married, and had children.
Rondeletius (l. 1. de pis. c. 13.) writes of a maid in France, and of another
in Germany, who lived diverse years without food: and of another whom he saw
that had no other food but air ten years together. Ficinus saw a man who had no
other food but what the air and Sun afforded him. In the year 1595. a maid
lived at Colen three years without food; another at Bern lived eighteen years
on the air alone, anno 1604. Other examples I could allege out of Citesius
Physician of Padua, Lentulus of Bern, Ioubertus, and others; but these may
suffice to let us see, that nutrition does not consist merely in meat and
drink. I will not here allege examples of miraculous fasts, or of Diabolical
and Magical; but such as are merely natural, as these which I have named: for
in them the natural heat was weak, and not able to master the humidity with
which they abounded: So then, where there is a weak heat, and much sweet
phlegm, which is imperfect blood, as Physicians call it, there the life may be
prolonged without food.

I have read ( Mendoza in Flor. phil.) of a Venetian who fasted forty six
years, being of a cold constitution, and abounding with thick phlegm; we see
this in the herb Semper-vivum, which many years together lives, and is green
without earth or water, having much natural humidity within it. So the Camelion
is only fed by air, as is said, which appears to be true (however Dr. Brown
(Book 3. c. 21.) writes to the contrary) by these reasons, 1. The testimonies
both of ancient and modern Writers, except a few* and the witnesses of some yet
living, who have kept Camelions a long time, and never saw them feed but on
air. 2. To what end has Nature given it such large Lungs beyond its
proportion? Sure not for refrigeration; less Lungs would serve for this use,
seeing their heat is weak; it must be then for nutrition. 3. There is so little
blood in it, that we may easily see it does not feed on solid meat.

The Doctor says, That Frogs and diverse Fishes have little blood, and yet
their nutriment is solid. But he does not prove the nutriment to be solid.
Besides, they have more blood then is in the Camelion. 4. To what end should it
contnually gape more then other animals, but that it stands more in need of air
then they, towit, for nutrition as well as refrigeration. The Doctor imputes
this gaping to the largeness of his Lungs: This is but a shift; for other
animals whose Lungs do exceed both the Lungs and whole bodies of many
Camelions, do not gape as this does, and yet they stand more in need of
refrigeration, as having more blood and heat, then ten thousand Camelions. 5.
He that kept the Camelion which I saw, never perceived it to void excrements
backwards; an argument it had no solid food: and what wonder is it for the
Camelion to live on air, when Hay a beast of Brasil, as big as a Dog, was never
seen to feed on any thing else, as Lerius witnesses? The Doctor concludes,
That the Camelion is abstenious a long time, but not still, because diverse
other animals are so. He may as well infer, that the Camelion is cornuted,
because diverse other animals are so. Each species has its property, which is
not communicable to other species* otherwise it were no property.

II. That water is the aliment of diverse creatures, is plain; 1. By the
vegetables; for herbs, trees, and plants are nourished by it. 2. By animals;
for it is the food of many fishes, as was showed by that fish which Rondeletius
his wife kept three years in a glass. Grasshoppers feed upon dew, which is
water.

I have read ( Mendoza, Prob. 23.) of Worms in Armenia, which feed only on
Snow; and of some birds whose aliment is only water. 3. By men; for Albertus
Magnus speaks of one who lived seven weeks together only upon water. I know
Aristotle, (l. 7. de anim.) Galen, and Averroes are against this opinion. But
we must understand they speak of the pure element of water, which is not
nutritive; not of that which is impure, mixed, or compounded* for such may
nourish.

Doctor Brown will not have water an aliment, 1. Because some creatures drink
not at all. Answ. To such, water indeed can be no aliment, and so indeed his
argument is good; but to say, that water is no creatures aliment, because some
creatures do not drink at all, is as much as if he should infer, that no man
eats bread, because some men never ate any. 2. He says, That water serves for
refrigeration and dilution; therefore it is no aliment. Answ. Why may not the
same thing serve both? Do we not many times eat cooling herbs, which both
refrigerate and feed us. 3. If the ancients (says he) had thought water
nutritive, they would not have commended the Limpid water for the best, but
rather turbid streams, where there may be some nutriment. Answ. If the Ancients
had spoken of Waters fittest to feed Eels, Frogs, and such as live on mud, they
would have commended the turbid streams; but they spoke of such Waters as are
fittest for our bodies, and therefore they commended the Limpid for the best;
and yet he confesses in the purest water there is much terreous residence, and
consequently some nutriment.

III. Chilification is an action of the stomach, but not absolutely necessary,
because many creatures in the Winter live without it: And this act is not to be
ascribed to the heat of the stomach; for though heat as heat does concoct; yet
it does not chilifie; for neither fiery, nor feverish, nor any other heat of
the body can perform this, but that of the stomach; therefore this action must
proceed from the specifical form and proper quality of the stomach, which turns
all it receives into a white creamy substance, but cannot produce several
substances, as the Liver does; because it is not so hot as the Liver, or rather
it has not that specifical form which the Liver has. Besides, that the
stomachs work is to master the aliment, to concoct it, and to prepare it for
the Liver. But besides this quality of the stomach, there is another more
strange, when some can eat and digest coals, sand, lime, pitch, ashes, and such
like trash. This is called by Physicians a disease, under the name of Pica,
Citta, Malacia; but I think it proceeds not only from a distemper in the
stomach, and malignant acide humors impacted in the membrans thereof, but also,
and that chiefly, from some occult quality. Forestus (lib. 18. Obs. 7.) knew
one who swallowed down live Eeels, another who ate a piece of Lime as big as
his fist, and all without hurt. Fonseca (Consult. part. 1. cons. 94.) knew a
woman who daily did eat earthen ware or pot-sheards so long as she lived; and
she lived till she was old; even when she fell sick of a fever, she could not
abstain from eating of this stuff: therefore I do not much wonder that the
Ostridge can eat and digest iron, which it does not by its heat, as Cardan
thinks; (though I deny not but the great heat of that bird, and the thickness
of his Gizzard may be some help) but rather by an occult quality, or the nature
of its whole essence, as Fernelius writes: For the truth of this, we have not
only the testimonies of the Ancients, but the experiments also of late Writers:
For Langius in his Epistles, writes that he saw some of those Ostriches in the
Duke of Ferrara's Garden, who swallowed and digested pieces of gold, and other
metal. Leo Africanus says, that they swallow whatsoever they find, even iron.
And what wonder is it if the Ostrich eat Iron, when Rats do the same. But
Doctor Brown denies this for these reasons, ( book 3. c. 22.) Because Aristotle
and Oppian are silent in this singularity. 2. Pliny speaks of its wonderful
digestion. 3. AElian mentions not Iron. 4. Leo Africanus speaks diminutively.
5. Fernelius extenuates it, and Riolanus denies it. 6. Albertus Magnus refutes
it. 7. Aldrovandus saw an Ostrich swallow Iron, which excluded it again
undigested. Answ. Aristotle's, Oppians, and AElians silence, are of no force;
for arguments taken from a negative authority, were never held of any validity.
Many things are omitted by them, which yet are true; It is sufficient that we
have eyewitnesses to confirm this truth. As for Pliny, he says plainly, that
it concocteth whatsoever it eats. Now the Doctor acknowledges it eats Iron:
Ergo, according to Pliny, it concocts Iron, Africanus tells us, that it devours
Iron. And Fernelius is so far from extenuating the matter, that he plainly
affirms it, and shows, that this concoction is performed by the nature of its
whole essence. As for Riolanus, his denial without ground, we regard not.
Albertus Magnus speaks not of iron, but of stones which it swallows, and
excludes again without nutriment. As for Aldrovandus, I deny not but he might
see one Ostrich which excluded his iron undigested; but one Swallow makes no
Summer. All individuals have not the same temperament: Among men, some will
digest that which others cannot: there might be some weakness or distemper in
the stomach of that Ostrich. Again, digestion or concoction (if we speak of the
first which is the work of the stomach) is nothing else but the altering of the
aliment, not into a new substance, (for that is done by the Liver) but into a
new quality, in which the natural heat separates the excrements from that which
is fit for nutrition: If so, then the Iron which this Ostrich excluded, was
digested; for the stomach sucked something out of it, and altered that which was
fit for nutriment, sending away the superfluous part: Thus the Iron was not
undigested, because egested: For of every thing we eat, there is some part
excluded. Now the Doctor cannot deny, but that the Iron receives an alteration
in the stomach; and what I pray is this but chilification? Yet he will not
have this alteration to proceed from the power of natural heat; but from an
acide and vitriolous humidity (if there were such a manifest quality, or a
vitriolous humidity to corrode the Iron, it would doubtless corrode the
stomach it self; therefore the safest way is to acknowledge an occult quality.

Again, if the Doctor will speak Philosophically, the principal agent in
digestion is heat, not moisture; for humidity compared to calidity, is a
passive quality; so then the vitrioll corrodes by its heat, not by its moisture.

IV. When I fell upon this piece, I thought not to meddle with Doctor Browns
Enquiries: but finding some of his Assertions contradictory to what I was to
write, I thought good to bring some of them to the Test, and to remove all
rubbish out of my way; wherein I hope I shall do him no wrong, seeing as he
says in his Epistle, Opinions are free, and open it is for any to think or
declare the contrary. Having therefore examined some of his Assertions, I will
be bold to enquire into some more of his Enquiries, having no intent to traduce
or extenuate his excelle^ pains, but to elucidate what may seem to be obscure,
and to deliver my opinion wherein I think he is mistaken. Whereas then he says
out of Aristotle, That Flies, Bees, etc. make a sound by the allision of an
inward spirit, upon a little membrane of the body. I will not deny but this may
be in some, but not in all: for I have observed the contrary in Gnats, whose
sound is made by their wings only; when I plucked off one wing, they sounded
with the other; but when they lost both, they made no sound at all. Again, when
he says, That the sight of the Glowworm depends upon a living spirit, he
expresses but a remote cause: for the proximat and immediate cause is the
natural heat in a clear luminous water or humor: For I have observed in those
I kept some days in grass, that as this heat decreased, the humor thickened,
and as it were congealed, and so the light grew dimmer; being quite dead, there
remained the congealed humor, white like a piece of chalk. Those I took were
for three or four nights, so shining, that holding the book near, I could see
to read by them. Again he says, That grains whose ends are cut off, will
suddenly sprout; which thwarts their opinion, who say, that the Pismires bite
off the end of the corn, which they store up to prevent the growth thereof.
Both these Assertions may be true: For corn cut at the ends, may grow, and yet
that may fail which the Pismire bites; because of some malignant quality
contrary to the grain, impressed upon it by the Pismires bite, which is not in
the knife. Again, he says, ( Book 3. c. 27.) That the plant animal, or
vegitable Lamb of Tartaria, is not much to be wondered at, if it be no more then
the shape of a lamb in the flower or seed. Sure it must be more then this, if
those that write the story thereof deceive us not. For Scaliger (Exerc.
182.29.) describes it out of them to be like a Lamb in all the parts of it: in
stead of horns, it has long hairs like horns, it is covered with a thin skin,
it bleeds when it is wounded, and lives so long as it has grass to feed on;
when that is spent, it dies. And they write also, that it is a prey to Wolves.
All these circumstances may be true: For 1. the shape, why may not this plan^
resemble a Lamb, as well as that Indian fruit described by Nic. Monardes,
resembles a Dragon so artificially painted by nature, as if it were done by a
painter. 2. Why may it not have a Downy, or Woolly skin, as well as Peaches*
Quinces, Chestnuts, and other fruits which are covered with a Down, called
Lanugo by the Poet? 3. Why may it not bleed as well as that Tree we mentioned
but now, called Draco, from the shape of the Dragon which its fruit has; the
juice of this Tree from the resemblance is called the blood of the Dragon, well
known in Physic for its astringent and corroborating quality. 4. Why may it
not have some animal motions, as well as that plant called Pudica, which
contracts it leaves when you touch or come near it, and dilates them again when
you depart? Or that Tree in the Isle of Cimbub on, whose leaves falling on the
ground, crawl up and down like Worms: they have (says Scaliger, Exerc. 112.)
two little feet on each side: if they be touched, they run away. One of these
leaves was kept alive eight days in a platter, which still moved it self when
it was touched.

V. That Tigers are swift creatures, is affirmed by all the Ancients; but
denied by Bontius, Because (as the Doctor cites him) those in Iava are slow and
tardigradous. By the same reason he may infer, that our sheep are as big as
Asses, and do carry burdens, because the sheep of America are such; or that
the African Lions are not fierce, big, and red, as they are described; because
the American are nor so; for the Indian animals differ much from ours, although
they be the same species. Though then the Indian Tigers be slow, the African or
European may be swift. Again, the Doctor doubts, that the story of the Remora
may be unreasonably amplified. The story is, that it stays ships under sail:
This, says Scaliger, is as possible as for the Loadstone to draw Iron: for
neither the resting of the one, nor moving of the other, proceeds from an
apparent, but from an occult virtue: for as in the one there is an hid
principle of motion, so there is in the other a secret principle of quiescence.

CHAP. IX.
1. Lions afraid of Cocks: Antipathies cause fear and horror in diverse animals.
2. Spiders kill Toads; the diversities of Spiders. 3. The Cocks Egg and
Basilisk: Diverse sorts of Basilisks, 4. Amphisbana proved, and the contrary
objections answered. 5. The Vipers generation by the death of the mother
proved, and objections to the contrary refuted.

THat the Lion is afraid of the Cock, is doubted by the Doctor, ( book 3. c.
24.) because Camerarius speaks of one lion that leapt down into a yard where
were Cocks and Hens, which he ate up. But the same Camerarius ( Medit. part. 1.
c. 12.) in the same alleged place, shows, that this fear of the Lion is
justified both by experience, and many eyewitnesses. And surely this is no
more improbable then for a Lion to be afraid at the fight of a fire, or for an
Elephant to be afraid at the sight of a Hog; which the Romans knew, when they
drove an Herd of Swine among the Enemies Elephants, by which means they got the
Victory of Pyrrhus. So much afraid is the Elephant of an Hog, that if he hear
him gruntle, he will run away. And who would think that a Monky should be
afraid and shake at the sight of a Snail, that Erasmus (in amicitia) tells us,
he saw one which at the sight of a Snail was so affrighted, that he fell to
vomiting so, as the owner could scarce keep him alive. Who can give a reason,
why the scratching upon brass, or other hard metals, should distemper the
teeth; and in some men force urine? Why are some men whom I know, affrighted at
the sight of a Toad; nay, of a Frog? There is among Horses in the same stable,
among oxen in the same stall, among children in the same school, an antipathy:
It is no wonder then, that so magnanimous a creature as the Lion should be
afraid at the sight of a Cock, when the courageous horse startles at the sight
of a block; and the Elephant will not touch the straw which the mouse has
touched. Now for that Lion which killed the Cock and his Hens, I deny not but
it may be true* yet hence we cannot conclude that the Lion is not afraid of the
Cock: For a special antipathy may by accident fail in some individuals. A
particular exception must not overthrow an universal Rule or Maxim. Sheep are
generally afraid of Dogs; yet I have seen a Sheep beat a Dog. Men generally
hate Serpents, yet some will keep them in their bosoms; yea, ^an them: And it
may be that this Lion was mad, and so the fantasy distempered: for they are
subject to be mad because of their heat; or else he was a hungered, and hunger
we know makes even men transgress the common laws of Nature, and eat those
things which otherwise they hate.

II. That Spiders will kill Toads, is recorded in Story; yet the Doctor (3.
Book c. 26:). in his Glass found that the Toad swallowed down the Spiders
which he included. This may be true, and the other untrue: For all Spiders are
not venomous; and those that are, have their degrees of venom, and so we may
say of Toads. That Spiders have a more active poison then the Toad, is
confessed by those who write of these insects: For I read both in Ancient and
Modern Writers, that Spiders have poisoned Toads with their touch; but never
that any Toad poisoned a Spider: for the Doctors Toad did not poison but
swallow the Spiders, being impatient of hunger, which it cannot endure so long
as the Spider; some whereof I have kept nine months without food in a glass,
and then they were as nimble at the end of this time, as when I put them first
in. Now that some of our Spiders are venomous, I have observed; for by chance
one of my acquaintance bruised a Spider which had lighted on his face when he
was in his bed, and presently the place blistred and grew scabbed. I have
likewise found, that the small bodied Spiders with long legs (which as I think
some call Spinners) are more venomous then the big ones: for I enclosed in a
glass some great black bodied Spiders with short legs, with some of those
small b^died long shanks, which fell upon the big bodied Spiders and killed
them. Such is the venom of some spiders that they will crack a Venice glass,
as I have seen; and Scaliger does witness the same, however the Doctor denies
it.

III. That the Basilisk should proceed from a cock's egg, is a conceit as
monstrous as the brood it self, says the Doctor; and yet presently after he
grauts, there may ensue some imperfect or monstrous production. That cocks
growing old and decrepid, lay eggs, or something like eggs, on which they sit,
as hens do on theirs, is not to be denied: for many will witness this; among
the rest, Lev. Lemnius tells us ( de mirac. l. 5. c. 12.) of two old cocks,
which in the City of Ciricaea, could be scarce driven away from incubation on
their eggs, till they were beaten off by slaves^ And because the Townsmen had
conceived a persuasion that of this egg the Basilisk might proceed, they caused
the cocks to be strangled, and the eggs to be bruised. It is granted then that
cocks lay eggs, or some seminall matter which they exclude and sit upon. 2.
That of these eggs ensue strange productions. 3. This may be without a
commixture of the seed of both sexes, (though the Doctor denies it) for we see
what strange shapes of Insects are produced of putrefaction even in man's body
without any seed. 4. it is granted also that there have been and are Basilisks,
though the descriptions of them do in some circumstances differ: For there may
be diverse sorts of them; those which Lemnius describes, seen sometimes in
Germany, have acuminated heads, and somewhat yellow, three palms long, having
a belly with white spots, a blew back, a crooked tail, and a wide gaping mouth.
This description differs but little from that of Albertus Magnus (de anim. 25.)
Scaliger speaks of one that was seen in Rome; and Lemnius tells us that Germany
is not free from them; but that they are not so venomous as those of Africa.
Now whether this Serpent is begot of the cocks'egg, is the question; we have
tradition and witnesses for it, besides probability: for why may not this
serpent be engendered of a cocks putrified seminal materials, being animated by
his heat and incubation, as well as other kinds of Serpents are bred of
putrified matter.

IV. The Doctors reasons against the two-headed Amphisbaena, are not
satisfactory. 1. (says he) The principal parts, the Liver, Heart, and
especially the brain, regularly they are but one in any kind whatsoever. Answ.
This is not so: For God to show his wisdom and greatness, has made variety of
shapes among the creatures; some fishes and Insects have no heads at all, some
but one, the Amphisbaena two, as Nicander, Galen, AElian, Pliny, and others
witness. I have read of birds in Paphlagonia with two hearts, of the Serpent
Chersydros that has two tongues; of a worm in Taprobona with four heads. I
say nothing of the Hydra, because doubtful: why then may not the Amphisbaena
have two heads? 2. He says, That it was ill contrived to place one head at
both extremes; for it will follow that there is no posterior or lower part in
this animal. Answ. This will not follovv: for though the head be at both
extremes, yet they do not both at the same time perform the office of the head;
but when the one moves, the other suffers it self to be moved, and is in
stead of the tall; so that head which moves Eastvvard, draws the other
after it; the former then is anterior, the other posterior; and this when it
moves Westward, draws the other: and so what before was posterior, becomes now
anterior. This was so ordained by nature for the more convenience of this
creature, which cannot turn it self about so nimbly as other serpents do. And
of this mind is AElian (de anim.) 3. He says, That if this animal have two
heads, it is not to be called one, but two, because Aristotle says, that
animal is not one but two, which has two hearts: and therefore geminous births
are christened with two names, as having distinct souls. Answ. There may be some
reason why two hearts should give demonstration to two animals: because the
heart is the original of life, and all vital actions, which need but one
fountain and original: but the reason is not alike in the Amphisbaena's two
heads: for though it harh but one life, and consequently but one heart, yet it
has two several motions backward and forward: and therefore needed two
principles or prime movers by reason it cannot turn so readily it self about as
other animals, which though they have but one head, yet have diverse instruments
of motion subservient to that head, which are defective in the Amphisbaena: and
yet the head is not the original of all motions in our own bodies: for the
hearts motion of Systole and Diastole depends not upon it. Besides, the Doctor
denies not but there are bicipitous serpents, and yet are not called two from
their two heads: Why then should the Amphisbaena be denied this privilege? But
he says, these other are monstrous productions, and besides the intention of
Nature. He says, but he proves it not: I acknowledge no monsters in Insects,
especially in such as are begot of the Suns heat and putrefaction: nor is there
any shape in them besides the intention of Nature. For if by nature he means
the matter, it is not besides its intention to receive any form: if he
understand the Suns influence, or formative power, or God himself, it is not
against their intention to produce all kind of shapes for the ornament of the
world. But if these bicipitous productions were against their intentions, yet
this will not serve his turn, because such a production is but one, although it
has two heads. Lastly, geminous births receive two names in Baptism, not
because they have two heads, but because they have two distinct souls, and
individual properties flowing thence; so that they are indeed two individuals,
though their body be but one from the Navell downward, as that Monster was of
which Buchanan speaks. Now the Amphisbaena having but one sensitive soul,
cannot be called two notwithstanding its two heads. 4. Many animals (says he)
with one head perform contrary motions. Answ. It will not follow that therefore
the Amphisbaena has but one head, or that these oneheaded animals can as
easily perform contrary motions with one head, as that which has two. Neither
are these contrary motions performed immediately by one head, but by inferior
organs which are not in this animal. Besides, I observe that in many worms
there is as much life and activity in the fail as in the head; and therefore
may be said to have two heads effectively, if not formally. For in Damask-Rose
leaves which I kept by me, not being thoroughly dried, worms were procreated,
whose heads when I cut off, their bodies were moved by their tails, as if those
had been other heads.

V. Concerning the Viper, which all Antiquity affirms, produces her young ones
to her own destruction; we find some Neotericks doubt, nay deny this truth.
Doctor Brown reasons against this production, 1. It Is injurious to Natures
providence to ordain a way of production which should destroy the producer.
Ans. Natures providence is no more injured in the corruption then in the
generation of the Creatures: seeing the corruption of one is the generation of
another; and not only in Vipers, but in Silkworms also, and diverse other
creatures, in production the producer is destroyed. And this also we may
observe in men and women oftentimes: Nature is wiser in her productions then we
are in our conceits and imaginations. 2. It overthrowes (says he) Gods
benediction, Be fruitful and multiply. Answ. Gods benediction of
multiplication was not pronounced to the beasts and creeping things, but the
birds and fishes. 2. It Is a question whether Vipers and some other poisonous
creatures were created before the fall. 3. The viper multiplieth fast enough
when at one birth she brings forth twenty young ones, as Aristotle and others
affirm; there is then no cause to complain, when twenty are produced by the
loss of one; neither is it a greater curse in the Viper to die, then in all
other living creatures; for all are morrall in their individuals, though
immortal in their species. 4. If the viper had been created before the Fall,
yet this punishment was not inflicted on her till after: for all creatures do
fare the worse by reason of Adams sin, who has made them all subject to
vanity, Romans 8.3. To bring forth in sorrow (says he) is proper to the woman,
therefore not to be translated on the Viper. Answ. I deny that painful births
are proper to the woman: for all animals have some pain more or less in their
productions. I have seen a Hen, which with the pain of excluding her Egg, fell
down gasping for breath, as if the pangs of death had bin on her, and so she
continued till the Egg was excluded. Many Bitches and other females have died
with pain at the time of their littering. Painful productions then is a
punishment of the woman, and yet no translation to the Viper; for her pain is
not thereby eased, because the Viper in such a case is killed: nor are all
women alike tortured, some are less pained then many other creatures. 4. This
overthrowes (says he) Natures parentall provision: for the Dam being
destroyed, the youngling^ are left to their own protection. Answ. No, they are
left to the protection of him who is by David called the Savior both of man
and beast: and by the same is said to seed the young Ravens when they call upon
him. And God in Job, long before David, shows, That he fills the appetite of
the young Lions, and provideth food for the young Ravens when they cry unto
God. For the Naturalists tell us, the old Ravens quite forsake their young
ones; but God feeds them with Flies and Worms he sends into their nests. The
like improvidence and cruelty we find in Ostridges, who exclude their Eggs in
the sand, and so leave them without further care, to his providence, in whom
all things live, and move, and have their being: Therefore God complains in
Job, ( Chap. 39.14, 15, 16.) of the Ostridges astorgie and cruelty, in leaving
her Eggs in the earth, forgetting that the foot may crush them, or that the
wild beast may break them: she is hardened (says he) against her young ones,
as though they were none of hers. The C^^kow also wants parentall provision:
for she lays her Egg in another birds nest, and so leaves it to the mercy of
a stranger. And no less cruelty is there in this young nursling, then in the
viper: for he both destroys his Foster-brothers, and the mother that brought
forth and fed him. I read also in AElian of Scorpions begot sometimes in
Crocodiles Eggs, which sting to death the Dam that gave them life. The young
Scorpions do use to devour the old. I have also read of women who have brought
forth monsters to the destruction both of the mother and of the child in her
womb: therefore what the Ancients have written of the vipers cruelty, is not a
matter so incredible as the Doctor makes it As for the experiments of some
Neotericks who have observed the young vipers excluded without hurt to the
parent; I answer, 1. There is great odds between the Vipers of Africa or other
hot Countries, and those in cold Climats; and so there is in poysonable herbs
and Serpents, which lose their venom upon transplantation: in cold Countries
the most fierce, cruel, and poysonable animals lose these hurtful qualities.
2. The works of Nature in sublunary things, are not universally the same; but,
as the ^Philosopher saith^, (...), for the most part there is no Ruleso
general, but has some exceptions; ordinarily the child comes out with the
head forward, yet sometimes otherwise; ordinarily the child is born at the end
of the ninth month, yet sometimes sooner, sometimes later: Therefore though
ordinarily the young Vipers burst the belly of the Dam, yet sometimes they may
be excluded without that rupture. 3. Education and food do much alter the
nature of creatures; these vipers mentioned by Scaliger and others, which
excluded their young ones, or viperels by the passage of generation, were kept
in bran within boxes, or glasses, and fed with milk, bran, and cheese, which is
not the food of those wild vipers in hot Countries. It is no wonder then if the
younglings stayed out their time in the womb, being well sed, and tamed by the
coldness of the climat. 4. All the Ancients do not write that the vipers
burst the belly, but only the membrans and matrix of the Dam, which oftentimes
causes the^losse of her life; and they wanted not reason, besides experience,
for this assertion, to wit, the fierceness of their nature, the heat of the
country, and the numerousnesse of their young ones, being twenty at a time;
besides the goodness of God, who by this means does not suffer so dangerous a
creature to multiply too fast; for which cause also he pinches them so in the
Winter, that they lie hid and benumbed within the earth; besides, he will let
us see his justice, in suffering the murder of the Sire to be revenged by his
young ones upon the Dam. As for the Doctors exception against Nicanders word
(...), it is not material; for it is a Poetical expression, and what is it to
the purpose, whether the head be bit, or cut off, if so be the bite be mortal?

CHAP. X.
1. Moles see not, and the contrary objections answered. 2. The opinions of the
Ancients concerning diverse animals maintained. 3. The right and left side
defended. 4. The true cause of the erection of man's body, and the benefit we
have thereby. 5. Mice and other vermin bred of putrefaction, even in men's
bodies. 6. How men swim naturally; the Indian swimmers.

COncerning Moles, the Doctor proves they are not blind, (Book 3. cap. 8.)
because they have eyes: for we must not assign the Organ and deny the Office.
Answ. Scaliger tells us they have not eyes, but the form of eyes. Pliny (lib.
11. cap. 37.) says, They have the effigies of eyes under the membrane, but no
sight, being condemned to perpetual darkness. Aristotle (lib. 3. de Animal.)
says, (...), it seems they have eyes under a thin skin, and a place for eyes.
The Prince of Poets calls them, Oculis captos, ( Geor. 1.) Scaliger ( Exer.
243.) says, They are deprived of the noblest sense, and gives the reason,
because living still under ground, they had no use of sight. If then by eyes
are meant the perfect organs of sight, with all things requisite thereto, I
deny they have eyes, and consequently sight: they have neither the organ nor
the office, except we say, that like is the same. Now these forms of eyes
Nature gave to the Moles rather for ornament the use; so wings are given to the
Ostrich, which never flies; and so a long tail to the Rat, which serves for no
other use but to be catched sometimes by it. And to what end has Nature given
tears to men, and other males? Again, Nature in all her works aims at
perfection; but is oftentimes hindered by some obstacle, which is the reason why
the Mole wants eyes, and the Manucodiata feet: but what is defective in the
Moles eye, is recompensed by the quickness of his hearing. 2 He says, That
they are not exactly blind; for they can discern the light, which is one object
of vision. Ans. I do not believe they can discern the light at all. 2. If they
could discern the light, yet they are blind: for I have known men stark blind,
who yet have discerned light from darkness when a candle came into the room.
3. Light is not the object of vision; for we see not light, but lucid and
colored; we see not light, but by it: Light is Objectum quo, non quod. 3. He
says, A Mole cannot be properly blind, if it want the organs or capacity of
seeing: for privations presuppose habits. Answ. A Moal is as properly blind as
he in the ninth of John, who was born so; for he had no capacity of seeing
naturally, no more then the Moal; yet he is said to be blind from his nativity,
and that properly, because he was a subject capable of sight, quatenus an
animal or sensitive creature, which is capable of sight, because of senses,
whereof the sight is one. Moals therefore are capable of sight, in the genius
of animals, though not in the species as a Moal, and so an Oyster is capable of
sight.

2. The Doctor prying too narrowly into the sayings of the Ancients, reckons
them amongst his Vulgar Errors, which being rightly understood, are no errors
at all; as when they say the Elephant has no joints, they mean* their joints
were stiff, and not so easily flexible as those of other animals. When they
write that the Swan sings, they meant that with their wings they made a kind of
harmonious noise, as the learned Poet expresses in that Verse: Cantantes
sublime fernnt ad sidera Cygni;
Which he explains in another place, Vt reduces ludunt illi stridentibus alis.


When they say the Lampery has nine eyes, they mean so many spots resembling
eyes. When they write, that a Horse and Dove have no gall, they mean, that
these have not baggs of gall annexed to the Liver, as other animals. When they
speak of Griffins, that they were animals like Eagles in their foreparts, and
behind like Lions; they spoke mystically, showing by this hieroglyphick, the
valor, magnanimity, courage, and audacity that ought to be in Princes and
Governors. And when they write, that Toads do piss, they did not speak
properly, but only meant, that they squirted out some liquid matter behind.
When they spoke of the Toads stone, they do not mean a true and proper stone,
but a concretion or induration of their crany. When they write that Hares are
double Sexes, they write no more then what has been observed in other animals
which are Hermophroditicall, and in whom sometimes females have been changed
into males. Hares also make a show of a double Sex, because of the two Tumors
representing Testicles, and their holes or cavities near the siege in the
males, by which they seem also to be females. And what they write of their
superfaetation, is true: for the like is incident to some other animals, even
to women. When they say that Snails have eyes at the ends of their horns, their
meaning is, that these are like eyes. So when they hold, that all animals of
the land, are in their kind in the sea, they mean that there was a great
resemblance between the sea and land-animals. So when they write, that the
Peacock is ashamed when he looks on his black feet, they write symbolically,
intimating that pride ends in shame, when men look upon their deformities and
infirmities. When they say, whelps are blind nine days, they mean that they
are so for the most part, though some be blind three or four days longer.
When they write that Worms have no blood, they write properly; for how can
those have blood which have no liver, or other sanguifying organs? that red
humor in them is not blood properly, but analogically.

II. That there is in man a right and a left side, is manifest by Scripture,
general consent, Experince and Reason, which also prove the dignity, agility,
and strength of the right side above the left; because on the right side is the
Liver, the cistern of blood, in which consists our life, vigor and strength,
therefore this side is not so often as the left subject to palsies, because it
is stronger to resist and repel the matter of that disease into the weaker
side. Yet Doctor Brown ( Book 4. c. 5.) denies any prepotency in the right
side, and such as arises from the constant root of Nature, because he finds
not Horses, Bulls, and Mules, are generally stronger on this side. Ans. There
is great diversity between the conformity, situation, and parts of man's body
and beasts, and therefore to reason from the one to the other, is absurd: We
find not that variety of colors in the eyes of Horses, Bulls, and Mules, that
are in Man's eyes; nor do we find the Horses gall annexed to his liver; shall
we hence infer a deficiency of things in man? The weight of the Bodies of
Four-footed Beasts, lies equally upon all four, and all four equally are
used in motion; and therefore there was no reason why any side or leg should
be more preporent then another; but it is otherwise in man, to whom Nature has
given one side stronger and nimbler then another for uniformity of action.
Hence the right hand and foot are stronger then the left. Neither is it Custom
but Nature that has given this dexterity to the right side: For I have known
some who have endeavored by custom to bring their left hand to perform the
offices of the right, but could never do it with that ease and dexterity.
Scaliger and Cardan speak of one who had never a hand, yet with his right foot
could perform all the offices of the right hand, write, sew, eat, drink, and
fling darts. 2. He says, that children indifferently use either hand. Answ.
That is because as yet in the tender infant the heat and strength of the body
is equally diffused, and not settled in one part more then in another; but as he
begins to gather strength, and the body to be more solid, so does the right
hand begin to be more agill; though I deny not but in some the left hand is
more agill, but these are few, and aberrations from the common course of
Nature: for we see that in all her works there are some accidental deviations.
His other objections are coincident with these two, and his discourse of the
right and left side of heaven, is impertinent to this purpose: therefore I will
spend no time in refelling it: for some make the East, some the South the right
part of heaven; but I will conclude with Aristotle, (hist. animal. 1. c. 15)
the right side and left in man consist of the same parts; but the left side is
every where weaker.

IV. The end why man's body was made erected, was to look up toward heaven,
whence the soul has its original, where our hopes should be, and our
happiness shall be; by the contemplation of which, we are brought to the
knowledge of Gods goodness and wisdom: For the heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament his handy work, Psalm. 19. Yet the Doctor ( book 4. c.
1.) will not have this the end of man's erection, but out of Galen the exercise
of Arts, which could not be performed in any other figure. Again (says he) the
eyes of diverse fishes regard the heavens^ birds who have no upper eyelid, have
in this the advantage of man: So the position of the frog with his eyes above
the water, serves to behold a great part of the heavens. Answ. All these are
weak Assertions; for the God of Nature created man to enjoy happiness, and to
glorify him; this is the chief end of his creation. Now this happiness is
heaven, by beholding which, our knowledge of God is confirmed, our hopes
established, and our joy and affections to heavenly things are enlarged: The
invention of Arts then was but a secondary end, which it seems Galen, that mere
natural man, thought to be the chief end. And whereas the Doctor says, (that
by sursum aspicere, was not meant to look upward with the eye, but to have his
thoughts sublime;) I would know what means so forcible to sublimate the
thoughts as the eye? All knowledge and affection of and to the object, comes by
the senses. How should Abraham have known the glory and multitude of his
posterity, had he not looked up (as God commanded him) to the stars? The wise
men found Christ in Bethlehem by looking upward to heaven, where they saw his
star. Christ in blessing the bread, and in Praying, looked up toward heaven:
should not our eyes be fixed there where our treasure is? Our Savior went up
to heaven, and we exspect him again to return with the clouds of heaven. Our
eyes then should be directed thither as well as our thoughts. The Philosophers
by the knowledge of the first Mobile, came to the knowledge of the first mover.
And though birds, some fishes and frogs, may have an advantage in looking
upward, yet this advantage was not given them to look on heaven, of which they
have neither knowledge, hope, affection or interest: they look upward then not
to contemplate heaven, but to watch either flies to feed on, or kites, hawks,
and other ravenous foul to avoid them.

V. He doubts whether mice can be procreated of putrefaction. So he may doubt
whether in cheese and timber worms are generated; Or if Betels and wasps in
cowes dung; Or if butterflies, locusts, grasshoppers, shel-fish, snails, eeles,
and such like, be procreated of putrified matter, which is apt to receive the
form of that creature to which it is by the formative power disposed. To
question this, is to question Reason, Sense, and Experience: If he doubts of
this, let him go to Egypt, and there he will find the fields swarming with
mice begot of the mud of Nylus, to the great calamity of the Inhabitants. What
will he say to those rats and mice, or little beasts resembling mice, found
generated in the belly of a woman dissected after her death, of which Lemnius
is a witness, who thinks this generation might proceed of some sordid excrement
or seminal pollution of those animals with which the woman's meat or drink had
been infected. I have seen one whose belly by drinking of puddle water, was
swelled to a vast capacity, being full of small toads, frogs, evets, and such
vermin usually bred in putrified water. A toad has been found in a sound piece
of Timber.

VI. That men swim naturally he cannot assent to, because other animals swim as
they go; but man alters his natural posture as he swims, (4. Book c. 6.) Answ.
This is no reason; for man alters his natural posture when he crawls; will it
follow therefore, that this motion is no natural to man. But to speak properly,
swimming is no natural motion, neither in man nor beast: For if we take natural
as it is opposite to animal, swimming is an animal motion; and if we take
natural as it is opposite to artificial, then swimming is an artifical motion;
for there is some Art in it. But if we take nature for a propensity, facility,
inclination, or disposition; then, I say, these are as well in men as in
beasts. Therefore Pliny tells us of the Troglodites, that they swim like
Fishes. Lerius, Acosta, and other Indian Historians write, that the American
children begin to swim as soon as they begin to walk; and that for eight days
together they can live in the Sea, and longer if it were not for fear of the
great Fishes: so swift and skillfull they are in swimming, that they out-swim
the Fishes and catch them; and so far they exceed other animals in this
motion, that they can swim with the left hand only, holding hooks and darts in
the right, which no other creature can do. If it be objected, That swimming is
not natural to man, because he learns it; I answer, That walking and talking
are natural actions to man, and yet he learns both when he is a child. So I
have seen old birds teach their young ones to fly. Lastly, if it be natural
for beasts to swim because of their posture, then it must needs be as natural
to those wild men, who from their infancy were brought up among wild beasts,
to walk upon all four, having no other posture.

CHAP. XI.
1. The Pictures of the Pelican, Dolphin, Serpent, Adam and Eve, Christ, Moses,
Abraham, and of the Sybils defended. 2. The Pictures of Cleopatra, of
Alexander, of Hector, of Caesar, with Saddle and Stirrops maintained.

THe Doctor [ Book 5. c. 1.] quarrels with some pictures, as 1. With that of
the Pelican opening her breast with her Bill, and feeding her young ones with
her blood. But for this he has no great reason: for Franzius (de animalib.) to
whom he is beholding for much of his matter, tells him that this and diverse
other pictures are rather Hieroglyphical and Emblematical, then truly
Historical: for the Pelican was used as an Emblem of paternall affection among
the Gentiles; and of Christ's love to his Church among the Christians. 2. With
that of the Dolphin, because he is painted crooked, whereas his natural figure
is straight. This is true, yet he is crooked sometimes, as when he leaps and
jumps, and in this posture the painters express him. 3. With the Serpent
tempting Eve, because it is painted with a virgins head, which might afford
suspicion to Eve in beholding a third humanity beside herself and Adam. But
this could not so much trouble Eve, to speak with one like her self, as to
hear a reasonable discourse proceed from a Serpents mouth; for she could not be
so grossly ignorant in that happy state, where there could be no deception of
mind, as to think a serpent could speak and discourse rationally; therefore
Satan cunningly assumes a woman's face, whereby there might be the less
suspicion. neither could Eve be amazed to see a Serpent with a woman's face: for
diverse other creatures have the form of humane faces, such as Baboons, Apes,
Monkies, Satyrs, and that American beast mentioned by Andrew Thevet, called
Haijt by the Inhabitants, and Guedon by the French; the picture whereof may be
seen in Gesner. 4. He quarrels with the pictures of Adam and Eve with Navels,
accounting those parts in them useless superfluities; because the use of the
Navell is to continue the infant unto the mother, and by the vessels thereof to
convey its aliment. The Navell, which is the center of the body, was not
useless or superfluous in Adam or Eve; because they were ornaments, without
which the belly had been deformed: Therefore Solomon amongst other beautiful
ornaments of the Church, puts in the Navel for one, Thy Navel, says he, is
like a round Goblet, Cant. 7.2. He might as well quarrel with the picture for
giving hair to Adam and Eve; for the sole use of hair both for head and chin,
is for ornament and distinction. 5. He questions Christ's picture with long
hair, seeing he was no Nazarite by vow. I answer, It Is true, he was no Nazarite
by vow; for he drank Wine, and approached the dead, yet he was a true Nazarite,
because he was as the Apostle says, separated from sinners: Therefore it was
fit he should in this respect wear long hair, as Sampson the Nazarite and
Type of Christ had done before. Besides, hair being an ornament, and sign of
ingenuity (for slaves durst not wear long hair;) and being also the custom
of those tines and Countries, it is most probable he wore long hair; and
therefore his picture is causlesly quarreld with; especially seeing he was so
painted in that picture sent by Lentulus, President of Judea, to Tiberius. And
in the same length of hair he was found in some old brass coins at Rome, which
Theleus Ambrosius did see; in his Introduction to the Chaldee Tongue, he
speaks of this. 6. He rejects Abraham's picture sacrificing Isaac, because he
is described as a little boy. Answ. Josephus makes Isaac at that time 25 years
of age; some Rabbis make him above thirty. But Aben Ezra the Rabbin makes him
only twelve years old: And sure at this age he might be able, by his Fathers
help, to carry a bundle of wood up the hill, being men were stronger at that
time then now; howbeit he was but a Boy in comparison of his fathers age, who
was now 125 years old, if Isaac was 25. for he was born in the hundredth year
of his Fathers life. 7. He reproves the picture of Moses, because painted with
horns. It was not the Painter but the Scripture which gave him horns. For the
Hebrew word Keren is so translated by Aquila (...), and by Ierom, Cornuta: So
it is in the vulgar Editions of Sixtus and Clemens. So it is translated by
diverse Protestants, by Munster, by Rivet, and some others, and therefore
Munster doubts whether that relation of Steuchus be true, that the Jews are
offended when they see Moses painted with horns, seeing R. Solomon and Kimchi
do use the word Horn, saying, That the beams of Moses face did resemble horns;
and therefore R. Solomon calls those Rays the horns of Magnificence. It is
true, there is a difference between Keren and Karon, that signifying a horn,
this to shine, but who could put this distinction truly, before the invention
of the Hebrew pricks; neither is it material which way it be translated,
seeing clear horns do cast rays of light, and luminous bodies cast abroad
their rays like horns, as we see in the Sun and Moon. Neither is there any
danger of conformity with Jupiter Ammon, (as the Doctor thinks) if Moses be
painted with horns: for Jupiter was painted and worshipped not with Rams horns
alone, but with the Rams head and skin, with which his Image was yearly
adorned; because in the shape of a Ram he showed a Well of water to Bacchus,
when he was dry in the Deserts of Libya; and because he turned himself into a
Ram when he sled from the Giant into Egypt. And lastly, he showed himself to
Hercules in the shape of a Ram. As for cornuted Pan and Bacchus, they were the
same with Jupiter, one Sun under diverse names and shapes, as Macrobius shows.
8. He reproves the pictures of the Sybils, because there be ten or twelve of
them, and all with youthful faces. For the number of ten, he must reprove
Varro (de Divinat) not the Painter, for so many he delivers to us; others have
added two more. And that there were so many, Boisardus makes it appear by what
he has collected out of ancient Authors, concerning the difference, originals,
times, and numbers of the Sibyls, where he shows, that Sibylla Cumaea whom
AEneas consulted, and Cumana, who sold the Books to Tarquin, were different,
between whom were six hundred years distance. As for their youthful faces, he
has more reason to quarrel with the Poets then with the Painters; but indeed
neither are to be blamed; For the Sibyls may be aged, and yet look young, as
many aged people do; some I have already mentioned who looked young after they
have been an hundred and fifty years old. It Is true, that Sibyl is called
Longaeva by the Poet, ( AEn. 6.) but by that was signified her long life, not a
withered or wrinkled face. The same word is by the same Poet ascribed to
AEnaeas, whom not withstanding he makes immortal; and Romulus in Ennius is
said, Degere aevum in heaven; so in AEschylus the gods are called (...), that
is, Longaevi, who I think have not old faces. As in Charon, so in the Sybils,
there was Cruda viridisque, senectus. It is true also that Sybil is termed Anus
in Livii. But I deny the Doctors Etymology out of Festus; for anus is ab a^nis,
and not from (...) and (...), as if she had doted; for she could not be (...),
that was (...): Sibylla is so called, as being the mind and counsel of God,
therefore could not be a dotard.

II. There are some other pictures which offend the Doctors eyes; as, 1. That
of Cleopatra with two Asps. Suetonius speaks of one, Florus of two, so does
Virgil, Nec dum etiam geminos a tergo respicit angues.
So does Propertius, Brachia spectavi sacris admorsa colubris.


He should therefore have reproved these rather then the Painter; he should
also have quarrelled with Augustus, who from the pricks he found in her arms,
concluded she was bit by Asps, and therefore employed the Phylli to suck out
the poison. But whether she was bit by one, or two, or none, the picture is
harmless, and consonant both to Roman Historians and Poets. 2. The pictures of
the nine Worthies displease him; because Alexander is described sitting upon an
Elephant, Hector on Horseback, and Caesar with Saddle and Styrrups. But he
should remember that Painters and Poets have a privilege above others,
Pictoribus atque Poetis quid libet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.

Horat.

And yet these pictures are partly historical, partly hieroglyphical.
Alexander sits on an Elephant, to show his conquest over the Indians which most
abound in Elephants. Besides, this picture has reference to that story of the
Elephant in Philostrates, (Lib. 2. Cap. 61.) which from Alexander to Tiberius
lived three hundred and fifty years: This huge Elep^hant Alexander after he
had overcome Porus, dedicated to the Sun in these words, (...); for he gave to
this Elephant the name of Ajax, and the inhabitants so honored this beast, that
they beset him round with Garlands and Ribbons; they used also to anoint him,
and adorned him with a golden chain, It was not then without cause he is
painted sitting on an Elephant, rather then Judas Macchabaeus, or any others
who have overcom^ battles wherein were Elephants; or Caesar, whose triumph was
honored with captive Elephants; for he was not the first, long before him
Curious Dentatus was thus honored, and so was Me^^llus, who had an hundred and
twenty captive Elephants in his triumph. Again, the Doctor asks, Why Hector is
painted upon an horse? I answer, because he was a brave Cavalier, and kept
excellent Horses; such, as if we will believe Homer, had understanding: for
Hector makes an eloquent speech to them, and his wife Andromache fed them with
good bread and wine, ( Ili^d. lib. 8.) Their names were Zanthus, Podargus,
Aithon and Lampus: Is it likely that he would keep such horses and never ride
them? whereas Horsmanship was in use long before. And we read in Pindarus, (in
Olympiad) that the Grecian Princes took delight in keeping and riding of good
Horses. And although the Ancients used to fight in Chariots, yet sometimes they
fought on Horseback too, being as Pliny says, taught so to fight by the Theban
Centaurs. As for Caesar's Saddle and Stirrops, they are neither dishonor to his
picture, nor repugnant to story; for though we find some of the ancient
equestral Statues without Saddle or Stirrops, it will not thence follow these
were not in use; for we find the ancient Roman Statues bare-headed; will it
therefore follow there were no use of Helmets, or that they fought or rid
bare-headed? But we do not find (says the Doctor out of Salmuth upon
Pancerol) the word Stapida in ancient Authors. I answer, We find words
equivalent; for what is Suppedaneum, Pedamentum, Subex, Pedaneus, and
Sta^iculum, but the same that Stapida which we call Stirrup? So we find
Ephippium in Horace [ Optat Ephippia bos piger] and Equorum strata found out by
Pelethronius in Pliny, and what were these but Saddles? For to take stratum
there for an Horse-cloth, is ridiculous, as if that had been such a piece of
invention to be recorded, to cover the Horse back with a piece of Cloth. Appian
writes of the Numidians, that they used to ride without Saddles; but nothing of
the Romans. The two verses which the Doctor cites out of Salmuth to prove his
Assertion, are needless; for in the one is left out the principal word,
Saltus superbus emittat in currum: So that Turnus did not leap on Horseback;
but into his Chariot, [ AEn. 12.] The other, Corpora saltu subjiciunt in equos,
shows, that they jumped on Horseback; but whether by stirrups or not, is not
there set down.

CHAP. XII.
1. The Picture of Iephtha sacrificing his daughter maintained. 2. The Baptist
wore a Camels skin. 3. Other pictures, as of S. Christopher, S. George, etc.
defended. 4. The antiquity, distinction and continuance of the Hebrew tongue,
of the Samaritans, and their Letters.

THe picture of Iephtha sacrificing his daughter, is questioned by the Doctor
(5 Book c. 14, 15, 16, etc.) because (says he) she died not a natural but a
civil kind of death. Answ. Indeed her death was neither natural nor civil, but
violent, being sacrificed by her father. This he denies; because she bewailed
her virginity, not her death. Answ. She had no reason to bewail her death, to
which she freely offered herself; but to die childlesse deserved lamentation,
because that was a curse among the Israelites. 2. Because the women went yearly
to talk with Iephtha's daughter, which had she been sacrificed they could not
have done. Answ. The word Letannoth from Tanan, signifies to lament, and so it
is rendered (...), by the Seventy; and Leallaah by the Chaldee Paraphrast; so it
is interpreted by Munster, by the old Latin Edition, by the French and English
translation. But suppose the word were derived from Tanah, to declare or speak,
yet this will not prove Iephtha's daughter was alive: For in mournful
complaints and lamentations over the dead, words and Elegies were oftentimes
expressed, and Prosopopeia's are used to them as if they were alive; as we see
David's Lamentation for Jonathan, and in other places both of sacred and profane
writ. So did that sorrowful mother speak to her dead son Eurialus, and AEnaeas
to dead Pallas in the Poet. 3. Because it is said in the Text, And she knew no
man, he inferres, that virginity was her only death. Answer. These words, she
knew no man, are added to show the cause why the women so much lamented her
death, in that she died childlesse. 4. The offering (says he) of mankind, was
against the Law of God. Answ. True: But will it therefore follow, that Iephtha
did not sacrifice his daughter. He may as well infer, that David committed not
adultery and murder, because these were against the Law of God. How often are
Gods Laws violated by the best of his servants? 5. He thinks the Priests and
people would have hindered this sacrifice; and that Jephtha was no Priest; and
that he had evasion for his vow by redeeming his daughter; and that his vow of
Sacrifice was to be understood only of that which was sacrificeable and
lawful. Answ. These are but the conjectures of those who would defend Iephtha:
for it is more likely neither Priest nor people durst oppose his resolution,
being now strong and crowned with victory; and though he was no priest, yet it
was no unusual thing for Princes and great Commanders sometimes to perform the
Priests office; and though he might have evaded his vow, yet it seems he knew
not so much, for superstition had blinded him: therefore he says, I have
opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back. And doubtless he thought
that the sacrificing of his daughter was lawful; grounding this his conceit
upon Gods command to Abraham, and commendation of him for his readiness to
sacrifice his son. Lastly, he says, the 31 verse may be thus rendered, It shall
be the Lords; or I will offer. Answ. Most Translations have it, and I will
offer; although the Hebrew Ve, sometimes signifies Or; but this is seldom.
Hence then we see, the Painter is not to be blamed, who in representing
Iephtha's sacrifice, is waranted by the Scripture, by Austin, Ambrose, and
Hierom, by the ancient Rabbis, and Josephus, besides reas^ns. For what needed
Iephtha so to vex himself, and tear his clothes, if he meant only to sequester
his daughter from marriage and humane society? Again, there was neither Law nor
President for him to vow his daughters virginity; nor could such a vow be
effectual without her consent. It was a curse also in Israel to be childless,
and it had been ridiculous in him or her, to vow virginity and then to lament
it.

II. He excepts against the picture of John Baptists, because he is painted in
a Camels skin, whereas the text says his garment was of Camels hair. Answ. It
was fit the Baptist, who came to preach repentance for sin, should wear a
garment of skins, which was the first clothes that Adam wore after he had
sinned; for his fig-^^aves were not proper, and this garment also showed both
his ^overty and humility. For as great men wear rich skins, and costly furs, he
was contented with a Camels skin. By this garment also he shows himself to be
another Elijah, (2. Kings 1.) who did wear such a garment, and to be one of
those of whom the Apostle speaks, who went about in skins, of whom the world
was not worthy. Neither was it unusefull in John's time, and before, to wear
skins; for the prophets among the Jews, the Philosophers among the Indians, and
generally the Scythians did wear skins; hence by Claudian they are called
Pellita juventus. Great Commanders also used to wear them; as Hercules the
Lions skin, Acestes the Bears, Camilla the Tigers. John's garment then of Camels
hair, was not as some fondly conceit, a Sackcloth, or Chamblet^ but a skin
with the hair on it. So in Exodus (chap. 25.) the peoples are commanded among
other skins, to bring to the Tabernacle Goats hair: not as if they were to
pluck off the hair for Aaron, and keep the skins to themselves, but to offer
both: therefore in the original Hairs is not expressed, but the word Goats.

III. In some subsequent Chapters the Doctor questions the pictures of S.
Christopher carrying Christ over the river, of Saint George on Horseback
killing the Dragon, of S. Ierom with a clock hanging by, of Mermaids, Unicorns,
and some others, with some Hieroglyphick pictures of the Egyptians. In this he
does luctari cum larvis, and with AEneas in the Poet, Irruit and frustra ferro
diverberat umbras.
He wrastles with shadows: for he may as well question all the Poetical
fictions, all the sacred Parables, all tropicall speeches; also Scutchions, or
Coats of Arms, signs hanging out a^ doors, where he will find blew Boars,
white Lions, black Swans, double-headed Eagles, and such like, devised only
for distinction. The like devices are in military Ensigns. Felix Prince of
Salernum had for his device, a Tortoyse with wings flying, with this Motto,
Amor addidit; intimating, that love gives wings to the slowest spirits. Lewis
of Anjou, King of Naples, gave for his device, a hand out of the clouds,
holding a pair of scales, with this Motto, AEqua durant semper. Henry the first
of Portugal, had a flying Horse for his Device. A thousand such conceits I
could allege, which are symbolical, and therefore it were ridiculous to
question them, as if they were historical As for the Cherubims, I find four
different opinions: 1. Some write they were Angels in the form of birds. 2.
Aben Ezra thinks the word Cherub signifies any shape or form. 3. Josephus will
have them to be winged animals; but never seen by any 4. The most received
opinion is, that they had the shape of children: for Rub in Hebrew, and Rabe in
Chaldee, signifies a child; and Che, as: So then, Cherub signifies, as a
child, and it is most likely they were painted in this form.

IV. For the Doctors questioning diverse superstitious observations, (5. book,
c* 22.) as the crossing of a Hare, the falling of salt, the breaking of
Eggshels, and such like: I have nothing to say, but to conclude with him, that
they are superstitious, yet ancient. But when he asks, whether the present
Hebrew be the unconfounded language of Babel. I answer, That if by the present
Hebrew he mean the language which they now speak, it is not: for as the
greatest part of the world lost that tongue (except Hebers family) at the
confusion of Babel, so Hebers family) the Jews) lost it themselves in the
captivity of Babel; for being mingled with the Chaldeans, they made a mixed
language of Hebrew and Chaldee, which for distinction sake was called Syriac;
and sometimes Hebrew, because the Jews, Hebers posterity, spoke it. Hence S.
Hierom is to be understood when he writes, that Matthew penned the Gospel in
Hebrew, and Eusebius when he calls it his native language, they mean the
Siriac, which was now the native language of the Hebrews; and S. Paul in the
Acts is said to have made a speech to the people in Hebrew, the meaning is, he
spoke in Syriac; for they understood not the ancient Hebrew, only the Priests
and Lawyers kept the knowledge of it. Therefore it had been vain for Matthew to
write his Gospel, or for Paul to speak in pure Hebrew to those that understood
it not; yet there is an Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew extant, which some think
was written by S. Bartholomew and by Pantaenus, coetaneal with Origin brought
from the Indies, this imperfect and torn Copy, Munster says he extorted
fromthe Jews. But if his question be whether that Hebrew text now extant, be
the ancient Hebrew tongue before the confusion; I answer It is: For though the
Jews lost their ancient language in respect of speaking and use, yet the Bible
was carefully retained in the true Hebrew without any alteration, save only,
in the Characters or Letters, which about the captivity were changed by Esdras,
as Hierom (de emend^t. temp. p. 621.) Joseph Scaliger, Ioh. Drusius Casper
Waserus, lib. 2. of his old Hebrew coin, and Sethus Calvitius in his
Chronological Isagoge witnesses, that this was done by Esdras to debar all
commerce with the Samaritans, not the Israelites, which were long before
carried away by Salmanasser; who also were called samaritans from their chief
City Samaria, but I understand that table of Nations which Salmanasser brought
in to possess the Israelites lands. These with so many of the ancient
Samaritans or Israelites as remained in the land, retained the ancient Hebrew
characters in which the Law was given by Moses; and these letters for
distinctions sake were named Samaritan; and those of Esdras called Hebrew, and
square from their form. Some ancient coins, as Sicles, have been found with
Samaritan characters on them, which show this difference. The form of these
letters may be seen in the Samaritan Alphabets. As these Samaritan retained the
ancient characters, so they did the ancient Pentateuch of Moses, and no more.
Now that Hebers posterity retained their language without mixture after the
Flood, is proved by Austin and Jerome out of the Hebrew Names given to the
creatures before the Flood. It stood also with reason that Hebers family should
not be partakers of the worlds punishment in this confusion of tongues, seeing
they were not guilty of their sins.

CHAP. XIII.
1. There is not heat in the body of the Sun. 2. Islands before the Flood
proved. 3. The seven Ostiaries of Nilus, and its greatness. The greatness of
old Rome diverse ways proved. Nilus overflowing, how proper to it: the
Crocodiles of Nilus; its inundation regular.

THe Doctor in his subsequent discourses (6 Book c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) has many
learned Cosmographicall passages collected dexterously out of many approved
Authors, against which I have nothing to say; only he must give me leave to
dissentfrom him in his opinion concerning the Suns heat,when he says, that if
the Sun had been placed in the lowest sphere where the Moon is, by this
vicinity to the earth its heat had been intolerable. What will he say then to
that world lately discovered in the Moon by glasses as fallacious as the
opinion is erroneous. Surely these people must live uncomfortably where the
heat is so intolerable; or else they must have the bodies of Salamanders, or
else of those Pyrus^ae in the Furnaces of Sicily: but indeed though the Sun
work by the Moon upon sublunary bodies, yet the Moon is not hot, nor capable of
it, no more then the line is capable of that stupidity which from the Torpedo
is conveyed by the line to the Fishers hands. No celestial body is capable of
heat, because not passive; except we will deny that quintessence, and put no
difference between Celestial and Elementary bodies. The Sun then is not the
subject but the efficient cause of heat; the prime subject of heat is the
element of fire, the prime efficient cause is the Sun, which can produce heat,
though he be not hot himself. And this is no more strange then for him to
produce, life, sense, vegetation, colors, odors, and other qualities in
sublunary bodies, which notwithstanding are not in him, though from him. Again,
if the Sun be the subject of heat, because he is the original and effector of
it; then Saturn is the subject of cold, the Moon of moisture, and Mars of
dryness, and so we shall place action and passion, and all elementary
qualities in the heavens, making a Chaos and confusion of celestial and
sublunary bodies. Moreover, if the Suns vicinity causes the greatest heat, why
are the tops of the highest mountains perpetually cold and snowy? Why do there
blow such cold winds under the Line, as Acosta shows? We conclude then, that
the Sun is the cause of heat, though he be not hot; as he is the cause of
generation and corruption, though he be neither generable nor corruptible. Ovid
then played the Poet not the Philosopher, when he causes the Suns vicinity to
melt Icarus his waxen wings.

II. He says, That Islands before the Flood are with probability denied by
very learned authors. Answ. He does not allege any one probable reason out of
these Authors in maintenance of this opinion. I can give more then probable
reasons that there were Islands before the Flood, First, the whole earth it
self was made an Island; therefore the Sea is rightly called Amphitrite, from
encompassing the earth; For this cause David says, That God has founded the
Earth upon the Waters. And though Earth and Sea make but one Globe, yet the
Earth only is the Center of the world, as Clavius demonstrates. 2. The world
was in its perfect beauty before the Flood; but Islands in the Sea tend no
less to the beauty and perfection of the world, then Lakes upon the Land. 3.
All the causes of Islands were as well before the Flood as since; for there
were great Rivers running into the Sea, carrying with them mud, gravel, and
weeds, which in time become Islands. There were also Earthquakes, by which
diverse Islands have been made, the vapor or spirit under the bottom of the
Sea thrusting up the ground above the superficies of the water; and who will
say, that in the space of 16. hundred years before the Flood there should be no
Earthquakes? Again, in that time the Sea had the same power over the
neighboring lands which it has since the Flood. But we find that Islands were
made by the Sea washing away the soft and lower ground in peninsules at this
day; there doubtless the Sea wanted not the same force and quality before the
Flood: for there were as forcible winds, and as impetuous waves. Lastly,
Islands are made when the Sea forsakes some Land which it uses to overflow;
and this property also we cannot deny to have been in the Sea before the Flood;
for there were winds to beat off the Sea, and to drive together heaps of sand
into some altitude, whereby the water is forced to forsake the land, whence
has proceeded diverse Isles.

III. He says ( Book 6. c. 4.) there were more then seven Ostiaries of Nilus.
Answ. There were but seven of note, the other four were of no account, but
passed by as inconsiderable: Hence they were called (...); therefore the stream
of all waters run upon seven; so Virgil, septem discurrit in ora. And AEn. 6.
septem gemini turbant trepida ostia Nili. Ovid calls the Ri^er Septemfluus; by
others it is named Septemplex; by Valerius, septem amnes; Claudius gives it,
septem cornu; Manilius, septem fauces; Ovid, septem portus; Statius septem
hiemes; Dionysius Afer, (...). These seven mouths have their particular names
given them by Mela and other Geographers, and so the Scripture gives it seven
streams, Isaiah 11.15. at this day there are but four left, two of which are
of little use; therefore the Doctor needed not to have troubled himself so
much as he does, because so frequenely this is called the seven-mouthed river;
for it is usual to give denominations not from the exact number, but from the
most eminent and major part of the number, He may as well except against Moses,
who indivers places reckons but seventy souls which went down into Egypt; and
yet Saint Steven in the Acts mentions 75 souls. Again, he dislikes the Title
given by Ortelius to Nilus when he calls it the greatest river of the world.
But Ortelius was not mistaken in calling it so; for it is the greatest, though
not perhaps in length, because it may be some are longer, the which are not
certainly known; yet in breadth when it overflowes the whole Country, in which
respect it may be called rather a Sea then a River; and so it was called by the
Ancients, as Pior Valerius shows. Nile, says Basil, is liker a Sea then a
River, and some esteem the length of it a thousand German miles, or 35.
degrees, having Summer at the springs thereof, and Winter at the other end the
same time. It is also the greatest in regard of use and benefit; for no River
does so much enrich a Country as Nilus does Egypt. It is the greatest also in
same; for no River is so renowned in Writers. By the world also is meant so
much as is known to us; for the Rivers of America are known rather by hearsay
then otherwise. The greatness of this River was of old Hieroglyphically
expressed by the vast body of a Giant. There is a Statue of Nilus in the
Vatican, the picture whereof is in Sands his Travels, the greatest of Poets, by
way of excellency calls this the Great River, In magno maerentem corpore Nilum.
Again the Doctor will have Rome (magnified by the Latins for the greatest of
the earth) to be lesser then Cairo; and Quinsay to exceed both. But he is much
mistaken; for Cairo, as Sands tells us who was there, is not above 5. Italian
miles in length with the suburbs, and in breadth scarce one and a half; whereas
Rome was almost fifty miles in compass within the walls, and the circuit of
the suburbs much more, as Lipsius (de mag. Romans l. 3. c. 2.) has collected out
of diverse Authors: He shows the greatness of it also by the number of the
people therein* for there were three and twenty thousand poor which was
maintained upon the public charge; then if we reckon the multitude of rich
men, and their train, which was not small: (for diverse of the great persons;
maintained families of four hundred persons;) if we look upon the multitude of
Artificers, of Soldiers, of Courtiers, of strangers from all parts flocking
thither, as to the great Metropolis and shop of the World, we shall find there
were no less then four millions, or forty hundred thousand people, which is
more then can be found in many large provinces. Heliogabolus collected the
greatness of this City by the Cobwebs found in it, which being gathered
together, did weigh ten thousand pound. Another argument of its greatness may
be collected out of Eusebius his Chronicle, who reckons that for many days
together there were buried of the plague ten thousand daily. Not without cause
then was Rome called the Epitome of the world; by Aristides (...) the Earths
workhouse, and (...), the worlds Citadel, or Castle; by Saint John, the great
City, and the great Babylon* by Virgil, Maximum rerum. And it stood with
reason that Rome should be the greatest of Cities, being the Queen and Mistress
of the greatest Empire, of such large Territories, and full of people, Cities
and Nations. Rome then was every way the greatest City, both in extent, in
power, in people, in glory, in magnificence. What City ever had that multitude
of stately Palaces, Temples, Theaters, Olisks, triumphant Arches, Baths, and
other public buildings, as Laurus shows? As for Quinsay in China, we have a
fabulous narration in M. Paulus Venetus, that is was an hundred miles in
compass; but his narrations have been found erroneous, and if the Kingdom of
China comes far short of the greatness of the Roman Empire, surely Quinsay
must fall short of Rome, which as the Poet says, Inter alias tantum caput
extulit urbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupress^.
As for Quinsay now it is not thirty miles in compass, as Nicolas de Contu
shows who was there. Again he says, That this anuall overflowing is not
proper unto Nile, being common to many currents in Africa. I answer, It is so
proper to Nile, that no other River does so orderly, so frequently, so fully,
overflow their banks as this does. Crocodiles (says he) are not proper to
Nile. Answ. They are so proper, that no river either in Africa, Asia, or
America, has such Crocodiles as Nilus, if either we consider the magnitude,
multitude, or fierceness of them; Other Crocodiles, chiefly the American, are
gentle, the Egyptian fierce and cruel, which is the cause that Dogs are so
afraid to drink out of Nilus, whence arose that proverb, Canis ad Nilum, The
greatest Indian Crocodiles exceed not twenty foot in length, as Scaliger
shows; but those of Nile are three hundred foot long, whose jaws are so wide,
that one of them can contain a whole heifer at a time: some have been found
there of 25, and above 26. cubits in bigness, as AElian reports. The Romans to
show how proper this beast was to Nile, represented Egypt by a Crocodile in
that Coin on which Augustus stamped a Crocodile tied to a palm tree, with this
Inscription, Primus relegavit; for he subdued Egypt, and restored peace to
them. Again he says, That the Causes of Niles inundation are variable,
unstable, and irregular, because some years there has been no increase at
all. Answ. He may as well say, that the causes of all natural effects are
variable, because sometimes they fail: But all natural causes operate for an
end; therefore are constant, regular, and stable, so are not Chance and
Fortune, which Aristotle excludes from natural causes: Are the causes of rain,
and storms irregular, variable, and unstable; because sometimes it rains more
in Summer then in Winter? Or is generation irregular, because sometimes women
miscarry? Natural causes always produce their effects, or for the most part
so, that they fail but seldom, and that upon the interposition of some
impediment, whereas fortuitall causes produce their effects seldom: The causes
then of Niles overflowing, are not contingent, but certain, constant, regular,
and stable; because they never fail, or but seldom upon some impediment in the
producing of that effect. As for the Egyptian raines I have spoken elsewhere,
( animad. on Sir Walt. Raleigh,) Now because of this regular, constant, and
beneficial inundation of Nilus, it was called Jupiter AEgiptius, and divine
honors were given to it, its annual festival was kept about the Summer
Solstitial, when it overflows the land. This was called by the Greeks, (...)
the Priests used to carry the water of Nile on their shoulders with great
solemnity to their temples, falling down on their knees, and lifting up their
hands, gave solemn thanks to Jupiter Nilius, to whose honor they dedicated a
certain piece of coin with this Inser^ption, Deo Sancto Nilo.

CHAP. XIV.
1. The cause of Niles inundation. 2. Lots wife truly transformed into a salt
Pillar. 3. Hels fire truly black: brimstone causes blackness. 4. Philoxenus a
glutton, and his wish not absurd: How long necks conduce to modulation.

THe Inundation of Nilus (says the Doctor) proceeds from the rains in
AEthiopia. This I deny not, because averred by Diodorus, Seneca, Strab^,
Herodotus, Pliny, Solinus, and others both ancient and modern Writers: and it
stands with reason; for the Springs of Nilus are near the Tropic of
Capricorn, where it is winter when the Sun is with us in Cancer: then does it
rain abundantly in that Southern climat; for though within the Tropicks the
Suns vicinity causes rains, yet without his distance is the occasion thereof:
His melting of snow upon the Hills of AEthopia is a cause of this inundation.
But Scaliger denies that there is any snow at all; yet I do not think the high
mountains there should be less subject to snow then in Peru under the line,
although the people in the low Countries thereof be black, and the winds in
the valleys warm. The third cause of Nilus overflowing, are the Etesiae, or
northerly winds, which blow there every year when the Sun is in Cancer.
This wind blowing into the mouth of Nile, keeps it from running into the
Mediterranean sea. Scaliger refutes this reason, because at the same time the
river Nigir which runs into the Western Ocean, overflows his banks; but to this
I can easily answer, That at the same time there be different Etesi^, or
constant winds in different regions of the world; so that whilst the North
wind blows against Nilus, the West or Southwest, which also as Acosta says, is
predominant upon the coast of Peru, blows against Nigir. As for the original
of Nilus, it has been still held uncertain; Pliny writes that King Iubia found
out the springs thereof in the Mauritanian Mountains; but since, this river
has been found as far as the lake Zaire, which is in ten degrees of Southerly
latitude. The Egyptian Sultan did spare neither for men nor cost to search out
these springs, but could not find them; therefore Virgil calls these streams of
Nilus, Latebrosa flumina. Herodotus witnesses, that neither Egyptian,
Grecian, nor African could resolve him any thing of Nilus springs. Hence in
Homer Nilus is called (...), that is, falling or descending from Jupiter,
because God only knew the original of this river.

The Doctor ( book 7. c. 11.) will not question the metamorphosis of Lots wife,
whether she were transformed into a real statue of salt, though some conceive
that expression metaphorical. That the expression is not metaphorical, but the
transformation real, is manifest by the testimonies of the Rabbis, by the
Thargum of Jerusalem, by the best expositers, by Josephus and Borchardus, in
whose times that statue of Salt was yet extant; besides diverse reasons do
evince the same: For it was as easy for God to turn her body into a salt
Pillar, as to turn Moses rod into a Serpent, Nilus into blood, Nebuchadnezzar
into a beast. 2. We see daily transformations in generation, and in our own
nutrition. 3. Nature can transform men's flesh into Worms, Calves flesh into
Bees, Horses and Asses flesh into Wasps and Hornets. We read also of Birds
procreation out of old Timber, of Iaponian dogs transformed into fishes, of
water turned into stones, and of an Oyster metamorphosed into a Bird, which was
presented to Francis the first of France. 4. The Magicians of Egypt trans*
formed diverse substances, and the Devil by Gods permission has often done the
like; examples of which may be seen in Spuedanus, Camerarius, Peucerus, and
others. 5. The Gentiles who laugh at this transformation are convinced by their
own stories or Fables, of Ulysses and his fellows transformed into beasts; and
of Diomedes his companions metamorphosed into birds; if they can believe these
changes, why should they doubt of Lots wifes transmutation?

III. To conceive a general blackness in hell, and yet therein the material
flames of sulphur, is no Philosophical conception, nor will it consist with the
real effects of its nature. Answ. What though this were no Philosophical
conceptions, nor consisting with the effects of Nature, is it therefore untrue?
God is not subject to Philosophical conceptions, nor to the laws of nature who
could make fire to burn, but not consume the bush, and make the fiery furnace
burn the Chaldeans, and yet not sindge a hair of the three childrens clothes;
the same power can make blackness and the flames of sulphur dwell together in
hell; and which is more, he can make fire, which naturally is accompanied with
light, to be the subject of darkness in Hell. But the Doctor is deceived by his
experiments, who thinks that sulphur affords no blacking smoke; for I know the
contrary by blacking paper with the smoke thereof. Besides, both Philosophers
and experience tell us, that the sulphurous vapors which in thundering and
lightning break through the clouds, do make black the things touched with them;
so says Aristotle, Pliny, and others: And though Brimstone make red Roses and
Tiffany white, it will not therefore follow that it will make any thing white;
the Sun beams which whiteneth the Linen, tawns the skin; and if the whitning
of things by sulphur, proceeds as he says from its drying and penetrating
quality, much more would all things be whitened by the Sun and fire, whose heat
is more penetrating and drying; but we see how many things by them are
blackned; and the very heat of the fire will induce blackness upon paper,
though there come no smoke at all to it. He therefore who long since destroyed
Sodom with fire and brimstone, will with the same materials punish the wicked
in hell, where shall be in stead of light, blackness and darkness.

IV. Philoxenus the Musician desired a Crains neck, not for any pleasure at
meat, but fancying thereby an advantage in singing, (Book 7. c. 14.) Answ. That
this Philoxenus was a glutton, ancient Historians do affirm, and that he
wished a Cranes neck to enjoy the longer pleasure of meat and drink, is
asserted by Aristotle, Athenaeus, Machon the Comic, AElian and others: Machon
says, that he wished a neck of three cubits long. He was a great Fish eater,
therefore was nicknamed Phylichthys, and Solenista from Solenes, a kind of
Oysters which he delighted in. Being one day at Table with Dionysius the
tyrant, he had a small mullet set before him, which he takes up in his hand,
and holds to his ear; Dionysius asks what he meant by that? He answers, that
he had asked advice of Galataea, but she said that she was too young to advise
him; and that he were best to consult with the old Galataea in Dionysius his
dish: At which the Tyrant laughing, gave him the great Mullet that he had
before him, which was very pleasing to the glutton. This story is recorded by
Caelius Rhodiginus, and doubtless that proverb, Collaria cadavera, that is long
necked carcasses, which Erasmus borrowes from Aristophanes, has relation to
this wish of Philoxenus; for by it are meant Gluttons and Drunkards, who being
buried in sleep and wine, are little better then dead carcasses with long
necks, as this Philoxenus was, whose belly was his God; of whom it is recorded,
that when he saw a dish of good meat, he would spit upon it, that he might
enjoy it all alone: Yet the Doctor denies this wish upon no other ground, but
because it was absurd. Sure this is no ground at all; for it is no unusall
thing with Gluttons and Drunkards, both to wish and do absurdly. His wish was
not so ausurd as that of Midas, who wished all he touched might become gold;
or that of Heliogabalus, who wished and longed that he might eat the Phoenix,
being the only single bird in the World. Again, this vvish of Philoxenus was
not so absurd as the Doctor thinks: for though the Tongue be the organ of taste,
yet the Oesophagus cannot be altogether tastlesse, seeing there is one common
membrane which is nervous to it and the Tongue. Now the membrane of the Tongue
is the medium of taste: will any man say then, There is no taste or pleasure in
deglutition? We find by experience, how unpleasant to the throat is the descent
of bitter pills, or potions; so that I could never yet swallow a bitter pill,
be it never so small. That there is much pleasure in deglutition of sweet meats
and drinks, is plain by the practice of those who to supply the want of long
necks, use to suck their drink out of long small Canes, or Quils, or glasses
with long narrow snouts: And others for want of these will tipple leasurely,
and let their liquor glide down the throat gently and by degrees: therefore
doubtless Philoxenus knew that a long neck conduced much to the pleasure of
eating and drinking, which made him vvish for a Cranes neck, that he might
enjoy for some longer time the relish of his delicate viands, which gave the
name afterward to dainties and sweet meats; for they were termed Placontae
Philo^eniae. Again, when he says, That it had been more reasonable if
Philoxenus had wished himself a Horse; because in this animal the appetite is
more vehement; he is deceived, for the vehemence of the appetite is no
pleasure, but pain; there is no pleasure in hunger and thirst, but in eating
and drinking. And indeed there is no reason that he who loved fish and sweet
meats so well, should with himself a Horse, who must content himself with
Oats and Hay, and sometimes with dry straw, without any sauce; he should rather
have wished himself to have been Apuleius his Ass, who sometimes filled his
belly with good pies, and other dainties. Lastly, when he says, That canorous
birds have short necks, and that long necked birds are not musical. I answer,
It is not the length of the neck that hinders medulation, but the wideness
thereof: For which cause youth before puberty, women, and Eunuchs, have more
melodious voices then men, whose a^pera arteria, with other vessels, are
dilated by the heat of the Testicles: For therwise we find that the length of
the neck is ahelp to singing: Hence birds thrust out their necks when they
chant, which the Poet intimates when he says, Longa canoros dant per colla
modos.


Therefore the proportionable length of wind-instruments does conduce to
modulation.

CHAP. XV.
1. Heavy bodies swim in the dead sea: and the Ancients in this point defended.
2. Crassus had reason to laugh at the Ass eating This^tles: Laughter defined:
in laughter there is sorrow; in weeping, joy. 3. That Christ never laughed,
proved. 4. Fluctus Decumans, what?

THat heavy bodies will not sink in the Lake Asphaltites, or dead sea of
Sodom, is affirmed by Aristotle, Solinus, Diodorus, Justin, Strabo, Plutarch,
Josephus, and others, and confirmed by the practice of Vespasian, casting into
that lake captives bound, who sloated and sunk not: Besides that, it stands
with reason; for salt water will support heavy burdens, much more will that
water which is thickened with a forcible ebullition of Sulphur and Bi^umen; yet
the Doctor ( Book 7. c. 15.) will not believe but that heavy bodies do sink
there, though not so easily as in other waters. Therefore rejects Pliny's
swimming of Bricks, Mandevils Iron, and Munsters burning Candle, which sinks
not there, as fabulous; yet all this may be true: for the ebullition may be so
forcible, the water so thickened with the Bitumen, the sulphurous vapors and
spirits ^o violently tending upward, that they may waft up Bricks and Iron, and
not suffer them to sink. A greater wonder then this may be seen in those that
write of AEtna, Vesuvius, the burning hills of Island and America, whence are
belched out and elevated into the air, great stones by those fiery vapors
which issue out of those Vulcans. Within these twenty years Vesuvius cast out
great stones above twenty miles distance. And therefore it is no such wonder
for a burning Candle to swim, which being extinguished, sinketh; for the flame
adds levity to it. But let us see the Doctors reasons, 1. Josephus (says he)
affirms that only living bodies float, not peremptorily averring they cannot
sink, but that they do not easily descend. Answ. The words of Josephus are
these ( de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 5.) The most heavy bodies that are being cast
into this Lake, float upon it, neither can any man be ^asily drowned there,
though he would. Here Josephus speaks both of living bodies, that though they
would, they cannot sink easily; they may force themselves perhaps to dive
under the water, but not without difficulty, and he speaks also of the
heaviest things in general. Aristotle (says he) speaks lightly thereof,(...),
and esteems thereof as a Fable. Answ. Aristotle speaks not lightly but
seriously of this Lake; for from the quality of supporting heavy bodies, he
deduceth one of his prime Arguments to prove the salsedinous quality of the
Sea. But the Doctor deceives himself in the word (...), as if this did still
signify a fabulous relation; whereas in that place, and elsewhere, it
signifies a serious narration. So confabulari in Latin does signify
conference of serious matters for the most part: (...) is to speak, not to tell
Fables, from (...), a word or speech. In Homer, (...), signifies a grave and
serious speech made by Agamemnon. So in the same Poet, (...) is to speak and
discourse. The like in Phocylides, (...) is to be moderat in eating, drinking,
and speaking. Andrew Thevet (says he) saw an Ass cast therein and drowned.
Answ. So says Camerarius indeed, and I will not question the truth of Thevets
narration; there may be diverse reasons of this, the violent hurling of the Ass
with his burden under the water. 2. His sudden suffocation by the sulphurous
exhalations. 3. The Lake in all places thereof, and at all times, has not the
same violent ebullitions, but sometimes there is remission. The Ass then might
sink in such a place, and at such a time when and where the boiling was remiss,
the vapors weak, and the water thinner then in other parts of the same Lake.
But hence it will not follow, that in other parts, and at oher times, the
heaviest bodies may not swim there.

II. That Crassus never laughed but once, and that was at an Ass eating
Thistles, seems strange to the Doctor, yet he gives no reason for this, but
only that the object was unridiculous, and that laughter is not merely
voluntary. But these are no reasons: For a more ridiculous ^bject there cannot
^e, then to see such a medley o^ pleasure and pain in the Asses eating of
Thistles; for whilst he bites them, they prick him, so that his tongue must
needs be pricked, though perhaps his lips may be hard, and not so easily
pen^trable; whence arose the Proverb, Like lips, like ^^tice. But there was
something else in this that moved Crassus to laugh: For he saw here the vanity
both of most men taking pleasure in those things which are accompanied with
much pain and sorrow: Besides, he saw here the folly of the Roman rich men, who
held Thistles such a dainty dish, that they would not suffer poor men to eat
thereof, engrossing them with great sums of money to themselves, which
notwithstanding the Asses did eat on free cost. Was it not then a ridiculous
thing to see rich men pay so dear for Asses food, and to debar poor men from
that meat which they permitted to Asses? Pliny could not but laugh at the
consideration of this folly. 2. When he says, that Laughter is not merely
voluntary, he can infer nothing from hence, except this, That it was as
natural for Crassus to laugh, as for others; which I deny: For some are more
naturally inclined to it then others; all have not the like temper and
constitution of body, some have hard and solid hearts, heavy and pensive
spirits, which no ridiculous object can move to laugh; these are called (...).
There be others again who can never be moved to weep. But he gives us here a
lame definition of laughter, when he says, It is a sweet contraction of the
Muscles of the face, and a pleasant agitation of the vocal organs. These are
but the effects of laughter, the cause is the softness and agility of the
heart, the cheerfulness and levity of the spirits, moving first the
Diaphragma, and by them the Muscles. Again, there is a laughter called
Sardonius, which is accompanied with a contraction of the Muscles, but this is
not sweet, yet it is laughter; and in finging, which is not laughter, there is
an agitation of the vocal organs, accompanied with pleasure. Lastly, whereas
he condemns Heraclitus, who by his weeping made a hell on earth; he is
deceived: For oftentimes there is hell in laughing, and a heaven in weeping; in
tears there is often delight, and in laughing pain, and as Solomon says,
Madness. Aristotle says (1. Rhet.) That there is in sorrow and tears a
certain sense of pleasure; and as Prudentius says, Gaudia concipiunt
lachrymas, dant gaudia fletum.


This is (...). Tears (says St. Ambrose) feed the mind, and ease the heart,
which David found when he said, My tears have been my meat day and night.
Good men therefore found not the uncomfortable attendments of hell in weeping,
but rather the comfortable enjoyments of heaven.

III. The Scripture witnesses, that Christ wept thrice, but never that he
laughed. The Doctor thinks there is no danger to affirm the act and performance
of that, whereof we acknowledge the power and essential property, and whereby
he convinced the doubt of his humanity. Answ. We deny not but there was in
Christ, by reason of his humanity, the faculty of risibility; yet it will not
follow that therefore he did actually laugh: For this act is rather a property
of levity and folly, then of reason and humanity; therefore we see women more
inclined to laughing then men, childhood then old age, and fools then wise men.
Neither needed Christ to prove his humanity by laughing, he proved it
sufficiently by weeping, which is the first demonstrative act of our humanity
as soon as we are born; only Zoroastres the author of Magic, came like a fool
laughing into the World. Again, he says, We need not fear to adscribe that to
the incarnat Sun, which is sometimes attributed to the uncarnat Father. Answ.
From a metaphorical laughing which is adscribed to the Father, to a natural
and real laughing in the Son, can be no consequence. God laughs figuratively,
therefore Christ laughs really, is as good a consequence, as if I should infer,
that man flies naturally, because God is said to fly tropically. Lastly, he
says, It is not reasonable to conclude from Scripture negatively, in points
which are not matters of Faith. Answ. It is true, where the Scripture speaks
superficially, and by the way of any thing, diverse circumstances are omitted,
in which regard we may not conclude negatively; but where the Scripture speaks
exactly, as it does of our Savior, we may reason from the negative. For no
less then four Evangelists write the story of Christ so fully, that they
mention all his passions and affections, as his anger, joy, sorrow, pity,
hunger, thirst, fear, wearisomnesse, etc. They speak that he mourned three
several times. So when the Prophets describe him, they set him out as a man of
sorrows, acquainted with griefs, smitten of God, and afflicted, wounded for
our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, and stricken for our sins. It
is strange then, that neither Prophet, Historian, Apostle, nor Evangelist,
should speak a word of his laughing, and yet so punctually mention to us his
griefs, sorrows, and weeping: therefore not without cause did Chrysostom,
Austin, Basil, Bernard, and others, conclude negatively, That Christ never
laughed, and yet he did not for this cease to be a Man. For the like is
recorded of Crassus, Grandfather to that Crassus who was killed in the
Parthian war; who (as is said) never laughed but once. It is also recorded of
Anaxagoras, Aristoxenes, Socrates, Cato, Nerva the Emperor, and others, that
they were never seen to laugh. Besides, seldom or never is laughing in
Scripture taken in a good sense; it is called madness, and like the cracking
of thorns: laughing is threatened to end in sorrow, and woe is denounced to
those that laugh; but a blessing to the mourners. As for the priority of the
heart above the brain, whereof the Doctor speaks here, I have already proved
out of Aristotle, and it is plain that in the Scripture it is of greater
account then the brain, because this is never mentioned, but still the heart,
let Physicians say what they will for the brains principality.

IV. That Fluctus decumanus, or the tenth wave, is greater or more dangerous
then any other, etc. is evidently false. Here the Doctor troubles himself to no
purpose, in refuting the greatness of the tenth wave, and tenth egg: For the
tenth of any thing was not counted the greatest, but the greatest of any things
was called by the name of Tenth; because that is the first perfect number, as
consisting of 1, 2, 3 and 4. It was also held a sacred number; therefore the
tenth of spoils was dedicated to Hercules, and from him called Herculan, the
tenth of fruits was paid by the Corinthians to Cyphelus their King, by Cyrus to
Jupiter, by the Arabians to Sabis, and long before by Abraham and Jacob to the
true God. When there was yet no positive law, but the law of Nature. In the
number then of Ten, the Ancients conceived there was perfection and
excellency: For Nature perfects man, and brings him into the world the tenth
month; she has parted his hands into ten fingers, his feet into ten toes: she
has given him ten passages for evacuation, in three ten days the male child
is formed in the womb, in four ten days the female: there be ten Heavens;
they made up their music of ten strings, their year of ten months, Apollo
with the nine Muses made up the full consort, they used to drink but ten times
in their Feasts, the woman's Dowry anciently was ten Sestertia at least; and the
greatest ordinarily decies Sestertium, that is ten hundred thousand pounds, of
our money 7812. l. 10. s. Many other observations may be made of this number;
therefore any thing that was greater then another, was called Decumanum. Porta
decumana was the great gate of the Camp. Limes decumanus in grounds, was from
East to West; decumana pyra in Pliny, are great Pears; Decumatio was the
calling forth of every tenth delinquent in an Army for punishment: And Lipsius
thinks that from them the great gate of the Camp out of which they went, was
called Decumana. This number also of Ten is musical in Scripture, as may be
seen in diverse passages thereof. Now whereas he says, That the Greeks express
the greatest wave by the number of three, as their word (...) shows. This he
has from Erasm us in his Adagies: but I think the word is not from (...),
three, but from (...), I fear; so this (...) is not the third wave, but the
most terrible and greatest wave. Hence the Latin Decumanus should be rendered
(...), not (...).

CHAP. XVI.
1. Epicurus, a wicked and wanton man, impious in his opinions. Seneca's
judgment of him. 2. Twelve of his impious and absurd opinions rehearsed.

THe Doctor is very prodigal of his pity, when he cries out, Who can but
pity the virtuous Epicurus, who is commonly conceived to place his chief
felicity in pleasure and sensual delights, etc. But these pleasures were of the
mind, not of the body. Gassendus indeed has taken much needless pains to
vindicate Epicurus from his errors and impiety; but in this he washes a Brick,
or Blackmore: his chief supporter is Diogenes Laertius, an obscure Author in
former times: for no ancient Writer speaks of him; and he cites more
Philosophers then (it is thought) he ever read. This Laertius lived 450. years
after Epicurus, that is, in the time of Antonius pius, about 150. years after
Christ; whereas Epicurus lived almost 300. years before our Savior. Now how he
should come to know more of Epicurus then those Philosophers who were
contemporary with him, even his own disciples, who writ the life and doctrine
of that wanton garden Philosopher; is a thing to be questioned, and to
indifferent men improbable: For whatsoever Gassendus out of this Laertius,
writes of his commendations, yet we find in the writings of ancient
Philosophers among the Gentiles, and primitive Doctors among the Christians,
that he was a man lewd in his conversation, and monstrous in his opinions; so
that ever since he opened his School till this day, a wanton Atheist is called
an Epicure. Sine vano publica fama. Sure there could not be so much smoke
without some fire; and to say that his contemporary Philosophers, chiefly the
Stoics, should out of malice write untruths of him, is very improbable: For to
what end should they do so? And why more against him then any other? Besides,
if he was innocent, why did he not vindicate his own reputation by writing? Why
did not his Scholars stand up in his defense, how came it that in almost five
hundred years he was branded by the tongues and pens of all men, and no man all
that while stood up to clear his reputation, till Diogines Laertius produced
three of his Epistles, which wise men may think to be fictitious; and the
rather because they contradict what his own Scholars, and ancient Philosophers
have recorded of him. For Timecrates his beloved Disciple, and one whom he made
one of the Executors of his last will, writes, that with excess of eating and
drinking he used to vomit twice a day. And Laertius himself is forced to
confess, that he killed himself in the Bath with drinking too much sweet
wine, and so he showed himself to be Epicurus indeed. He was so decrepid the
later part of his life, that for many years together he could not rise out of
his chair, he had so enervated his body with pleasures, wherein he placed his
felicity. Is this the Doctors virtuous Epicurus, who spent every day a Mina,
which was an hundred Drams, that is, 3. l. 2. s. 6. d. every Dram being
7. d. ob. I confess only Seneca among the Stoics speaks favorably of
Epicurus his opinion concerning pleasure, as if he meant of mental delights (
lib. 1. de vit. beat.) yet withal checks him, showing that his commending of
pleasure was pernicious, because voluptuous men upon this took occasion to hide
their luxury in the bosom of Philosophy, and to cover their wantonness with
the patrociny and mantle of pleasure: Therefore elsewhere he calls him, The
Master of pleasure, and one who too much yielded to the delights of the body.
Seneca therefore by speaking favorably of Epicurus, would keep off voluptuous
men from making him their patron of sensual pleasures; and was loath that the
sacred name of Philosophy should be bespattered by such an impious professor:
His intention in this was good, but yet truth should take place. Neither does
the honor of a holy profession depend upon the quality of the professor;
though wicked Judas was an execrable Apostle, yet the Apostolical function is
sacred. But perhaps it may be objected, That Epicurus did oftentimes use to
fast, and content himself with bread and water. I answer, That there is a
pleasure sometimes in fasting, as well as in feasting: the nature of man
delights in change; if it were not for abstinence sometimes, we should not know
the delight of fullness; darkness commends the pleasure of light, and Winter
adds to the delights of Summer. There is a vvearisomnesse in continual
feasting, which takes away pleasure. therefore Epicurus to maintain an
alternate vicissitude of delights, would interchangeably fast and feast. But
his abstinence was to increase the pleasure of his intemperance; and his
intemperance was to add delight to his abstinence. Beside that, he was
necessitated sometimes to fast for his healths sake, and enjoyment of a long
life, which could not consist in continual surfeiting. Seneca (in Epistol.)
also reproves Epicurus for his inconstancy in saying, That virtue is never
without pleasure; and yet affirms that it is not the virtue but the pleasure
that makes a man happy. A foolish distinction says he: For if Virtue be never
without that which makes a man blessed, then virtue it self is sufficient to
beatitude, and that perfectly; for otherwise an imperfect felicity is
infelicity. Again, in his Book of Benefits he tells Epicurus, That virtue is to
be desired for its self, not for its pleasure, which he proves out of his own
Doctrine of God: though he has disarmed him of all power, excluded him from
all commerce and care of Man, yet he worships him for his greatness and
goodness, though he have no benefit by him, nor is afraid of any hurt from
him. Again, he commends many of Epicurus his sayings, not because they were
his, but because they were common Principles and Tenants used by him, Non quia
Epicuri voces, sed quia publicae. Another reason he gives, because some sayings
are rare and unexpected out of his mouth, whose doctrine and practice was so
lascivious: and therefore he commends his sayings more then his actions: he
says he was fortis, sed manuleatus, a brave man, but vvithal debauched and
effeminate; brave in his sayings, but debauched in practice. Ignava opera
Philosopha sententia. As there be too many like him, Stoics in opinion, and
Epicureall in conversation; by nature says the Comic, we are all prone to
pleasure and lasciviousness, d labor proclives ad libidinem. Arcesilaus being
asked why so many of other Sects revolted to Epicurus, but none fell from him
to them, answered, That Cocks can be easily made Capons, but Capons could never
become Cocks again. It is easy to become and turn a Priest of Cybele, but not
so easy to return. Facilis discensus Averni, sed revocare gradum, superasque
evadere ad auras, hoc opus hic labor. Broad is the way that leads to
destruction, but the gate to salvation is narrow, and sew enter thereat. Seneca
also checks that Master of the Revels for saying, In contented poverty there is
much honesty: For how can he be poor that is content? It is content that
makes rich, discontent poor. He plainly bids defiance to Epicurus his opinion
of pleasure, in his fourth book of Benefits, calling his Sect effeminate,
umbratick, trencher Philosophers, making virtue the handmaid to pleasures,
which ought to be the Mistress, enslaving her to her Vassals, which she ought
to lead, to command, to keep under; he calls it a manifest blindness in them
to set the Cart before the Horse, to prefer pleasure before Virtue, to set that
first which should be last: And not only is he angry for advancing pleasure,
but for joining it with Virtue at all, which scorns pleasures, and accounts
them her enemies, desiring rather the acquaintance and familiarity of pains and
labor, then of such an effeminate happiness as pleasure. Now that these
pleasures of Epicurus are not mental, but corporal, the same Seneca (whom the
Doctor cities for his defense) makes it appear in the 13. Chapter of the same
book; Your pleasure, O Epicurus, says he, is to accustom your tender bodies
to dull idleness, to a sleepy security, in the heat to delight your selves in
cold shades, to solace your drooping souls with wanton thoughts, and to cram
your lasie karkasses with good meats and drinks in your shady gardens. Any man
therefore may see that Epicurus his God was his belly, and gormandising his
chief happiness. Wherefore Athanaeus, lib. 7. shows, that he flattered
Idomeneus and Metrodorus, (...), for his bellies sake. The same Seneca also
rejects Epicurus his impious opinion of God, whom he makes as idle as himself,
sitting in another world secure and careless of humane affairs, acting nothing
at all, which is Epicurus his chief happiness, and taking no notice of our
injuries and benefits. If this were so (says he) the world had been made to
solicit such deaf and impotent Deities with vows, supplications, and lifting
up of hands: Thou O Epicurus (says he) have disarmed God, and taken from him
all his darts and power, so that he is not to be feared of any; thou have
secluded him from this world by a wall or rampire, so that he can neither see
nor feel what is acted here. Hence then it is plain, that Seneca was no
supporter of Epicurus, though he commends some of his moral sentences, not
because they were his, but because they were common; and what greater
commendation is it for him to speak some good sentences, then for the Devil to
utter Scripture phrases. Lastly, Seneca's commendations, (if any such be) of
Epicurus, are of no great moment, seeing with him he doubts of the souls
immortality; when he says, Illa quae nobis inferos faciunt terribiles fabula
est, etc. Cons. ad Marcian.

II. But that we may have a more full view of this swinish Philosopher, whom
the Doctor commends for his virtue, long life, and many books, we will point at
some of his absurd and impious tenants, that Gassendus, and other fantastical
heads of this wanton age, may see what a goodly School of Philosophy they would
open here in Christendom. 1. He rejects Logic, calling it, as Laertius tells
us (...), superfluous, or preposterous, whereas it is the most useful of all
human Arts or Sciences; for without Logic we can neither define, nor divide,
nor distinguish, we can neither tell the essential nor accidental differences,
nor identities of things; we can neither discourse or reason, speak or write
methodically, we can infer no conclusion from any premises, nor find out
probable and demonstrative arguments for proof of any thing, nor detect the
fallacies and captions that are in men's discourses. But it is no wonder he
denis the Art of Reasoning, who knew not what ^eason was; for he confounds it
with the senses, as if it had its essence and being in and from them. And in
his Epistle to Phythocles, he would not have his happy men to meddle with any
knowledge or discipline at all. 2. He makes a difference between (...), the
Universe and the World; affirming that there is but one Universe, but
innumerable Worlds subject to continual generation and corruption; a position
repugnant to Divinity, Philosophy, sense and reason. 3. He makes a certain
space between his worlds, which he calls (...), Tully translates it
intermundium, there he places his idle and careless Gods sleeping securely, as
not being troubled with noise, tumblings and clamours of this tumultuous world.
4. He says that the Sun, Moon and Stars were made a part by themselves,
(...), and afterward were palces in this. 5. He will have the just magnitude of
the Sun and Stars to depend upon our senses, and to be no bigger then they
seem to our eye; so that the bigness of the Sun cannot exceed a foot. 6. He
tells us that the Sun every night perishes, and every day is generated. 7. He
acknowledges no other happiness then what consists in the pleasure of
tasting, smelling, seeing, hearing, feeling, or venery, as may be seen in
Laertius. 8. He makes all things to have their existence not by providence, but
by hap-hazard of Atoms, and not the bodies of things only, but the reasonable
souls of men also, which he makes subject to uncertainty. 9. He makes all the
Gods (...), with humane shapes. 10. He reaches, as Plutarch tells us, that
there is no qualities in things, but what the senses apprehend; so that the
same wine may be both sweet and source, according to the palate that tastes it;
and hot water is not hot but cool, if a man conceit it to be so. 11. He makes
his doctrine fit for all men's humors; he commends wealth to the covetous,
discommends it to the prodigal and riotous; he praises gormondising to the
Glutton, dispraiseth it to the abstenious: he tells the continent venery is
hurtful, but to the wanton that it is delightful and pleasant. 12. He shows
himself to be a profane Atheist in despising Religion, making it a tyrant to
keep men in aw, a pernicious device and a scar-crow to terrify and enslave the
world. And now lest any might think that Epicurus is wronged, and that these
damnable opinions are fathered upon him causlesly, I will not allege Cicero,
Plutarch, Lactantius, and others that have professedly written against him, but
his prime Scholar Lucretius, who highly commends him, as being the first that
freed the World from the bondage and slavery of Religion: His words are these:
Humana ante oculos faede quum vita jaceret
In terris oppressa gravi sub relligione,
Quae caput ^ coeli regionibus ostendeba^
Horribili super adspectu mortalibus instans:
Primum Graius homo mortales tendere contra,
Est oculos ausus, primusque obsistere contra:
Quem neque fama Deum, nec fulmina nec minitanti
Murmr compressit coelum, etc.


And so he goes on, glorying in the conquest and victory that Epicurus had got
over religion, Quare relligio pedibus subjecta vicissim obteritur, nos exaequat
victoria coelo. His other wicked and absurd opinions, you may see mentioned and
commended by the same Poet through all his Poem; so that the Doctor has no
reason to complain that Epicurus is wronged, and much less cause has he to
commend and pity so profane and absurd a Writer, and to call him virtuous who
was the greatest enemy that ever virtue had. Neither are his many Writings, or
long life, arguments sufficient to prove him an honest man. I shall not need
spend time and paper in refuting the senseless and wicked Dictates of Epicurus,
being fully refuted already by diverse eminent Writers, both Christians and
Gentiles.

CHAP. XVII.
Epicurus his Atoms rejected by nineteen reasons.

BEcause the Doctor speaks oftentimes in his Book of Epicurean Atoms, which
first were hatched in the brains of Leucippus, then entertained by Democritus,
and by him recommended to his Scholar Epicurus; and because some giddy heads of
this age loathing wholesome doctrine, desire to embrace any trash, like women
troubled with the Pica, who prefer ashes, chalk, coals, tar, and such like
stuff, to nourishing meats. I will propose to the Readers view, the
absurdities of this whimsical opinion concerning Atoms, that they may see how
little reason there is to fill young brains with such empty phantosms, and to
reject Aristotle's wholesome and approved Doctrine of Principles. The inventers
of these Atoms at first, out of a vainglory that they might seem singular,
rejected the common received principles of natural Bodies, obtruding on the
World their idle dreams; which are greedily embraced by the vainglorious wits
of this age, but upon what grounds let us see: 1. Either many bodies are made
up of one atome, or one body of many atoms. But neither are true; not the
first, because an atome is indivisible; not the second, because they cannot
unite together in respect of vacuity in which they are distant from each other.
2. It is a maxim among them (says Aristotle) That there is no passibility but
by the means of vacuity. Now atoms have no vacuity in them, because they make
them solid, therefore they are not subject to passibility; it will follow then,
that where there is no passion, there can be no action; for passion is the
reception of action, and therefore where no patient is, there no agent can be,
because that is wanting on which the agent should act. Hence it will follow,
that where there is no action and passion, there can be no generation. 3. There
can be no action where there is no contrariety; but contrary qualities are not
in atoms: for Leucippus (as Aristotle says) placed heat in them, but not
cold; hardness, but not softness; gravity, but not levity. 4. These Atomists
contradict themselves: for they hold their atoms impassible, and yet place in
them degrees of qualities, making some heavier then others; by which it will
follow, that some atoms are hotter then others, and consequently they cannot
act one upon another: For the greater heat acts upon the lesser, as the
stronger upon the weaker. 5. If compounded bodies are made up of atoms, then
the qualities which are in these bodies, were first in the atoms, or were not;
if not, whence have compounded bodies their qualities, being they are not in
their principles? If they are in atoms, either they are singly, so that in
each atome there is but one quality, as frigidity in one, hardness in another;
or else there be diverse qualities in one atome. If the first be granted, then
it will follow, that each atome has a different nature from the other, and so
no possibility for reception of the quality of another, and consequently no
action; if the second be granted, then it will follow that atoms are
divisible: for there must be one part for reception of one quality, and another
part for the other quality. There must be also besides, integrall parts, matter
and form, act and passibility, which we call essential parts; so will it
follow, that atoms are compounded bodies, which cannot be principles. 6. The
uniting of these atoms must be either by themselves, or by another; if by
another, then they are passible, which is repugnant to Democritus; if by
themselves, then they are divisible into parts, to wit, into the parts moving,
and the parts moved: For nothing can move itself; because contrarieties cannot
be in the same thing secundum idem. 7. They make some of the atoms to be soft;
it will follow then, that some of them are passive: for soft things are apt to
receive impressions, and so to suffer. 8. If these atoms be smooth and round,
as some will have them, they can no more unite to make up a mixed body, then so
many small seeds or grains, which only make up a body aggregate, as a heap of
stones; but if they be rough, cornerd, or hooked, as others say, then they are
divisible, and so not atoms. 9. If there be innumerable worlds, as Epicurus
holds, and innumerable atoms must concur to make up any one of these Worlds,
how many innumerable atoms are there to make up innumerable Worlds? There must
needs be more atoms then Worlds, and consequently degrees of more and less in
innumerability and infinity, then which nothing can be more absurd. 10. If all
things are made of atoms, to what end was seed given to vegitables and animals
for procreation? What needs the Husbandman sow corn, or the Gardener cast his
seeds into the ground? What needs he dig or plow, plant, and water, whereas all
fruits, herbs and plants, can be produced by atoms? Birds, says Lactantius,
need not lay eggs, nor sit upon them for procreation, seeing of atoms both
eggs and bird can be produced. 11. The souls and their faculties are made of
finer and smaller atoms then the bodies which are compounded of a grosser
sort. It must then follow they have degrees of magnitude, and consequently
divisibility. 12. Those atoms have neither knowledge, reason, wisdom, nor
counsel, and yet can produce by hap-hazard, worlds and all things in them,
which neither Men nor Angels can effect by their wisdom. 13. If the statue or
picture of a man cannot be effected, but by art, reason, and wisdom, what
impudency is it, says Lactantius, to affirm man himself by chance to be made,
or by a ^emerarious and fortuitall conglobation of atoms. 14. We see the World
and the creatures therein governed, not temerariously, but by an admirable
providence and wisdom, how then can any imagine these should be made by
chance, and not by wisdom. * 15. I would know whether Towns, Castles, Temples,
Ships, and other buildings, are made up of atoms? If these are not, how shall
we believe that celestial or sublunary bodies, or the whole World should be
made of them. 16. When Epicurus gives to his atoms magnitude, figure and
weight, he makes them perfect bodies, and consequently unapt for Physical
mixtion: For the uniting of perfect bodies makes up an aggregative body; so
that in the generation of bodies there is no mixtion but aggregation, which is
ridiculous. 17. He gives figures to his atoms, and yet makes them invisible,
which is a plain Bull and contradiction: For an invisible figure is like an
invisible color, an inaudible sound, an inodorable smell, an ungustible sapor,
an untangible hardness. To make the senses proper objects insensible, is a
senseless toy. 18. He makes his atoms move downward in a straight line, by
reason of their gravity; but fearing lest by this motion there would never be
any concurring of them for generation, he assigns them in another motion,
which he calls declination, and so to one simple invisible indivisible body, he
gives two motions, but tells us not the cause of this motion of declination,
which as Tully says, argues his gross ignorance in Natural Philosophy: For I
would know whether this motion be from an internal or external cause; not from
an internal, for there is no other internal cause of the atoms motion
downward, but gravity, which cannot produce two motions; the cause cannot be
external, because Epicurus his Gods do not move or work at all: Beside that,
his Gods are also made of atoms, as Cicero shows. 19. Most ridiculously did he
invent this motion of Declination, lest he should seem to deprive man of his
liberty of will: For he thought man's will must needs be necessitated, if those
atoms of which the soul is made, should have no other motion but downward,
which is a natural and necessary motion. And by the same means also he took
away Fate or providence. Thus have I briefly touched the absurdities of this
opinion, which is so hugged, and greedily swallowed without chewing, by some
unsettled and vainglorious men, not regarding the dangerous consequences
arising thence, nor the impiety of the Author, being both an Atheist and a
profane wanton, and unsettled in his opinions, saying and unsaying at his
pleasure: For when he saw the envy and danger he had brought upon himself by
his impious Dictates, he sweetens them a little in effect, as Tully says,
denying all Divinity, and yet in words allowing Divine Worship, which is most
ridiculous: to pray and praise, to fear and love, to serve and worship such
Gods as neither love nor hate us, such as take no notice of our good and evil,
such as have no relation to us, nor we to them. So he palliates sometimes his
swinish pleasures with the delights of the mind, clothing a foul Strumpet with
the habit of a modest Matron; whereas by the delight of the mind, he meant
nothing else but mental thoughts, or the delightful remembrance of his
fleshly pleasures, which we leave to him and his Disciples, Epicuri de grege
porcis.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. That Crystal is of water, proved, and the contrary objections answered:
how it differs from Ice. 2. The Loadstone moves not; its Antipathy with
Garlic. Of the Adamant, Versoria, Amber, etc.

THat Crystal was at first Water, then Ice, and at last by extreme cold
hardened into a stone, was the opinion of the ancient Philosophers, and of
Scaliger the best of the Modern; but Mathiolus, Cardan, B^e^tius de Boot, and
Agricola, with some others, will have it to be a Mineral body, hardened not by
cold, but by heat, or a Mineral spirit. Of this opinion is the Doctor ( Book
1. Cap..) but his reasons are not satisfactory: For first (says he) Mineral
spirits resist congelation, but Ice is water congealed by cold. Answ. He takes
this for granted which is not: For he is to prove Crystal a mineral, and that
it is hardened by a mineral spirit, which he does not. Again, all Minerals resist
not congelation, but further it sometimes as he shows himself of Snow and
Salt by the fire side turned into Ice, and of water converted into Ice, by
Saltpeter. Besides, all minerals are not hard; for Quicksilver is not, nor can
mineral spirits harden their own bodies or keep them from dissolving into
liquor, it is the external heat or cold that does it, not the internal spirit,
as we see in Salt, which dissolves into water if it be not hardened by the heat
of Sun or fire, and so will Ice dissolve into water, if the cold grow remiss or
the heat prevail. If then a Mineral spirit cannot harden its own body, how can
it harden the body of water? What mineral spirits are there in cold water to
harden it into Ice? Spirits are hot, therefore apter to dissolve water then
harden it; but we see manifestly that it is cold and not spirits which causes
Ice: the same cold in some Caves where the Sun never comes, nor heat,
converteth water-drops into stones, and the cold of some waters metamorphise
sticks, leaves and trees, pieces of lether, nut-shels, and such like stuff
into stones; why then may not cold convert Ice into a higher degree of
hardness, and prepare it for reception of a new form, which gives it the
essence and name of Crystal. 2. [A liquation in Crystal may be effected, but
not without some difficulty; but Ice may dissolve in any way of heat.] Answ.
The difficult melting of the one, and easy liquation of the other, will not
prove that Crystal was not Ice, but that it is notice. For as Scaliger says,
Valde a seipso differt quod fit, dum sit, and cum est, Ice before it attains
the hardness of a stone, or Crystal, is yet water formally, and Crystal only
materially, or in the way of preparation. But when it cease to be ice, it
assumes the form of crystal, and will not deny its original, that it was once
Ice, which now is a stone. The matter then of crystal, is water, and it is made
of Ice, because it was water, by which ^^e it has stepped up to the form of a
stone. 3. They are differenced by supernatation, or floating upon water, for
crystal will sink, but ice will swim in water. Answ. Its no wonder to see a
stone sink, and ice swim; for crystal when it was ice, swimmed, being now a
stone, sinks; as being a body more compact, hard, solid, and ponderous: so a
stick will swim, but when it is converted to a stone, it sinks. The argument
therefore is good thus: Crystal sinks, Ice swims, therefore crystal is not ice;
but it will not follow, therefore crystal was not ice. 4. They are distinguished
in substance of parts, and the accidents thereof, that is, in color and
figure, for ice is a fimilary body, but the body of crystal is mixed, and
contains in it sulphur, for being struck with steel, it sends forth sparks,
which are not caused by collision of two hard bodies, but they are inflamable
effluences discharged from the bodies collided; for a steel and flint being
both met, will not readily strike fire. Answ. Crystal is not so much
distinguished either in substance or accidents, from ice, as a chick is from an
egg, and yet the chick was an egg.

What wonder is it, if crystal having received a new form, be distinguished
from ice, whereas we see greater distinctions daily in our own nutrition, our
blood, flesh, and bones, have neither the color, figure, or substance of corn,
fruits, herbs, roots, and other meats we feed upon. In the same rose-leaf
there be distinct qualities and operations, one part being restringent, the
other laxative; the same Rhubarb as it is differently prepared, differently
works, one way by loosning, another way by binding the belly. Let us not deny
that distinction to a natural, which we give to an artificial preparation;
there are distinct colors in one and the same leaf of a gillyflower, or tulip.
Again, when he says, That Ice is a similary body, but Crystal is mixed; Here
is no opposition, for similary and dissimilary, are opposite* not similary and
mixed, for a similary body may be mixed; so is flesh, so is blood, so is ice,
except he will make it a pure element. And when he says, Crystal contains
sulphur in it; This is very unlikely, for sulphur is hot and inflamable, it
is also viscous and fat, it is of a piercing quality and of an ungrateful smell,
none of which qualities we find in crystal. In fiery mountains there is most
sulphur, in snowy mountains, most crystal; but his reason to prove there is
sulphur in crystal, is invalid, because says he, being struck with steel, it
sends forth sparks; by this reason he may prove there is sulphur in every hard
thing, even in wood and sticks, for by attrition, or any other violent motion,
they are inslamable, as the Americans know, who use no other way to kindle
their fires, but the attrition of sticks. Arrows will burn in the air, their
Lead will melt, bells, mil-stones, and cart-wheels, will grow extreme hot with
motion, and so will water; is there sulphur in all these? And here he
contradicts himself, when he says, That the sparks are not sent forth by
collision of two hard bodies, but they are inflamable effluences discharged
from the bodies collided. I would know how these effluences can be discharged,
if the bodies be not collided, and how they can be collided without collision.
These sparks then are doubtless the accension of the air, and aerial parts of
these hard bodies, by motion and collision, being no way hindered by wetting
the Steel and Flint, for I have tried the contrary by wetting both, and yet
the Sparks fly out as readily, as if both had been dried; so they will out of
Flints taken out of Rivers, where they have been perpetually moist, so that the
sparks are not quenched at their eruption, because the air is not wet, though
the Steel and Flint be. 5. They are (says he) differenced in the places of
their generation* For Crystal is found in Regions where Ice is seldom seen
Answ. It is sufficient that in those Regions where Crystal is found, Ice is
sometimes seen; and as Ice is there but seldom seen, so Crystal is there but
seldom found: The best and greatest quantities are found in cold and snowy
Countries. Again, though in those hotter Countries the air above is warm, yet
in the bowels of the earth it is as cold, or rather colder, then elsewhere by
antiperistasis; and that is sufficient to prove Crystal may be there generated.
6. They have contrary qualities elementall; and uses medicinal. Answ. It is
true, Ice is moist, and Crystal dry: so water is moist, and salt is dry; will
it therefore follow, that salt is not generated of water? Alum, Saltpeter,
Vitriol, are all hard and dry, so are the bones in our flesh, the teeth in our
gums, the stones in fruits, yet all are begot of soft and moist materials. As
for their contrary medicinal uses, I question not, whereas there are in one
and the same simple (as I showed but now) contrary effects.

II. In the 2, 3, and 4 Chapters of the second book, the Doctor has diverse
pretty and pleasant Discourses of the Loadstone and Amber, yet to some passages
I cannot assent; as 1. when he says, There is coition, syndrome, and concourse
of the Lodestone and Iron to each other; For I do not think that the stone is
moved at all to the Iron, for every natural motion has its reason and end;
the end of attraction in animals and vegitables is for aliment: the motion o^
stones and other heavy bodies downward, is to enjoy their Matrix, or Center:
but no end can be assigned why the Loadstone should draw or move toward the
Iron * the motion therefore is in the Iron, and other metals, which are moved
to the Loadstone, as to their Matrix, says Scaliger; therefore it is no more
wonder for Iron to move to the Loadstone, then to move downwards, the end and
efficient cause being the same in both motions, to wit, the enjoyment of their
proper place or matrix. 2. Whereas the ancients held that garlic hindered the
attaction of the Loadstone, he contradicts this by experience; but I cannot
think the ancient Sages would write so confidently of that which they had no *
experience of, being a thing so obvious and easy to try; therefore I suppose
they had a stronger kind of garlic, then is with us, which made Horace write
so invectively against it, calling it poison and worse then hemlock. 3. He
denies the virtue of the Adamant in hindering the Loadstones attraction, which
the Ancients affirm. It seems our diamonds have not this virtue, but this is no
sufficient reason to deny the virtue of the Adamant, for though our diamond be
a kind of Adamant, yet it is not that kind which the Ancients speak of; for
Pliny reckons six kinds of Adamants. 4. He takes Versoria in Plautus, with
Turnebus, for the rope that turns about the ship; but if versoria there
signifies a rope, it must be false Latin, for funis must be understood,
therefore Plautus would rather have said versorius; but I rather take it with
Joseph Scaliger, upon Manilius, and with Pineda, for a turning back and taking
the contrary way: so that it is an adjective, and via is to be understood; the
same phrase Plautus uses in Trinummi, when Stasimus bids Charmides return to
his master, cape versoriam recipe te ad herum; or else versoria is taken for
the helm by which the ship is turned about. 5. He will not have amber a
vegitable, but a mineral concretion, as is delivered by Boethius. Answ. Boethius
delivers, that there are three sorts of Amber, to wit, minerals, animals, and
vegitables, the first is begot of a bituminous exhalation or oil; the second of
the fat of animals, the third of the gum of trees; he tells us also that because
oftentimes in Amber are found spiders, flies, and other insects, with pieces of
sticks and straws, which the gum falling from the trees, might lick up, or
involve. That all Amber is vegitable, and the juice of trees, even that which
is gathered in the sea, because says he, much land has been drowned by the
sea, and gained from the sea again, as he shows of the Netherlands. Cardan
denies not but all Amber is the juice of trees, yet made bituminous by the heat
of the sea; and Salmuth upon Pancerol, tells us, that the Ancients called that
only Amber, which distilled from the trees, whence Saint Ambrose calls it the
tears of the shrub; therefore though it be th^ckned by heat or cold, or the
seawater, it is not therefore to be called a Mineral, but a Vegitable, as
having its original and essence from Vegitables. Scaliger writes, That there
is a kind of black Amber gathered in those Seas where there is greatest store
of Whales; and therefore Amber is called Whale by the inhabitants of Morocco
and Fez, as believing that it is a substance proceeding from the Whale: But
whether it be true Amber, may be doubted, and I do not find that among the
Ancients Succinum signified any thing else, but the Gum of Trees, concrete into
a solid substance, and of this mind is Petrus Bellonius, in his Observations.

CHAP. XIX.
1. The Navigation of the Ancients by the stars: they knew not the compass. 2.
Goats blood softneth the Adamant. Gold loses its virtue and gravity with its
substance. Iron may grow hot with motion. Coral is soft under water, and
hardened by the air. Viscum or Missletoe, how it grows. The shade of the
Ash-tree, pernicious to Serpents.

IT is not probable (says the Doctor) That the long and sundry voyages of
elder times, were performed by the help of Stars. It is so far from being
improbable, that there was a necessity they should be directed by the Stars,
wanting the use of the Compass; therefore Palinurus in the Prince of Poets, is
still described observing the stars in his Navigation, Sydera cuncta notat
tacito labentia coelo, AEneid. 3. And, Oc^losque sub astra tenebat, AEneid. 5.
And in his Georgicks, he shows, That the Seamen were the first that made use
of the stars, and gave them names, Novita tum stellis numeros and nomina
fecit, Pleiades, Hiados, clarumque Lycaonis Arcton. So Seneca shows, That
before Navigation, there was no use of Astronomy, Nondum quisquam sidera norat.
And Flaccus tells us, That Typhis directed his course altogether by the
stars. Pervigil Arcadeo Typhis pendebat ab astro: Agniades Foelix stellis qui
segnibus usus. So Hora^e wishes, That Venus, Castor, and Pollux, those clear
stars, might direct the ship in which Virgil was, Sic te diva potens Cypri,
etc. The lesser Bear, called Arctophylax by the Grecians, and Cynosura, or
dogs tail; and by some Phoenice, was altogether observed by the Sidonians, or
Phoenicians, the first and ^lliefest Navigators we read of, the greater hare
called Helice, directed the Graecians in their Navigation. The grounds and
rudiments of this art was first laid by Noah, afterward his posterity perfected
it by industry and observation, marking how ^ishes did swim, and birds ^lie,
ruling their motion with their rails, and furthering it with their wings and
finns, whence we have the use of Helms and Oars, or sails; therefore in Hebrew
triim signifies both a bird and ship, and in Latin n put to avis, makes navis.
The perfection of this art is now in this last age attained to by means of the
compass unknown to the Ancients whose Navigation was along the Coast, as we
know by the voiages of AEnaeas and Paul, who for want of the compass durst not
venture into the Ocean, as we do. In the voyage of Jonas, and others, we find
they used Oars most commonly; by the Navigation of Paul, we ^earn that sounding
the coast was much used; yet we read that the Ancients sailed in the Ocean: but
by this word we must understand the Mediteranean sea, called by the Psalmist
the great and wide sea, and by Virgil, mare magnum, AEn. 5. or else the skirts
and brim of the Ocean; for they knew no other Navigation, then along the coast,
as we see by the voyage of Hanno, from Calez to Arabia, and of Eudoxus from the
bay of Arabia to Calez, and the Fleet of Augustus which sailed Northward; for
they neither durst, nor could with safety venture too far into the Ocean,
without the compass, the want of which, made Sol^mons ships spend three years
in their voyage, which might have been effected in three months; they entered
also into most Creeks and Harbors by the way, to find out ^arities for
Solomon: This admirable sea-guide was found out by one Flavius at Melphis, in
the kingdom of Naples, above three hundred years ago, as Blondus, Pancer^l,
and others affirm. Pli^y speaks of the Magnes, or loadstone, but makes no
mention of this virtue to turn the iron touched therewith to the pole, nor in
reciting the instruments of Navigation, does he speak a word of this. In no
ancient Writer do we find this virtue mentioned, nor so much as a name for it
in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, neither do they mention the touching of their
sun-dials with it; besides, Pliny says, the Islanders of Tapro^an or Sumatra,
because they cannot see the North, carry with them in their ships certain small
birds, which being let loose, by natural instinct fly to the Land, whether the
Mariners direct their course after these guides; this shows they were
ignorant of the compa^s, as Acosta, Gomara, Pancerol, Salmuth, and others do
prove. The Phoenicians and Sidonians were anciently the expertest Navigators of
the world, yet we find not that they had any knowledge of the compass: the
Carthagineans indeed by sea viewed all the coast of Mauritania, yet they kept
close by the shore; and though ingenious men did live in old times, and were
inventors of many rarities, yet some things they have left for posterity to
find, whereof they were ignorant, as Clocks, Gun^, Printing, etc. therefore
the reasons of Lemnius are weak, who thinks the Ancients knew the compass, and
no less infirm is ^he argument of Pineda, taken from Solomon's knowledge of all
things; for this word ( all) in Scripture, is taken for many, and many is taken
for all: So Christ cured all diseases, in S. Matthew, that is, many; so all of
those that sleep in the dust of the earth, says Daniel, shall arise, that is,
many. Solomon then knew all things, that is, most things and more then other
men; but I do not think he knew the compass or all the species of animals,
vegitables, minerals, people and places, that are found at this day in America,
nor all the arts invented since, nor all the supernatural works of God. His
chief knowledge was political, for government; he knew not the future
contingencies, nor all the secrets in the earth and seas; if he knew the polar
verticity of the Loadstone, then Adam also knew it, for his knowledge far
exceeded Solomon's, he gave names to all the creatures according to their
natures; he lived 930. years, a fair time to get experience;yet though Adam
knew this, it will not follow that the compass was used in his time, or in
Sol^mons either, who knew that Copper and Brass did sound well, yet Bells of
Copper were not used in his time; and whereas Pineda says, that God would not
have so useful a thing as the compass, hid from man so long. I answer, that
Printing is no less useful, which was not known till of late. What was more
useful then the Preaching of the Gospel, and Incarnation of Christ, and yet
hid many thousand years from the world? God has his own times to bestow his
gifts on men; ^or that fable of ships built without ir^n, for fear they should
be stayed in the failing by the great store of Loadstones near Calicut, is
ridiculous; for our Europaean ships are continually tratficking that way, and
they perceive no such things. To conclude then, ships of old were guided, being
out of sight of Land, not by the compass, but partly by the Tides, partly by
the Winds, and partly by the Stars, and Sea-birds; and when all these failed,
they wandered up and down, not knowing where they were, as we see in AEnaeas his
Navigation, caecis erramus in undis, nec meminisse viae media Palinurus in
unda; the like we may read in Saint Paul's vojage.

II. The Ancients held that Goats blood could soften the Adamant, and yet
resist the hardest hammers; this is denied by the Doctor (2 Book c. 5, 6, 7.)
and his Lapidaries: but their argument is not Logical; our Diamonds are not
softened by Goats blood, but are mastered by hammers; therefore the Ancients
Adamants were such. All Adamants are not of the same kind, for Pliny as we have
already said, reckons six sorts of them; and I think it is no greater wonder
for blood to soften a stone, then for water to harden a piece of Leather, or a
stick into a stone. 2. He says, [that though the substance of Gold be not
sensibly immuted, or its gravity at all decreased, yet from thence virtue may
proceed; for a body may emit virtue without abatement of weight, as is evident
in the Loadstone.] Answ. An accident without a miracle, if it be the same
numerically, cannot pass without the substance in which it is inherent, nor can
the substance be diminished but the gravity must also be abated. Therefore if
Gold in the Patients body loses nothing of its substance and gravity, it
loses no part of its virtue: if the loss be insensible, the virtue
communicated to the patient i^ insensible also; and so he that swallows gold
receives no good by it: For where there is a cure, there must be a sense and
feeling of the cure. As for the Loadstone, if it imparts its virtue, it parts
also with its substance, but in so small a quantity that its scarce
perceptible; but the gold ought to impart much virtue to cure the disease, and
consequently much of its substance, which would be seen by the weight and the
cure; but neither is sensible, and therefore no deperdition, but imaginary. 3.
He cannot apprehend how an iron should grow red hot by motion, since in
swinging a red hot iron, it will grow cold. Answ. That violent motions will
excite heat and fire in hard bodies, we have already showed in diverse examples;
Aristotle proves it by. the example of Arrows, whose Lead will melt with the
heat and motion thereof, in that part of the air, which is near the fire ( de
coelo, l. 2. c. 7.) Virgil confirms the same, speaking of that Arrow which
Acestes shot, that it took fire in the motion. Namque volans liquidis in
nu^ibus arsit arundo, signavitque viam flammis, AEn. 5. but when he says that
hot iron will grow cold by swinging, I grant it, because that heat in the iron
is merely accidental, and from an external principle, it wants pabulous aliment
in the iron to maintain it; therefore no wonder, if encountering with the cold
air, it extinguish: but take a bran or stick of fire, and swing it about, it
will grow redder, hotter, and more fiery, because there is not the bare
accident of heat; but the substance of fire, which is anima^ed and quickened by
the motion of the air; neither is it strange if the violent motion of an Arrow
in hot weather, and in that part of the air which is near the fiery element,
take fire, where we see so many fiery Meteors engendered. But he says, that a
bullet shot at paper or linen, will not set them on fire; it may be so, because
the bullet is not hot enough, having moved but a little way, and a small time;
you cannot in a long time make paper or linen burn, be the fi^e never so hot,
except they touch the flame. 4. He will not believe that Coral is soft under
water, and hard in the air, because one who went down a hundred fathom into the
sea, returned with Coral in each hand, affirming it was as hard at the bottom,
as in the air. Answ. Boethius in his second Book of stones and gems, c. 153.
tells us, that Coral does not harden or grow stony till it be dead; it seems
then, whilst it is alive, its soft under water, and therefore this Diver
lighted upon a dead Coral; but because that was hard, it will not follow that
all Coral under water is hard, except all under water be dead. There is also a
difference between old and young plants, the older the plant grows, the harder
it is; perhaps this was not only dead but also an old plant: Its no wonder then
if Coral petrifie when taken out of the sea, for then it dies being separated
from its matrix and element, in which it had life and veg^tation; and it seems
by the same Boethius, that the substance of Coral at first is wood, for he saw
some which was partly wood and partly stone, not being thoroughly petrified,
which might proceed from some internal impediment: it is therefore no more
wonder for a sea-plant to petrifie in the air, then for a landplant to petrifie
in the sea, or other waters. This is called in Greek (...), as you would say
ston-tree, or stone-plant, and (...), quasi (...), because it petrifieth when
it is touched by the hands, and because the Gorgons were turned into stones,
therefore in Pliny, Coral is called Gorgonia. 5. He likes not the opinion of
the Ancients, concerning the generation of Viscum or Misseltoe, to wit, that it
is bred upon trees from seeds let fall there by thrushes, and ring-doves; his
reasons are, because it grows only upon some trees, and not in Ferrara, where
these birds are found, and because the seed thereof being sown, it will not
grow again, and in some trees it grows downwards under the boughs, where seed
cannot remain. Answ. That Viscum is begot of seeds let fall by birds, as the
Ancients thought, may be true, and that it is an excre^cence of viscous or
superflous sap, as Scaliger writes, may be true also. Many things are
procreated both with and without seeds; there is an equivocall generation both
in vegitables and animals, which the learned Poet knew when he writ of this
Viscum, saying, Soletfronde vivere nova quod non sua seminat arbos. Now the
reason why it grows not upon all trees, and in all Countries, is, because as
the same Poet says, Non omnia fert omnia tellus, there is not a disposition in
the matter of all trees to receive this form, nor in the climate or soil to
animate this seed. Yet Mathiolus observes, that in Hetruria, where is greatest
store of Thrushes, there is greatest pleny of Misseltoe, which shows, that this
plant has its original from the seeds mixed with the excrements of those
birds; and therefore the old proverb was not untrue, Turdus sibi malum cacat,
even in the literal sense; and so where this Viscum is merely an excrescence,
it may grow downwards under boughs, where no seeds can come or remain. 6. He
can deny that a Snake will not endure the shade of an Ash; Pliny and other
ancients affirm it, perhaps upon surer grounds then the Doctor denies it; for
though here in these cold Countries our Snakes may accord with our Ashes, yet
it may be otherwise in hot Regions, where the Serpents are more venomous, and
the Ash-leaves more powerful: why may there not be somewhat in the shade of an
Ash repugnant to the Serpent, whereas the leaves and juice thereof are such
Antidotes against poison, as Dioscorides and Mathiolus show? Cardan tells us,
That in Sardinia the shadow of the Rododaphne is pernicious to those that sleep
under it, making them mad. He instanceth the dangerous qualities proceeding
from the shadows of some other trees; and Lucretius affirms. That the shade of
some other trees procure pains in the head, and other dangerous effects.
Arboribus primum certus gravis umbra tributa est
Vsque adeo capitis faciant ut saepe dolores,
Si quis eas subter jacuit prostratus in herbis.


CHAP. XX.
What the Ancients have written of Griffins may be true. Griffins mentioned in
Scripture. Grypi and Gryphes, Perez and Ossi^rage, ^ha^?

THe Doctor [denies there be Griffins, that is, dubious animals in the fore
part resembling an Eagle, and behind a Lion, with erected ears, four feet, and
a long tail, being averred by AElian, Solinus, Mela, and Herodotus,] Answ.
AElian tells us, That Griffins are like Lions in their paws and feet, and like
Eagles in their wings and head. Solinus says only, that they are very fierce
fowls; Mela, that they are cruel and stubbo^n animals; Herodotus only
mentions their names, when he shows, the Arimaspi takes away their gold from
them: S^ Philostrates shows, That in strength and bigness they are like
Lions; So Pausanius speaks of them; but neither he, nor the others named, tell
us in plain terms, that they are like Lions behind, and Eagles in the
forepart: For Pliny and some others doubt of this as fabulous. 2. Suppose they
had thus described Griffins, as mixed and dubious animals, yet this is not
sufficient to prove them fabulous: for diverse such animals there are in the
World. Acosta tells us of the Indian Pacos, which in some parts thereof
resemble the Ass, in others the Sheep. Lerius speaks of the Tapiroussou in
^rasill, which resembles both an Ass and an Heifer. Many other sorts of mixed
animals we read of, as flying Cats, and flying Fishes; and some kind of Apes
with Dogs heads, therefore called Cynocephali. Our Bats are partly birds and
partly beasts: They fly like a bird with two feet, they walk like a beast with
four: They fly with their feet and walk with their wings, says Scaliger. And
which is a greater wonder, there are Plant-animals, or Zoophits, partly plants,
and partly animals. But he says, In Bats and such mixed animals, there is a
commixtion of both in the whole, rather then an adaptation of the one l^to the
other. Here he is deceived; for in Bats and such like Animals, it is easily
^een what parts are of the bird, what of the beast, which we could not discern
if there were a commixtion: it is rather an adaptation then. This is most
apparent in that Indian beast which has the forepart of a Fox, the hinder part
of an Ape, the ears of an Owl, and a bag or purse under its belly, wherein its
young ones hide themselves in time of danger. Neither is it fabulous that these
Griffins are greedy of gold, which they preserve and hide in the earth: for I
^^ve seen Magpies do the like: I have observed one which stole money, and hid
it in a hole; and perhaps it may be from this that Plautus calls Griffins
Mag-pies; Picos divitiis qui colunt aureos montes supero. In Aulul. And yet I
am of AElians opinion, That it is not so much for the gold they fight, as for
their young ones, which men use to carry away when they search the Country
for gold. Neither was Aristaeus the first that affirmed these Griffins, as the
Doctor says; for we read of them in Leviticus and Deuteronomy, which though
Tremellius and we use not, but the word Ossifrage, yet the Hebrew word Peers
is translated Griffi by the Septuagints, by the old Latin, by Ierom and Pagmin,
by Arias Montanus, and by the Italian version: And if (...) be from (...) to
break, then may the word Ossifrage be meant of the Griffin: for no bird so sit
to break bones, as this fierce and strong animal. (...) then signifies
properly a Griffin, and not a kind of Eagle with a hooked Bill; for both birds
with hooked Bills, and men with Aquilan noses, are called Gryphi, not Gryphes.
Hence then it appears, that the negative testimony of Michovius is not
sufficient to overthrow the received opinion of the Ancients concerning
Griffins, especially seeing there is a possibility in nature for such a
compounded animal. For the Gyraffa, or Camelopardalis, is of a stranger
composition, being made of the Libbard, Buffe, Heart, and Camel. Besides,
though some fabulous narrations may be added to the story of the Griffins, as
of the one-ey'd Arimaspi with whom they fight, yet it follows not that
therefore there are no Griffins. If any man say, That now such animals are not
to be seen; I answer, It may be so, and yet not perished: for they may be
removed to places of more remoteness and security, and inaccessible to men:
for many such places there are in the great and vast Countries of Scythia, and
Tartaria, or Cathaia, vvhither our Europeans durst never, nor could venture.

CHAP. XXI.
1. The existence of the Phoenix proved by diverse reasons: and the contrary
objections refelled: the strange generation of some birds. 2. The Ancients
cleared concerning the Phoenix, and whether the Phoenix be mentioned in
Scripture. Diverse sorts of generation in diverse creatures. The Conclusion, with
an Admonition not to slight the Ancients opinion and Doctrine.

BEcause the Doctor following the opinion of Pererius, Fernandus de Cordova,
Francius, and some others, absolutely denies the existence of the Phoenix, I
will in some few positions set down my opinion concerning this bird. 1. I grant
that some passages concerning this bird are fabulous,; as that he is seen but
once in 500 years, that there is but one only in the World; or if there be
two, that the old Phoenix is buried by the younger at Heliopolis. 2. These
fabulous narrations do not prove there is no such bird, no more then the
fables that are written of Saint Francis, prove that there was never any such
man. 3. Nor does it follow, that there is no such bird, because some write,
they never read of any who had seen a Phoenix; for though these few who write
of this bird, did never see him in a picture, yet the Egyptians, from whom
they had the knowledge of the Phoenix, did see him. Tacitus writes, That no man
doubts but that this bird is sometime seen in Egypt, Aspici aliquando in
AEgypto hanc volucrem non ambiguitur, Ann. l. 6. There are some creatures in
Africa and the Indies, that were never seen by any of those who writ their
histories, the knowledge whereof they have only by relation from the
inhabitants. 4. Though Egypt was the mother of many fictions, as Pererius
shows, yet it will not follow that the Phoenix is a fiction, or that Egypt
was not also the School of many truths; for the Graecians from thence had the
their knowledge and wisdom, Orpheus, Homer, Musaeus, the Poets; Lycu^gus, and
Solon, their Lawgivers; Plato and Pythagoras, their Philosophers; Eudoxus and
other Mathematicians, were all Scholars in Egypt. 5. That there is but one
Phoenix, is not against Philosophy and Logic, which teaches us, That the
species can be preserved in one individual, Pererius shows, That this is
only true in things incorruptible, as in the Sun and Moon; but I say, That this
is true also in things subject to corruption; for in these, though the
individuals be corruptible, yet the species are eternal; and it skils not how
few the particulars be, so long as the species can be preserved in one; and
though there be no individual actually existent, yet the species can be
preserved; for in Winter the species of Roses is not perished, though there be
no individual Roses actually existent; for even then they have their being and
essence, though their existence be but potentially in the ashes, as the forms
of the elements are in the mixed bodies, or as the form of a cock is in the
egg, which by the heat of: the hen or Sun, is actually educed. 6. Whereas
P^rerius holds it inconvenient, that so noble a species as the Phoenix is,
should have but one individual, subject to so many dangers; I answer, That in
all beasts and birds, the nobler the species is, the fewer are the individuals;
there are not so many Eagles as Doves, nor Elephants as Rabbets, and Nature is
so provident in the conservation of the species, that where there be few of
the kind, they live long, and have their abode in some remote rocks, mountains,
Islands and Deserts, from the dangers they are subject to by men, as Eagles,
and the Phoenix, which is seen but seldom. Now multitude of individuals does
not argue the nobility of the species, but rather imperfection; for it proceeds
from the division of the matter, whereas unity notes perfection, as issuing
from the act and form of things. 7. Whereas Fernander shows, it is a miracle
that the Phoenix can never be taken dead or alive; I answer, It is a miracle in
nature, and we know there be many natural secrets and miracles: is it not a
miracle that the Manucodiata, or bird of Paradise, is found dead somet^mes, but
was never seen alive, neither was there ever any meat or excrement found in his
b^lly? how he should be fed, where his abode is, from whence he comes (for his
body is found sometime on the sea, sometime on the land) no man knows: the
Phoenix is sometime seen alive, but seldom, because provident Nature has given
him that instinct for the preservation of his kind, that he appears to man, the
great tyrant over the creatures, but seldom; for had Heliogabalus, that Roman
Glutton, met with him, he had devoured him, though there were no more in the
world. Nature has given to each creature so much policy, as to preserve
th^mselves from danger; and the fewer there be of that kind, the more wary and
cautelous they are; and if it be true that Pliny and others write of the
Ravens, that their nests can never be found, it is a great miracle, which
perhaps may be so in Italy; yet in the rocks of Norway, Shetland, and other
Northern places, their Nests ^re found. But it is more to be admired, that
Ravens use to fly to the places where dead bodies are, and by a strange
instinct have knowledge of the bodies dying two days before they be dead; and
I think there is as great a miracle in the Loadstone, as there is in the
Phoenix. 8. It is as possible for a Phoenix to arise out of the ashes of the
dead parent, as for a silkworm to proceed out of the Egg of the dead Worm. If
any reply, That the one is perfect, the other imperfect; I answer, That every
thing is perfect in its own kind, and in generation; Nature looks not at the
perfection or imperfection of the creature, but to the aptitude and disposition
of the matter to receive such a form, Again, a Cock, which is a perfect
creature, is excluded out of the Egg by the heat of the Sun, or Fire; and
Scaliger speaks of a bird that was found in a shell, the learned men of that
time concluded, That the Oyster was turned into a bird. I take it to be as
great a wonder for a Mule, which is a perfecter creature then a bird, to be
generated of the seed of another kind, the^ that the Phoenix should arise out
of the putrified ashes; That the Clakgeese are generated of trees in the
Northseas, beyond Scotland, is not altogether fabulous; the inhabit^nts
thereabout at this day constantly believe it. They are observed every year to
fly from the North to Shetland and Crkney, where I have been; in the beginning
of Winter they come thither, in the Spring they fly away Northward in flocks,
which must be to Norway or Gree^land, for I know no other land they can repair
to Northward. Island is Northwest, but neither in these places, nor any where
else, could their nests ^e ever yet found. Besides, bodies of old trees that
have been driven upon these Islands by the winds, have had upon them the full
proportion and shape of those birds. And why should this be more incredible
then that which Scaliger writes of a certain tree in the river Iuverna, whose
leaves falling into the water, receive the form and shape of fishes, and life
withal; and of that tree in the Isle Cimbulon, whose leaves falling on the
ground, move themselves backward and forward; being touched, they go back: one
of these was kept 8 days alive in a platter. 9. Whereas Fernandus asks,
whether every parcel of the dead Phoenix his ashes has an^ aptitude to become
a new Phoenix; if it has, then (says he) there is more then one Phoenix; if
it have not, what is the reason that one part of these ashes should have this
aptitude, and not the other; I answer, All that heap of ashes is but one body,
of which is produced one Phoenix, as one bird out of one egg, and not many out
of the several parts thereof. 10. Though Aristotle and some others make no
mention of the Phoenix, it will not f^llow that therefore there is no such bird
extant; for there are many kinds of creatures of which they write not. 11. It
is likely that the bird Semenda in the Indies, which burns her self to
ashes, out of which springs another bird of the same kind, is the very same
with the old Phoenix. 12. The testimony of so many Writers, especially of the
Fathers, proving by the Phoenix the Incarnation of Christ, and his
Resurrection, and withal our resuscitation in the last day; do induce me to
believe there is such a bird, else their Arguments had been of small validity
among the Gentiles, if they had not believed there was such as bird. What
wonder is it, says Tertullian, for a virgin to conceive, when the Eastern bird
is generated without copulation, Peribunt h^mines, avibus Arabiae de
resurrectione sua securis. Shall men utterly perish (says he) and the birds of
Arabia be sure of their resurrection? The existence of this bird is asserted by
Herodotus, Seneca, Mela, Tacitus, Pliny, Solinus, AElian, Lampridius, Aur.
Victor, Laertius, Suidas, and others of the Gentile-Writers. The Christian
Doctors who affirm the same, are, Clemens, Romanus, Tertullian, Eusebius, Cyril
of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Nazianzenus, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierom, Lactantius,
and many others.

Now out of what we have spoken, we can easily answer the Doctors objections
whic he has collected out of Pererius, Feriundes, Franzius, and others, as
first, when he says, That none of those who have written of the Phoenix, are
oculary describers thereof. Ans. Neither was Aristotle, Gesner, Aldrovandus,
and others, who have written largely of beasts, birds, and Fishes ocular
vvitnesses of all they vvrote: they are forced to deliver much upon hearsay
and tradition: So those that write the later stories of American and Indian
animals, never saw all they write of. Secondly when he says, [That Herodotus,
Tacitus, and Pliny, speak so dubiously, that they overthrow the whole relation
of the Phoenix.] Answ. Herodotus doubts not of the existency of the Phoenix,
but only of some circumstances delivered by the Heliopolitans, to wit, that
the younger Phoenix should carry his Father wrapped up in Myrrh, to the Temple of
the Sun, and there bury him; so Tacitus denies not the true Phoenix, but only
says, That some hold the Phoenix there described, which was seen in the days
of Ptolomy in Egypt, not the right Phoenix spoken of by the Ancients. The
words of Pliny are falsified by the Doctor, who cites them thus: Sed quae falsa
esse nemo dubitabit: whereas the words are, Sed quem falsum esse nemo
dubitabit: So that he does not say, That what is written of the Phoenix is
false; but only that this Phoenix which was brought to Rome in the Consulship
of Claudius, was false, and not the right one. 3. He says, That they who
discourse of the Phoenix, deliver themselves diversely, contrarily, or
contradictorily. Answ. There is no contradiction except it be ( ad idem) most
of them agree in the substance, that there is a Phoenix, they only differ in
the accidents and circumstances of age, color, ann place. We must not deny all
simply that is controverted by Writers: for so we might deny most points both
in Divinity and Philosophy. 4. He says the word Phoenix in Job 29.48. can have
no animal fignification, because there is expressed (...), the trunk of the
Palm Tree; and the Hebrew word is by Tremellius rendered Sand. Answ. The same
which properly signifies the trunk of the Palm, may metaphorically be meant of
the body of the Phoenix. For the same word in Greek is given both to the Palm
and Phoenix; for as the one is long green, so the other is long-lived: but the
Hebrew word (...) hhol in that place, though expounded Sand by Tremellius. yet
signifies a Phoenix, as both Pagnin, Montanus, Buxtorsius, and other
Hebricians affirm; and so does R. Solomon with other ancient Hebrews expound
this Text of the Phoenix, consonant to which is the Tygurin Version, so
Tertullian; Philippus Presbyter, and Cajetan expound this place of the Phoenix,
being the symbol of our resurrection, and of a long life. And it seems that
the word Phoenix is more consonant to the Text then Sand, because Job speaks of
his nest: I shall die in my nest (says he) and shall multiply my days as the
Phoenix. 5. He says, [That the existence of the Phoenix is repugnant to the
Scripture, which affirms, there went of every sort two at the least into the
Ark. It infringeth also the benediction of multiplication, Genesis 1. For they
cannot be said to multiply who do not transcend an unity.] Answ. When the
Scripture speaks of two that entered into the Ark of every sort, it means of
those that were distinguished into male and female* for the end why these went
in by couples, was for procreation, now the Phoenix has no distinction of Sex,
and therefore continues not his species by copulation, as other creatures do.
Hence though he enters into the Ark, it was not needful he should be named
among those that went in by couples and sevens. For how could he that was but
one, be said to go in two and two, or male and female. As for the benediction
of multiplication, it was not pronounced or enjoined to the Phoenix, which was
not capable of it, God having supplied the want of that with another
benediction equivalent, which was a longer life then other animals, and a
peculiar way to continue the species without multiplication of the Individuum.
6. He says, That to animal generation is required the concurrence of two
Sexes, and therefore such as have no distinction of Sex, engender not at all,
as Aristotle conceives of Eeles, and testatious animals. Ans. Aristotle de
genesisanimal. l. 3. c. 10. shows that there no distinction of sex in diverse
Fishes, and Bees, which notwithstanding generate. But when he speaks of Eels in
historia animal, he shows they do not generate at all, not because they want
distinction of sex, as the Doctor says; for he speaks of diverse creatures that
generate without that distinction; but because there is not in them (...), a
production or generation of eggs or spawn; for all those kind of Fishes, says
he, which generate, have spawn or eggs in them, which Eels want. Again, he
shows in his first book de gener. animal. c. 1. That sanguine creatures are
distinguished into male and female except a few, says he: If then there be
some sanguine animals without sex, what wonder is it if the Phoenix have none?
As for testacious animals, they want distinction of sex, because they are, as
he says, Immovable alone, and stick to rocks, having as it were the life of
plants, and therefore are no other wise distinguished into male and female then
plants are, which is not properly but analogically. 7. He argues, That if the
worm into which the Phoenix is corrupted, becomes a Phoenix, this would
confound the generation of perfect and imperfect animals, and the laws of
Nature. Again, the generation of venerous animals is not from a corruption of
themselves, but rather a seminal and specifical diffusion. Answ. The generation
of the Phoenix is no confusion or disturbance of Natures laws, which delights
in variety of productins. Therefore in plants we see some produced by their
seed, some by their roots without seed; some by their stems only without root
or seeds; some without any of these, imm^diatly of the earth: So in animals
some are generated by coition of male and female in the same kind, as Men,
Lions, Horses, etc. Some by coition of different kinds, as Mules; some without
coition, by affriction only, as diverse Fishes; some are produced by the female
without the male, as the fish Erythi^us, which some think to be the Rochet;
some by reception of the females organ within the male, as flies; some by a
salivious froth, as the shell fishes called the Purple; some are progenerated
of slime without coition, outwardly in the mud, as Eels; some without coition,
but within the body of the parents, as Bees: And lastly, the Phoenix is begot
without coition, of its own putrified body, at which the Doctor wonders how it
should be, [seeing the generation of Insects is not by corruption of
themselves, but rather a seminall effusion.] To which I answer with Aristotle,
speaking of Bees, that as they have a proper and peculiar kind of Nature
differing from all other creatures, so it was fit they should have (...), a
peculiar and proper kind of production. The like I may of the Phoenix, which is
a miracle in nature, both in his his longevity, numericall unity, and way of
generation. And in this wonderful variety the Creator manifests his wisdom,
power and glory.

Thus have I briefly an cursorily run over the Doctors elaborate book, tanquam
canis ad Nilum, having stolen some hours from my universal History, partly to
satisfy my self and desires of my friends, and partly to vindicate the ancient
Sages from wrong and misconstruction, thing it a part of my duty to honor and
defend their reputation, whence originally I have my knowledge, and not with
too many in this loose and vvanton age, slight all ancient Doctrines and
Principles, hunting after new concerts and whimzies, which though specious to
the eye at the first view, yet upon near inspection and touch, dissolve like
the apples of Sodom into dust. I pity to see so many young heads still gaping
like Camelions for knowledge, and are never filled, because they feed upon airy
and empty phansies, loathing the sound, solid and wholsome viands of
Peripatetick wisdom, they reject Aristotle's pure fountains, and dig to
themselves cisternes that will hold no water; whereas they should stick close
and adhere as it were by a matrimonial conjunction to sound doctrine, they go
a whoring as the Scripture speaks) after their own inventions. Let us not
wander then any longer with Hagar in the wild desert where there is no water;
for the little which is in our pitcher, will be quickly spent; but let us return
to our Masters house, there we shall find pure fountains of ancient University
learning. Let Prodigals forsake their husks, and leave them to swine, they will
find bread enough at home: And as dutiful children let us cover the nakedness
of our Fathers with the Cloak of a favorable Interpretation.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO Arcana Microcosmi: WHEREIN Are contained diverse Passages; As of
Fishes, As of Presages, As of Sneezing, As of Thunderstruck persons, etc.
WITH A Refutation of diverse Tenets held by Doctor HARVIE in his Book De
Generatione.

The LORD BACON in his Natural History, And some others.

By AEEXANDER ROSS.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb. 1652.

To the Worshipful and my much honored Friend, Andrew Henley, Esquire
SIR,
I Should wrong both you, and my self, if with Harpocrates, the God of Silence,
I should lay my finger on my lip, and tacitly pass over either your Worth and
Goodness, or my obligations and thankfulness: Perhaps I may trespass on your
modesty, which desires no Trumpet to sound before you, yet doubtless I shall
do you right otherwise, if I acquaint the world with your virtues, and that you
are one of that small number which in this sordid and fantastical Age loves
true and solid Learning, not being carried away with the vain whimzies of
brainsick Sciolists, whose learning and piety consists in shaking the
foundation of both, esteeming that building strongest which is erected on
stubble and straw: but let them aloue with their brittle and sandy groundwork,
Old Truth is that sure Rock against which Hell gates shall not prevail. I have
adventured to consecrate this small piece to you, as one who is truly
acquainted and affected with the Old and True principles. In this Dedication I
have endeavored to discharge my self of ingratitude and oblivion, and to
testify to the world how much I am indebted to you, which I will always
thankfully acknowledge so long as I am

Sir, Your humble servant to command, ALEXANDER ROSS.

AN APPENDIX. Containing diverse passages of Fishes, Presages, Sneezing,
Thunder, etc.
With a Refutation of Doctor HARVY, the Lord BACON, and others.
CHAP. I.
1. Fishes breath not: the Reasons thereof, and the contrary objections
answered. 2. Fossil or earth-fishes. 3. Fishes delight in the light. 4. Fishes
of Humane shapes. 5. Fishes are cunning and docible creatures. 6. Why some
Fishes have Feet and Wings. 7. Many monstrous fishes.

I. THat Fishes have no breathing, or respiration, is manifest, 1. Because they
want Lungs, and other Instruments of breathing: For, though they may receive
air in at the mouth, and let it out again by their gills; yet this is not
respiration, which is the action of the Lungs, Windpipe, and Diaphragma in
attracting the air for refrigeration, and emitting the same. 2. There is no air
under or in the water, therefore fishes cannot breath there. For this cause
terrestrial creatures die in the waters for want of air, as fishes die in the
air for want of water. If any will say, That man dies in the water, not for
want of air there, but for want of gills, or some other passage to let out the
water received into the lungs; I answer, The Dolphin has a passage, or Fistula
to let out the water; and yet there he could not live without suffocation, if
he did not now and then elevate his head above the water to draw breath. If it
be be again objected, That water is a body mixed with air, therefore Fishes do
breath; I answer, That so is wine which we drink, mixed with more air then
water is; yet if we did not draw the air above, we should be quickly choked.
The quantity of air in the water is so little, that it is discernable by Art
only, not by the senses: and so there is some water in that air which we
breath; yet we are not said to breath water, but air. Again, if there were air
in the water which the fishes drew, bubbles would appear upon the super^icies
thereof, as we see in Mice, or other terrestrial creatures drowned in the
water: For as soon as the water fills the breast and lungs, it draws out the
air, which tending upward toward the super^^cies, ^auseth bubbles. If it be
objected, That fishes breath, and yet ^ake no bubbling, because the air has a
free passage through the gills; I answer, That the freeness of passage is no
hinderance to bubbling, seeing any light agitation of the water will make
bubbles, when it has received air within ir, and so we deny not but fishes may
make the water bubble, not by their breathing, but by their motion. 3. If
fishes breath air in the water, why do they die when they are in the air? If
any say, It is because they cannot endure the coldness of the air; I answer,
That the water is colder then the air. Again, we see, that the hotter the air
is, the fishes die the sooner. Hence it is observed, that ^els live longer in a
Northern then in a Southern wind, and these live longer out of the water then
other fishes, because their heat is in a more viscid and slimy humidity then
others. Hence it is, that the parts cut off do live and move sometime, because
their heat is not easily dissipated in so slimy a matter. But some will object,
That fishes out of the water gape for air, therefore they breath. Answ: To
gape, or open the mouth, is no argument of breathing, except we will give
respiration to Oysters which sometimes gape. Again, fishes gape not for air,
but for water: so men in the water being almost stilled, gape, not for water,
but for air. Object. 2. The air penetrateth into the thick earth, therefore
much more into the thin water. Answ. I deny that air can penetrate into the
thick parts of the earth; for that were to make penetration of dimensions, but
only to avoid vacuity the air enters into, and fills up the holes and
cavernosities of the earth: for if the air could pierce the thick earth, there
would never be earthquakes; and if that air which is mixed with the substances
of the earth, were sufficient for respiration, Moles needed not take so much
pains as to work through and make cavities purposely for respiration. For shut
up a Mole within a parcel of earth which he cannot dig through, he will die
for want of sufficient air. Object. 3. Exhalations and vapors arise out of the
water, which shows there is air. Answ. These exhalations are the thinner parts
of the water turned into vapors by heat or motion* whence it will not follow,
that air is in the water actually, or a body separated from the water, in which
are not cavities, as in the earth, and much less will it follow, that fishes
breath in the water, though there were air in it, seeing they want the organs
of breathing, as is said. Object. 4. Fishes enclosed in a vessel half full of
water, strive to get up into the air. Answ. This striving to get uppermost, is
not to enjoy the air, which is not their element, but to get out of prison, and
to have more scope, being straightened in a narrow vessel: so fishes in the net
struggle to get out, and to be at liberty. Object. 5. Fish in a close vessel
die for want of air. Answ. They die for want of sweet water, which being
included from fresh air, degenerates and putrifies. Hence fish die in a pond
that is long frozen; because the water for want of agitation and fresh air,
becomes ^nwholsome to the fishes, which yet can live a mone^h together under
the Ice, without any air. Scaliger shows that he has kept fish in a close
vessel, who have lived, and the same in an open vessel who have died. It is
also manifest, that Leaches in a close glass will live whole years without
air. Object. 6. Pliny objects against Aristotle, that as some creatures have
not blood, but an humor; so some fishes want lungs, but have some other
instrument by which they breath. Answ. It is as easy for us to deny, as for
him to affirm that which he could never prove: For neither does he show what
these fishes be, nor what are these instruments, nor (though there were such)
can he prove that they breath by them. And though some creatures have an humor
in stead of blood, yet that humor has not the properties, qualities, nor
office of the blood. Object. 7. Fishes gape, therefore they breath. Answ. Here
is no sequel; for Oysters gape, which breath not, and many creatures breath
which gape not. Again, if with their gaping there were any breathing, we should
see (says Aristotle) the breathing parts move; but there is no motion at all,
and it is impossible there should be attraction and emission of the air without
motion. Besides, if Fishes breathed, we should see some bubbles on the water
when their breath went out, as in breathing animals when they die in the water.
It is true that lunged fishes, such as Dolphins, Whales, Seals, and Frogs,
make bubbles, because they breath, which will not prove that all fishes do so.
And yet there be other causes of bubbling besides expiration: for rains,
tempests, vapors, or any agitation of the water will cause bubbling. Object.
8. The Moon gives increment to shell-fishes, therefore their spirits also do
increase. Answ. It Is true, if they speak of the animal and vital spirits; but
what is this to breathing, the subject whereof is the air, and not those innate
spirits: and if increment of substance does suppose respiration, then trees
must breath as they grow in bigness. And although the Moon causes humid
bodies to swell, yet she does not make the air by which we breath, being a part
of the Universe. Object. 9. Fishes do smell and hear, therefore they breath,
because air is the matter of all three. Answ. Air indeed may be called the
matter of breathing, but not of hearing and smelling; it is not the air we
smell or hear, but we smell the odors, and hear the sounds in the air, which is
therefore properly called by Philosophers, the Medium, not the mat^er of
hearing and smelling. And as the air is to us, so the water is to fishes the
medium of hearing and smelling: And if it be the matter of breathing to fishes,
then it is not air but water which they breath; whereas indeed water cannot be
the subject or matter of breathing, nor can they breath at all which want the
organs of breath. Object. 10. No animal can live without respiration,
therefore fishes breath. Answ. The antecedent is denied; for many animals live
without respiration, only by transpiration, such are insects, so does the
child in the matrix, so do women in their histericall passions, these breath
not, yet they live. Object. 11. Pliny tells us that fishes do sleep, therefore
they breath. Answ. Breathing has no relation to sleep, it is neither the
effect, nor cause, nor quality, nor part, nor property, nor consequent of
sleep: for some animals sleep, which breath not all that time, as Dormice in
Winter, the child in the mothers womb breathes not, as having in the matrix or
membran within which he lies, no air at all, but a watrish humor, which if he
should suck in by the lungs, he would be presently suffocated; yet at that time
the chid sleeps. There is no community at all in the subject or organ of
sleep and respiration, nor in their natures, the one being a rest or cessation,
the other a motion; the one consisting in the senses within the head, the other
in the lungs, breast, and Diaphragma. Again, respiration consists rather in the
actions of life and sense, which accompany waking, then in sleep, which
resembles death. Respiration is for refrigeration of the heart, which is more
heated by the motions of the body whilst we are awake, then by rest when we are
asleep; therefore men that walk, labor, run, struggle, or whose heart is
heated by anger, or Fevers, breath much faster then in sleep, as standing more
in need of air for refrigeration. So children because of their heat breath
faster then old men. Therefore we conclude^with Aristotle, that fishes which
want lungs and throats, and have gills, breath not; for what needed lungs to
draw in air, seeing Nature has given them gills to let in water for cooling
the fishes hear, which is but weak, because they have little blood.

II. That some small fishes have been found on hills far from the Sea, is
verified by diverse; as also that sometimes fishes are dug out of the earth,
which we may call Fossil, to distinguish them from aquatile, is recorded by
grave and ancient Writers: But I believe that these are not true fishes, but
rather terrestrial creatures resembling fishes in their outward shape; for as
many fishes resemble terrestrial animals, which are not therefore properly
terrestrial, so many terrestrial creatures may resemble fishes, which
properly are not such; or else where these Fossil fishes are found, there are
subterraneall waters not far off, by which they are conveyed thither. Hence
sometimes fishes have been found in deep wells; and I have read of some fishes
found in springs of sulphury and alum water: for otherwise fishes can no more
live in the earth, then earthy creatures in the water, seeing nothing can live
out of its own element, where it has its original food and conservation. Or
lastly, these land fishes have been such as have fallen out of the clouds: For
I have read in good Authors of diverse showers or rains of fishes, and of Frogs
and Mice, and such like animals, out of the clouds.

III. That Fishes in Moonshine nights, chiefly when she is in the full,
delight to play upon the superficies of the water, is plain by fishermen, who
take greatest quantities of them then. The cause of this may be the delight
that fishes take in the light, or else they find some moderate heat in the
superficies of the water when the Moon is full: but I rather think it is the
pleasure they take in the Moon light, which gives a silver brightness to the
water, and Nat^re has given them a quick sight and eminent eyes, whereas the
senses of smelling and hearing are in them, yet the organs are so obscure they
cannot be found; and albeit they have all the senses, yet they are dumb, for
they make no sound at all, because they breath not, nor have they the organs of
sounding, such as the throat, windpipe and lungs.

IV. That some fishes resemble men in their faces, hands, and other parts, is
no fable, for such are not only recorded by the ancients, but also have been
seen by late Navigators, Lerius saw none of them, yet relates that an American
fisherman cut off the hand from one of those fishes which did offer to get into
his boat, the hand had five distinct fingers like ours, and in his face he
resembled a man. Scaliger writes that one of those seamen, or men-fishes was
seen by Hierom Lord of No^icum, which laid hold on the cable of his ship, this
story he related as a truth to Maximilian the Emperor. These fishes were called
anciently Tritons, Ner^ides, and Sirenes, one of those Scaliger saw at Parma,
about the bigness of a child of two years old. In some part of Scythia Pliny
shows that men did feed upon these fishes, which some condemned for Canibals,
but injuriously; for it is not the outward shape, but the soul which makes the
man; neither does the soul or essence of man admit degrees, which it must needs
do, if those Tritons were imperfect men; neither is it unlikely what is written
of the River Colhan in the Kingdom of Cohin among the Indians. That there are
some human shaped fishes there called Cippe, which feed upon other fishes,
these hide themselves in the water by day, but in the night time they come out
upon the banks, and by striking one flint against another, make such a light,
that the fishes in the water being delighted with the sparkles, flock to the
bank, so that the Cippae fall upon them and devour them. This I say is not
improbable, if we observe how many cunning ways nature has given to the fox,
and other creatures to attain their prey. Scaliger wonders why these Cippae do
not rather catch their prey in the water, then to take so much pains on the
bank; but the reason may be, that either these Cippae are not so nimble and
swift as those other fishes, or else that these fishes will not come near them,
being afraid of their human shape, which is formidable to all creatures.

V. That Fishes are not dull and stupid creatures, as Cardan and some others do
think, is manifest by their sagacitie and cumming they have, both to find out
their prey, and to defend themselves from their enemies. The fish called
Uranioscopus, deceives the other fishes by a membran which he thrusts our of
his mouth like a worm, which they supposing to be so, lay hold on it, and so
are caught. Herrings being conscious of their own infirmity, never swim
alone, but in great shoals, and the whales who prey upon the herrings, by a
natural instinct frequent those seas most, where there be most herrings; and I
have observed in the Northern seas for a mile or two in compass the sea
covered with herrings flying from their enemies, the whales which were in
pursuit of them, tumbling like hills on the sea; but by reason of their huge
bodies and slow motion, could not overtake them; and when the herrings are in
any danger, they draw as near to the shore as they can, that the whales
pursuing them, may run themselves on the sand, where they stick, as often times
they do, and so become a prey themselves to man: thus in one year 80 whales run
on the Isl^nds of O^kney, where I have been a whole year together; so that the
Bishop of those Islands had 8 whales for his Tithe that year. There are also in
the Northern seas, fishes about the bigness of an ox, having short legs like a
beaver, and two great teeth sticking out, of which they make handles for
knives; these fishes are called Morsse, they sleep either on the ice, or upon
some high and s^eep place on the shore, when they sleep they have their
Ce^tinel to watch, who in danger, by a sound he makes, awakes them, they
presently catch their hindmost feet in their mouth, and so roll down the hill
into the sea like round hoops or wheels. The cunning also of the Cuttle fish,
or Sepia may be alleged here, who to delude the fisherman, thickneth the water
with his black ink, and so escapes; The Torpedo, and other fishes may be
produced for examples of their cunning, and the Dolphins for their docilitie,
but these may suffice.

VI. Though God has given to some fishes feet, and wings, as well as fins, yet
not in vain; for these Amphibia that were to live on the land as well as in the
water, stood in need of feet for walking as well as of fins for swimming; and
those winged fishes being not such swift swimmers, as to escape the dangers of
their enemies, the Ducades, by their sins, were to avoid them by their wings;
hence being pursued in the water, they fly in the air till they be weary, or
far enough our of danger, then they fall down into the water again. It Is
commonly thought that they fly so long as their wings are moist; and fall down
when they are dry; but I see no reason why moisture should help their flight,
when it hinders the flying of birds, which fly swiftest when their wings are
driest: Swallows indeed and other birds, do sometimes wet their wings, not to
help their flight, but to cool and refresh their heat.

VII. That there are many monstrous fishes in the sea, is not to be denied in a
grammatical sense, nor in a Philosophical, if we speak of individuals; for in
such both by land and sea, there be diverse aberrations of nature; though there
can be no specifical monsters except we will make the first cause to hay erred
in his own work, and first production of things; yet in a grammatical sense,
even the species of some fishes may be called monsters, a monstrando, for their
hidious and uncoth shapes demonstrate Gods greatness and power, and his
goodness also, in that he makes them to serve our uses, and they may also
demonstrate what should be our duty to God, when we look on them, even to
praise and honor him, who has not made us like one of them. The whale then to
us is a monstrous creature, when we look upon his huge bulk, and strange shape,
and motion, the quantity of water, and manner of spouting it like floods out of
his head; for each whale has a prominent spout on his head, and some have two,
(though Dr. Brown denies it, yet Olaus an eyewitness proves it) by these
pipes they breath, and send out the water which they drink in: and it is none
of the least wonders that these vast creatures should be caught and subdued by
the art of man. In Norway they are taken by the smell of Castoreum, which
stupifieth their senses; in the Indies they are taken by stopping their holes
and vents by which they breath, so that being stifled they submit to the poor
naked conquering Indian who sits upon him, as on horseback, and with a cord
draws him to the shore. Acosta tells us of a strange fish called Manati, which
ingenders her young ones alive, has tears and does nourish them with milk, it
feeds on the grass, but lives in the water; it is of a green color, and like
a cow in the hinder parts, the flesh is in color and taste like veal. The
Shark or tiburon is a strange fish, out of whose gullet he did see drawn, a
butchers great knife, and great iron hook, and a piece of an oxes head, with
one whole horn, their teeth are as sharp as rasors, for he savv Sharks leap
out of the water, and with a strange nimblenesse snap off both the flesh and
bone of a horses leg hanging upon a stake, as if it had been the stalk of a
lettice. That was a monstrous fish which Scaliger speaks of, having a hogs
head with two horns, and but one bone in all its body, on whose back was a
bunch resembling a saddle. In the lake Amara of Ethiopia is a kind of Conger
having a head like a toad, and a skin of party colors. In the Ethiopian sea
is a fish resembling a hog in his head and skin, with long ears, and a tail of
two foot in length. No less monstrous is the Hippocampus, a fish like a
horse in his head and neck, having a long main, the rest of his body is like
our painted dragons. He speaks also of a fish like a leather purse with
strings, which will open and shut. There is a fish having the resemblance of
a calves head with horns. There are fishes that have four ranks of teeth, and
in every rank fifty teeth. Rondoletius speaks of fishes in whose bellies
have been found men armed at all assaies. The Uletif is a fish having a savv on
his forehead three foot long and very sharp. Thevet tells us ^f a fish in the
Sarmatique sea, having horns like those of a heart, on the branches whereof are
round buttons shining like pearl, his eyes shine like candles, he has four
legs, long and crooked pavves, with a long speckled tail, like the tail of a
Tigre, his muzzle round like a cats, with moustaches round about. There are
s^a serpents of two hundred cubits long. Some fishes have been found
resembling mitred Bishops, others hooded monks, and diverse more shapes there
are: but none more strange then that we read of in the Story of Harlem in
Holland, out of whose lake was fished a sea-vvoman, which by a spring tide
had been carried thither, when she was brought into the Town, she suffered
her self to be clothed, and to be fed with bread, milk, and other meats, she
learned also to spin, to kneel before the crucifix, and to obey her Mistress,
but she could nebe brought to speak, and so remained for diverse years dumb.
They that will see more of fishes, let them read Aristotle, Pliny, Olaus
Magnus, Arbian Oppian, Rondoletius, Gesner, Aldrovandus, Belon and others.

CHAP II.
1. Public and private calamities presaged by owls. 2. By dogs. 3. By ravens,
and other birds, and diverse other ways. 4. Wishing well in sneezing, when and
why used. 5. Diverse strange things in thunderstruck people.

THat destruction and mortality are oftentimes presaged by the skrieching of
ovvles, the houling of dogs, the flocking together and combating of ravens, and
other birds, and by diverse other ominous signs, is no Gentil superstition, or
Vulgar Error, as Dr. Brown ( Book 4. c. 21.) would have it, but a truth
manifested by long experience. Lampridius and Mar^ellinus among other
prodigies, which presaged the death of Valentinian the Emperor, mention an
ovvle which sat upon the top of the house, where he used to bathe, and could
not thence be driven away with stones. Julius Obsequeus (in his book of
Prodigies c. 85.) shows that a little before the death of Commodus Antoninus
the Emperor, an ovvle was observed to sit upon the top of his chamber, both at
Rome, and at Sanuvium. Xiphlirus speaking of the prodigies that went before
the death of Augustus, says that the ovvle sung upon the top of the Curia:
(...), etc. he shows also that the Actian war was presignified by the flying
of owls into the Temple of Concord in the year 1542 at Herbipolis or Wirtzburg
in Franconie, this unluckie bird by his schrieching songs affrighted the
Citizens a long time together, and immediately follovved a great plague, War,
and other calamities: Pliny ( lib. 10. c. 12.) shows that this abominable and
funeral bird, as he calls it, portended the Roman destruction at Numantia; and
therefore one time being seen in the Capitol, so affrighted the City, that Rome
was purified to prevent the evils which that ovvle presaged. Balthazar Cossa,
who was Pope and named John the 24th was forevvarned by an ovvle- (that
appeared over against him as he sat in Council) of the troubles which justly
fell on himself, and by his means on others. About 20 years ago, I did observe
that in the house where I lodged, an Owl groaning in the window presaged the
death of two eminent persons who died there shortly after. Therefore not
without cause is the owl called by Pliny, Inauspicata and funebris avis, by
Ovid, Dirum mortalibus omen, by Lucan, sinister bubo; by Claudian, infestus
bubo. and the Prince of Poets, among other ominous portenders of Q. Dido's
death, ( AEn. 4.) brings in the owls schrieching and groaning. Solaque
culminibus ferali carmine bubo
Saepe queri, and longas in fletum ducere voces.
And in another place he makes the owl presage the death of Turnus, AEn. 12.
Quae quondam in bustis, aut culminibus desertis
Nocte sedens s^rum canit importuna per umbras.


II. That dogs also by their howling portend death and calamities, is plain by
History and experience. Julius Obsequeus ( c. 122.) shows that there was an
extraordinary howling of dogs before the sedition in Rome, about the
Dictatorship of Pompey, he shows also ( c. 127.) that before the civil Wars
between Augustus and Antonius, among many other prodigies, there was great
howling of dogs, near the house of Lepidus the Pontifice. Camerarius tells us (
c. 73. cent. 1.) that some German Princes have certain tokens and peculiar
presages of their death, amongst others are the howling of dogs. Capitolinus
tells us that the dogs by their howling, presaged the death of Maximinus.
Pausonius (in Mess.) relates that before the destruction of the Messenians,
the dogs brake out into a more fierce howling then ordinary, (...), and we read
in Fincellus that in the year 1553, some weeks before the overthrow of the
Saxons, the dogs in Mysina flocked together, and used strange howlings, in the
woods and fields. The like howling is observed by Virgil, presaging the Roman
calamities in the Pharsalick War: Obscaenique canes, importunaeque volucres
Signa dabant. --
So Lucan to the same purpose: Flebile saevi latravere canes: and Statius:
Nocturnique canum gemitus.

III. By ravens also and other birds, both public and private calamities and
death have been portended. Iovianus Pontanus relates two terrible skirmishes
between the ravens and the kites in the fields lying between Beneventum and
Apicium, which prognosticated a great battle that was to be fought in those
fields. Nicetas speaks of a skirmish between the crows and ravens,
presignifying the irruption of the Scythians into Thracia: The cruel battles
between the Venetians and Insubrians, and that also between the Liegeois and
the Burgundians, in which above 30 thousand men were slain, were presignified
by a great combat between two swarms of emmets: In the time of King Charles the
8 of France, the battle that was fought between the French and Britans, in
which the Britans were overthrown, was foreshewed by a skirmish between the
magpies and jackdaws. I have read also of skirmishes between wild-ducks and
wild-geese; likewise between water and land serpents, premonstrating future
calamities among men. In this land of late years our present miseries and
unnatural wars, have been forewarned by armies of swallows, martins, and other
birds fighting against one another: And that private men have been forewarned of
their death by ravens, I have not only heard and read, but have likewise
observed diverse times: a late example I have of a young gentleman, Mr. Draper
my intimate friend, who about five or six years ago, being then in the flower
of his age, had on a sudden one or two ravens in his chamber, which had been
quarrelling upon the top of the chimney; these he apprehended as messengers of
his death, and so they were; for he died shortly after. There is then no
superstition in the observation of such things; for God is pleased sometimes to
give men warning of their ends by such means; so we find in the life of
Cicero, who was forewarned by the noise and fluttering of the ravens about him,
that his end was near; which proved true, for the murderers sent by Mark
Antonie slew him presently after in his Sedan: Why may not God forewarn men of
their future death and calamities by birds, as well as by generation of
monsters, apparition of comets, strange showers of frogs, blood, stones, and
such like; I saw a little before these last troubles of Germany, diverse
Parseleons, or Moors with crosses in the air, not long before the appearing of
the last blazing star. Why is it less superstitious to observe such uncouth
meteors, then uncouth actions of birds and beasts, or why is there less credit
to be given to the one then the other, seeing God can make use of all his
creatures as he pleases: therefore he that employed a raven to be a feeder of
Elias, may employ the same bird as a messenger of death to others. Camerarius
out of Dietmarus and Erasinus Stella, Writes of a certain fountain near the
river Albis or Elbe in Germany which presageth Wars by turning red and bloody
colored. Of another which portendeth death, if the water which before was
limpid, becomes troubled and thick, so caused by an unknown Worm. There is a
noble Family in Bohemia which is forevvarned of death, by a spectrum or ghost
appearing like a Woman clothed in mourning. Such an apparition had Mr.
Nicholas Smith my dear friend, immediately before he fell sick of that fever
which killed him: having been late abroad in London, as he was going up the
stairs into his chamber, he was embraced as he thought by a Woman all in
white, at which he cried out, nothing appearing, he presently sickneth, goes
to bed, and within a week or ten days died. Now whether these things be
true and real, or only imaginary in the fantasy, I will not here dispute; it
is sufficient that by such means many are forevvarned of their ends, as Brutus
was in his Tent, to whom his evil Genius appeared the night before he died.
And why may nor our tutelary Angel by these and such like means, give us
warning of our dissolution? We read in Histories of a Crow in Tr^jans time,
that in the Capitol spoke, (...), All things shall be well. And St. Hierom
tells us, that the Ravens fed the two Eremites, Paul and Anthony many years
together with bread. The same God that employed these birds as Stewards to feed
his servants, may also use them as messengers to warn them of their migration.
And yet in this I do not patromize the heathen augurations, who in all their
actions depended superstitiously upon the chattering, flying, and feeding of
birds, then the which nothing could be more vain, seeing they cannot naturally
foreknow the death of others, who cannot fore*see their own; as that Roman
Commander made appear to his Army, who shot the bird dead, by whose chattering
the Augur would have hindered the Armies march. Yet from hence it will not
follow, that all observations of meteors or animals are superstitious, or that
they do not fore-warn at all death and future calamities, seeing History and
experience teach the contrary: and Christ shows, that before the destruction
of Jerusalem there shall be signs from heaven in the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and Sea, which Josephus confirms. Obsequeus tells us, That at Rome was
extraordinary thundering immediately before Catilines conspircy; the like was
before the Pharsalick battle, as the Roman Stories inform us: in which also we
find, that before the invasion of Italy by the Goths under Alaricus, by the
Huns under Attila, and by the Lombards there was more then usual thundering and
lightning, presaging the calamities that were to fall on that Country. And
this very hour that I am writing this discourse, ( Aug. 23. anno 1651.) I
observe that it has continued thundering and lightning almost 14 hours with
some short interruptions; whereas usually thunder lasts not above an hour or
two: By which I fear me God is forwarning this Land of the horrible bloodshed
and calamities which are suddenly like to fall out among us, which we beseech
God in his mercy to avert, and to give us all repenting and relenting hearts.

IV. That sneezing or sternutation was superstitiously abused by the Centiles
in divination, is manifest by their writings, who used to foretell good or bad
events by sneezing: they held that propitious which was in the afternoon, and
toward the right hand; but to sneeze in the morning, or toward the left hand,
was counted unlucky, as Aristotle shows. So superstitious they were, that if
they sneezed whilst they were rising in the morning, they would to bed again;
and if any sneezed at Table whilst the meat was taking away, they would set
down the meat again. If the General of an Army did sneeze when he was going to
fight, he would forbear fighting that day, such an ominous thing they held
sneezing to be. On the other side, at Monopotama sternutation was of such high
esteem, that when the King sneezed, all the people would fall down and worship
him; and proclamations were sent abroad to give notice to all the Kings
subjects of his sneezing, to the end they might rejoice and worship. Among the
rest of the Gentiles ridiculous opinions, this was one, That Prometheus was the
first that wished well to the sneezer, when the man which he had made of clay,
sell into a fit of Sternutation upon the approach of that celestial fire which
he stole from the Sun. This gave original to that custom among the Gentiles
in saluting the sneezer. They used also to worship the head in sternutation, as
being a divine part, and seat of the senses, and cogitation. They held also
sternutation one of their gods: and because their chiefest soothsayings and
divination was by Birds, hence sternutation was called (...) a Bird by them:
and by reason it is the action of the brain which is the seat of the senses,
therefore in Aristophanes the word sneezing is used for feeling; as when he
says, I sneezed not the blow, his Interpreter expounds it, I felt it not, as
Caelius observes. But now because the Gentiles abused sneezing
superstitiously, and wished well to the Sneezer, we must not hence infer,
That to pray for the safety of him who sneezeth, is superstition or Gentilisme,
as some do: for so we may conclude by the same reason, that to pray at all is
superstition, because the Gentiles used to pray. It is an ancient custom among
Christians to wish well to him that sneezeth, taking its original from the
time of St. Gregory, when at Rome in a great sickness, men died with sneezing.
Doctor Brown out of Fernandes brings some proofs to show, that the original of
wishing well to the sneezer, is more ancient then Gregory; to whom I answer,
That it was used among the Gentiles before Gregory's time; but I deny that it
was usual among Christians till then. From this sickness therefore at Rome in
Gregory's days, in which this wel-wishing was used, and not from the Gentiles
practice, we draw this civil and charitable custom in praying for our friend
or neighbor when he sneezeth.

V. In those that are thunderstruck, diverse things are remarkable, as, 1. They
keep the same posture of body being dead, which they had when they were alive
at the time when they were struck, as Cardan ( de rer. var. lib. 8, c. 44.)
instanceth of 8 harvest people in the Isle Lemnes, who sitting together under
an Oak at supper, were all thunderstruck, retaining the same posture they had
before; one with his hand on the cup ready to drink, the other with the cup at
his mouth; a third with meat in his mouth; so that they looked like so many
statues. The reason of this may be the stiffness of the nerves and muscles,
being parched and dried up by the hot and sulphury matter of the lightning. The
like I read of those that are killed with excessive cold, which so stiffeneth
those parts mentioned, that the body retains its posture whether sitting or
standing. 2. They that are thunderstruck look black, because the heat dries
up the radical moisture. The like we see of fire, which makes the whitest
paper and linen grow black, and the Sun tans men's skins. 3. Their bodies do
not putrify, by reason their moisture, which is the mother of putrefaction, is
exhausted. 4. There is neither wild beasts nor ravenous birds will touch or
come near such bodies, because of their sulphury smell which is noisome to
them, and their dryness is such, that they can afford no nutriment. 5. That
part which is wounded by the thunder, is colder then any other, notwithstanding
that the lightning or thunder is of a fiery nature; because all things which
have been heated by the fire, grow colder then before, by reason the inward
heat is drawn out by the fire; for in things of the same nature or quality, the
stronger attracts the weaker. 6. The Romans never suffered their bodies to be
burned that were thunderstruck, but covered them with earth in the same place
where they were struck, or let them remain unburied, nor would they suffer any
funeral obsequies to be performed to them: perhaps they thought it unfitting to
burn those with terrestrial fire, who had been scorched already with fire from
heaven, or to take the shape away, or figure of that body with their fire which
the celestial fire had spared: nor would they honor him with a a funeral
whom they thought execreable, and extremely hated of the gods: therefore none
would venture to come near the place, till it was expiared by a sacrifice,
which was called Bidenta^l, being a sheep of two years old, or of two eminent
teeth; which word also by Persius, is given to the party that is
thunderstruck, whom he calls evitandum Bidentall ( Sect. 2.) because none
durst touch or come near him. 7. The thunder seldom or never kills those that
are asleep, but such only as are awaked: this may proceed from the fear which
is in those that are awaked, by which the spirits and blood suddenly suffocate
the heart, whereas in sleep there is no fear or apprehension of danger; and not
only men, but cattle also are much afrighted: wherefore in thundering times the
shepherds use to gather their sheep together, that being united, they may be
the lesle fearful, whereas any creature alone is subject to be fearful. 8. It
is a strange quality in the thunder to break the bones, to melt the sword, to
dry up the wine, to kill the infant in the womb, and yet not touch the skin,
the scabbard, the barrel, nor the mother; perhaps the skin and leather being
pory, transmits the sulphury vapor, which is resisted by the bones and metal.
As for the wine exhausted, I think Pliny, Plutarch, and others, mean only the
Spirits of the wine evaporated; and so the child being more tender and apter to
receive the malignant vapor of the thunder then the mother might die and she
live.

CHAP. III.
1. The Female has no active seed of generation. Doctor Harvies and Fernelius
reasons refutaed. 2. A Discourse of the Cholick. 3. The same soul in a
subventaneous and prolificall egg. Doctor Harvies reasons to the contrary
refuted. 4. Blood not the immediate instrument of the Soul, Doctor Harvies
reasons answered. 5. Doctor Harvies way of conception refuted.

WE have proved already ( l. 1. c. 4. sect. 3.) that the female has no active
active seed for generation, but is merely passive, affording only blood, and
the place of conception, according to the truth of Aristotle's doctrine; but
because the Physicians are of another opinion, that the female has also seed
actively concurring to generation, we will examine the solidity of their
reasons. 1. Doctor Harvy ( Exercit. 32.) proves, That in the female there is
an active principle of generation, Because of the Horse and Ass is procreated
a mixed species, to wit, the Mule, the whole form whereof is made up and mixed
of both parents; so that the Horse alone was not sufficient to produce this
form of the Mule in the matter, but as the whole form is mixed, therefore the
Ass must concur as an other efficient cause. Answ. The Mule is not a
compounded species, or mixed of the Horse and Ass, but rather a third species
different from both, as having neither in whole nor in part, nor separated, nor
mixed, their essential forms, but has its own specificall form, and
properties distinct from those of the parents, as we may see in the Mules
sterrility, which is a property not individual as in some other animals; but
specificall, of which the species of the Horse and Ass is not capable. As for
some outward resemblances in the Mule to the parents, these are but
accidental, and are in animals of far different species, as also in trees,
and other vegetables. Besides, the forms or species of things cannot be mixed,
because essences are impartible, and admit no intentions nor remissions: the
form then being simple and indivisible, cannot be made up of two, so that two
seeds cannot concur as two efficient causes to make up a third entity. For,
Ex 'duobus entibus per se, non fit unum ens per se. Again, we see that trees
and plants are generated of one seed without copulation; for the earth
concurres, not by affording another seed to propagate, but as the matrix to
cherish and foment. So in fishes, which have no distinct sex, there is
generation, notwithstanding, because in them there is seed, which is the only
active principle of generation. Again, that outward shape or form which the
Mule has, was not induced by the formative faculty of the females seed; for
there is none, as we have showed, much less of the blood, for the plastic
virtue resideth not in the blood, but in the Males seed; which of its own
particular nature endeavors to form a Horse, but finding the Asses blood
(being united now and coagulated with and by the Horses seed, incapable to
receive that form of the Horse, is retreated by the superior and general
formative faculty, which aiming at the production of a new species for the
perfection of the Universe, generates a Mule. Hence we may infer, that Mules
were not the invention of Ana, except we will conclude, that the world was
imperfect till that time, which were an injury to God who made the world
perfect; but perfect it could not be till the production of this species: for
Perfectum est cui nihil deest. The Doctors second Argument, ( Exercit. 34) is
taken from the production of the egg, which Aristotle holds is generated by
the Hen, and which has also vegitation from her. Hence he inferres, That
according to Aristotle's mind, the Hen is an active principle in generation.
Answ. From hence it will not follow, That the Hen is an active principle in the
generation of the Chick, because she furnishes the Egg, which is the
materials of the chick; for so in other animals the female furnishes blood,
which is the matter of which the Embryo is made; and yet she is not, as we have
said, an efficient cause of generation, but the male only by his seed; neither
will it follow, that vegitation does still presuppose generation; for in many
individuals there is a vegitive, soul, and yet no generation, so there is in
some species, as in Mules, in adianthum or capillus veneris, which we call
Maidenhair, and diverse other hearhs which generate not, though they have
vegitation. But when Aristotle says, The egg is generated in the Hen, or that
the female generates in her self, he takes generation in a large sense, for any
way of production; so we say water is generated of air, and worms of purrid
matter, and yet neither the one nor the other is the efficient, but the
material cause only of generation. And though we should yield that the Hen
were the efficient cause of the egg, yet it will not therefore follow, that
she is the efficient cause of the Chick, for that is only the Cock, as
Aristotle holds: though in the woman there is a working faculty of her blood,
yet there is no working faculty in her of the child or Embryo; that is merely
from the plastic power of the fathers seed.

II. Now let us see Fernelius his Arguments, ( l. 6. de hom. pr^creat.) the
first whereof is this, The woman's seed has no other original from the
testicles and vessels then the males seed has, therefore in her seed there is
a procreative faculty. Answ. 1. We deny that there is seed in the woman
properly so called. 2. If it were so that she had seed, yet it will not follow
that it is prolificall; for it must be concocted and spirituous, because the
spirits are the prime instruments of Nature in generation: but the the woman's
seed is crude, because that Sex by nature is cold, being compared to the man,
as both Aristotle and Galen affirm, and experience does evince; for the woman
is much weaker and slower then the man, whereas strength and agility argues
plenty of spirits and calidity: The man's hairs also are more curled, stiff and
strong then the woman's, which shows more heat. The woman's voice is weaker and
smaller, which argues the narrowness of the vessels, and consequently defect
of heat, and because the woman is less hot and dry then the man. Hence it is
that she abounds much more in blood, which in man is dried up. Besides, the
woman is the more imperfect Sex, her seed therefore must be imperfect, and
consequently not fit to be the principal or efficient cause of so noble an
animal as man. Aristotle observes, that boys in the mothers womb are more
lively, and nimbler then maids, that they are sooner formed in the matrix, and
that the woman sooner grows to her height, and sooner decays, her strength
quickly fails her, and old age assaults her soonest. Secondly, he proves, That
the child draws (...) Gout, Stone, Epilepsie, and other hereditary diseases
from the mother, who was subject to these her self. Answ. This will not prove
that the mother is an active cause in generation, or that the formative faculty
^^ the cause of diseases, which rather are to be attributed to the matter of
which the similar parts are formed, then to the active principle of generation;
whereas then the woman ^^rnis^^th blood, of which our bodies are made up, it is
no marvel if with the blood she imparts to the child whatsoever infirmity is
in it; and not only does the mother by her blood, but the father also by his
seed, communicate diseases to the child: for the same seed which is the
efficient cause of generation, is also the material cause of infirmities and
diseases. Hence many times gowry fathers beget gowty children. His third
Argument is, The child oftentimes resembles the mother, therefore her seed
must needs be active. Answ. That the child for the most resembles the mother,
proceeds not from any agencie of her seed, but from the strength of her
imagination; for otherwise the child would still resemble the father, in whose
seed alone resideth the formative faculty, which because it is a natural power
depending from the generative, and consequently inferior to the imagination,
which is an animal faculty that gives place to this. This force of the
mothers imagination is plain by the diverse impressions made on the tender
Embryo upon her depraved imaginations, by the stories of those women who have
conceived children resembling the pictures hanging in their bed-chambers, and
by the practice of Jacob, Genesis 30. in causing his Ewes to bring forth streaked
Lambs, according to the streaked rods put in their troughes when they drank.

II. There is no disease that more molests and tortures man then the Cholick,
which is so called from Colon, the great intestine; the torment of which has
made some to kill themselves: nor is there any malady that proceeds from more
causes, or has more strange and various cures: sometimes it proceeds of
intemperance in eating and drinking; sometimes from the quality of the meat and
drink we use; sometimes also from the malignity of the medicament we take: In
some it is caused by choler in the intestine, in others by phlegm, in others by
statulency: In some upon costivenesse and retention of the seces: in others
upon fluxes and too much evacuation: In others again it is procured by the
rupture of the Peritonaeum, and lapse of the intestine into the Scrotum.
Sometimes this disease is procured by the distemper of some adjacent part,
sometime by stones bred in the intestines; sometimes by worms generated there;
sometimes by congealed blood in the same place; sometimes by a wind; in many it
is caused by drinking cold water; in others by sitting on a cold stone, and in
some by impure venery; sometimes the malady is in the caviti^s of the Colon,
sometimes in the tunicles; and sometimes it i^ bred by the infection of the
air; and sometimes by the contraction and shrinking of the intestines. Thus we
see of what brittle meterials we are composed, how careful we should be of our
diet, and how many ways God has to punish us for sin. Like to this disease is
the Iliaca passio, so called from the Ilium, a smaller intestine, which is
sometimes so violent and the obstruction^ below so great, that the excrements
for want of passage downward, recoil upward by vomiting. Many likewise are the
ways by which the Cholick is cured. For, besides the ordinary ways of curing by
purging, vomits, clysters, phlebotomy, and outward somentations, there be
diverse extraordinary ways, some are cured by the smoke of Tobacco used
downward; some have been eased by blowing of wind out of a pair of bellows
into the intestine, for dilatation thereof; some are cured by drinking of
urine, some by the Wolses excrement dried and powdered, and mixed with white
Wine, some by the Wolfs gut, dried, powdered, and drunk with Canary or Malago:
others have been cured and preserved by carrying about them the Wolfs
excrement, the flesh of a Lark either boiled or burned into ashes, and so taken
in three spoonfuls of warm water, has cured some. The Thracians used to cure
themselves of this disease, by carrying about them the heart of a Lark, being
taken out whilst he was alive. A Goats liver is commended by some for a present
remedy, if it be burned, powdered, and drunk in wine. Some commend the infants
navel-string being cut off, salted, and carried in a Box. Others have found
good by a hogs blind gut worn about them; the decoction of Mints by some, and
of Horehound by others, are held singular remedies, so are snakes, if they be
burned, powdered, and drunk in wine. Some have been eased by drinking snow and
sugar, and by applying of cold snow to the part that was pained. A Bulls pizle
is commended by some for a present ^^^p, if it be powdered, a scruple whereof in
Malago wine will give ease. Some have been cured by drinking down quicksilver,
and experience shows us, that swallowing of goldenor leaden bullets, are
present helps, because with their weight they open the passages and make way. I
have eased my self of that pain by drinking white Wine in which onions have
been steeped all night. Thus as God has diverse ways to punish us, so he has
as many ways to ease us, and that very strangely: for who can give a reason of
those occult qualities or antipipathies which are between this malady, and most
of these remedies now mentioned? But of this see Fracastorius, Forestus,
Fernelius, Fonseca, Zacuta, Rondeletius, and other Physicians.

III. That there is the same soul in a subventaneous egg which is in a
prolificall, may appear by the same properties and effects in both, because in
both is accretion, nutrition, attraction, retention, concoction, etc. which are
the effects of the vegetive soul; yet Doctor Harvy ( Exercit. 25.) denies this,
Because (faith he) If there were the same soul in the subventaneous which was
in the prolificall egg, they would both equally produce Chickins, Answ. This
will not follow, except he could prove that the vegitive soul produces the
sensitive soul, or the sensitive creature, which cannot be; for no soul can
produce another, neither can an inferior faculty produce a superior, by reason
the effect cannot be more noble then the cause: The reason then why the
subventaneous egg is not prolificall, is not the want of a vegive soul, which
we know it has by the effects thereof; but because that egg was not animated
or fecundated by the prolificall sperm, feminall spirit, or spermatick vapor
of the Cock. So the blood in a married woman and a maid, has the same
vegitation, though both be not prolifical for want of the man's improlificating
sperm. But the Doctor tells us, ( Exercit 25.) That from the male proceeds
only the plastic or formative virtue which fecundateth the egg, because the
seed or geniture cannot penetrate into the Hens matrix, or inward receptacles.
Answ. The formative virtue being an accident, cannot be derived or conveyed
from the Cock to the Hens matrix, without its proper iubject, in which it is
inherent. And though in a dead Hen those passages or conveyances cannot appear,
yet in the living Hen they are open for the seminall vapor to pass. For this
cause in the closure of the Cocks treading, there is a nimble and almost
imperceptible touch of both their fundaments, by which then the seminall spirit
is conveyed. Again, the Doctor faith ( Exersit. 25.) That whereas the soul is
the act of an organicall body, having life potentially, it is in credible that
it should be in a Chick before any part ^ of its body be-organized. Answ. The
egg is not altogether a body inorganicall actually, seeing it has different
parts. Besides, it is organicall potentially, as containing in it all the parts
and members the Chick that shall be. So the seed of other animals contains
potentially the animal that shall be, with all its members; therefore the
common opinion is, that seed is drawn from all parts of the body, because it
contains in it all the parts. As the soul then is in that body which has life
potentially, that is, a possibility to exercise the functions of life; so it is
in the body that has organs potentially, or the faculty of producing organs.
Hence the soul cannot be in a stone, which has not this possibility. Of this
opinion is the Doctor ( Exer. 71) when he says, That in the primogeniall
humidity of the egg, all the parts of the chick are potentially, but none
actually. Again, he says, Exer. 25.) That in the egg and chick there cannot
be the same soul, because they are different entities, and produce different,
yea contrary operations, so that the one may seem to be begot of the others
corruption. Ans. I deny that the egg and chick are different entities otherwise
then secundum magis and minus, as an imperfect thing differs from it self,
when it becomes more perfect; in this respect an infant and a man may be called
different entities, and they have their different operations; yet they have the
same soul. If then we conclude diversities of things from diversities of
operations, we must infer that every animal is different from it self,
because it produces different operations, and that Peter has not the same
soul when he does different things. How many different entities must there be
in the Sun, who produces so many different effects. Neither do I allow of
the Doctors Assertion, in saying, The chick is begot of the eggs corruption;
for indeed it is begot of the eggs perfection: For then is the egg perfected
when the chick is procreated. If by corruption he understand the abolition of
the form of the egg, I assent to him, that according to the old Peripatetick
Maxim, The corruption of one thing is the generation of another. But if by
corruption he understand putrefaction, as he seems to do, I say that then a
chick is not, nor cannot be procreated of a putrified egg, which is fitter to
breed worms then a Chick.

IV. Because the soul is a pure and celestial substance, and our bodies are
gross and earthy, on which so sublimate an entity cannot operate without a
medium, that may in some sort participate of both natures, therefore God in his
wisdom has interposed the animal and vital spirits as the immediate
instruments of the soul to work upon the body. But Dr. Harvy ( Exercit. 70)
will have the blood to be this immediate instrument of the soul, because it is
every where present, and runs to and fro with great celerity. Answ. Neither can
the blood be the immediate instrument of the soul, because the spirits being of
a purer essence, come nearer to the nature of the soul, and therefore must be
more immediate; neither is there any ubiquitary presence or celerity of motion
in the blood, but by the reason of the spirits which drive it to and fro.
Besides, all animals have not blood, some being exanguious, yet they have
spirits by which they are moved. Again, he says, That the blood works above
the power of the elements, being the part first begot, and the innate heat does
fabricate the other parts of the body. Answ. The blood works not at all, much
less above the elementary powers, but by virtue of the spirits; which the
Doctor immediately after seems to acknowledge, when he faith, It is made the
immediate instrument of life, by the gift of the formative faculty and vegetive
soul. Now this formative faculty consists immediately in the spirits, and so
does the vegitive soul, which are even in those parts where there is no blood
at all, to wit, in the spermaticall parts, according to the doctrine of
Hippocrates and Galen. To say then that the blood is the immediate instrument of
life, by means of the plastic faculty, is in effect to say, It is not the
immediate, because there is one more immediate, to wit, the plastic faculty in
the spirits. Neither is the blood the part first begot, as the Doctor says, if
we will believe the Galenists, but the spermatick parts are first begot, if we
speak of the formation of the child: neither can the blood fabricate any part
at all, being a dull thing in it self: but the spirits, or the plastic
faculty in them do fabricate, the blood is only the material cause of the
flesh and sanguineall parts, as the Galenists affirm. And whereas the Doctor
says, That the blood is a spirit, because Virgil says, Una cademque via
sanguisque animusque sequuntur;
He speaks very improperly, for blood and a spirit are specifically different,
and if the Poet had meant that blood and a spirit were the same thing, he had
used a mere tautologie, which is far from his elegancie; and therefore his
words intimate the contrary, that they are different things, because he says,
Sanguisque animusque, though then they had but one passage or vent, yet they
are not one thing. And whereas he says, That the blood is celestial, because
the soul lodges in it, he may say the whole body is celestial, being the
house and tabernacle of the soul, which lodges in each part thereof, even
where there is no blood, as in the bones, grisles, etc. But indeed the spirits
are rather to be called celestial, because in them the soul immediately
resides, and by them in the blood, and other parts. The blood then is not
celestial at all, but by the spirits, nor these in respect of their original,
but because of their celestial qualities and operations. Again, when he
distinguishes the principal agent from the isntrumental in this, That the
one can never work above its own strength, whereas the other does. I say, this
distinction is needless; for no agent can work above its own strength, much
less the isntrumental, which works not at all, but as it is moved by the
principal agent: The instrument then does not work above its own strength,
but the prime agent works by it, above the strength of the instrument.
Besides, when he says, That the blood deserves the name of Spirit, because it
abounds more with radical moisture then other parts, by which it feeds all
other parts. I answer, That the seed deserves rather to be called a Spirit; for
though in the blood there is more moisture extensively, yet in the seed there
is more radical moisture^: And if that which feeds us immediately be a spirit,
then the blood is no spirit; for it is not that, but a roscid and benign juice
extracted from thence, which immediately nourishes us. Lastly, when he says,
That the soul with the blood performs all things in us; If he understand here
(as he seems to do in all his discourse) collateral efficient causes, I deny
his saying; for the soul by the spirits is the sole efficient cause of all
that is acted within us, the blood is only a material cause, having no more
efficiency in it, then Bricks and Mortar have toward the building of an house.
Doctor Harvy ( de Conciptione) will have the Female conceive and be prolificall
without any sensible corporeal Agent, as Iron touched with the Loadstone
draws other Iron to it. Again he says, That the substance of the womb being
ready for conception, is very like the constitution of the brain. Why then
should not their function be alike? And what the phantasme or appetite is in
the brain, the very same, or its analogy is excited after copulation in the
womb; ^for the functions of both are called conceptions. And shortly after, As
when we have conceived a form or Idaea in the brain, we produce the like in
our workmanship; even so the Idea or species of the Father being existant in
the womb by the help of the formative faculty, produces the lik brood. Then
after diverse amplifications to the same purpose, he concludes, That it is no
absurdity if the female that is made pregnant by conceiving the general Idaea
without matter, does generate. Answ. In this Tract the Doctor seems sometimes
to be in earnest, and sometimes to speak-problematically, or rather doubtfully:
But however, this opinion cannot consist with reason; for what can be more
unreasonable, then that the Noblest Animals should be conceived without any
sensible corporeal Agent, by mere imagination, not of the brain, but of the
Womb: For, 1. If this be true, that the Female can thus conceive and generate,
what need was there of the Male? they are then useless in generation, and
fathers have no reason to provide for their wives children, seeing the woman is
the sole parent, the man but a Cipher. Why should there be any laws against
adultery and fornication, seeing there can be no such sins? If this doctrine be
true, what miracle was it for a virgin to conceive and bear a Son without the
help of man, seeing this is ordinary for the female, as the Doctor faith, to be
prolificall without any sensible corporeal agents; for the seed, he says, is
not received within the matrix. But if I should grant him this (which cannot be
true) yet he cannot deny but that the seminal vapor and prolificall spirit is
conveyed thither, by which the female is made pregnant; if he grants this, then
there is a sensible corporeal agent, though not so gross as the earthy part
of the seed: If he deny this, then it will follow, that we are all produced
without fathers and that there is no other sensible corporeal agent but the
womb; and so the fifth Commandment of honoring father should be put out,
seeing there is no such thing in nature. Again, if he says there is no agent,
then it will follow, that the effect can be produced without an efficient, and
an action without an actor. If he he says there is an agent, but not
corporeal, then that agent must be either a spirit or an accident; if a
spirit, then we are all the children of spirits, not of corporeal parents, and
so man cannot have for his genus a corporeal substance. And these spirits, if
created, must be either Angels, Demons, or Souls, which was the dreams of some
ancient Heretics, long since condemned by Councels. If again he says, that
these agents are not spirits, but accidents, he will make us in a worse
condition: For man, the Noblest of all creatures, is the child of an accident,
therefore Aristotle should have placed man in the Categorie of quality rather
then of substance. But we know that no accident is operativ^ but in and by the
power of the principal agent; Neither can an accident be conveyed into the
womb without the subject in which it is inherent: and therefore Iron touched
without the Loadstone, cannot draw Iron if the substance of the Loadstone were
not imparted to it. Hence we see, that as the substance of the Loadstone in the
Iron decays, so the virtue of attraction decays likewise. Again, when he
says, that the substance of the womb is like the constitution of the brain, he
speaks very improperly; for neither is the substance of the one like the
substance of the other; the one being white, spermatical and cold; the other
red, sanguineal and hot; nor can the substance of the one be like the
constitution of the other, these being indifferent predicaments, between which
there is no similitude, nor is the constitution of the one like unto the
constitution of the other, as being of different temperaments, and having
different uses; and suppose they were either of the same substance, or
constitution, it will not follow, that therefore they must have the same
function: The stomach and guts have the same substance and constitution, so
has the brain and pith in the back bone: yet they have not the same functions.
Again, when he says, [that what the fantasm or appetite is in the brain, the
same or its analogy is excited in the womb, for the functions of both are
called conceptions.] He speaks more improperly then before; for he seems to
make the fantasm and appetite one thing, and to be both resident in the brain,
whereas the appetite is the inclination of the will, and has its residence in
the heart; the fantasm is the imaginary, or fictitious object of the fantasy,
which this internal sense residing in the brains represents to it self; neither
of these is excited in the womb, nor any thing like it; for the womb is neither
the seat of the fantasy, nor has it fit organs for it; nor is it the seat of
appetite, except by this word he understands an inclination to conception or
generation: neither again is this a valid reason, that because the functions of
the womb and brain are called conceptions, therefore they are the same; for the
conception of the womb is far different from that of the brain, neither do they
agree, but equivocally, and in name only; so this word conception is ascribed
to the action of understanding. Lastly, though we can produce upon stone, or
timber, or such like matter, some shape or form like that Idea in our brain,
yet it will not follow that the species of the father in the womb can produce
the like brood; for I deny that the species or idea of the father is in the
womb, but in the brain; this (not that) being the proper fea^ of the fantasy,
which receives the species from the common sense, and the imagination does not
always work upon the seed, or embryo, nor does it produce any form, it only
works sometimes and produces but the accidental form; whereas ordinarily
both the essential and accidental forms are produced by the formative power of
the seed, or rather by the soul it self, which fabricates its own mansion,
which soul lay potentially in the seed, and is excited by the heat, or rather
innate property of the matrix. To conclude, it is as great absurdity to affirm
that the female can be made pregnant, by conceiving a general immateral idea,
as it was by some of the ancients to think, that the Spanish Mares could, as
Aristotle speaks, (...), conceive or be made pregnant by the Western wind, and
as the Poets says; Ore omnes versae, in Zephyrum, stant rupibus altis,
Exceptantque leves auras, and saepe sine ullis
Conjugiis vento gravidae, mirabile dictu.
The like fabulous impregnations we read of in Ravens by the north wind, and
in Partrages by bare imagination.

CHAP. IV.
1. My Lord Bacon's opinion confuted concerning the French disease. 2.
Concerning the expulsion of pellets out of guns. 3. Of the wax candle burning
in spirit of wine. 4. Of the parts most nutritive in animals. 5. Of the spirits
in cold bodies. 6. Of air, fire, water, oil, whiteness, the hands and feet. 7.
Of souls and spirits. 8. Of visible objects and hearing. 9. Of sounds and
music. 10. Of singing birds, descending species, light. 11. Ingrate objects,
and deafness, with other passages.

HAving lighted lately upon two books, the one of Doctor Harvie's De
generatione animalium, wherein he proves that all animals have their original
from eggs; which if true, then that is no fiction of the Poets, concerning
Leda's two eggs, out of which were procreated Pollux and Helena, Castor and
Clytemnestra; but I conceive the Doctor in this, speaks rather tropically then
properly; for simile non est idem, and what may in some sort resemble an egg,
is not an egg: however, his book is full of excellent learning and
observation; yet I have been bold in some things to dissent from him, as may be
seen in the former Chapter. The other book I lately viewed is, my Lord Bacon's
Natural History, a Piece fraughted with much variety of elegant learning; but
yet wherein are diverse passages that deserve animadversion^; I never had
leisure to run over the book till now, though I had seen it before, and now my
distractions are such, that I cannot exactly examine it, but only ( ut canis e
nilo) here and there touch a little. First then, I find him mistaken in
thinking that the French Pox is begot by eating of man's flesh: Cent. 1. Sect.
26. His reasons are, A story of man's flesh barrelled up like tunny, and eat at
the siege of Naples; the other is, because the Canibals who feed on man's flesh
are subject to that disease. 3. Because the blood or fat of man's flesh is mixed
with poisons: And lastly, because Witches feed on man's flesh to aid their
imaginations with high and foul vapors. Answ. These reas^ns are of small
validity. For 1. it was not the eating of man's flesh at the siege of Naples
that brought this disease into Europe, but it was procured by some of Columbus
his Company, who had carnal commerce with soul Indian women, which with the pox
they brought along with them. 2. Man's flesh of all other animals is counted the
most temperate, therefore cannot produce such a venomous distemper so repugnant
to man's body. 3. This is a peculiar disease of the Indians, both East and West;
for diverse Countries have their diverse maladies. 4. Neither can this, or any
disease be counted new in respect of their subjects, original causes, or
seminaries, for this disease is as old as man's flesh, though in this part of
the world it did not break out so generally as of late; and who knows but that
the ancients had it, but under another name, being a kind of Leprosy. 5. The
Canibals among the Indians are not more subject to this disease then others,
who never tasted of man's flesh; for in all ages there have been men eaters, yet
not tainted mith this malady, and millions of latter years among us, who are
infected with this poison, and yet never eat of man's flesh. 6. It is against
reason to imagine, that the flesh of a man should rather breed this disease,
then of an ox or a sheep, seeing man's flesh is sooner convertible into
nutriment, then of any other animal, because of the greater simpathy and
specifical unity. 7. Though ignorant Indians do mix man's blood or fat with
poison, it will not therefore follow, that these are poy^^nable; no more then
wine can be called poison, because poysonable materials may be mixed with it:
so we mix sugar and butter with rats bane, which we know have no venomous
quality in them. 8. Witches, who are silly fools, may eat man's flesh, hoping
thereby to aid their imaginations, but there is no such vetue in man's flesh as
they conceive; so they use many spells, charms, and canting words, in which
there is no more virtue then in a pibble stone, or a piece of rotten wood. 9.
Man's flesh can afford no soul vapors, except it befoul it self, and putrified,
and so indeed it may breed loathsome diseases, as all other corrupt and
putrified meats do; which is done as it is corrupted, not as it is man's flesh;
neither can it afford high vapors, except it were full of spirits, which cannot
be in a piece of dead flesh; he that will have high vapors must drink sack, not
eat man's flesh; the blood of the vine, not of the vein can breed high vapors.
Indeed the drinking of man's blood, and eating of his flesh, may inure a man to
cruelty, which Catelin knew by causing his associates to drink humane blood;
hence the Judaical law forbids eating of blood at all, showing us hereby, how
much God abhors cruelty, or that which may induce a man to it.

II. His Lordship calls it, A crude and ignorant speculation, to make the
dilatation of the fire, the cause of the expulsion of the pellet out of the
Gun; but he will have the cause to be the crude and windy spirits of nitre,
dilated by heat, which blows abroad the flame, as an inward bellows. But I
would know what difference there is between dilatation, and between the flame
and spirit of the nitre. He affirms dilatation to be the cause of this
expulsion, therefore his exception against the former opinion was needless; and
whereas he grants the flame to be the immediate expeller of the pellet, he
unawares affirms what he rejects: neither can I see any difference between the
flame of the nitre, and the spirit of the nitre inflamed, only he was pleased
to make show of a new reason, by altering somewhat the words of the former,
whereas the sense is one and the same, the speculation then is not crude, but
the spirit of his nitre is crude, which without the flame can do nothing.

3. From a wax candle burning in a porringer full of spirit of wine set on
fire, he infers ( Cent. 1.31.) strange conculsions. As 1. That the flame of the
candle becomes bigger and globular, and not in pyramid, and consequently that
the pyramid of the flame is accidental. I answer, the flame of the candle
becomes bigger and globular accidentally, because the air about it is heated by
the flame of the wine, therefore, as in all things like draws to like, so one
flame dilates it self to enjoy the other; as a drop of water will contract it
self upon a dry, but dilate it self upon a wet table. 2. He infers, That the
flame of itself would be round, if it were not for the air that quenches the
sides of it. But I say that the air is so far from quenching, that it
cherishes and maintains the flame, without which it would quickly vanish,
and that the flame would not be round of it self, if the air round about were
not inflamed: for the same cause it rouls and turns, not of its own nature, but
because the ambient flame draws it. 3. He ^nfers hence, That the celestial
bodies are true fires, for they are ig^obular, and have rotation, and have the
color and splendour of flame: These are weak arguments that from common
accidents prove specifical identities; for if the stars be true fires, because
globular, then we may infer that water drops are fire, because round, and that
every thing which has rotation is fire; and if that be fire which has the
color of fire, or that a flame which has the splendour of flame; we may say
that rotten sticks, and glowworms, or cats eyes are fire or flames, and if
stars be flames, because in color they are like to flames; let us say that the
Heaven is water, for in color it is like water.

IV. It seems (says he, Cent. 1.45.) that the parts of living creatures, that
lie more inwards, nourish more then the outward flesh; except it be the brain,
which the spirits prey too much upon, to leave it any great virtue of
nourishment. This is not so, for experience shows the contrary, that the
outward flesh of sheep, and so of other animals nourish more then the heart,
lungs, liver, kidney, and spleen: Therefore Galen, ( l. de cibis.) reckons
these amongst his meats of bad juice; and indeed this stands with reason, for
that nourishes most which is easiest of concoction, and softest, and most
abounding in benign and nutritive juice, but such is the outward flesh, not the
heart, kidney, etc. which are harder and drier, and not so apt to be converted
into blood: It is true the Romans made much of the gooses liver, more to please
their palate, then out of any good nutriment it offorded; so they preferred
moshromes and such like trash, to the best nutrive meats, as for the brains
they are less nutritive then the flesh, not because the spirits prey upon them
(for the animal spirits in the brain, do not prey more upon it, then the vital
spirits do upon the heart, which notwithstanding, his lordship acknowledges to
be more nourishing then the outward flesh, because more inward) but because the
brain is less sanguineal then the flesh; for those parts which they call
spermatical, are less nutritive: what is more inward then the ( Spinalis
medulla) or pith in the back bone, on which the animal spirits do not prey, and
yet it is little nutritive.

V. The fifth cause of cold (says he, Cent. 73.) is a quick spirit enclosed in
a cold body, as in nitre, in water colder then oil, which has a duller
spirit, so show is colder then water, because it has more spirit; so some
insects, which have the spirit of life, as snakes etc. are cold to the touch,
so quick silver is the coldest of all metals, because fullest of spirits.
Answ. No spirit can be the cause of cold, for all spirits in vigitable animals
produce heat, and are produced of heat, therefore we find that where there are
most spirits, there is least cold. 2. Nitre which is mentioned by the Ancients,
is hot and not cold; and therefore both Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen adscribe
to it the qualities of heat, to cut, extennat, discuss and purge gross and cold
humors; and if that nitre which we use at this day, be not the same, yet it is
not much unlike, (as Mathiolus shows) as having diverse qualities of the old
nitre; besides, it is a kind of salt, and is begot of hot things, as pigeons
dung, and the urins of animals, therefore Brun. Seidelius makres it hot. 3. I
deny that water is colder then oil, to the outward touching, for hot waters (as
he said before) are in this regard cold, and if oil has a dul^er spirit then
water, how comes it to mount upward, and swim above the water: sure this
ascendant motion cannot produce from the earthy and gross substance, but from
the quick spirits thereof; therefore we find that water is cold, and oil hot
in operation, because more full of spirits then water. 4. I deny that snow is
colder then water, because it has more spirit; but because it is more
condensed: for heat and cold are more active in a dense and solid, then in a
thin atternated substance; so ice is colder then water, and yet who will say
that there is more spirits in the ice then in water; besides, the snow is
colder then the water, because begot of colder winds, and in colder clymats. 5.
I deny that insects are cold to the touch, for having in them the spirit of
life; because they are colder when that spirit is gone, as we see in all dead
bodies which are colder, then when they were alive; therefore death is called
by the Poets ( frigida more) and ( gelidum frigus) the spirit of life is that
which is both begot of heat, and begets heat, and preserves it; that when that
spirit leave su^, heat also for sakes us ( caler ossa relinquit) says the
Poet; It is not therefore the spirit of life, but the temperament and
constitution of the body of diverse earthy and watrish animals, which argue
cold; and we see that for this cause women's bodies are colder then men's, and
some men of colder constitutions then others, because they have fewer spirits,
and more of earth and water in them. We know also how dull and stupid our hands
are in cold frosts, till the spirits in them be quickened by heat. 6. I deny
also that quicksilver is the coldest of metals, because fullest of spirits: for
it is much doubted whether Mercury be cold at all; for agility proceeds from
heat, not from cold, and such a quality became the messenger of Jupiter, by
whom all things receive life and vigor. Indeed Mercury may be called the
Monster of Nature; for sometimes it refrigerats, sometimes it califieth; it
cures sometimes cold, sometimes hot diseases; take it hot, it produces cold;
take it cold, it produces hot effects: and it has this quality of heat, that
nothing is more penetrating then it is. Christopher Encelius ( de re metalica)
makes it hot and moist in the fourth degree. Quercitan in his answer to Aubert,
makes it rather aerial then aquiall; and we know that heat is one of the
qualities of air. Renodaeus (in Pharmac.) makes it both hot and cold. Keckerman
(in Sist. Phy.) says, That it is hot, as it is full of spirits, but cold as
these spirits are congealed. Croclius (in Bas. Cly.) prescribes it in
defluxions of the head, and in hydropsies, which shows it is hot. And Poterius
(in Pharm. Spagir.) tells us, That by reason of its different operations, no
man can tell whether heat or cold be most predominant; but it is certain, says
he, that it is both: for is known by our senses that it is cold, it is known by
its effects and operations that it is hot: for it cuts, at^enuates, dissolves
and purges, which are the effects of heat, and so his Lordship does acknowledge
in the next following leaf, That heat does attennate, and by atenuation,
sends forth the spirit.

In his following discourses he has phrases not to be tolerated in Philosophy,
as when he says ( Cent. 1.80.) That tangible bodies have an antipathy with
air. Belike then the air is no tangible body; but experience shows the
contrary, that air is tangible both actively and passively; our bodies are
sensible enough of this tangibility, both in hot and cold weather. Again, if by
tangible bodies he mean gross and dense bodies, how can air have an antipathy
with them, seeing air is one of the ingredients of which all mixed bodies are
compounded? can it ^e contrary or antipatheticall to it self? He says ( Sect.
91.) That paper or wood oyled, last long moist, but wet with water dry or
putrify sooner, the cause is, for that air medleth little with the moisture of
oil. Answ. He should have told us the cause of this cause; for why does not
air meddle with oil as well as with water? The reason is, because oil is a
more tenacious and dense substance then water, and therefore resists the heat
of the air longer, and cannot be so soon evaporated; and indeed it is not the
air, but the heat in the air that works both on water and oil; for the cold
air dries up neither, it may well harden them. Take then two papers, the one
moystned with water, the other with oil, and hold them near the ^re, we shall
see the one dried up long before the other, so that his saying is erroneous
when he infers ( Sect. 91.) That fire works upon oil as air upon water.
For indeed the air does not work upon water, but heat in the air or fire; nor
does the fire work so soon upon the oil as on the water, when they are at a
distance. Again, he says, That white is a penurious color, and where moisture
is scant. Answ. There are many things which want moisture, and yet are black,
as diverse dry stones and coals; many bodies are not scant of moisture, and yet
are white, as Lilies, Milk, Snow. There is as much moisture in a white Swan as
in a black Raven. But when he says ( Sect. 93) That Birds and Horses by age
turn white, and the gray hairs of men come by the same reason; he is mistaken:
for it is not want or scant of moisture, but want of heat rather that is the
cause of whiteness: for old men abound more in watrish moisture then young
men: and therefore we see that cold climats produce white complexions and
skins, whereas they are black and swarthy in hot Countries. Snow is not bred in
hot Summers, but in cold Winters; and hoar frost is engendered in cold Scithia,
not in hot Ethiopia. Again, he is mistaken when he says, ( Sect. 96, 97.) That
the soals of the feet have great affinity with the head and mouth of the
stomach; so the wrists and hands have a sympathy with the heart. For there is
no more affinity between these parts then any other; the feet have as great a
sympthy with the heart, and the wrists with the head, as these with the heart
and the other with the head. If there be any affinity between the head and the
feet, it is by reason of the nerves; and so the same affinity may be to the
hands. If there be any sympathy between the heart and the wrists, it is because
of the arteries, and so the sympathy may be to the feet. It Is true, that the
heart is affected in Agues by things applied to the wrists; not because there
is any sympathy between the skin, muscles, nerves and bones of the wrists with
the heart; but because the arteries which have their original from the heart,
lie more open, and are more tangible there then in many other parts of the
body; and yet in the temples, and diverse other parts of the body, you shall
find the pulse as well as in the wrists, and things applied to these parts,
will work as powerfully on the heart, as if applied to the wrists.

His Lordship is angry, ( Sect. 98.) Because we call the spirits of Plants and
living Creatures (Souls) such superficial speculations (says he) they have.
But he should for the same reason be angry with the Scriptures, which
ordinarily calls the spirits of beasts, birds, and fishes (Souls.) He must also
be angry with all wise Nomenclators, which have called living and sensitive
creatures (Animals) because they have (animal souls:) For animal is from
anima.) Again, I would know, if this word likes him not, how he will call these
spirits of animals? If he call them nothing but spirits, then he makes no
difference between them and all other tangible bodies: For, according to his
doctrine, there are spirits in stocks and stones, as well as in plants and
animals; but I hope the spirits of these deserve another name, then of the
others; which indeed, according to the old and true Philosophy, are mere
qualities: which word also he rejects as Logical, as though forsooth Logic,
or Logical terms were needless, whereas no knowledge is more useful and
necessary, as being the handmaid to all Sciences, the want of which has
occasioned multitudes of whimzicall conceits, and Chimera's in men's brains.
Again, if he will not have these chief acts, agents, or movers in animals, to
be called souls or spirits, but air, or vapor, or wind, he will find that all
these three are called by the word ( Anima) 1. Air is Anima in the Prince of
Poets, Eclog. 6.: Namque canebat uti magnum pir ina^e coacta
Semina, terrarumque, animaeque marisque fuissent.
2. Vapor is called ( anima) too in the same Poet, ( AEn. 8.) Quantum ignes
animaeque valent. 3. The wind is ( anima) also in Horace: Impellunt animae
lintea Thracie: and ( animus) in the Poet, ( AEn. 1.) Mollitque animos and
temperat iras. So then, call the Spirits of animals what you will, air, vapor,
wind, or spirit, you will still find ( anima or soul) is the term most proper
for them, and that this is no superficial speculation.

My Lord in his second Century ( sect. 11.) Makes pictures and shapes but
secondary objects to the eye, but colors and order the things that are
pleasing to the sight. If he had said, That colors are the chief objects of
the eye, he had spoken more properly then to say, they are pleasing to the eye;
for some colors are very displeasing to some eyes. As for order, that is not
at all the object of the sight; for it is a relation, and relations incur not
into the senses. Again, he says ( sect. 114.) That the sense of hearing
strikes the spirits more immediately then the other senses. This is a very
improper saying; for the senses are patients in receiving the species of their
objects, not agents upon their objects. If there be any action of dijudication,
that is the work of the fantasy* rather then of the outward sense; and though
I should yield that there were some actions of the eye, yet the sense of
hearing is merely passive, and therefore it is not the sense of hearing that
strikes the spirits, but the species of the sound which is received by the
spirit in the auditory nerve, and so conveyed into the fantasy: so it is not
the smelling (as he says) that works on the spirits, but the object that
works on the sense of smelling. Again, when he says, ( sect. 117.) That
doors in fair weather give no sound; he speaks by contraries: for if by fair
weather he means dry weather, then doors give the greatest sound. I know not
what kind of doors his were, but mine sound much in dry Summers, and but little
in moist weather. And this stands with reason; for the humidity of the air must
needs moisten the hinges, and consequently hinder their sound. Neither is it
true which he says of bullets, ( sect. 120.) That they in piercing through the
air make no noise: For Soldiers will tell him the contrary* that many times
they hear the whistling of the bullets over their heads. So darts and stones
flung with violence in the air, make a sound, as the Poet shows: Sonitum dat
stridula cornus, and au^as certa secat.
And his reason is no less infirm then his observation, to wit, That the
extreme violence or swiftness of the motion should hinder the sound, whereas
nothing furthers the noise so much as the swiftness of motion. Again, he is
mistaken in our definition of sounds, when he makes us say, That it is an
elision of the air, which is a term of ignorance. ( sect. 124.) So it ^is
indeed, but in him, not in the Philosophers, who do not call sound an elision
of the air, but the collisian of two hard or solid bodies in the air. And no
less is he mistaken when he says, That Sounds are generated where there is no
air at all. This he can never prove, for even in the water, and in the flame
(wherein he says sounds are generated) there is air; and if it were not for
air, the sound should never be carried to our ear; and therefore the instrance
he makes (^.133.) of knapping a pair of tongs within the water, which we can
hear, and yet there is no air at all present, is to no purpose; for there is
air present, both in the water, and besides nothing but air from the
superficies of the water to our ear, by which medium the sound is conveyed to
us. He gives us a strange reason ( Sect. 143.) why we hear better in the night
then in the day, Because in the day the air is more thin, and the sound
pierces better, but when the air is more thick, the sound spreads abroad
less. Indeed by this reason we should hear better by day; for the thinness of
the air, and the easy piercing of the sound, are main helps to hearing,
whereas the thickness of the air is a hinderance: Therefore Hippocrates in his
Aphorisms* observes truly, That when the wind is Southerly, and the air
thick, our hearing is heavy. We hear better when the wind is Northerly, and the
air clear. It is not therefore the thickness of the air, but the silence of
the night which helps hearing, as the Poet says, Tunc silens omnis ager,
pecudes, pictaeque volucres.
AEn. 4. And then it is when every sound, though never so small, affrights and
excites him. Tunc omnes terrent aurae, sonus excitat omnis.
AEn. 2.

In his third Century ( Sect. 201) he tells us, That though there be a wall
between, we can hear the voice one this side which is spoken on the other, not
because the sound passes through the wall, but archeth over the wall. But here
he contradicts himself in his former Century ( Sect. 154) when he says, I^
is certain that the voice does pass through hard and solid bodies. The voice
then may pass through a wall, and not over it: And how can it pass over that
wall which is continually with the seeling or roof of the House? For in a
close chamber I can hear the voice of him that is in the next room, though
there be a wall between us, and the room sieled or roofed. But he says ( Sect.
213.) That the spirit of the hard body does cooperate. I would know what
spirits there are in a stone or brick wall, or in a wall of mud to cooperate?
If there be such cooperating spirits, it will follow* That where are greatest
numbers of them, there will be most help, and the sound better heard; but in a
thick stone wall there are more spirits (because more stones, every stone
having his own spirit) then in a thin mud, wooden, or brick wall, and
therefore the sound must be better heard through a thick then a thin wall,
there being so many pneumaticall cooperators, all helping to carry the sound.
This is Philosophy that passes all understanding. He says ( Sect. 235.) It is
manifest that between sleeping and waking (when all the senses are bound and
suspended) music is far sweeter then when one is fully waking. All the
senses are not bound when a man is between sleeping and waking; but when a man
is in dead sleep, then are all the senses bound: If then they are all bound,
and likewise all are bound between sleeping and waking, what difference will he
make between the extreme and the medium, between a dead sleep, and that which
is betwixt sleeping and waking. Again, how can music be sweet to him in whom
all the senses are bound up? Which way shall the music enter? Can he hear
without hearing? Doubtless the delight he has in the Music does show all his
senses are not bound up. He shows, (238, 239.) That Parrets, Pies, Iayes, Dawes
and Ravens, are singing birds, and that this aptness of singing is in their
attention. He should have added Thrushes and Stares to his singing birds; but
it is not attention which is the cause of their singing; for beasts and other
birds may have as much attention, but its natural for birds to sing, and their
speaking is but a kind of singing, for singing is the music of the throat, and
speaking the music of the tongue: it is easy for those who exercise their
throats and tongues in singing, to be brought to utter words by the same
organs. It may be (says he, 205) the spiritual species of visible things and
sounds, do move better downwards then upwards. Those on the top of Paul's seem
much less then they are, but to men above, those below seem nothing so much
lessened. So knots in gardens show best from an upper window. These examples
thwart his ( may be) for if the species move better downward, how comes it that
we see the object better from the top of Paul's, then from the street looking
upward to the top? Doubtless it is because the visible species of the things
seen below, move better upward, as being more natural both for the air which
is a light body, and for the species which has no gravity in it. Hence it is,
that when we stand below, we cannot so clearly discern the just magnitude of
the men upon the top of Paul's, because the species must come from that high
object to our eye downward, which is not so natural. The same may be said of
the audible species; for sounds are better heard by those who are in high
rooms, then by those who are below: and so they that sit in Church galleries,
which are above the Pulpit, hear better then they who sit below in the pues. He
speaks against experience when he says, There is a greater degree from the
privative to the active, that is, from darkness to light, then from less
light i^ more light. For when the day breaks I cannot see to read in the first
degree of light, which is from darkness; but in the other degree which is from
less light to more, I can see to read, therefore this degree of less light to
more light, as far greater then the other, which was from the privative to the
active.

He tells us (270) That in visibles there are not found objects so^ odious and
ingrate to the sense, as in audibles; thus the grating of a Saw sets the teeth
on edge. That there are visible objects more ingrate to the eye then audible to
the ear, is plan by experience, in such as have swounded and fallen suddenly
dead at the sight of some objects; some will sweat and fall into strange
passions at the sight of a Cat, others at other sights. Pompey's wife fell into
a swound when she saw her husbands coat be sprinkled with blood, Mark Antonies
speech did not so forcibly work upon the Romans as the sight of Caesar's bloody
garment, to prosecute his murderers. The fantasy is much more affected by
the eye then by the ear. As for the grating of a Saw, by which some men's teeth
are set on edge, will not prove what he aims at, but only that the teeth are
thus affected by reason of that nerve of the fifth conjugation, which sends
one branch to the ear, and another to the larinx and tongue; as likewise there
is a cartaligenous passage between the ear and palate, by which the air received
by the mouth, is communicated to the ear. Hence we stop our breath when we will
hear attentively, and violent sounds are evacuated by that passage which are
received by the ear. But when he says (276) That there is no effect of
deafness found in Canoniers, and such like; he is again mistaken: For it is
known that diverse have lost their hearing by the noise of Cannous, and other
violent sounds. I knew one who grew deaf by being present at a Muster where
many Muskets were discharged. Again, he says (277.) That when a Skreen is put
between the candle and the eye, the light is seen on the paper whereon one
writes, where the body of the flame is not seen. But indeed neither the flame
is seen, because of the Skreen, nor the light on the paper, but the paper by
the light: for light is not the object which we see, but by which we see; it
actuates the medium, and makes the object visible.

CHAP. V.
The Lord Bacons opinions refuted. Of holding the breath when we hearken. Of
time. Of long life. Of making gold. Of stars. Of oil. Of indisposition to
motion. Of death, diseases and putrefaction. Of stuttering. Of motion after the
head is off. Of sympathies and antipathies of the Vine and ^olewort, the
Fig Tree and Rue. Of white color. Of the Oak bough in the earth. Of
transinutation of species. Of Incubus. Of grain in cold Countries. Of
determination and figures. Of accretion and alimentation. Of the period of
life. Of sugar, leaves, roots, snow, and putrefaction.

WE have showed out of Anatomy, 283
why we hold our breath when we hearken attentively; 284
but my Lord gives a reason no way satisfactory: For (says he) the cause is,
for that in all expiration the motion is outward, and therefore rather drives
away the voice then draws it. His Lordship says well if we did hear by the
mouth; but withal he should have considered,, that in breathing there is
inspiration as well as expiration, and we hold our breath in hearing
attentively, that there may be no inspiration as well as expiration. And indeed
it must be a very weak voice that our breath in expiration drives away. The
true cause then as we have showed, is the free passage of the air between the
mouth and ear by means of the pipe or channel we mentioned; therefore we stay
our breath rather from inspiration then expiration, lest the drum in the ear be
extended too much with air. He says, 292
It conduces to long life that men's actions be free and voluntary. If this
were so, the absolute Monarchs of the world, whose words and commands are laws,
and who have none to control them, should be longer lived then their subjects,
who are forced to do many things against their liking, though not against
their will; for all men's actions otherwise are free and voluntary, because they
are men, but many times we see slaves live longer then Princes. He tells us,
That time and heat are fellows in many effects; 294
for they both are airy and liquifie. Time and heat cannot be fellows in
effects, because time is no agent, it does not operate at all, quantities work
not, though all things are produced in time; so honey and sugar grow liquid,
clay and roots grow dry in time, but not by time. These effects are produced by
the heat, dryness and moisture of the air, so that sugar waxes not more
liquid by age, but by the air: for keep it twenty years, it will harden or
soften according to the weather. So it is not time that hardens the crum of
bread, but the heat of the air by drawing in insensibly its humidity: and
therefore it is rather Poetically spoken then Philosophically, to say that time
hardens or softn^th, produces or destroys. This indeed is to put the sith
into Saturns hand, and to make him the father and devourer of his own children.
299
He alleges one cause, why women live longer then men, because they stir
less. But I say that men live longer then women, because they stir more: For
by exercise the blood is warmed, the pores are opened, vapors are expelled,
concoction is helped, the limbs and joints are strengthened, the natural heat
is excited, the spirits and humors are refined. All ages show us, that no
women have ever reached to the age of some men; and it stands with reason that
men should be longer lived, because they abound more in natural heat, which is
the cause why the Northern people are longer lived then the Southern. And I
have observed, that in the Northern parts women are more given to exercise then
in the countries farther South; and therefore are longer lived there then here.
And my Lord himself acknowledges, That exercise hinders putrefaction, 344
and rest furthers it. Therefore it follows, that men who exercise live
longest, because they are furthest from putrefaction.

326
He judges the work of making gold possible. So have all they who have made
shipwreck of their estates upon that stone, which has proved no less
dangerous then the rocks of Malea. It is not enough to judge the possibility,
but it must be proved either by reason or experience, neither of which has
been yet done. For that factitious, or rather fictitious gold the Chemists brag
of, is as far from true gold, as a painted fire is from a real; for neither
can it endure the fire, nor comfort the heart, nor has it any of the qualities
or essential properties of true gold, I am of Scaligers opinion, that it is as
easy to change a beast into a man, as to convert any other metal into gold,
which were to introduce by Art a specificall form into the matter, which is the
work of^ Nature alone. He says, It is a vain opinion to think the star is
the denser part of his Orb. This is spoken both Lordly and ma^esterially: 354
but he had done well to tell us why this opinion is vain, and to have
delivered an opinion void of vanity, which he does not; but his bare word is
not sufficient to make this a vain opinion, which the learned of so many Ages
have approved, and stands so much with reason. I confess we know but little of
those quintessentiall natures; for we are, as the Poet says, Curvae in terris
animae, and coelestium inanes.
Yet of all opinions this is most consonant to reason, that the star is
homogeneall with its sphere, so that the star is the heaven contracted, and
the heaven in which the star moves, is the star dilated; for otherwise we
must make the heaven an heterogeneall body, and consequently organicall, which
will prove the vainer opinion of the two. He tells us, That Oil is almost
nothing else but water digested. 359
I may say it is any thing else rather then water, from which it is so averse,
that it will not be united or incorporated with it: and the effects are clean
opposite, for water is cold, oil hot in operation, water putrifieth, oil
resists putrefaction; water makes Iron rust, oil keeps it from rusting;
water quenches the fire, oil kindles and feeds it; water is heavy, oil
light, for it will still be uppermost; water is thin, oil thick; water is
quickly up by heat, and turned into vapors, so is not oil; water is the food
of plants, oil of men; oil is apt to be inflamed, so is not water: therefore
oil is rather air or fire then water digested.

He gives us a strange cause of man's indisposition to motion when Southern
winds blow. 381
The cause (says he) is, that the humors do melt and wax fluid, and so flow
into the parts. How humors should melt, I know not, except they were congealed
like butter, wax, or ice: and where be the parts into which they flow, he tells
us not: but indeed the true cause is, the giving (as we call it) or relaxation
of the muscles, nerves, and tendons by the warm and mo^st air which in dry and
cold weather are more firm compacted and united; and therefore the apter for
motion. It is (says he) commonly seen, 382
that more are sick in Summer, and more die in Winter. This is to me a Riddle;
for if more die in Winter then in Summer, it must follow, That more are sick in
Winter then in Summer; for men usually die not till they be sick, and so he
contradicts himself. Much like to this is that saying of his, Diseases are
bred chiefly by heat; the contrary whereof is apparent, that multitudes of
diseases are bread by cold; neither can I yield to him in saying, That it is a
superficial ground, 383
that heat and moisture cause putrefaction, because there have been great
plagues in dry years. But by his Lordships leave, the plagues were not bred by
the dryness of the year, but by the precedent heat and moisture of the
Winter, or Spring, which break out upon the hot and dry Summer, or Autumn, and
this he acknowledges in his next Section, where he shows, 384
That the cause of diseases is falsely imputed to the constitution of the air at
that time when they break forth, whereas it proceeds from a precedent sequence
and series of the seasons of the year; and so when he says, That in Barbary
their plagues break up in Summer when the weather is hot and dry: If this be
so, then it is no superficial ground to say that heat and moisture cause
putrefaction, seeing it is resisted by hot and dry weather, and indeed it were
absurd to think otherways, seeing both experience and reason tells us, that
heat and moisture are ^he breeders of putrefaction, and that frigidity and
^^ccity are its greatest enemies; therefore in cold climats and seasons
putrefaction is not so frequent, as in hot Countries, and Summers; so he
confesses, that the Country about Cap Vorde is pestilent through moisture;
neither are dry things so apt to putrify as moist, so the flesh putrifieth
and not the bones; the apple or the pear will putrify, when the seed within
remains unputrified: whereas those bodies which have little or no moisture,
resist putrefaction both in themseves and others, as Salt, Brimstone, Myrrh,
Aloes, and such like.

386
He makes Refrigeration of the tongues the cause of stuttering. If this were so,
then old men should stutter more then young men; for old men are colder. But we
know the contrary, that not the coldness, but rather the over-heating of the
tongue causes stuttering, and this he acknowledges in the same Section, that
many stutterers are very choleric men. But choler is hot, then it seems that
both heat and cold is the cause of stuttering. But indeed the true cause in
some is a bad habit or custom contracted from their infancy, in others
eagerness of disposition; for hasty and eager natures usually stutter, and
whilst they make the more haste, they use the less speed; in others again
stuttering proceeds from some infirmity or impedim^ in the tendon, muscles, or
nerves of the tongue. As for drinking of wine moderatly, which he says, will
cause men stut less, is a thing I could never yet observe in those stutterers
I have bin acquainted with. He says, That men and beasts move little after
their headss are off, 400
but in birds the motion remains longer, because the spirit are chiefly in the
head and brain, which in men and beasts are large, but birds have small heads,
therefore the spirits are more dispersed in the sinews. That the spirits are
chiefly in the head and brain, I deny; for the vital spirits are chiefly in the
heart. And if the spirits be chiefly in the head and brain, why does the body
separated from the head, move more and longer time then the head? Again, though
birds have lesser heads then men and beasts, yet they have heads proportioned
to their bodies, and the spirits proportionably are as much in their heads, as
in men's or beasts heads. Moreover, though some men and beasts move little after
the head is off, yet some move much: for I saw one beheaded, whose body after
it was laid in the coffin, and carried a pretty way from the place of
execution, with a violent fit of motion, was like to beat the coffin out of the
hands of the bearers; therefore the true causes of this difference are these,
as I conceive, 1. The spirits of birds are more aeriall and fervent then of men
and beasts, and in some more, in some less; therefore the body of a Cock
beheaded will flutter more then of a Goose, or Turkey; and so in beasts, a Cat
beheaded will move more violently, then of many others: for this reason some
men move more then others. 2. The capacity of the vessels may be the cause of
this differance; for in men and beasts the veins, arteries, and nerves, wherein
the spirits and blood are contained, be larger then in birds, and therefore in
them is a more sudden eruption of the blood and spirits, and consequently a
shorter motion then in birds. 3. The weight of the bodies in men and beasts
far exceed the weight of birds bodies, and therefore are not so apt to be
moved.

His Lordship is pleased to call The opinions of sympathies and antipathies
ignorant and idle conceits, 479
and a forsaking of the true indications of causes, Felix qui potuit rerum
cognosere causas, God will have us in some things, rather admire his wisdom,
then know his secrets; and because we cannot attain the true reason of many
things, we are to submit our judgments to a reverend admiration of his
goodness: who can give the reason of that sympathy between the loadstone *and
the iron? Between the same stone and the pole? We see there is a sympathy
between some simples and some humors, and between some parts of our bodies and
some drugs. What other reason properly can be given, why Faltick draws choler,
Agaric fleghm, Epithymum melancholy? Why Selenites, as Fernelius observes,
being applied to the skin, stays bleeding? Why should Cantharides work only
on the bladder? Why does Hemlock and Henbane poison men, which nourish birds?
How do cats come to the knowledge of Nip, and dogs of grass? who taught the
Chicken to fear the Kite, or the Lamb the Wolf? And why have some men strong
Antipathies with some meats? Why are some sounds, some smells, some sights
grateful to us, some again odious? If there be no sympathies and antipathies
why are water and fire so averse to each other? The Vine will not prosper if
the Colewort grow near it, he gives a reason for this, Because the Colewort
draws the fattest juice of the earth, and where two plants draw the same
juice their neighborhood hurts. This reason may be as well rejected as
admitted; for other plants that are set near and among Cole-worts, fare not
the worse for their vicinity, except it be Rue: and not only does this
Antipathy last between the Vine and Colewort when they are alive, but when they
are dead, and separated from the earth: for they write that Coleworts hinder
inebriation, and suffer not the wine to fume into the head; and why is not the
vine as strong to draw its nourishment from the earth as the Colewort, seeing
it has more spirits, and extends it self to a greater circuit and height? But
when he says, That Rue being set by a Figtree, becomes stronger, because the
one draws juice fit to refult sweet, the other bitter. I would know how one
and the same piece of earth can afford sweet juice to the one, and bitter to
the other at the same time^punc; and how the fetide juice of the earth goes
into the Garlic, and the odorate into the Rose when they grow together. Sure
these are whimzies, for no piece of earth can have so many contrary qualities
at the same time, nor can there be several juyces in one bud as he says
afterward; neither is the earth any thing else but the common matrix of the
plants, affording them moisture and nourishment, which my Lord acknowledges
proceeds rather from the water then from the earth, when he says, That white
Satyrion bean flowers, 507
etc. are very succubent, and need to be scanted in their nourishment; he
contradicts his former assertion when he said, Sect. 93
That white was a penurious color, and where moisture is scant: And yet he
says, That white plumbs are the worst, because they are over-watry: So it
seems that white is both a penurious and a super-plentifull color, 509
where moisture is scant, and yet over-watry.

The opinion that an Oak bough put into the earth, will put forth wild Vines,
is rejected by him, upon this ground, ^t is not the Oak (says he) that
turns into a Vine; 522
but the Oak bough putrefying, qualifieth the earth to put forth a vine of it
self. If the earth could put forth a vine of it self, what need it to be
qualified by the putrified Oak bough? If it be of the putrified Oak bough (as
doubtless it is) that the vine is generated, then the earth does not of it
self send forth the vineIt is natural for one thing to be generated out of
the corruption of another; but for plants to be generated of the earth alone,
without either seed, boughs, or some putrified materials of other things, 525
were miraculous. He says, That transmutation of species is in the vulgar
Philosophy pronounced impossible* but this opinion is to be rejected. What he
means by vulgar Philosophy, I know not, but this I know, that the Philosophy:
which is vulgarly received by all learned and wise men, hold the transmutation
of species impossible: not to God, who could transform Lots wife into salt,
Nebuchadnezzar into a beast, waters into blood, a rod into a serpent, and water
into wine, but to Art or Nature which cannot transform species, whether we
understand the word in the extent and universality, or as it may signify the
individual nature under such a species: For every individual consists of a
matter and a form, the whole composition cannot be transformed into another
composition, nor the form to another specificall form, nor the matter into
another matter: not the first; for generation is not the changing of one
composition into another, but an introduction of a new form into the matter:
not the second, for one form always perishes by corruption upon the
introduction of another by generation: not the third; for the matter which is
the common subject of all mutations, must be always the same in substance,
though it receive some alterations in qualities. Transmutation then of species
is impossible to Nature, not to Chemists, who think to transform silver into
gold: not to the Roman Church, which holds a transubstantiation of bread into
Christ's body: not unto Poets, who sing of so many metamorphoses and
transformations of men into beasts: nor of those who think Witches can
transform themselves into Cats, Hares, and other creatures. He tells us, That
Mushroms cause the accident which we call Incubus, or the Mare in the stomach.
If this were true, in Italy and Africa, where these are ordinarily eaten, this
disease would reign most: but we find that the Northern Countries are more
subject to the Incubus then the Southern. Many then eat Mushroms who never were
troubled with this disease, many are troubled with it who never eat them. But
indeed the Incubus, or Mare, is no disease of the stomach, as he says, but of
the Diaphragma and lungs, which being oppressed by a thick phlegm or
melancholy, send up gross vapors into the throat, by which speech is hindered,
and into the brain by which the imagination is disturbed.

It is reported (says he) that grain out of the hotter Countries translated
into the colder, 575
will be more forward then the ordinary grain of the cold Country. This is
known to be untrue by diverse grains transplanted hither into this cold climat,
and by the grains translated hence into the Orcades, and other cold parts.
Again, he says, That plants are all figurate and determinate, which inanimat
bodies are not] if this be so, then inanimat bodies are infinite, for certainly
whatsoever is finit, has its termination; and figure is nothing else but the
disposition of terminations; even water is figurat, because it is sinit, though
it assumeth the figure of the continent body in which it is. To say then that
a stone is sinit, and yet not figurat nor determinat, is a plain contradiction*
a dead carcass is an inanimat body, and yet retains the same figure and
termination, which it had whilst it was animat. In this same Section he tells
us [ that plants do nourish, 600
inanimat bodies do not, they have an accretion, but no alimentation] but how
any thing can have an accretion without alimentation is to me a ridle: I speak
of proper and Physical accretion, which is an extension of all the parts by an
internal principle or soul converting the aliment into the substance of the
body nourished. For that accretion of stones, and other inanimate things, is an
apposition of external matter, not an extension of the parts by an internal
agent, converting the nutriment into the thing nourished. And how can stones,
or such hard bodies have extension, whereas they want humidity, which is the
cause of extension. Besides, accretion is a supply of deperdition; for where
there is diminution of parts, by means of the heat exhausting the radical
moisture, there must be restoration ^y nutriment, and consequently accretion.
Therefore there maybe an outward agglutination or aggregation of stones without
alimentation; but an accretion properly so called, there cannot be. Lastly, he
tells us in the same Section, That Plants have a period of life, 602
which inanimate bodies have not. If inanimate bodies have a life, and no
period, then they are immortal like the Angels, and so the stones we tread on
in the dirty streets, are in better condition then the great Monarcks of the
world. Again, if plants have a period of life, they have life, and conquently
are living creature; and yet shortly after my Lord distinguishes them from
living creatures in diverse respects,

607
[ Sugar (says he) to the Ancients was scarce known, and little used] Sugar was
both known to, and used by the Ancients; for that which they called mel
arundineum, honey of the cane was much used in Physic: they called it also
Indian salt, because it was like salt in color and consistence, when it was
hardened by the Sun: the other kind of Sugar the Ancients knew and used as
well as we; only they made it by pressing, we by boiling of the canes, which
kind of boiling they used not as we do, because they sweetened their water by
steeping the canes in them, and that was their drink: of this drink Lucan (
lib. 3.) speaks, Quique bibunt tenera dulces ab arundine succos. And that they
used sometimes to boil the Sugar canes, is plain by Strabo ( lib. 35.) and
likewise by Statius ( l. 1. Syl.) Et quas praecoquit eboisa cannas. [ Seeds and
Roots (says he) are chiefly for nourishment, 63^
but leaves give no nourishment at all, or very little] this is not so, for the
leaves of cabbages, coleworts, lettice, and such like, give the nourishment,
and not the roots; there is more nourishment in the leaves of one cabbage, then
in a hundred cabbage roots. He gives us a bad definition of snow, when he calls
it [ the froth of the cloudy waters] froth is aereal, snow is watrish, 663
froth is hot, snow cold, froth is light, snow heavy, because more terrestrial;
indeed in color snow is like froth, hence Scaliger says, that snow is almost
froth. Poetical Phylosophie discriminates froth from snow, in making Venus the
daughter of the one, not of the other, snow then is not the froth of cloudie
waters, though Pliny so calls it; but it is the thin and ra^ified vapors of
the watrish clouds, united into those white flakes we see, by cold; snow then
is not begot immediately of water, as froth is, but of cold and thin vapors:
Why he should call [ putrefaction the subtilest of all motions] I cannot
conceive, 692
for what more subtilty is there in putrefaction that is a kind of corruption,
then in generation, the one consisting in the deperdation of the old form, the
other in the acquisition of a new form; neither does he speak Philosophically,
when he calls it a motion, for indeed putrefaction is a mutation, and no
motion, because both the termini a quo and ad quem, are not positive, as they
are in all motions.

CHAP. VI.
The Lord Bacons opinions confuted concerning Snow, Ephemera, gravitie, the
sperme of Drunkards, putrefaction, teeth, bones and nails, thick and thin
mediums, Nilus, hot Iron, br^in, sudddn dakness, dry and moist bodies, fish,
corns, hunger, liquifaction, hardness, moisture, accidents, light, right side,
spungy bodies* stonewalls, imagination, the cramp, hedghog, mummy, salt,
Commenus and others refuted concerning motion, qualities, colors, forms, the
Epilogue.

MY Lord thinks [ that there is in snow a secret warmth, 69^
because the Ancients have observed worms bred in old snow] but I am of another
opinion (though Scaliger seems to favor my Lords tenets) that neither the
snow is vvarm, nor do these worms breed in snow; our senses tell us there is
no heat in snow; and where there is no heat, there can be no putrefaction nor
generation; the worms then are bred in the ground under the snow, but not of
the snow, which is not vvarm, but keeps in the warmth of the earth, and
defends it, as it were a mantle from the piercing air, therefore in great
snovves, sheep will live longer under the snow then above in the sharp air.
And whereas the worm dies when it comes out of the snow, this proceeds not
(as he says) from the exhaling of the worms spirits, which was shut in by the
cold, but rather from the chilling of that spirit which was kept in by heat:
for whilst it was under the snow, the worm was kept warm from the piercing air
which now kilsit. 697
He says, That the flies called Ephemer^, live but a day, the cause is the
exility of the spirits, or perhaps the absence of the Sun. But neither of these
is the cause: not the exility of spirit; for we see that among men they that
have weak and attenuated spirits, live longer then they who have more strong,
dense, and more plenty of spirits, and so in other creatures, a Horse, or Bull,
are not so long lived as a Crow, or Raven, which have more exility of spirit.
The cause therefore of short and long life, is the goodness or badnesse of the
crasis and temperament of the radical moisture, and its due or undue proportion
with the natural heat, the symatrie or assymatrie of the four humors, and
first qualities, and the conformity of the organs. As for the Suns absence,
that cannot be a cause of short life: For, 1. the Sun is never absent in his
virtue, efficacy, and influence. 2. Many creatures prosper best in shades, as
plants. 3. In those Northern parts where the body and light of the Sun is not
seen in many months together, yet multitudes of creatures are generated and
live there. 4. It seems that the Ephemera are hurt rather by the Suns presence
then absence: for Scaliger writes ( Exer. 194.5.) That those Ephemera flies
which he had seen, were always to be seen in the evening, never at the Sun
rising, and one of them which he had caught, lived all night, but died in the
morning. The Suns presence then rather then his absence, is the cause of this
short life in the fly.

704
He says, That the motion of gravity is a mere motion of the matter, and has
no affinity with the form. If it be so, what use is there of the form? the form
of every thing is the nature thereof, and nature, as the Philosopher tells us,
is the principle and cause of motion: the matter is but the passive, the motion
is the active principle of motion. When he tells us, That over moisture does
somewhat extinguishthe* heat, as hot water quenches the fire* he speaks not
like a Philosopher; for there is not Physical action but where there is a
contrariety: now there is no contrariety between moisture and heat, but between
moisture and dryness, heat and cold: therefore the humidity of the warm water
works upon the siccity of the fire, and not upon its heat. For if the one
quality be taken away, the other will fail. Neither does his Lordship speak
like a Philosopher when he says, That the sperm of drunken men is unfruitful,
because over moystned. Lot, 723
who in his drunkenness got both his daughters with child of boys, can show
him the contrary, and so can the Comic when he says, Sine Cerere and libero
friget Venus. The Poets knew this when they made Bacchus armor-bearer to
Venus, and a continual companion of the Fauns and Satyrs. And the Gentiles
that still offered wine in the sacrifices of Venus, as I have showed elsewhere
( In Mystagogo.) Neither is the sperm over-moistned, as he says; for the
drunkards wine cannot get presently into the sperm to moisten it, which
requires time for elaboration in the spermaticall vessels. Neither can I
approve of his reason when he says, That Caterpillars breed upon Cabbages,
because they have fat leaves, and apt to putrify. 728
This contradicts his former assertion, That the viscy substance of plants is
most in the roots, and the vvatrish in the leaves, which is the cause that the
root is more nutritive then the leaves. Neither does fatness make a thing apt
to putrify, but rather resists it: it is the watrish moisture that is most
apt to putrify, especially being mixed with a gross and earthy substance.

He tells us, That bones and teeth stand at a stay, 748
as for nails they grow continually. This is not so: for nature has prefixed
certain limits of growth to every thing, which when it has attained, rests
there: nails then if they be not pared, will grow to their prefixed length, and
there stay; but if they be kept pared, they will grow, still aiming at their
just magnitude, which by paring them often, we hinder. Hence it is that they
are still growing, because still pared; so do the hairs of our head and
beards, and so do hedges and trees that are pruned.

He knows not how the eye works when it is placed in the grosser medium,
and the object in the finer. This is easily known; 761
for if ever he had been in a mist, he should have found that his eye being in
the grosser medium, could not well apprehend the object that was in the finer,
though the object be celestial luminaries, and so it is with those that are in
the water, they cannot see the object that is in the air, so well as they who
being in the air, behold the object in the water, because the distance of the
thicker medium from the eye dilateth the object, which is contracted and made
obscure if the eye be in the thicker medium: for how can the species be
received into the eye, if the medium that should convey it, hinders it? The
cause why it raineth not in Egypt (says he) is, 767
For that Nilus has a longer race, and runs swifter, for such waters vapor
not so much as standing waters; or else there is a better concoction of that
water; for waters concocted vapor not so much as raw. Besides, the air there
is thin and thirsty, and imbibeth the moisture, and suffers it not to remain
in vapors. Here are diverse causes alleged, but none of them satisfactory:
For, 1. there be rivers that have as long a race, and run swifter, which hinder
not rain. 2. If standing waters breed vapors, then Nilus should, when it
stands 40 days together over Egypt. I deny that concocted waters breeds fewer
vapors then raw waters: for water over the fire will never cease to vapor,
till it be all spent, and converted into vapors* 4. The air of Egypt is not
so thin and thirsty as under the Line, and yet there it raineth. 5. The true
cause then why it raineth not in Egypt is, because God and Nature do nothing
in vain* but rain had been in vain and needless in Egypt, whereas Nile
supplieth the effects thereof, therefore by the Poet Nilus is called, Jupiter
AEgyptius.

My Lord speaks against manifest experience when he writes, 774
That Iron red hot burns and consumes not. That was the privilege only of
the fire-bush which Moses saw. We know that the fire by degrees wastes the
Iron, and Steel also, which is a harder metal. But he says, That the
increasing of the weight of the water will increase his power of bearing, as
br^in when it is salt enough will bear an egg. In twenty gallons of water an
egg will sink as well as in one, so as the increasing of the weight is
no-thing, but it is the thickning of the water with salt that makes it strong
to bear. So we see men in boats are better supported in Seawater then in
fresh. How sight as he says, 793
coming into sudden darkness, should induce an offer to shiver, is a strange
AEnigma; for the sight in darkness can neither act nor suffer, as having no
object nor visive species. It is not the sight then, but the imagination upon
the sudden change apprehending danger, that causes the shivering. Water (he
says) by a kind of appetite, 800
or thirst, receives dry bodies, and so dry bodies drink in waters and
liquors. It were strange that contraries should have an appetite or thirst to
each other. It were against nature, simile simili gaudet, like draws to like,
and contraries shun each other. Hence it is, that water will not spread it
self so soon on a dry board as on a wet: upon a dry board a drop of water
will contract it self into a globular form, and rise into some height, rather
then join itself to its enemy; whereas upon a wet board it presently spreads
it self: So dry things will rather swim upon, then sink in the water, except
their weight force them downward. He also contradicts experience when he
says, 825
That Fish hating the dry will not approach the air till it grow moist. For we
see that fish play most upon the top of the waters in hot and dry Summers, and
in the hottest and driest time of the day, when the Sun is in his Me^idian. So
when he says, 828
That Aches and Corns engrieve most toward rain or frost. This is not as if
they were sensible of future rain, but because the extremity of heat and cold
do exasperate these infirmities. For the same reason Moals work, and Fleas
bite more eagerly. He tells, That hunger is an emptiness. But this is not so;
for there is sometimes hunger without emptiness, 831
and sometimes emptiness without hunger. It is therefore not emptiness, but
(...), as the Philosopher tells us, a desire or appetite of hot and dry things,
caused by the corrugation and sucking in the mouth of the stomach.

His Lordship is pleased to call the received opinion, 836
That putrefaction is caused by cold, or preternaturall heat, but nugation. But
if cold be not the cause of putrefaction, how comes it that Apples and Cabbages
do rot in frosty vveather? And if peregrine heat be not the cause, how comes
it that in hot and moist years and places, pestilentiall Fevers, and other
putrid diseases do reign? Besides, abundance of vermin; doubtless these are
procreated of putrefaction, and this of heat, except we will forfeit our senses
and reason; of which he being afraid, confesses at last, that such a heat
tends to dissolution. He will not have liquifaction to proceed from any of
the four prime qualities, that he calls an inutile speculation, but from his
own phantomes. 840
For bodies (says he) that are more turgid of spirit, or that have their
spirits more straightly imprisoned as metals, or that hold them better pleased
and content as butter, are liquifiable. How happy then are those spirits which
dwell in butter, where they have pleasure and content, in comparison of those
vvretched spirits which are imprisoned in Irons and other metals, and yet how
these spirits should make the metal turgid, I know not. Surely these are but
crasie fancies, whereas it is apparent to all ntelligible men, that these
things are most liquifiable, which abounds most with congealed moisture,
whether it be aeriall and oily, as in pitch, butter, wax, and grease; or
watrish alone, as in Ice; or of a middle nature between both; or peculiar, as
the moisture of metals. And to tell us, That wood, clay, freestone, etc. are
not liquifiable, because they are bodies jejune of spirits, is ridiculous; for
there are more spirits in vegitables then in metals: and it is plain, that clay
and stones melt not, because they want moisture, which is in metals. So it is
not the dilatation of the spirits (as he says) by heat, which causes wax to
melt at the fire; but the rarefaction of the moisture by heat, which was before
contracted by the cold. For this cause dry wood is more fragile then green,
stone then metal, and fictile earth then crude, because there is no moisture
in the one comparable to the moisture of the other.

844
He tells us, that the hardness of body is caused chiefly by the jejuness of the
spirits. Indeed this Philosophy is somewhat jejun; for I would fain know whether
there be not more spirits and less jejune in the hard bodies of Cloves,
Nutmegs, and Cinnamon, then in the soft bodies of Wool, Silk, and Cotton?
According to his Philosophy there is a greater quantity of Spirits in a pellet
of butter, because softer, then in a Nutmeg which is harder; he that believes
this, let him when he is troubled with flatulencies in his stomach, use butter,
and not hard spices. He says, That Moisture does chiefly color hair; but
dryness turns them gray and white. 851
In his Philosophy then gray and white are not colors, nor indeed blacknes,
which he says afterward, is but a privative, and consequently has no entity.
873
Aristotle indeed sometimes calls black a privation; but there he uses the
words in a large sense: for if it were properly privative, how could other
colors be made of black and white, seeing of habits and privations nothing can
be made. 853
He says, That some fishes be greater then any beasts, because these have not
their moisture drawn by the air and sunbeams. Also they rest always in a
manner, and are supported by the water. If these be the reasons of fishes
greatness, then why are Smelts and other lesser fishes, smaller then the
beasts? Or why are they not as big as Whales, seeing neither air nor sunbeams
draw away their moisture, and are also supported by the water? The true cause
then of the bigness of fishes above the beasts, is the predominance of moisture
in them, which is easily extendible. And indeed it is a frivolous thing to give
reasons for the different magnitudes of the creatures, seeing Nature has given
to each creature a determinate magnitude and period of duration. And whereas he
thinks, that fish do rest in a manner when they swim, because they are
supported by the water; he may as well say, That beasts and men rest when they
walk and run, because supported by the earth: they that swim find there is no
rest, but labor and motion.

Before my Lord told us, That by heat in putrefaction the spirits are emitted,
suppressed, and suffocated: But now he says, 836
That the spirits in putrefaction gather heat. 856
How the spirits at the same time should be destroyed by the heat, and yet
gather heat, is so sublime a fancy, that no fancy but his own can reach it.
865
Water (says he) being contiguous with air cools it, but moystneth it not,
except it vapor, because heat and cold have a virtuall transaction without
communication of substance, but moisture not. He takes it for granted, which no
Philosophy will grant him, to wit, that accidents can pass from one subject to
another without their substance, which is to make accidents subsist by
themselves, and to be all one with the substance, which is repugnant to sense
and reason: therefore without vapors neither can the water moysten nor cool
the air. He says, Air is not without some secret degree of heat. He needs make
no secret of it, for it is manifest, 866
that the air is hot and moist, as the fire is hot and dry; but for any secret
degree of light in the air, I deny: For though (as he says) Cats and Owls see
in the night, this is not because there is any degree of light in the air; for
what light can there be in a dark dungeon where yet a Cat can see? The air is
not a light body of it self, being diaphanous; for the celestial spears are
not light, neither is there any luminous body in the dark Dungeon, except the
Cats eyes, which afford light enough to the Cat to see his object. He gives us
a reason why the limbs on the right side are stronger, Because motion is helped
from the liver. 876
How the liver should help motion, is not known in Anatomy, seeing motion and
its Organs are from the brain, not from the liver: He had better have said,
that motion is helped from the heart, and so might have inferred, that the left
side limbs are strongest. But indeed the true cause why the right side is
stronger then the left, is, because the right limbs are bigger: but why Nature
made them bigger or stronger, no other reason can be given, then that the right
side is hotter, because there is the fountain of blood. He says, That all
spongie bodies expel the air, and draw in liquor. This is not so; 884
for why should such a body expel the air and draw in liquor; but when the
liquor enters into a spongie body the air gives place as a void penetration:
therefore Sugar expels not the air to suck up the Wine, but the wine enters
into the Sugar, and expels the air, so that the Sugar is a mere patient. He
tells us, That stone walls are not so wholesome as wood, or bricks. This
assertion stands neither with experience nor reason; 937
for they who have lived with their predecessors within stone walls many
hundreths of years, never found any unwholsomnesse by the stones, and it is
against reason, that dry stones, who as he phraseth it, are jejune of spirits,
should afford any vapors, or unwholsom damps. It Is true, that in moist weather
there be some Sea-stones, or such as are taken out of Rivers, will sweat; but I
have seen such drops upon brick-walls. This proceeds neither from the stone nor
brick, but from the air, which falling upon the hard stone, and being resisted
for want of pores, from penetrating, stays there, and by the coldness of the
stone turns to water-drops, 954
even upon Marble. It is certain, says he, that potions, incense, perfumes, an
ointments, do naturally work upon the imaginations. The contrary rather is
certain, to wit, that the imagination works upon these, not they upon it: for
according to the strength of imagination the physic works, and not according
to the strength of physic does the imagination work. For sometimes the smell
or sight of physic have wrought, not upon the imagination, but upon the body
by the power of imagination, so that this is the prime cause why the physic
works, which will not work at all in others whose imagination is weak and
dull.

964
The cramp (says he) comes of contraction of sinews either by cold or
dryness. The cramp comes by distention as well as by contraction, by heat and
moistness as well as by cold and dryness. A Lute string will break as soon in
moist weather when it swells, as in dry weather when it shrinks. And Hippocrates
tells us, that the cramp proceeds as well fromrepletion as from inanition: for
gluttony, drunkenness, and suppressing of accustomed evacuations, procure the
cramp as well as fasting, watching, bleeding, burning fevers, and vomiting,
chiefly by Hellebor, which I can speak to my grief: for I never knew what the
cramp was, till I was let blood and purged with Hellebor by an unskilful
Physician. And indeed the cramp is not so much the affection of the sinews, as
of the muscles; for it is the involuntary contraction of the muscle to its
original or beginning, because not the nerve but the muscle, is the proper
instrument of motion, which by the cramp is hurt; so that this infirmity has
different names from the different muscles in which it is. If it be in the
muscles of the eye, it is called Stratismus* in the yard, Satyriasis; in the
muscle of the jaw bone, Trismus; in the muscles of the mouth, Spasmus Cynicus,
or the Dog-cramp. In the Epilepsie also, or falling sickness, there is a kind
of cramp. And many times the cramp proceeds from flatulencies in the muscles,
which though they be the proper organs of convulsions, or cramps, yet the cause
is many times in the nerves, which being contracted by the sharpness or
fullness of humors, or by malignant vapors, draw the muscles with them.

Because the Hedg-hog puts forth many prickles, therefore he inferres, 979
That the juice af a Hedg-hog must needs be harsh and dry. There is no
necessity for this, because the harsh and dry matter is expelled by nature into
the prickles. The flesh of some fishes, whose shells or skins are full of
prickles, is neither harsh nor dry. The Rose sends forth many prickles, and yet
it is both pleasant, odoriferous, cooling and moist. So are the Respberries. He
tells us, That Mummy has a great force in stanching of blood. But I wish he
could tell us where we may find it: 980
For the true Mummy which was found in the Tombs of the Egyptian Kings, which
were embalmed with diverse precious liquors and spices, are spent long ago, so
that the Mummy now in use is only the substance of dried Karkasses dug out
of the sands, being overwhelmed there, in which there is no more virtue to
stanch blood, then in a stick. He says, All life has a sympathy with salt. In
hogs I think its true; 982
for as life is the salt of a living hog, so salt is the life of a dead
hog: For both life and s^lt keep the body from putrefying: otherwise I know
little or no sympathy that salt has with life; for it destroys the life of
many creatures. But he is mistaken when he says, That salt draws blood,
because being laid to a cut finger, heals it. For salt is laid to a cut
finger, not to draw the blood, which comes too fast of it self without
drawing; but to repel the blood, and to stop its running. It heals them, not
by drawing the blood, but by abstersion, exsiccation, astriction and resisting
putrefaction.

Thus I have cursorily run over my Lords new Philosophy, which he calls a
Wood, and so it is indeed; for here a young Scholar may quickly lose himself,
and shall encounter with many briars and brambles. I find that Philosophy is
like Wine, the older the better to the taste; new Wine is pleasant, and so are
new conscripts to the mind: but to the intelligent man oldest is wholsomest and
less flatulent. And indeed that which they call new Philosophy, is nothing but
the old in a new dressing, which is neither so handsome nor so useful as the
other. They have found out new terms, which are neither so proper nor
significant as the former. They have metamorphosed the elementary qualities
both first and second, into spirits, so that now this word, like a nose of wax,
serves them for all shapes. I find in my Lords book much dross mingled with his
gold; he does wrong both himself and his reader, in undertaking to give the
causes or reasons of every thing: For Nature is pleased in thousands of things,
to sport herself with variety. Who can give the cause of so many different
forms in beasts, birds, and fishes; of so many different shapes and colors in
herbs, trees, and plants; of so many different streaks and spots in shells,
stones, and other things. He that takes upon him to give reasons of all these
varieties, will take too much upon him. But as Scaliger says, It is the part
of true wisdom not to be too wise.

Whereas Aristotle had with infinite pains and industry, and not without
singular dexterity, reduced all entities into certain heads, and placed them in
ten Classes, or Predicaments to avoid confusion, and that we might with the
more facility find out the true genus and difference of things, for our more
easy defining, describing, dividing of things, and methodicall arguing upon
any subject. Which Aristotelian way has been received and approved by all
Universities, and the wise men since his time in all ages, as being the best,
easiest, most methodical, and most consonant to Reason, of all the vvayes yet
found out: These new Philosophers, as if they were wiser then all the world
besides, have like fantastic travelers, left the old beaten and known path,
to find out ways unknown, crooked and unpassable, and have reduced his comely
order into the old chaos, jumbling the Predicaments so together, that their
Scholars can never find out the true genus of things. For example, they tell
us, that the qualities, to wit, of heat, cold, etc. are spirits, consequently
substances; so sometimes again they will have these to be qualities, and
sometimetimes to be motions and actions. Thus Proteus-like they turn themselves
into all shapes, so that we know not in what predicament to put their heat, or
what Genus to give it. Comenius in his reformed Physics, gives us some wise
reasons to prove that heat is motion, because forsooth There is not with us a
body that is perpetually hot. Besides that this is false, for our fire is
perpetually hot, and never cold, water perpetually moist and never dry, the air
perpetually light and never heavy, the earth perpetually heavy and never light;
so it is ridiculous to think, that whatsoever is not either perpetually hot or
cold, moist or dry, etc. must be motion: for by this reason all sublunary
entities must be motions, because there is no other permanent quality except in
a few. But let us examine* the Pabsurdities of this conceit. 1. If heat, cold,
and other qualities be motions, then they are all imperfect entities, for
motion is such, as being (in fieri, not in facto.) But this is untrue; for all
qualities are perfect entities in their own kind. 2. Rest is the perfection and
end of motion; but it is not the end and perfection of heat and cold: for the
coldness of a standing Lake is not more perfect because it rests, then of a
river because it moves. 3. Rest is opposite to motion, cold is opposite to
heat, how then can heat and cold be motions? 4. Motion is ( commune sensibile)
an object of diverse senses, for it is perceptible by the eye, by the ear in
sounds, and by the tact also; but heat and cold are only perceptible to the
tact. 5. Motion adds weight to a heavy body; it is the motion of the Cutter
that makes the Ax cut down the tree, whereas neither the heat nor coldness of
the Ax adds any thing to the action of the Ax. 6. Motion begets heat,
therefore they cannot be the same, except we will make one and the same entity
to work upon, and produce it self, to be both cause and effect, agent and
patient to it self, which is an absurd contradiction. 7. It is not motion but
heat that attenuateth, penetrateth, opens, ripeneth, dissolveth, congregateth
homogeneous things, and disgregateth heterogeneous. Again, they reason thus (
Comen. Phys. c. 4.) that heat penetrates and distends, cold stops and
contracteth, therefore they are motions. They may as well infer, that light is a
motion, because it penetrateth glass, or that wine-vinegar, oils, or any
substance that penetrates, are motions, which are childish conceits. And no
less feeble is their third Argument, whereby they prove heat to be a motion,
Because it wastes and consumes even the hardest metals. Heat preserves as
well as wastes. Is it a motion in both regards? Again, is there no difference
between the agent and the action, the mover and the motion, the waster and the
wasting of a thing?

As in many other vain conceits they show their weakness, so likewise in this,
when they call colors light, and say, (Comen. c. 4) That colors of themselves
have no entity, but from the light, because they are not seen without the
light. Thus they confound (after their manner) the object (which) and the mean
(by which) we see. We see colors, we see not the light, but we see by the
light. This doctrine, if there be no entity in colors, but what is given by
thelight, then in darkness there must be none^tities; and so a Crow is not
black, nor a Swan white, but when the Sun shines on them: blood then is not red
within the veins^* nor milk white within the breasts, till they be let out into
the light. What can be more ridiculous then to think, that because the light
gives, visibility, therefore it gives entity to things. To a blind man all
colors are non-entities, which to him that sees them are entities at the same
time; so at the same time colors are something and nothing. My Lord Bacon
says, That the colors of Gems are fine spirits, how then can they be be
non-entities? And surely, if whatsoever we see not* be non-entities, we may
conclude that substances are non-entities, for they are not visible: and if it
be the light that gives being to colors, it must needs follow, that black
hairs turn gray in us, not from the constitution of our temperaments, but from
the light: and so it is only the light that makes some black, some red, some
flaxen, and some gray haired. Again, they say, ( c. 4.) Color diffuseth it
self through the air, as light does, therefore it is light. This is untrue;
for color does not diffuse it self through the air as light does: for the
color of a Rose is only in the Rose, and not diffused in the air; they should
rather say, That the smell of the Rose is diffused through the air, and that
therefore the smell is light, or that heat and cold are lights, because they
are diffused. Again, they say, ( c. 4.) That the light produces in the
Rainbow different colors. What then? Will it follow that therefore the light
produces all colors? Will they make no difference between real and apparent
or intentionall colors? The color which is in a green glass, is real; but
that which from the glass is cast on the paper, is only apparent. The color
of my face is real, but not in the looking-glass, there it is only apparent.
If light makes colors, why makes it not snow black, and coals white. Lastly,
they tell us, ( c. 4.) That specificall forms are made up of qualities. If this
be so, then things cannot differ specifically one from another: for what
differs in qualities, differs only accidentally; and so must a man differ from
a horse: one man differs from another only in qualities; but if he differ
only in qualities, then Alexander and his horse Bucephalus are specifically
the same. But whence proceed these qualities which make the difference? not
from the matter, for in this they differ not; not from themselves, for nothing
can produce it self. It remains then, that they result from the substantial
form, from which all proper and specificall accidents have their dependence,
both in entity and operation. And indeed to deny the substantial form, is to
deny the composition and generation of things; for in all compounded bodies
there must be two parts at least to make up the composition, and these can be
none else but matter and form. For qualities are no parts, nor can they make a
composition with the substance. And whereas the end of generation is the
production of the form, there would be no generation at all, if qualities only
were produced; alteration there may be, generation there can be none.

Thus I have (good Reader) given thee a taste of our new Philosophy, or rather
old pseudosophy: for indeed these new opinions are but old obsolete and
rejected errors, raked out^again from under their ashes, where they have lain
buried many years. Here we see how queasie stomachs are weary to eat
continually of one dish, though never so wholesome. I would not have any man so
silly, as to think that I wrong those whose opinions here I ventilate. I honor
their persons, memories and worths, though I oppose their dictates. The
Traveller is not wronged, if when he goes astray, he is told so, and the right
way is showed him. What hurt is it to tell our friend when he eats too much
raw fruit, that his health will be thereby endangered. If any man say, that I
who points the way to others, am out of it my self; I will thankfully submit
my self to him, that will set me right. I know* we are all pretenders to truth,
but few can find her out, she lies so deep in the well: she is indeed the
daughter of Jupiter, as the Poet calls her, and (...), a fellow-citizen with
the Gods, and (...) one which has the honor to be their guest, and sit at
table* with them, so that access to her is very full of difficulty; but this
is my comfort, that in seeking her I follow the conduct of the most and wisest
Philosophers, so that if I am out of the way, I am not alone; and better it is
to go astray with the best then with the worst, with company then alone. And if
I cannot in this life find out that beautiful Lady, I will comfort my self in
the enjoyment of her picture, or of that which most resembles her; as that
amorous Queen, who missing of the Father, was content to solace herself with
the embracements of his young Son. Haec gremio Ascanium genitores imagine capta
Detinet.


FINIS.
Good Reader, I met yesternight with this learned Letter, which I have briefly
answered, and have annexed to this Apendix, that thou may know how offensive
Dr. Harvey's opinion is to others as well as to my self.

Doctissime vir,
NISI summa tua eruditio aditum mihi patefacere videretur, non auderem te, cum
quo nec familiaritas nec consuetudo mihi unquam fuit compellari: sed quod
persuasum habeam doctissimos quosque maxim obvios plenosque humanitatis esse,
hoc mihi haerenti animos dedit. Hac igitur veniam a viro erudito (uti spero)
impetrata, par est ut pauois, quid ad hoc consilium me compulit, exponam. Anno
proxime elapso, Exercitationes viri celeberrimi Dom. Harvei, De Generatione
Animalium, in publicae famae comitium prodieruut. In quibus argutissimus
Author, relictis medicorum placitis, qui ex maris and feminae seminibus
conceptu^ fieri statuunt; atque etiam Aristotel^ dissidens, qui maris semen
formam, ut agens confer foeminam materiam asserit: ^ovam generationis
Sciographiam depingit. In qua nec ma^is semen, utquod uterum nequaquam
ingreditur, nec foeminae, quippe quae semine caret; locu^ ullum habere
contendit: sed sceminam foecundam fieri, post tactum in coitu sperma. ticum,
simili virtute, qua fercum a magnete tactum: hoc notat contagium prolificum.
Nec hic subtilis vir requiescit, verum postea in altiore gradu pedem figere
videtur. Et foeminam ex conceptu Idaeae generalis sine materia impregnatam
esse; and a similitudine constitutionis cerebri and uteri, utriusque functionem
similem esse vult. Ut quemadmodum cerebro artificis in est ratio sui operis and
species immaterialis, ita utero insit species five forma filius immaterialis,
quae sit causa impregnationis. Haec summa atque ultima meta est, quam
exercitationum suarum cursu contendere nititur, plura tamen sunt, per totam
operis seriem disseminata, quae summus ille Philosophiae augur, rationibus, ex
ipsius naturae penetralibus petitis, quasi quirinali lituo designat. Dum haec
perlegi veterum doctrinae ita contraria, luctabantur tonsae lento and difficili
illo marmore: substiti paulisper sollicitus, donec statui viri alicujus docti
opem rogare. Cum protinus occurrebas tu, ut qui contra Philosophia novatores
strenuum te exhibuisti athletam. Rogatum igitur te venit haec mea chartula, ut
adjutes dubitantem, tuamque de his, quae apud me plurimum valebit, sententiam
aperias: Haec si concesseris in omnes abstringes gratias,

Verum eruditionis tuae cultorem. I. P.


Doctissimo Viro. I. P.
HEsterna nocte (vir eruditissime, sed solo literarum and candoris nomine mihi
cognita) Epistolam tuam latiomelle conditam accepi; in qua sententiam meam
requiris, quodnam judicium habendum sit de clarissimi Doctoris Harvaei opinione
in Generatione Animalium. Ego sane non sum nescius meae imbecilitat is quamque
impar sit congressus; Achilli nihilominus veritatis praesideo fretus, animam
assumpsi ut cum Homero loquar (...), and conatus sum hesitantes per flumen
traducere; nam suasu amicorum aggressus sum Doctoris literatissimi opinionem
eamque ni fallor conferti pro meis viribus in tractatu illo Anglico quem
nuperrime typis commisi: scio plurimos esse me long in doctrinae laud
praestantiores (inter quos tu mihi videris non minimus) qui debebant hanc
provinciam suscepere; sed cum adverterem omnes monomacheam hanc detractantes
volebam potius me periculo exponere, quam alto silentio permittere, ut opinio
talis apud nostrates (qui quicquid novum est avide and sine masticatione
deglutiant) hospitium haberet fortasse stomachabitur Doctor quod ego micantibus
eruditionis suae radiis, nebulam hac mea scriptione objicerem; and famae suae
splendorem mea refutatione obfuscarem; sed pro ingemita viris doctis humanitate
non ignorant in civitate libera debere linguas and pennas esse liberas, and
oppugnandos errores a quoc umque Authore processerint: amicitia enim veritatis
Platonicae and Socraticae praeferenda est. Ego me intra modestiae limits
continui, neque quidquam a mea penna lapsum est, quod posset illius famae
officere; neque ab omni errore liber esse potest, quamdiu homo est; si autem
pergat hanc suam Helenam ulterius propugnare: Ibo animis contra vel magnum
praestet Achillem. Interea autem vir doctissime quisquis es haud equidem
invitis coelestibus auras vitales carpis, tibi meam sententiam breviter
aperiam, quum me tam humaniter compellas, Haec opinio videtur and a religione
and a recta ratione prorsus aliena, nam si maris semen uterum non ingrediatur,
sed foemina tactu virtuali solum concipiat, Isaac, and proinde Christus non
magis dicendi sunt semen Abrahae; quam solis, nam sol contactu virtuali generat
hominem, neque potest ullus filius di^i aut esse os de ossibus, aut caro de
carne parentu^, quando matter semine careat patris autem semen uterum non
ingrediatur. Haecopinio tollit omnem amorem paternum: erga liberos omnemque
provid^ntiam, quis enim pater sollicitus erit haereditatemilli relinquere quem
scit non esse filium, quomodo autem filius dicendus est, qui ex substantia
patris non est, (loquor hic de filio naturali, non adoptivo) quorsum creavit
Deus marem and foeminam, quorsum utrumque in arca conservavit, si absque maris
semine concipere valet foemina: vir non potest vocari adulter, nec ulli possunt
generari in adulterio quum semen viri in uterum non recipiatur, cumque
quotidianum sit ut foemina absque corporali tactu virilis seminis concipiat,
quid miraculi fuit Christum sic concipi, quorsum honorandus est pater ex quinto
praecepto si pater non sit, quomodo autem pater est, qui non generat, and
quomodo generat si semen in uterum non emittat? Simile autem quo utitur Doctor
sumptum a Magnete im^ pertinens est: Nam dicit tactum spermaticum in coitu esse
virtualem, at cum ferrum tangitur a Magnete, ibi tactus est corporalis. Magnes
etiam trahit corpus ferri, sic debet uterus semen si similitudo valet. Deinde
Scire cupio utrum semen masculeum recipiatur intra matricem; an non sinon? quo
abit? cur etiam, aperitur matrix? ad recipiendam virtutem solum seminis sine
corpore? nugae. Virtus non est corpus, non ergo opus est apertione, nulla
namque penetratio dimensionum erit, si ostium occludatur; si autem recipiatur
semen ab utero, and tangat sanguiuem menstruum; Tactus ille corporalis crit,
non virtualis. Praeterea in tactu virtuali, tangens, aut est spiritus, sic
animae virtualiter tangit corpus, intelligentia coelum; aut toto genere differt
a re tacta; tale est coelum quod tangit inferiora corpora virtualiter: At
semen, nec est spiritus, sed corpus, nec genere differt a sanguine, quia ex
sanguine fit, ergo non tangit virtualiter. Dices: Magnes tangit ferrum
virtualiter; sed hoc nego, nullus enim est tactus illic nisi corporalis; fertur
quidem acus ad magnetem, ingenita quadam vi, sicut lapis ad centrum; an ideo
concludemus centrum tangere virtualiter lapidem? nihil minus. Sed si concederem
esse virtualem contactum in Magnete, rogo, cui sini data est illa virtus, nonne
ut fiat contactus corporalis videmus enim haec corporaliter, se tangere nes
contenta esse virtuali tactu; eodem modo semini data est virtus tangendi
sanguinem in utero, ut realiter and corporaliter se tangant cum datur
opportunitas. Debuit etiam, Dr. nobis ostendere, quanta mora requiratur, and
quanta distantia, ad virtualem hanc actionem. Videmus enim serium and magnetem
non se tangere nisi in debita distantia, idque absque ulla mora, quomodo etiam
fit, ut filius referat patrem vultu and moribus, si paternum semen, agat solum
virtualiter. Si etiam seminis actio sit solum virtualis, quid opus erat calore,
humore aliisque qualitatibus elementaribus? Virtualis quippe contactus fit ab
occulta, non ab elementari and manifesta qualitate. Deinde nulla fit conceptio
nisi semen detinea^ur in utero, at illa detentio est presentia corporalis non
virtualis; nec ulla generatio dicenda est univoca si semen agat solum
virtualiter; eodem enim modo generabitur homo quo mus virtute solis ex
putrifactione. Sed inepte vocat spermaticum tactum contagium, est enim
contagium morbus contractus ex contactu* At co^tus non est morbus, quum nihil
magis sit secundum maturam. Cum autem dicit, Doctor feminam ex concepiu daeae,
generalis sine materia impregnatam esse: videtur nes^ire naturam daeae quae nil
aliud est quam exemplar futuri opificii in mente opificis: exemplar autem nec
est efficiens, nec materialis causa rerum, nam statuae efficiens est statuarius
materia lapis aut lignum aut metallum: forma est representatio illius Idaeae
quam artifex in mente habuit, secundum ergo exemplar illud artifex introducit
formam statuae in materiam open variorum, instrumentorum, non ergo fit filius
materialis ex immateriali, sed ex parentum semine and sauguine, ad exemplar
illud seu filium immaterialem non in utero sed in cerebro, quod est propria
seeds phantasmatum and Idearum ob organa apta and spiritus animales; neque enim
ulla est similitudo (ut putat Doctor) inter cerebrum and uterum sive
substantiam, sive qualitates, sive constitutionem, sive operationes
consideremus; nam in cerebro producuntur Idaeae and phantasmata, in utero
corporales substantiae, in hoc est filius materialis in illo immaterialis; sed
haec satis refutavimus in tractatu nostro Anglico, quar hic nolo tecum pluribus
agere: Haec sufficiant ut scias me nec vetis tuis deesse, nec humanitatis leges
silentio meo violare voluisse; quare confestim vale, Vir liter atissime and
amicis sine fuco tui, omniumque qui veritatem amant antiquam, conatus boni
consule;

April 24. 1652. A. R.

FINIS.

