A NEW FUND Raised on the Foundation of Dr. Chamberlen's Bank, Where all
Objections against that Bank are removed.
AMONG all the Projects to relieve the LANDED MEN from the paws of the USURER,
Dr. CHAMBERLENS may justly challenge the precedence, though he was unhappy in
raising too great a Structure, which the Foundation could not bear; his FUND
was sufficient to discharge the Credid, in the compass of the time limited and
the Security for the yearly Payments was abundantly sufficient: But it must be
confessed that the Security, to answer that vast Sum which was to be raised, was
defective, the Lands made over being of no more value than Twenty Years
Purchase, and the Joint Stock designed for a Joint-Security being no Security
to the Credit, for that Stock being Bills did it self want Security. The truth
is, he proceeded upon a Supposition not to be supposed; For how could he hope
that this degenerate Age should for his sake, all at once grow good natured,
and continue so too for a Hundred Years, to give his Bills credit? To raise
five times the full Value of an Estate at once, and yet enjoy it, was a pretty
Notion, though it gave the COUNTRY GENTLEMAN occasion triumphantly to argue, that
the Doctor made the part greater than the whole; since this new kind of
Mortgage, if I may call it such, would raise five times as much as a just Sale
of the Fee Simple.

Now to clear all the rubs that lay in the Doctors way, and to raise a
sufficient, not an invidious Profit to the Subscriber, nor yet to require a
credit for a Hundred Years which is next to perpetuity, nor clog the thing with
the trouble of a Joint Stock the whole term; and further, to raise a large
Encouragement to the Undertaker, which the Subscribers shall insensibly pay, it
is here humbly proposed. I. That a Hundred Thousand Pound per Annum in Lands to
be raised by Subscription, do constitute the FUND. II. That to secure the
yearly Payment of this hundred thousand Pounds of the current Coin of the
Nation into such hands as shall be directed by the Trustees, a Hundred and
Fifty Thousand Pound per Annum be made over to the said Trustees, which Estate,
yearly Payments being duly made, at the expiration of Thirty Years, will be
clear and free from this encumbrance. III. That this Hundred Thousand Pounds
paid yearly, be yearly employed to buy up and cancel one Thirtieth part of the
Bank-bills, which shall be distributed soon after the Settlement proportionably
to the Subscribers; so that a^ Thirty Years end none shall be left. IV. That
the FUND being raised, such a Number of Trustees be chosen out of the
Subscribers as shall be judged convenient who may manage the whole affair, and
to whom the Estates are to be made over: And since no Man can be a Trustee to
himself, that every Subscriber choose three out of the whole Number of Trustees
to whom he may make over his Estate, so interchangeably the Trustees may be a
Trust to one another. It is farther proposed, that every one that Subscribes
Fifty Pounds per Annum, shall have one Vote, and consequently as many Votes as
he subscribes Fifty Pounds, and he that subscribes a Hundred and Fifty shall be
capable of being chosen a Trustee. V. That he that makes over a Hundred and
Fifty Pounds per Annum, for the Yearly Payment of a Hundred Pounds, and so
proportionably for a greater or less Sum, shall soon after the settlement is
made, receive the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds in Bank-bills; and at Ten Years
end, when one Million of the Credit raised on this FUND is paid off, and the
Bills for so much cancelled, receive one other Thousand Pounds in the like
Bills, deducting at both receipts Five Pounds per Cent. to reward and gratify
the Undertaker. VI. That none Subscribe less than Twenty Pounds per Annum, for
the Payment of which Twenty Pounds, Thirty Pounds per Annum (ut supra) must be
made over as a Security, yet so as less Estates may be united in Subscription.
VII. That every Subscriber shall when he Subscribes, pay one Shilling, and be
at the charge of making good his Title, and making over his Estate by such
Council as the Trustees shall appoint. VIII. That every Subscriber shall make
his yearly Payment in good and Lawful Money of England, within two Months after
the Year is Expired; for which Payment he shall have a Receipt Gratis, and the
like Receipt shall be Registered in a Book prepared for that purpose; but every
Subscriber that brings in Bills to be Exchanged into Money, in order to be
cancelled, shall pay five Shillings per Cent. which Bills shall be cancelled
before their Faces, then put carefully on a File, the Number of the Bills and
their Value, with the Persons Names, being strictly Registered in the said Book
in that order they were paid off and Cancelled; which Register every Subscriber
shall have free liberty to examine, in the sight of such an Officer as the
Trustees shall appoint.


Now if these Bills should have no currency at all, and that none will pass, be
the Security never so great, but such as will be immediately exchanged into
Money on demand, which (in my opinion) is to suppose mankind in a State of War;
no more Sociable, and scarce Rational Creatures; the Undertaker does promise
and engage, whatever is said in the Proposals to the contrary, either to cancel
all the Bills at once, or, if there may be hopes of a future currency, to
accept yearly payments in Bank-bills, Ten Shillings per Cent. being allowed him
either for part or the whole, and also to restore what was at each distribution
of Bills given him as a reward.

The design of this FUND is honest and plain, and the benefit as diffusive as
the Subscription reaches, and Bills of an unquestionable security may be useful
in Trade: Yet to make it plain to meaner Capacities, here the Subscriber, some
little charge to the Undertaker and the Officer deducted, has at two several
payments Thirty Years purchase for his Estate; and yet parts not with it at
all, and at Thirty Years end enjoys it entirely free; and suppose the worst
that can be supposed, that Bills are worth nothing, yet the loss cannot
possibly be above Ten Pounds to him that Subscribes a Hundred Pounds per Annum;
so that the loss is inconsiderable if put in the Balance with the gain; and
certainly there is the fairest prospect in the World of Success, as will appear
in the next Paragraph.

If it be inquired, why the whole Sum is not paid at once, the only reason of
making this double payment, and the requiring a Hundred and Fifty Pounds to be
made over for the payment of a Hundred Pounds yearly, was purely to establish
such a security for the credit raised, as should be beyond all exception; for
here the security is Three Millions, (so much a Hundred and Fifty Thousand
Pounds per Annum, is worth at Twenty Years Purchase) and the credit raised at
first, but Two Millions, which yearly decreases, so that at Ten Years end, the
Credit is but one Million, then another Million is raised, which makes the
Credit once more two Millions, which decreases by a Hundred Thousand Pounds
every Year, while the Security continues from first to last still Three
Millions. Besides all this whoever passes off Bills in payment, becomes a
Security to him that receives 'em; so that no Man can dispute the taking these
Bills, for any pretended deficiency in the Security; and when there is an
undeniable safety in 'em, Why should we fear any Man will be so ill natured to
refuse 'em, especially since if he be a great Trader, they will be an ease, and
may be an advantage to him?

I cannot foresee what Objections those Gentlemen of the National Land-bank can
make against this, only that here some particular Persons will be supplied, who
must otherwise have fled to them for relief against the USURER; but this is an
Objection that those Generous Undertakers will scorn to make; for it has so
much ill nature in the face, that it must come masked and cannot bear the Sun.
Do they aim at the Public good of Landed Men, with a little regard to their
own advantage? So do I their design is general, and (I hope) of the same
duration with the Government; mine is confined to a certain Number of Persons,
and stinted to a certain Number of Years: I heartily wish to see theirs
flowrish, and hope they will not look with an ill eye on mine. If Dr.
CHAMBERLEN shall think himself agriev'd, I assure him, if I find Success, he
shall not want a due reward for his (...).

Lastly, It is hoped, and with all humility prayed, that if the PARLIAMENT
shall in their great Wisdom think fit to Establish a National Land-bank. They
would not determine any thing Exclusively of this FUND; since if a private
Agreement without Their GREAT SANCTION (which modesty forbids me to ask) may
answer the ends proposed, they may hereafter upon a FUND of the like Nature,
raise Five Millions for the KING, or more if they please, in a way so easy to
the Subject, that there will be contending who shall pay it, they being
considerably enriched by doing so; as the Undertaker will make appear if
required.

Subscriptions will be taken by Mr. Thomas Roots Jun. at Mr. Frewen's Chamber
in Cliffords-Inn London, and by the Undertaker at the Free School in Tonbridge
Kent.

Thomas Roots.


