TRUTH UINDICATED Being An ANSWER
To the high flown Fancies of John Perrot, (known by the name of a Quaker) in a
Paper with this Inscription, to all BAPTISTS every where, or to any other who
are yet under the shadows and watery Element, and are not come to Christ the
substance. Wherein is laid open the airy vain Foolishness, if not
Blasphemousness of his words covered over with ambiguous and doubtful terms,
unto all unbiazed and rational men.

But I will come unto you shortly, and will know not the speech of them that
are puffed up, but the power. Cor. 4.19.

Whosoever transgresses and abides not, in the Doctrine of Christ, has not
God, he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the Father and the
Son, 2 Epistle of John, 9.

Take heed that the Light, that is in you be not darkness, Luke 11.35.

By Randall Roper, a Servant of Christ's.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1661.

To the Reader.
ALthough I am not ignorant of the prejudice, which a Subject of this nature,
has upon the minds of many men, and likewise conscious of my own inability to
such a work; yet notwithstanding I shall not omit Writing, according to the
measure of the Tallent that the Lord heth given me, in regard of that
encouragement that I have met with from the Lord, to this work since I first
thought on it, I shall entreat and beseech thee in the fear of God. to read
with an unbiazed affection, and not to be rash in judging, but on the contrary,
be fond like those Bereians that were more noble than those of Theselonica, and
the reason is there rendered, because they searched the Scriptures, whether
those things were so or no, alleged by the Apostle Paul, Acts 17.11. I am
nesessiated to say as Laban said to Jacob, (in an other case) it must not be so
done here, the short volume that I intend to comprize, what I shall write at
this time is such, that it will not bear a long Epistle; and therefore I shall
with as much brevity as I can give you my reasons of answering that Paper:
although I think there is abundance of folly at the best, if not lies, as shall
be made manifest, first reason that constrains me, is the restless condition of
the People called Quakers, in giving them up and down, to People that they
think, there is any hope to work upon together with that high confidence they
have of it, as an Oracle of God, and that which cannot be answered; when it is
nothing less than the senseless Profane, and divised words of a
brain-sick-apostate. Secondly that high estimation they have of the Author of
that Paper, insomuch that I have been told of two of his judgment (which I am
sure they will own) that he had as great a measure of the Spirit as ever man
had, and that he had talked face to face with God, as a man talks with his
friend, and several other things of a like tendency which would be too tedious
to insert which I have cause to think, nay believe are lies, therefore my
Friends who ever you are that desire to abide in the Doctrine of Christ, having
respect to all his Commandment that you may experience Communion with the
Father and the Son: you have cause to praise him magnify the name of your God,
that has so given up and in the way of his justice (which men has so
honored) that as he is a rageing wave of the Sea, so he has foamed out his
own shame. Secondly, we have cause of sorrow that any poor souls that aims at
the glory of God, should follow such Teachers. And so I shall leave, but shall
continue my Prayers, that the Lord would keep his Children and Babes from that
deceit, and that the Lord would grant some that are already turned after Satan,
Repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, which is the end and aim of him
that desires truth may flowrish, and that error and darkness may be done away.

RANDAL ROPER

TRUTH UINDICATED Being An ANSWER
To the high flown Fancis of John Perrot, (known by the name of a Quaker,)
GOd who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, has in times past spoken to
our Fathers, by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us, by his
Son even the Lord Jesus, who has told us that false Prophets should arise Mat.
24.24. and by the Apostle Peter whom he did in a special manner Authorize, to
feed his Lambs and Sheep John 21.15. who has told us that as there were false
Prophets among the people, even so there shall be false Teachers amongst you,
who privately (mind that) shall bring in damnable Hericises denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction; and many shall
follow those preniscious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of, whether this Scipture is not in a great measure fulfilled by
the People called Quakers? I will leave the impartial Reader to Judge, for
those that deny the Doctrine of Christ do privately, and covertly deny Christ,
but they do deny the Doctrine of Christ, therefore do privately deny Christ,
that they do deny declare as useless the Doctrine of Christ is manifest, and
shall be made manifest, and that the truths of the Gospel is evil spoken of by
reason of them, experience does testify, is it not the cry of the People, you
first turn Annabaptist and then Quaker, you do not continue in what you first
take up? But because I design brevity, I shall come to the words of this subtle
deceiver, who is pleased rather with emminancy of words, then pregnancy of
reason. That you may know his words they are in a different caracter from mine,
which I am necesesiated to insert because I may not beat the air, if any be
offended at my writting by way of argument I know not any way, to demonstrate
things beter than that, in this critiall age if I did I would take it, the
Auther of that Paper is confident in his assertions but proves nothing but I
do intend to prove what I say by the Scriptures of truth, and in order to the
words I shall take this way. First by taking a Veiw of the exprese words by him
spoken, and shall give particular answers. Secondly I shall answer that which I
apprehend to be his drift, and aim in what he says, and that is to lay low,
extenuate, and make void the two Ordinances of the Gospel to wit Baptism and
the Lords Supper, or breaking Bread and drinking Wine in remembrance of Christ's
death, not to be used by such, as are come to Christ the substance wherein I
will show the duration, continuation of Baptism and the Lord Supper, until
Christ shall come himself or personally, which is all one, and that the coming
of Christ by his Spirit, into the hearts of his people, does not put an end to
those two Ordinances, and shall answer some Objections.

First, then he begins with this inscription.

To all Baptists every where or to any other that are under the watery Element,
and are not come to Christ the substance.

This inscription is full of ambiguity and doubtfulness, if he means by watery
Element, water Baptism and by coming to Christ the Substance, the coming to
Christ the Substance the coming of Christ, by his Spirit, and if he means that
none of the Baptists, that do own Baptism to be a Principal of the Doctrine of
Christ are come to Christ, or Christ come to them. I answer that it is a Lie,
for many with my self can experience his coming by his Spirit into our hearts,
and yet we dare not let go the Ordinances of Christ, and this we have the sure
Word of the Lord to all sincere hearted Souls, that have respect to all the
Commandments of God and of Christ, whosoever abides in the Doctrine of Christ
has both the Father and the Son, that is Fellowship by the Spirit, and that
this is a Doctrine of Christ, see Math. 28.19, 20. Go ye teach all Nations,
Baptising them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Teaching them to
observe all things that I command you, and Lo I am with you always unto the end
of the World, I shall have occasion anon to treat more largly upon this Text,
therefore I shall not now, but you may see plainly, and manifestly, that it was
to be practiced in all Ages, in all Nations, and therefore this I say, and
testify in the Lord Jesus, that they that do keep close to the Ordinances of
Gods House, and do adorn it by any Holy Conversation, they are come to Christ,
and Christ is come to them by his Spirit, which is all the coming that is
promised on this side the Grave, in an unchanged condition, as to their Bodies,
If thou would persuade the World that a person cannot own water Baptism,
and have the Spirit of God, thou art found a false Witness, I shall show anon,
though persons had the Spirit of God, yet was to pass under, and obey that
Ordinance of Water Bpatisme he begins.

God dwells in deeps bottomeless beneeth your Element of Water, whence he is
utterly departed, for it was too shallow for him, and his incomprehensible
Majesty, lives and reigns far above your cloudy Heavens, which comprehended
not but darkened his Brightness.

In which words instead of Proof, there confident assortions and instead of
sound Arguments to prove what he says; he makes use of Retorical sentences to
deceive the Heart of the simple, therefore I beseech you that fear the Lord to
consider how he beats the Air, or else tells a manifest Lie, If he means God
dwells not by his special Presence in the Element of Water, simply as water
which I may safely take so, because he calls it your Element of Water, then
it is beating the Air for who ever assorted any such thing, I never heard the
Baptist assert any such thing, neither is he able to prove they Preach any such
thing; but if he means that God is not present with his People in the
Administration of Water Baptism, then it is a Lie, for the Promises of the
Lord are sure, he is God that cannot Lie, and his counsel must stand, who has
promised in the Administration of that very Ordidinance he will be with them to
the end of the World, Lo I am with you to the end of the World, Math. 28.20. I
shall not enlarge because of several Books which are yet extant, wherein this
truth has been commended to the Consciences of men, I would fain know of the
Author of that Paper? whether any men has cloudy Heavens which may be
appropriated to them, for says he your cloudy Heavens. Oh thou private
subtle, and close deceivers, when thou writes again (this I say to thee not
to sturr up that Spirit of Error, in thee God knows my intent, but if by any
means it might awaken thee to return to the Lord from whence thou art deeply
revolted) write plainly that there may not be double meanings in thy words, for
know this that truth needs not doubtful words, to hinder the bright ^rrayes to
shine unto men, but if he means by Heavens any coverings that are not of Gods
alowance such as are forbidden, Isa. 30.1. We say so too, and if so does he not
beat the Air? when the person that he writes to own no such thing as he
speaks of, and he further says.

He has given them for a day of fire, and your old Earth for a Consnmption in
their flames.

If he means by our old Earth, the Earthy mindedness of Professors of the
Truth, then it may be read that God will cast his Ordinances into the fire,
that the sins of the People may be consumed, though God may and does cast his
People into the fice, yet he does not use to cast his Ordinance into the fire,
but I find that though some Professors grew weary of the Ordinance of God by
Earthly mindedness, as in Mal. 3.14. Saying, It is ni vain to serve the Lord,
and what Profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances; and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord, what does the Lord do not destroy his Ordinances
and Statutes, but on the contrary, commands the Observations of them, Mal.
4.4. Remember ye the Law of Moses, with the Statutes and Judgments, that the
Lord does not take that way that this notionest Dreams of, take this reason;
That wherein there is no Dross, that is not to be cast into the fire, but there
is no Dross in the Ordinances of the Lord; therefore not to be cast into the
fire, every Ordinance of the Lord is pure, therefore doubtless it arises from
impure hearts, to say they must be cast into the fire; consider this and hide
the word of God in your hearts, that you sin not against him.

He further says, you eat Bread and drink Wine, as the Israelites did Manna
and Water, and yet in unbelief dyed in the Wilderness, you rest in shaddows,
like the unbeleeving Jews, though you know that in them you are but in the
Touching, Tasting, Handling of the things that Perrish with the using.

I do answer that the visible Forms of Bread and Wine do remain, and are not
Transubstantiate, yet, this let we tell you by the word of the Lord, that we do
by faith in that Ordinance partake of the Body and Blood of Christ, Take says
Christ, This is my Body, drink you all of it, this is my Blood of the new
Testament, Math. 26.26, 27. And though we practice the Ordinances as they were
delivered, yet we live upon Christ in them, and though I can not say every one
discerns the Lords Body, that eats the Bread and Drink the Wine, for that was
not found in the Church of Corinths, which is manifest by what the Apostle
says, 1 Corinthians. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks; unworthly, eats and
drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body for this cause some
are sick, etc. From which words it is plain, that some did not discern the
Lords Body, but did take it as common eating and drinking, and that the Lord
was angry for so practicing that Ordinance, but the faithful Souls that come
rightly qualified, discern the Lords Body, and eat the Lords Body, and drink
his Blood, and therefore for to say, that shall perish, to wit, the Body of
Christ, and the Blood of Christ is Blasphemy, it is my Souls desire that as
the Lord has made me sensible, would make me more and more sensible of the
Wretched, Blind, and Lame condition of such Souls that speak evil of the Body
and Blood of the Lord; Oh that my words might be acceptable, that I might
persuade some poor Souls from perverting the right way of the Lord; that the
Body of Christ does not perish, see Psalm. 16.10. Neither thy Holy one to see
Corruption, which all agree is meant of Christ, and that the Blood of Christ
does not perish, (...) 1. Pet. 1.18. Where the Apostles does oppose the Blood
of Christ to corruptable things, as things that perish with the using. Oh that
private Indignity, Emulation, and Hatred they have to the Blood of Christ,
which I have cause to say, not only from what is here said, but from an other
Testimony, from one Rob. Gresinham (who I am sure they do own) said he, does
thou think, that the Blood of Christ, that thou might have taken up in thy
hand, can wash away Sin, there is one besides my self to testify this, if out
of the abundance of the hearts the Mouth speaks, then surely there is very
Low and Contemptable thoughts of the Blood of Christ in the heart of that
Person that dares speak such Contemptable words, surely the Fountain from
whence such streams do Flow, is not a pure Fountain, and is much contrary to
what the Apostle Peter believes, he calls it precious Blood, consider this
you that forget that Fountain, that you was washed, and cleansed by, if you was
ever washed, Who has washed us in his Blood, Revel. 1.5. I would fain know of
thee (oh thou high Flown talker) whether the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2.21, 22. When
he exhorts (from whence I suppose you borrow your Expression) Notto Touch,
Taste, Handle, which all are to perish with the using; whether he means the
Ordinances belonging to Moses house, as the Ordinances belonging to Christ's
house, or those that God did command by Moses, surely I believe and have ground
so to do, that they are those that was commanded by Moses, for says the
Apostle, they were such that were against us, such as Christ nailed to the
Cross, and if so, then is it not wresting the Scripture to apply it to the
Ordinances of Christ in the Gospel, and whereas you say, we rest in shaddows,
it is possible it may be true in some that profess the Truth, they may hold it
in unrighteousness, as the Apostle says, some did in his time, but this I can
say, that those that the Lord has entrusted with the work of the Ministry, do
Persuade, Exhort, and Entreat poor Souls that have laid a good Foundation, That
they goon to Perfection according to that, Heb. 6.1, 2. And this there
Exhortation (in the fear of God) has not come in Word only, but in Power, and
Strength upon our Souls, so that many can say with the Apostle Paul, Phil. 3.
From the 10. To the 15. Not as though I had already attained, either were
already perfect, but I follow after, etc. And further I press toward the Mark
of the high Calling in Christ Jesus, and therefore I would persuade all that
own that Paper; that if they know any that are in such Condition, to be
persuading them not to rest in it, for it is dangerous to hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, likewise not to lay it as a general Aspertion upon all that
walk in the way of the Lord, and are as much for purity of Life, as purity of
Ordinances, and do desire to keep the Form and Power together, and not to
disjoyne that which God has joined, lest they be found Sinners, I would have
no Soul to think because I am upon this Subject, that I am not for purity of
Life as well as Obedience to the Ordinances of Gods House, I am as free to bear
a Testimony against an evil Conversation as corrupt Principles, yet not to let
them pass, but to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
he further says.

We are in the true Water and Blood which washes the Soul, and Baptiseth,
Dippeth, and Plungeth the Conscience, and cleanses it from all Sin, which
leads into the Heavens where God dwells, and we eat and drink the true and
real Body and Blood of the Lamb and hereby we know it, because it nourishes
us, and gives us Blessed growth, in the Life and Inocency of the Lamb, which
was with God before shaddows were, and henceforth we in it have passed and left
them all as Images of Gold and Silver to be cast to the Moles and to the Batts
for ever.

It has made me afraid to speak sometime against such a People, that should
declare such things as being washed from Sin, as being lead and having Blessed
growth in the Life and Innocence of the Lamb, and such like expressions, but
upon consideration I am confident both to speak and to Write (although I desire
to own any thing of the Lord in any profession whatsoever,) becauss I find the
Apostle Paul prophesing, there should be a people Declaring things that are not
so, concerning their own State and Condition, 1 Timothy 4.2. Speak Lies in
Hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with an hot Iron, Speaking Lies in
Hypocrisy. That is declaring they have Communion with God, and are washed from
Sin, and have Growth in the Innocence of the Lamb and such like, when it is not
so, that Persons may have a high Estemation of them when it is not so, neither
is those things found in them, and I will prove he speaks Lies in Hypocrisy,
although I do remember that Water is put for the Spirit, as John. 7.38, 39. He
that believes on me out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water, but
this he speaks of the Spirit. But when John speaks in that place, that he
alludeth unto, 1 Epistle of John 5.8. There are three that bare Record on
earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. That it cannot be the Spirit, (not
that I believe he has the Spirit; no, for this I ^estifie, that he that has
the Spirit of God, says not that he has cast the Ordinances of God to the
Moles and to the Batts for evermore,) my reason is this, because the Spirit is
one of the other two, and therefore it is undoubtedly Truth that it is not the
Spirit, therefore it must be Water that is used in Baptism, and if so? is not
his words a manifest Lie, when they disown, make void, and declare as useless
that Ordinance of Baptism, nay say themselves here passed through and left to
be cast to the Moles and to the Batts.! Oh the Contradiction that is in that
Paper; and whereas they say they eat the true Body and Blood of the Lord, this
will be nothing less then a Lie.

Take this argument founded upon the Scriptures of Truth, if Christ has
instituted visible forms, to wit, bread and wine, when persons do by faith
partake of the body and blood of Christ, then those persons that do not partake
of the visible forms, can not partake of the Body and blood of Christ, but
Christ has instituted bread and wine to be pertaken of, when persons do
partake of the Body and blood of the Lord, therefore those persons that do not
partake of the visible forms, cannot partake, that is to say, eat and drink the
Body and Blood of the Lord, that which will be questioned is whether persons
must partake of Bread and Wine, when they do partake by Faith of the Body and
Blood of Christ? which is plain Mat. 26.26.27, 28. Mark 14.22.23, Luke
22.19.20. agree all in one I shall repeat only that which Matthew writteth, and
as they were eating Jesus took Bread and blessed it, and break it, and gave it
to his Disciples, and said take and eat this is my Body, and he took the Cup
and gave thanks, saying, drink you all of it for this is my Blood of the New
Testament shed for the remission of sins, you see what way Jesus Christ takes
in order to their eating the Body and Blood of Christ, he gives them Bread and
Wine, and this must be granted Christ did nothing in vain that needed not be
done, now if it had been the mind of Christ, that they should, have eaten his
Body and drink of his Blood without eating the bread and wine, he would not
have given them to his Disciples, therefore let none be wise above what is
written, this I say, that I do not find in all the Scriptures of the New
Testament, that any person did eat the Body and blood of Christ, but those that
did partake of the visible forms, but I would not be mistaken, for I do believe
that it is not the want of Ordinances, but the contempt of Ordinances, that
condemns; for in days where his Ordinances cannot be enjoyed the Lord has
been, and will be to his people, that in the want of Ordinances, and without
Ordinances as he is to them in the use of them, but that cannot be pleaded now
in this day of light, the Lord commands obedience to all his Ordinances, and
will not hold men excused that lives without them, see John 3.19, Oh let not
the meanest of the Commands of God to carnal reason be a means to hinder thee
from the practice of them, for it is matter of commendation to keep the
Ordinances as they were delivered, 1 Cor. 11.2. and whereas he says, we know
it because it gives us blessed gronth in the life and iunocencie of the Lamb,
if that which they say they know by that they are in the water and blood, and
that they eat the body and blood of the Lamb. If that be not true then we may
conclude that the things are not true, now I say, though you do that which is
right and just between man and man, (although that is not found in all your
Principle) yet this is fare short of the innocence of the Lamb, the innocence
of Christ appeared in his, in that he stooped to the meanest of Gods Commands
to carnal reason as Mat. 3.15. Suffer it to be so for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness, if any person might have been exempted from the
obedience of that commandment, Christ might, yet he takes a painful journey
to that end to be Baptized of John, that he might not only be a commander, but
a leader to his People, Secondly his innocence appeared in that he does not
prove himself to be the Son of God, only by the signs and miracles which he
did, though he had the spirit without measure, but by the Scriptures and says
had you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for he wrote of me, John 5,
46. and though Persons are to honor the Son, as the honor the Father, yet
such was the innocence of Christ, that he exhorts them to search the
Scriptures and gives these two reasons. First, they was such that in them they
did believe, was taught the way to eternal life. Secondly, not only because it
was that they owned and believed that there was such virtue in them, but it was
so in Christ's account, for says he, they testify of me, they declare of me,
John 5.35.

As if he should say, if you question whether I am sent of God, whether I am
the Christ of God, search the Scriptures you shall find I am so, they testify
of me, and further, adds an imposibility of beleiving on him, if they did not
believe Moses writings 47. verse he did not say, turn to the light within, and
that will satisfy and that will Testify, no he does not say as the Author, of
that Paper, that the light within is the alone salvation of God, and therefore
for persons to say they are nourished in the life, and innocence of the Lamb,
and to lay low the Scriptures of Truth, not to be the rule to walk by, and that
which will not deceive that which does witness whether Doctrines be Truth or
Error, they that say this is not true, are not in the innocence of the Lamb.
For how shall any thing, or Doctrine be tried, if we have not assure word of
prophecy, one man says by his present light within, such a thing is an error,
another says by his present light within, that thing is truth, therefore of
necessity there must be some thing to inlighten which is sure, therefore says
David thy word is lamp to my feet, and a light to my path, Psalm. 119.105. Oh
therefore search and mediate in the word of God, that is to say, the mind of
God contained in Scripture, and be calling to the Lord for his Spirit, that
thou may have a right understanding, be not puffed up, and think you are in
the innocence of the Lamb, when it is not so; but this is the will of God
concerning you, what you search the Scriptures for they testify what Christ
would have his Disciples do, and if you would be Disciples, then walk according
to his Commandment contained in Scripture.

I would hope that there is some of you that love the Lord, let your love be
manifested in this that you have respect to all the Commandments of the Lord,
be not partial prefering one thing before another, 1 Timothy 5.21. But resist
Satan in all his deeps and wills, which he has halled you into, though some of
you be ignorant of it, surely you may have an holy conversation to wards men,
and yet walk in the worship of God blameless, and let the form and the power be
kept together, bear with me and be not rash, and give not way to that Spirit of
error that will be getting up in you, and let my words be acceptable unto you,
to this end, to own the Scriptures of the Prophets of Christ and his Apostles,
which is able to make the wise to Salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15. and not to contemn them as is usual, as one said to me, (which I am
sure they own), when I said I had the word of God, the Scriptures of Truth in
me, he asked me whether I had ink and paper in my heart! Oh, that such
expressions might cease from amongst you, I would fain know from any one of
you, whether all the Commandments contained in Scripture, whether spoken by
the Lord himself, or by his Prophets? or by his Son Jesus? or by his Apostles
which are not yet abrogated by the death of Christ? are not the duty of the
People of the Lord to observe and obey? and whether the Commandments of God
are of less virtue because they are written? then if Jesus Christ did
immediately speak them unto us, and whereas you say we have passed through, and
left them, this is no wonder (if I may be certain in any thing what you mean by
your expressions, I may in this, that you mean Baptism and other Ordinances of
Gods House) for the little number receiving Tenth, and the few of them that do
receive the Truth continuing in it, it is an argument to me, we are in the
Truth, rather than otherwise, for says Christ, Fear not little flock, for it
is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Luke, 12.32. It is not
only so now, but it was in the time while Christ was personally present many
left him, and walked no more with him, John 6.66. And this is what is
prophesied of 2 These. 2.2. Let no man deceive you, for that day shall not come
except there come a falling away, and says the Apostle to Timothy, some shall
depart from the Faith, but let us inquire into the reason which the Servant of
the Lord Paul gives.

The first Reason, 2 These. 2.11.12. Is because they received not the Truth in
the love of it; and this has been the reason of some falling away, and
receiving strong delusions, for it has been confessed to me by one of that
Principle, that she did submit to the Truth, to wit, Water-Baptisme, because
others did submit to it, because it was in fashion; and if any of your
Consciences condemn you in this, God is greater than your Consciences, and
knows all things; repent of that your wickedness.

The second Reason which the Apostle renders of persons falling away of
receiving strong delusions, is because they had pleasure in unrighteousness, it
is possible that some may receive the Truth in the love of it, and yet in time
loose their first love, and take pleasure in unrighteousness, and so loose
their peace, and so run to airy notions of things that they may get peace,
which is not the true peace of God, and this I find not only by the Scriptures
of Truth, but from their own expressions, some of them has said to me, that
they had not peace, though at the first they had it, and that they lived
contrary to their consciences, for some years before they received that which
they call Truth, Oh! that they would juslifie the Lord in his giving them up to
believe strong delusions, and take shame to themselves, for doubtless, the Lord
will not be mocked, for what they sow that they shall reap, and though the way
of God, is at this day called Herisie, and has been so in days past, yet know
this, that Herisie is a fruit of the flesh, as well as profaneness in
conversation, and if you live and allow your selves in it, you shall dye, not
only a natural death, but the second death; dear souls who are much upon my
heart, that have no ends but to glorify God, in what you do. know this, that
the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of light, and this I say to you,
by the word of the Lord, that if men have never so much outward holiness upon
them, if they persuade you to forsake any of the Commandments of God, do not
believe them, as you will answer it at the great day of the Lord, read
Galatians the first Chapter, and let your Souls tremble at the word of the
Lord, now that, it is the word of the Lord, or the mind of the Lord which is
all one, which the Apostle Paul writes, see 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man think
himself to be a Prophet, or a spiritual man, let him acknowledge the things
that I write to be the Commondements of the Lord. Oh! that you of the Ministry
(as you are called) would consider of this Scripture, and not to appropriate
that to your own Books, which you will not allow the Scriptures, and for you
that say, you went away because of the carnality of some Professors, you ought
to endeavored their reformation, and if not to have dealt with them according
to the rule of Christ in that case, and not to have forsaken the truth upon
that account, return, return to the Lord and the Truth, and you will find many
amongst the Baptists as willing to own any thing that is of God, as you can be
to persuade them.

He further says, for know ye where God is present, there needs not
arepresention of him by any thing; and where the eterual Fountain of all virtue
is set open, there needs not digging of other Wells for Water, turn therefore
to the light within; the Conscience which is able to Baptize, and wash your
Souls from all Sin, and make Rivers of living Water flow out of your belly,
which light is the alone Salvation of God, he that loves it and obeys it,
shall know it. In answer to which I know not any Baptist that does practice or
does set up any thing to represent God, but has renounced those hidden things
of darkness, and if so, does he not beat the Air when those persons that he
writes to, does not own any such thing, but if he means where God is present,
there needs not outward forms in his Worship, as Water in Baptism, and Bread
and Wine in the Lords Supper, then it is not true as to Baptism, that there
must be Water, I might give you many Scriptures, yet I shall only give you but
one because it is full and pregnant, Acts 10.47. Can any forbid Water, that
these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
For Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, see Mat. 26.16. He took Bread and so
likewise the Cup, compared with Luke 22.19, 20. And therefore let none deceive
you with vain words, and whereas he says, turn to the light within, which is
able to Baptize, wash from all sin, and further says, it is the alone Savation
of God, such an exhortation we find not in all the Scriptures of Truth, if
every man is to turn to his present light within, is not this to make several
Sects and opinions in the World, which they some time cry out of, would it not
be more agreeable to the Truth, to exhort them to take heed, lest the light
within be not darkness, that which may be darkness that is not to be turned
unto as a rule to walk by, but the light within may be darkness, therefore not
to be turned unto as a rule to walk by, Take heed says Christ that the Light
in you be not darkness, Luke 11.35. But we find the Prophets, Jesus Christ his
Disciples and Apostles commanding and exhorting Souls to obey the commands of
the Lord, the Prophets under the Law, exhort the People to keep the Law of
Moses, Christ exhorts to keep his Commandments, If you love me keep my
Commandments, John 14.15. Which are now recorded in the Scriptures, and so the
Apostle Paul, this I say to you by the word of the Lord, that those that are
asleep, etc. that is to say, by what the Lord has said; I tell you these
things by, which is now recorded, Mat. 24.38.39, 40. So the Apostle John, 2
Epistle 10. If there come any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him
not, neither bid him God speed, what Doctrine he tells us the Doctrine of
Christ his sayings, Precepts, Commandments which are now recorded in the
Scripture of Truth, because of the shortness of the Volume, I cannot show you
concerning all the rest of the Apostles, how they had an eye to what was
written in what they write, and therefore in a word, there was never any true
Prophet or Jesus Christ or any of his Disciples and Apostles, but did make it
their business to provoke persons to keep the Commandments of God, and that
there was never any of the Faithful Servants of the Lord did esteem the
Commandments the worser. because brought to them in writing, this I say, by
the Testimony of Scripture, that the light within has carried Persons to do
that which was not acceptable in the sight of God, nay to do that which was
very offensive to God, even to persecuto his People, see this in the Apostle
Paul, before conversion I thought within my self, I ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazereth, Acts 26.9. from whence you may see
that he did follow his light within, in persecuting the Church of God; and
says Christ, those that kill you, shall think that they do God good service,
from whence you may plainly see, they shall follow their present light within,
in killing the Saints; therefore I would exhort all to this, that they will
labor to get their consciences rightly informed by the word of the Lord, that
is to say, his precepts, and promises, and threatenings of the Lord, and then be
zealous according to their light within, and not before, for know ye, that the
conscience is a light of acceptance, and not a light of information, until it
becomes enlightened, and whereas he says, It is the alone Salvation of God, it
gives me to believe that he is of the same mind with Nicholas Blithe (one of his
principle) who did assert before a Congregation of People, that his obedience
to the light within, did make atonement for Sins that are past, therefore this
I desire to speak unto you in the fear of the Lord, to desire you to consider
of such expressions, whether such expressions do not plainly and manifestly
declare, that Christ dyed in vain, if Justification, freedom from fin, is
procured by our obedience, such an opinion is damnable folly and weakness, for
if it was possible to become as holy in nature and life, as the holy Angels, it
would be very dangerous to reckon attoining virtue thereto, my souls desire is
that you would not get up in the vanity of your minds, and plead perfection
when such great imperfections remain in, you, see 1 Pet. 1.18. For as much as
we are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gould, but with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ; and now I shall according to my promise, to the
second general thing, and that is to answer his main drift and aim, which is to
lay low and make void the two Ordinances of the Gospel, to wit, Baptism and
the Lords Supper, and answer some Objections.

First, then to Baptism, that it is to remain, continue, and be steadfast unto
the end of the World, see Mat. 28.18.19, 20. Jesus Christ after he had
accomplished the work of our Redemption, and was risen again, and that the
Father had conferred all power upon him in Heaven and in Earth, he gives out
his commission to his Disciples, go ye and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in
the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
what I command you, and lo I am with you to the end of the World. Truly the
very reading of the words does evidence this to be Truth, to wit that Baptism
must and ought to remain until the end of the World, Such was the state of the
People of God under the Law, that if at any time they found the Law of God,
though not spoken immediately to them, nay, though hundreds of years distance,
so long as they was under that dispensation, did judge it their duty to do
those things that the Law required, as Josiah, 2 Kings 22.23. Chapters, make
appear when he had found the Law of God, he does not say, it is true, such
things are commanded in the Primitive time, but they are not commanded me, he
does not say, it is true, we walk contrary to the Laws of God, commanded in
Mount Horeb, but these things was not commanded us, they have been lost, and we
have been in a Wilderness condition, and now they do not belong unto us, no but
he believes that he was bound to observe those Laws and commands as well as
those they was first delivered unto, and accordingly did set upon the work; and
the Lord was well pleased with them, read those two Chapters, and the Prophet
Malachi, though many hundred years after the Law was given upon Mount Horeb,
yet is persuaded that it is the Peoples duty to observe, Mal. 4.4. Remember the
Law of Moses with the Statutes and Judgments, it was the duty of the People of
God to keep these Laws and ceremonies until the coming of Christ in the flesh;
so it is the duty of the People of God to keep the commandments of Christ,
until his coming in the glory of his Father with all his holy Angels. If any
persons can prove, which I am sure they cannot, that there is another Prophet
risen, that the People of God are to hear as the appointment of the Father,
then the commauds of Christ do cease to be a duty, or else to remain while he
comes to put an end to them, the Law of Moses or any precept of it, had not
such adjuncts adjoined to them, to demonstrate it to be a duty until they come
in the flesh, as this precept has to continue unto the end of the World, yet
they did believe it was their duty, as has been proved. But surely Jesus
Christ did foresee, that men in the last days, should question his
Commandments, and that some should think, that antiquity did wear out the
verity of them, he makes such provision to show it to be a duty, that those
that are not wilfully blind may see, and now according to what the Apostle
Peter says, 1 Pet. 3.15. To give a reason of my faith, I shall reason from the
words of Christ, to clear the duration, continuation of Water-Baptisme, take
this reason or argument, That which Christ has commanded to be taught and
preached in all Nations and in all Ages, and has promised his presence with
his people, in the Administration of, to the end of the World, that is to be
taught, practiced unto the end of the World, but Christ has commanded
Water-Baptisme to be taught and practiced in all Nations, and all Ages, and
has promised his presence with his People in the due Administration of it;
therefore Water-Baptisme is to continue, remain, unto the end of the world,
that which some will question, is the middle proposition, that it must be
practiced in all Nations, is clear and evident says Christ, go you and teach,
and Baptize all Nations, what can be more clear.

Secondly, that it was to be in all Ages, that is as clear for all Nations, was
not in being in that Age, therefore it is clear that he intends succeeding
Ages, for says he, teaching them with those that was to follow, and so every
Age after another, whatsoever I command you, and that this was the mind of
Jesus Christ, that it was to continue in all Ages, he takes away all doubts,
and does promise his presence not only to them, but to all succeeding Ages, Lo
I am with you to the end of the World. Which is reason sufficient, that his
people is to be found in the practice of, unto the end of the World, you may
see, Mark 16.16. Where he commands the Gospel should be preached to every
Creature upon terms of Faith and Baptism, go and Preach the Gospel to every
Creature, He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, and he that
believes not, shall be damned. Every Creature that is in a capacity to be
saved, was not in being then; this I say, to all such as kick at the Ordinance
of Water-Baptisme, that it cannot be proved by the subtillest deceiver at this
day, that Christ has promised his presence to any thing longer, than the thing
or command is in being, if not, which doubtless is true, whether Baptism in
water, does not continue unto the end of the World, seeing Christ has promised
his presence to his People in that very Ordinance unto the end of the World.
Read, meditate, and let your souls tremble at the word of the Lord, Lo I am
with you to the end of the World.

I shall answer Objections anon. I shall give you an other reason which I would
have you consider of. That which is an instrumental cause of Remission of Sin,
or washing away Sin, that is to continue unto the end of the World. But water
Baptism is an Instrumental cause of Remission of Sins, or washing away of Sin,
therefore it is to continue to the end of World. That Baptism is so, see Acts
2.39. Repent and be Baptized for the Remission of Sin, and that it washes away
Sin, see Acts 22.16. And arise, why tarry thou and be Baptized, and wash away
thy Sins. What can be more plain then this, that their Sins was remitted,
washed away by repentence and Baptism, and not by repentance only, for that
Paul had wrought upon him, yet was to be Baptized to wash away his Sins, so
that the birth of the Spirit, and the birth of the Water was to go together,
see John 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Some will cavil, at the word Instrumental, but there
is no reason so to do, for if the Spirit of God in Scripture does reckon one
thing to two several Causes, as it does about Remission of Sin, then it is to
be understood two several ways, for Remission of Sin is rackoned to the Blood
of Christ, Revel. 1.5. Who has washed us in his own Blood. And therefore I am
necessitated to make this Distinction, and therefore that the Blood of Christ
is the officient Cause of Remission of Sin, and Baptism is an Instrumental
Cause, with those Companions (as I may say) Faith and Repentance, let not the
meanest of the Ordinances of God to carnal reason, hinder any Souls being
fitted for them to obey and practice them, Read 2 Kings 5. Chapters, Concerning
Naaman and the Syrian, and consider of it in the fear of the Lord, and know
this, that what was written aforetime, was written for our Learning to show the
foolish things of God are wiser then men, and that God will bring about great
things by small and contemptible means to reason, see Gal. the 3.27. What the
Apostle says of Baptism, As many as have been Baptized into Christ, has put
on Christ. That which brings unto Christ is needful at this day, and must
continue unto the end of the World; but I have exceeded already what I
intended, therefore I shall apply my self to answer the Objections, hopeing
what I have said will be profitable to some, and conviction to all but those,
Whose consciences are seared with an hot Iron; as the Apostle says, some say
that it is not water Baptism, but the Baptism of the Spirit, this Objection
has hardly the color of reason, but some are confident, and say, where is
Water? I answer, for as much as the Disciples could not Baptize without water,
water is employed, but that it is not the Baptism of the Spirit, it is plain
for it was such a Baptism that his Disciples were to Administer, says Christ,
Go ye Teach and Baptize, and therefore not the Baptism of the Spirit, but
that was never in the Power of the chiefest Disciples of Christ to do, it was,
and is, and ever shall be, only in the power of the Lord to Baptize with the
Spirit, see Luke 9.13. Your heavenly Fether will give his Spirit to them that
ask him, Turn at my reproof, and I will pour my Spirit upon you, Pro. 1.23.
The holy Spirit which God has given to them that obey him, Acts 5.32. and 2
Cor. 5.5. Who has given us the earnest of his Spirit, multitude of Testimony
might be given for this, but I cannot stand upon it now; and therefore, see
what John says I Baptize with water, well but does he not also Baptize with
the Spirit; No, for says he speaking of Christ, He shall Baptize you with the
Spirit, with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. And so the Apostle Peter did
practice it, even to Baptize with water, after Christ had given out that
Commission, Acts 2.38. Acts 10.47. Who can forbid water, that those should not
be Baptized, seeing they have received the Spirit so well as we. Therefore I
conclude that God the Father and Jesus Christ, by him are the Sole Baptisers
with the Spirit, then it is of necessity water Baptism that he commissionates
his Disciples to dispense, I find but three Baptismes at the most in Scripture;
the Baptism of the Spirit they cannot Administer the Baptism of afflictions,
they surely are not to adminster, to overwhelme one another in sufferings, none
I think will say they are to do, therefore of necessity it is water Baptism,
an other Objection which I met with from some of that principle; say they,
though it were water Baptism, 28 of Math. Yet it was the Baptism of John,
which was then are long to cease when that of the Spirit should come in; I
answer in brief, because I must draw to a conclusion, that the Baptism of
water which is called John's Baptism is no otherwise his Baptism then the
Gospel, which Paul preached was his Gospel, and therefore when the Scripture
calls it the Baptism of John, it is the Baptism which John was made the
chief administrator of, and so the Law of God is called the Law of Moses, and
so I understand the Apostle Paul, Romans 2.16. When he says, That God shall
judge men according to his Gospel, (according to my Gospel.) That is to say,
which I am appointed to preach, yet it was the Gospel of Christ which he was to
preach; and so I say, the Baptism that John did administer, was Christ's
Baptism, John was either the servant of Christ, or the servant of the Devil,
that must be granted, I hope none will say he was the Devils servant, then if
he was Christ's servant, then the service which he did was Christ's service, and
then surely his Baptism was Christ's Baptism which he did Administer and not
his own, no otherwise than he was the chief Administrator of it; consider this
you that run upon Airey Notions and fill your Belly with East Wind, which will
not profit in the day of the Lord, and that it was the Baptism of Christ which
John did Administer is manifest, because Christ was Commisionated Authorized by
the Father to Baptize with water as well as John, though it being an external
Water, he left the actual doing of it, to his Disciples amongst whom John was
the chief, or else seeing in commanded others to do it, and so Baptized by
others, at least, if not by himself, as John 3.22.4, 1, 2. His witness of
himself, John 12.39. Is it not true (if he had not Commission from his Father
so to do) which would be Blasphemy to think, for he says, that he spoke
nothing of himself, but as the Father gave Commandment, so he spoke, and
likewise as the Father gave him Commandment so he did, there are some
circumstancial difference between water Baptism before the Death of Christ,
and Baptiseme with water after the Death of Christ, but this is undeniable that
not only Christ did submit unto it, command his Disciples to dispense it, while
he was with thee, and not only so, but does Commission his Disciples to be
observing of it unto the end of the World, after he was risen again, Math.
28.19. And accordingly the Apostles did practice it in all the Primitive
Church, and that the coming of Christ by his Spirit, does not put an end of
water Baptism, see Acts the 10.47. Can any forbid water that those should not
be Baptized, seeing they have received the Holy Ghost so well as we, where you
may see the Apostle Peter makes it an Argument, that they must be Baptized with
water, seeing they have received the Spirit! Oh why should you maintain such
opinions that are so contrary to the Spirit of God in his children in days
past! Oh be not wise above what is written, for our Learning, but lie low and
be not exhalted in your selves, see how contrary your Spirit, that you are
guided by, is to the Spirit in that Apostle Peter was guided by, he says,
there is a necessity of water, who can forbid water if there be the Baptism of
the Spirit, you say if persons be Baptized by the Spirit, they need not be
Baptized in water; consider of this in the dread of the Almighty, and now I
will come to that Ordiannce of breaking Bread, and drinking Wine, to show forth
the Lords Death until he come, and will show that the coming of Christ by his
Spirit does not put an end to that Ordinance, take this reason; That which does
show forth Christ's Death that is to continue while he comes personal or
himself, but when we eat that Bread, and drink that Cup we show forth the
Lords Death, therefore it is to continue until the personal coming of Christ,
see Gal. 3.1. Who has bewitched you that you shall not obey the truth, (What
is the reason he rendereth) Before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth, Crucified among you, which was no otherwise then the Lords Supper; I
will add this Argument grounded with the Scriptures of Truth, that which in the
doing of persons do partake by Faith of the Body and Blood of Christ, that is
to continue to the end of the World, but in eating Bread and drinking Wine, the
faithful, the sencere hearted, do by Faith partake of the Body and Blood of the
Lord, therefore to continue unto the end of the World, for the first assertion,
see John 6.35. Excepta man eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, ye have no Life,
now life is of absolute nesessity, and therefore the means must continue to get
this Life, and that persons do by Faith in that very Ordinance, partake of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, see Math. 16.26. Take eat this is my Body, etc.

But in a word, what need I spend time in reasoning, from the benefits that it
brings, but may only say thus, and who can deny it, what Christ commanded his
Disciples, in that case is his Disciples duty to do at this day, and that
Christ did command, see Mat. 26.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.19, 20. Take eat, this
is my Body, and that the coming of Christ by his Spirit, does not put an end,
to this Ordinance is manifest for the Church of Corinths, had the Spirit in a
plentiful measure, did not come behind no Church, but was enriched with
knowledge utterance, as you may see, 1 Cor. 1.7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. and
so forward, yet they did and ought nay was commended that they keep the
Ordinances as they was delivered, 1 Cor. 11.2. and so in the 26 verse, As often
as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you show forth the Lords Death until
he come. Which of necessity must be an other coming than of his Spirit, for by
that he was come to them already, but it is plain, that it was a coming, which
they was not in the enjoyment of, for says the Text, until he come, but as it
was said before that he was come to them by his Spirit, and now I have with as
much speed as I could come to the end of what I promised, only I have a short
word, or my mind in shortness to speak unto two sorts of People, to the People
called Quakers, Secondly, to those that are under the profession of the Truth,
according to the mind of God contained in Scripture. First, then to the People
called Quakers, if any of you answer what I have writ in writing, do not wrest
my expressions, for I have dealt ingeniously with you in answering that Paper,
though it would be better for you to be silent then to speak evil of the way of
God, if you do, I shall not promise you to answer, truly friends God is my
witness, that what I have written is in tenderness of Spirit toward you, I
beseech you to consider of it, and do not please your selves with airy
conceits, but meditate in the Law of the Lord, that so you may hold fast the
form of sound words, I do hope and believe the Lord has a remnant amongst you
that fear the Lord, and do what you do in the integrity of your Souls, which
that prophecy shall be fulfilled upon, Isa. 29.24. They also that erred in
Spirit, shall come to understanding, and those that murmured shall learn
Doctrine. This I have faith in, shall be accomplished upon some of you, when
many amongst you shall discover themselves what they are now, privately, then
you that have erred in Spirit shall understand, that is, you shall see that the
Devil can, and has transformed himself into an Angel of Light, and you that
murmured at the way of the Lord shall then learn Doctrine, Dear Souls whom I
love, that have no corrupt ends, but only have the honor of God in your eye,
have respect unto all the Commandments of the Lord, and be not lead by the
error of the wicked, be no longer deceived by false Teachers, who as much as
in them lies makes the Commandments of God of none effect, read and consider
of that text of Timothy, that thou may have such an esteem of the Scriptures,
as holy men had of old, 2 Timothy 3.15.16. and you that are called the Ministry, I
do exhort you from the Lord, who has made me sinsible of the loss of Souls,
cease from perverting of the way of the Lord; Oh be careful what you say, and
Preach, lest the Lord lay the blood of poor Souls upon you, I am not unsensible
of that high confidence that you have of your selves, a^ being such that canno
err: Let me persuade you to lie low in your selves, and tremble at the Word of
the Lord, his saying, precepts, and Commandments contained in Scripture, lest
what I have said be as a witness against your, in the great day of the Lord,
when persons shall not be judged by what they have supposed light, but by the
Words of Jesus Christ, content not your selves with morality, but worship God
in Spirit, and not only so but in Truth, and trust in nothing below the blood
of Christ, to make atonement for sin, this I speak not to stir up prejudise
against you, but to warn you of the danger, which will come upon you if you
repent not, and shall continue my prayers for such of you that are in the
lemits of a Christians duty to pray for.

And unto you my Brethren and Sisters in the Lord Jesus Christ, do not make a
wrong application of what I have said, do not think you are in a safe
condition, barely because you are in the profession of the Truth of the Lord,
no friends do not trust or lean there, for know this if thou have been
Baptized, and if thou eat and drink at Christ's Table, yet if thou work iniquity
thou will be shut out of the kingdom? Oh my Friends do not hold the Truth in
unrighteousness (as some did in days past) but answer the end of the
Ordinances of the Lord, it is possible that some may be in that condition, that
profess the Truth, as the professing People of the Lord, wherein the 7 of Ier.
who was punctual in the observation of outward things, and yet gave way to
several evils, do not rest in such a condition, but remember from whence you
are fallen, and do your first work, Oh my Friends let your lights shine before
men, that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in
Heaven, and let not the enemies of the Truths of God, have no just accasion to
speak evil of the way of God, by reason of you, but study to adorn your
profession, and unto you my Friends which are a pressing after the Mark, of the
calling in Christ Jesus, go on in that work until you perfect holiness in the
fear of the Lord, and esteem of the Ordinances of the Lord, never the worser
because men that seem to have outward holiness upon them, speak against them,
see the 2 Cor. 11.13.14, 15. but do and say as the holy David in Psalm 119.126,
127, 128. I love thy Commandments: above gold, yes above fine gold. Therefore
I esteem thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false
way, which that we may all do, is and shall be the prayer of him that is
willing to serve you in the Gospel of Christ, according to the Tallent the Lord
has given me, faithful is he that has promised, who has began a good work in
us, and will carry it on to the day of the Lord.

THE END.
ERRATA.
EPistle, Page 2. l. 10. r. and for him, Epistle, Page 2. l. 11. r. him for
and, Page 8. l. 22. r. arreyes for error, Page 14. l. 1. r. that for what.


