PAEDOBAPTISMUS VINDICATUS: OR, INFANT BAPTISM STATED.

In an Essay to evidence its Lawfulness from the Testimony of Holy Scripture;

Especially St. Matthew, XXVIII. 19. The Grand, if not Sole Place so much
insisted on by the Antipaedobaptists, to prove their mistaken Principle.

Handled in a different Method from other Tracts on the Subject, as appears in
the Contents.

With an Account of a Conference publicly held with an Antipaedobaptist of no
small Fame.

By J. R. A. M. A Presbyter of the Church of England.

Prove. IX. 9. Former part. Give Instruction to a wise Man, and he will be yet
wiser. (...). LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey,
MDCXCIII.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse R. Rmo. in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domesticis.
October. 8. 1692.
To the Truly Worshipful, my very highly Honored Friend, WILLIAM STRONG ESQUIRE
one of Their Majesty's Commissioners for the EXCIZE.
SIR,
I was willing to take this Opportunity of an Address, that I might make my
grateful Acknowledgments for the obliging Favors I have received from you.
While you were in a private Capacity you were assistant to your Friends and
Relatives, and have not forgot them, since you were in a public Concern,
wherein you have been so serviceable to the Kingdom, that if I have not been
misinformed, you have been esteemed, and honored by several Princes, and in a
particular manner by our gracious King and Queen: And possibly few Persons have
served the Public so long with so little Advantage to their own private
Interest as you have done; which demonstrates the Greatness of your Spirit, and
a generous Contempt of the World. I have had the Happiness of an intimate
Conversation with you, and been often with Satisfaction entertained by you with
Excellent Discourses, That I can without a flattering Complement, say, I have
thought you a great Master of Reason. And when you have been in an hurry of
Affairs, and under the fatigue of business upon others Account more than your
own, you have appeared so calm and serene, that there has no Wrinkle been seen
in your Brow, nor Passion in your Breast, to ruffle and discompose you. You
have not had the least Emotion of Mind, but have been as sedate, and tranquil
(like the pure Ether) as those that have had no Concern of their own, or
others upon them. And this last Character makes you as Great a Master of
Empire, as the most victorious Conqueror, if we may believe one of the most
excellent Poets.

Latius regnes avidum domando Spiritum, Horat. Carm. Lib. 2. Ode 2.
quam si Libyam remotis Gadibus jungas, and uterque Poenus Serviat Uni. Which
the wisest of Monarchs properly translates, when he says, Prove. xvi. 32.
He that is slow to Anger, is better than the Mighty; and he that rules his
Spirit, than he that takes a City. But besides the Obligation of Gratitude, I
have another Reason why I presume on this Dedication, because you have a
piercing Judgment, and can well judge of a rational Consequence from Holy
Scripture, or a true Deduction from Reason; and seeing I have from these two
Topics undertaken a Defense of one of the main Doctrines of the Church of
England (whose Principles I have heard you heartily espouse, and rationally
maintain) I submit it to your Censure, which though it may deserve, yet I dread
not; because your natural Goodness will, I doubt not, mix so much Candor
therewith, that it will instruct, rather than affright; and I had much rather
have a Censure with a Reason, than an Approbation without it, because the one
may make a Man wise, when the other may be a Temptation to Pride. But I will
not trouble you long, because the Minutes of Public Persons are not to be
disturbed. Nor shall I need, because I am not so well able (as others to whom I
reserv that Province) to give a true Character of your Worth: Nor am I willing
if I were able, because I have known you long endued with such a stock of the
Virtues of Humility and Modesty, you had rather do well than hear of it; and
are much better pleased in the Reflections of your Mind, than with the Eulogies
of the best Men. And I am very confident you never did a Service for the
Public, or a Kindness for a Friend, but it was as great a Satisfaction to your
self, as it was to them who received the Benefit, and reaped the Advantage.
Great Spirits that are endued with strength of Reason, and have obtained a
Conquest over unruly Passions, are Persons fit for the Menage of Public
Employments: And that you have a large proportion of these Qualifications, is
not only my Judgment, (which possibly may not be valuable) but the Observation
of those that have known how faithfully you have transacted a Trust for the
Public: And therefore by giving this Account, I cannot in the least be
suspected guilty of Flattery. Men that are qualified for public Service may be
said in a true sense to answer the Ends, promote the Conduct, and carry on the
Designs of a wise Providence in his Administration of, and Government over, the
World. And such Persons who by their Prudence (with the Man after Gods own
heart) serve their Generation, Acts xiii. 22, 36.
shall inhabit more Glorious Mansions in the Regions of Bliss above, shall
receive greater Compensations in the Apartments of Glory. I will conclude with
the same Option the Poet puts up for his great Mecaenas, Caesar Augustus.

Serus in Coelum redeas, Horat. Carm. Lib. 1. Ode 2.
diuque Laetus intersis Populo. Which St. Paul may English, when he says,
Phil. 1.23.24.
Though he had a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; yet nevertheless to
abide in the Flesh, i. e. to continue longer in the World, was more needful for
the Public.

And he that shall reflect upon your indefatigable Pains for the Service of
others may without Ostentation believe that what St. Paul said as a Minister of
the Church, you may say as a Minister of the State; That you will gladly spend,
2 Cor. xii. 15.
and be spent for the Public.

SIR,

That after many years expended in the Public Service for the Good of the
Kingdom, you may leave behind you the Honorable Name of a Patriot of your
Country; And that the (...), Phil. III. 14.
the Prize, the Crown of Glory that hangs at the end of your Race may be more
Luminous, and Bright, have a greater Refulgency and Splendour, is, and shall be
the sincere Prayer of,

Greatly Honored Sir, Your most Humble Servant, And ever Obliged Relativ, J. R.

A PREFACE.
To all dis-interested, and unprejudiced Persons; especially those among the
Antipaedobaptists, that love Truth above Interest or Humor, and are desirous
upon rational Convictions to embrace it, and lead their Lives according
thereunto.
Candid Readers,
I Beseech you out of Love to your Souls, cast not aside this Tract after you
light on a Matter that displeases, but ponder why you are displeased. If your
Sentiments in Religion are charged to be against Evidence of Reason, and
Testimony of Holy Writ, you ought to be offended, because you entertained such
high Thoughts of your Abilities; but if you will not assume or take so much
Confidence, proceed, and consider if the Author has, or has not good cause to
oppose you; and whatever the Result be on a due Trial, you will have no Cause
to be troubled at your labor in the Inquisition or Search: For if there be no
cause to oppose your Sentiments, you may think you have ground to continue
them: If the Author has ground for what he writes, you may with Satisfaction
alter them. It is probable a word may be too jocose or too sharp; but let not
such Expressions cause the Argument to be cursorily or hastily read, but
weighed without the let of Passion, or bias of Interest to hinder that
Conviction the Author aims at. I declare with sincerity I bear not any
Bitterness toward any, nor was I under an emotion or heat of Mind, when I
studied or preached on this Subject. The Author knows how hard it is to remove
a prejudice, and withal believes it no easy thing to change Sentiments (how
impertinent soever) born and bred with us. For such Reasons as these, I cannot
express Indignation against my Adversaries; but truly pity them, because they
subdue not that intemperate Zeal by which they appear for Novel Opinions
against Primitive Canons and Ecclesiastic Establishments. I have endeavored to
express my self as moderately as I could, not designing to provoke a Passion,
but work a Conviction. I have treated my Adversaries with respect, designing
only to reduce them from Error to Truth, not to boast of Victory, or proclaim a
Triumph. If you have other thoughts of him, than he declares, he importunately
entreats you, if you meet with any thing may seemingly raise a Passion, esteem
it a slip of his Pen, and consider rather the reason is offered, than the Dress
it appears in. I will now acquaint you with the Reason engaged me in this
Controversy. You may believe me (who know my own Mind best) it was a
charitable Design on such deluded Persons, as have sincere Intentions for what
is true, (but through the smallness of their Understanding, have such narrow
Capacities as not to attain the knowledge of Truth,) and a Zeal to promote
Christian Doctrine. His Adversaries may entertain what thoughts they think fit;
his natural Temper is not waspish nor contentious; neither is he displeased
with any, because he does not think as he does: He knows not of any Quarrel he
has with any on the Account of Religion: He neither affects Differences, nor
is maintained thereby: He has possibly more Esteem than he deserves; but if
not, what he is satisfied with, as much as may preserve him from being tempted
to envy others, and the unworthy Arts of purchasing Credit by lessening his
Neighbor. And as he publishes not this for popular Applause, so is he at no
loss for what he opposes; but it is the Interest of Religion, and a Love for
Truth have engaged him in this business; for he apprehends them greatly
endangered by Error. Many Persons have not time to enquire into the Causes of
Matters of Moment, nor are they without great Importunity engaged therein: But
believe as such act, for whom they have an Admiration; and though they know not
the Reason of things, they often outvy those they follow. That the Truth of
Religion be discovered, tends much to the quiet of the World, and the welfare
of Mankind. Men cannot but believe it necessary Religion should be clearly
understood; and certainly such Men's Travels deserv Praise, who endeavor to
make persons know its Principles, that their practice may be directed. I can
with sincerity own I have used my Endeavors to set this Controversy in as
clear a Light as the Revelation of Holy Scripture, and the Dictates of Reason
could discover, which are the best Instructors of our Mind in the knowledge of
Truth, and the best Directors how to lead our Lives accordingly. But I may wish
for Success on this charitable Design, rather than expect it, if there be Truth
in the excellent Vide Lord Bacon 's Letter to Mr. Matthews, p. 69. cited by the
Author of the Friendly Debate, p. 176. Part 4th.
Lord Bacon's Observation, That there is little dry Light in the World, but it
is all moist, being infused and steeped in Affection, Blood, and Humors. The
Reason of Men is made to stoop to Interest, and they judge according to the
Current of their Inclinations. I can make the same Declaration the Excellent
Vide Dr. Sherlock 's Preface to his Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers
stated, and resolved according to Scripture and Reason, and the Principles of
the Church of England.
Dean of St. Paul's does, and with the same sincerity I doubt not he does; That
one occasion of publishing his Book is, That it is extorted from me by the rude
Clamors and unchristian Censures of some, and the earnest Importunity of
others: For an Antipaedobaptist told me I dare not publish my Conference with
Mr. M. C. for if I did, he would so expose me I should not dare to look him in
the Face. I have, for once, accepted his bold Challenge, to evidence the
fierceness he delivered himself with did not put me in a fright; and that their
Coryphaeus in that Country where I am concerned, may have an Opportunity of
showing his Art. And as for Importunity, though it be a trite Apology for the
Publication of a Book; yet I had more than was usual, so much that I was tired
therewith. Whereupon from a distrust of my self, I showed my Argument to
several Persons, eminent for their Learning among the Clergy: (even some of the
highest Station) Some said I was bound in Conscience, out of Obligation to the
Catholic Church in general, and to the Church of England in particular, to
print it; which I would not be so conceited as to believe said on Account of
the Argument; but from this Consideration, The Defense of a Fundamental Truth
is a Public Service. Infant Baptism being not only an Article of the Church of
England's Faith (as she declares in these words, Vide Articles agreed upon by
the Archbishops and Bishops, and the whole Clergy of both Provinces. Printed,
1562. Art. 27.
The Baptism of young Children is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as
most agreeable with the Institution of Christ) but likewise is, and has been a
Doctrine of the Catholic Church in all Ages, as the excellent Mr. Vide Mr.
Walker 's modest Plea for Infant Baptism. Printed at Cambridge. 1677.
Walker has made appear. Others would persuade me to it, from a likely
prospect of Success it might have on the advers Party; because they said, tho
others had done it in a rational way; (and in particular Mr. Walker in his
modest Plea for Infant Baptism) yet none had handled it in such a Scriptural
Way by Testimonies from Holy Writ; which manner of treating this Christian and
comfortable Doctrine, might be most effectual on the Minds of such as opposed
this Truth; because the Antipaedobaptists will not admit any Proof but from the
direct Words of Holy Scripture, or an Exposition so plain, that may be equal to
a literal sense: And this way I have endeavored to prove this momentous
Subject; and for this Reason some thought it might be successful on those of
that Party that have teachable Minds, and this Consideration, the Conscience,
and real desire of doing good, was the strongest Motive to expose it to the
Public. And truly if it may be instrumental to the convincing any that are not
too far gone by Interest or Humor, it will be a greater satisfaction than the
Eulogies of the wisest Men; and I shall think my Labor sufficiently
compensated. If any admire this Subject is methodized, and worded so like the
way of Preaching; it is, because I believed it would have the stronger
Impression on the people it was preached to, if it were printed as they heard
it; and I had rather be subservient to my People's Good, than comply with the
capricious Humor of the nicest Critic.

An Account of the Conference with Mr. M. C. upon the Subject of
Infant Baptism, and the Occasion of it.
AFter this, I hope useful Introduction, I come to perform the Obligation of my
Promise, which was to give a Relation of a Conference publicly held with an
Antipaedobaptist of no small Fame on the Subject, and of the Occasion; and this
I will endeavor to do with all imaginable Sincerity, and take all possible
Care not to commit any voluntary Error, or wilful Mistake.

In the Month of October 1686. I was collated to a Living by my reverend
Diocesan: After a Year I received Information that an Antipaedobaptist had
perverted one of my Parish. But I hope without a reproachful Reflection I may
say of some that pervert true Doctrine, what the Holy Jesus said of the glozing
Pharisees. Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites; St. Matthew. XXIII. 15.
for you compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, you
make him twofold more the Child of Hell than before. The first Intelligence I
had (as I remember) was from my Parishioner's Neighbor, of whom he held a
considerable Farm: the Gentleman was firm to the Church of England; and though
he is no Loquacious, Talkativ Person, yet I have heard him give good Reason for
his Principles. From the Account he gave, I found him in Christian Charity
concerned for his Tenant, whereupon he desired me to discourse his Tenant; and
because he thought he would be unwilling to give me a Meeting, he told me the
next time he came he would send for me to discourse him, to make a Trial if I
could reduce him to the Church. Accordingly he did, and I readily went, where I
treated him with all the Civility he could look for, and discoursed what I
thought proper; and I spoke with all the kindness and plainness was possible,
that what (...) said might have an Influence on him: But I was disappointed in
my hopes; for I found ^im weak, and (which is usually the unhappy ^ate of such)
obstinate, so that though I ^poke plainly; yet he either did not understand me,
or would not be convinced by what I offered. So true is the Observation of the
wise Lord Bacon, ^ertinaciae Hominum nullum Remedium posuit Deus. The Lord
Bacon.
That God has appointed no Remedy for the Obstinacy of Men: And if he have
appointed none, it will be in vain to endeavor to find any. All I could get,
was an importunate Request I would permit him to bring one to dispute with me:
I was much against it at first; because usually such Designs come to no good,
nor seldom have their desired end, but are attended with noise and clamor, and
generally there is a greater Contestation for Victory than Truth, and a Man's
Reputation is more consulted than their Satisfaction on whose Account the
Meeting is appointed.

The Answer he gave, was, He was no Scholar, and so not able to discourse with
a Man of Learning, as he supposed me to be: I replied, whatever my Stock of
Learning was, I would make no use of it with him, because I charitably intended
his Good; but this instead of satisfying, engaged him to renew his Importunity,
there might be a public Disputation, which he pretended would be much to his
Satisfaction; but I believe it was but a pretense. For on the Account of some
after-Circumstances, I have reason to conjecture that his Importunity for such
a Meeting, was not so much to be convinced, as from a Confidence that the
Advocate he pitched on (for he was in Vogue with his Party for his Disputatious
Faculty; and as I have heard, has often traveled many Miles to dispute with a
Clergy man) would so far baffle me, it would give a Reputation to his Cause,
and confirm him in his Principles: But because he could not prevail for a
Consent, his Neighbor joined, desiring I would comply: Upon which, out of
respect to him I condescended; but on this Condition, there might be but a few
at the hearing of our Discourse; and if he would name how many he would bring, I
would endeavor to equal his Number, or be content with fewer: For I told him,
I believed three or four judicious Persons of a side, might better understand
the Reason and Truth of an Argument, than a Multitude. For I had for many Years
been of the same Mind with the ingenious Mr. Matthew Clifford, who hated Crowd
and Noise.

A little after, I had notice my Parishioner would bring his Man on December
the thirteenth, 1687. And because I would be just to my Word, I acquainted (to
the best of my Knowledge) only two Persons; viz. my Parishioner's Neighbor,
and his Father: But he on the other side dealt unfairly with me; for, contrary
to his Promise, he sent his Man to Church (the Sunday before the Day) to
acquaint my People, when Sermon was done, there was to be a Dispute between Mr.
M. C. and My self. Some time before which, I addressed my self to a
Consideration of the Doctrine of Baptism, and the Holy Gospel Covenant, and
what Persons are to be admitted thereto, and to enjoy the Privileges by
receiving the Sign thereof. I had only by me one Book on the Subject, that
treated of the Nature of the Covenant; and whether Persons that were not
capable of understanding the Articles thereof, could by the external sign be
admitted to the Privileges.

But I had a belief he would not, or cared not to manage the Controversy from
that Principle; and thereupon I laid the Book aside, and for some time
consulted the Holy Scriptures, and addressed my self by importunate and sincere
Prayers to the Throne of Grace for the Divine Assistance, not in the least
trusting to my self; but earnestly begging the Aid of Heaven, that the God of
Truth would enable me to maintain what was true: And this I the rather did,
because I believed this one of the Doctrins of Faith once delivered to the
Saints, St. Jude verse. 2.
St. Jude exhorts Christians earnestly to contend for. When the Day was come, I
waited till about ten or eleven of the Clock before my Antagonist appeared,
about which hour he came, and knocked at door; which when I opened, I saw him
and a great Crowd, I let in as many as my room I intended for our Dispute would
hold; for so many crowded in. There were some scores. After I let him in, he
walked somewhat briskly, and with a sort of Smile (as if I were to be led in
Triumph, as the Roman Victors dealt with their conquered Slaves,) at the end of
my Hall, attacks me with a Challenge to dispute in the Church. I told him there
seemed some Vanity in the Request, as if he designed Noise more than Argument.

Whereupon I desired him to look into my Parlor, which I told him was large
enough for as many as were fit to hear us: Beside, I told him to dispute in the
Church might be accounted a Riot; and I asked him, if he would secure me from
the damage I might sustain, by undergoing the Penalty assigned for the
Transgression of the Laws? Whereto he answered, he thought the Act for Liberty
of Conscience was my Security: To which I replied, though I had the use of my
Church for Preaching, as he his Meeting Place to Hold-forth in; yet I did not
believe the Law allowed the Church to be a place for Disputation, nor was it
fit it should, because it was improper, where the Holy Gospel of Peace was
Preached, there Contention or Controversy should be managed. However, if he
would go to my Reverend Diocesan, and request his leave, upon License from him
I would comply. After which he walked into my Parlour to enter into Discourse:
I told him, being so many were gathered together, we should act with good
Intentions, designing the People's satisfaction, that they might be convinced
which of us had Truth on his side, being our Principles were diametrically
opposite, and directly contrary; not consulting our Credit, as if we contended
for Victory more than Truth; and being we of the Church of England had the Laws
on our side for what we professed, and as we thought Truth in Possession, he
ought by strong Reasons to show our Title was not Good, before he attempted to
dis-seize us of the Truth, we hoped we justly possessed: But before we begun, I
desired one thing, which I thought was reasonable, because for the Good of the
Auditors; and that was, I had a License from my Lord Bishop to teach School,
and on that Account I had an Usher, that did write a fair and swift hand, and
desired he might write the Argumentative part of our Discourse, and such
Collateral Proofs we urged to strengthen our Arguments; and after our
Conference was done, the Writing might be viewed by such as heard us, and they
have Liberty to judge which had spoken most Truth; and that he might be sure he
should not be imposed on, I told him, the Man that wrote what he spoke should
read it, and ask him if it were his Words and his Sens, or if he could read
Written-hand, he should read it himself; which I had not said, but he moved me,
by asking an impertinent Question before; but he answered, he would have
nothing writ on either side. That Proposal being denied, I had another to make,
which was as reasonable, viz. That I might propose two or three Cases, that
should include the greatest part of what was necessary for solving the Doubts,
and answering the Objections against Infant Baptism; and if he would allow any
of his Party to understand the Principles of Antipaedobaptism better than
himself, I would appeal to him, whether they did not; or if he thought I
imposed too much by such a Proposal, (for I had resolved before his coming to
treat him with civility,) I would allow him the Liberty I desired to take;
provided the Questions he should ask were as proper as mine; for I am of the
Poet's Mind, -- Damus petimusque vicissim.

The Answer I had, was, He should not ask me a Question, nor should I ask him
one; upon which I replied, That his coming was to wrangle, ^ot dispute; and I
was sorry the People were so disappointed; however, I was willing they should
hear what he had to say, on which I desired him to begin; but I perceived
(which he ought not to have done, for a Reason I have hinted) he expected I
should begin; whereupon I did: But before I give an Account of what was said, I
will give you the three Cases, propounded for a resolution of.

The Antipaedobaptists Object, An Obj.
Baptism is only to be administered to the Adult, and those of years of
Discretion.

For the making out of which (in Answer to what is objected) it is desired
these things appear.

If Children are to be Baptized,

If a Party be admitted into Covenant,

Affirmanti incumbit probatio.
The Proof lies on his side that Asserts; and the Antipaedobaptists do affirm
these things, it is desired they make proof, or else they have no Reason to
expect we should entertain a Belief of them.

And now (being I was engaged to begin) I will give as true an Account as I can
of what I offered, and he answered. I told him, I thought it as reasonable
Children should be admitted into Covenant under the Holy Gospel, as under the
Law, there being nothing more in the Holy Gospel Covenant to debar them an
admission thereto, than there was in that under the Law; besides, it adds
strength to the Argument, if we consider, that the Covenant made with Abraham,
and the Holy Gospel Covenant, are for substance one and the same, as St. Paul
tells us expressly, Gal. iii. 8.
and as we have made appear in the Book; Vid. p. 97, 98. of this Book.
and certainly the Holy Apostle understood the Nature and Difference of
Covenants, better I believe than any Antipaedobaptist in England. To all which
he made no return; but after some Pause, and an Harangue to the People, he told
me he would not be satisfied unless I brought him an Example out of the Holy
Scriptures of the New Testament, for any Child being Baptized; or a Command for
his admission into Covenant that way. To which I urged the probability of
Children being Baptized, Acts xvi. 15.33.
when it is said, That Lydia was Baptized, and her Household; and of the Jailer,
That he was Baptized, and all his straitway; 1 Cor. 1.16.
and when St. Paul says, I Baptized also the Household of Stephanas; and to
speak ingenuously, the only thing considerable he said, was the proving the
probability there were no Children in those Families. I am very sorry I have
forgot what he said; but if I could remember it. I would do him that Justice,
as to relate it; for I would pay my Adversary that respect, as to declare all
the Truth and Reason of him that his Cause will bear, or that he can with good
ground desire; but that which is but probably true, may notwithstanding be
false. However, that I may allow my Adversary all he can reasonably ask,
supposing there were no Children in those Houses mentioned, Dato, sed non
concesso, disputandi gratia.
Allowing, but not granting it, (as we say sometimes in the Schools,) for
disputation-sake; yet the Argument is not weakened, because the Holy Apostle
spoke those Words not with the consideration of there being Children in those
Families; but in allusion to known Customs among the Jews, in their receiving
Proselytes of Righteousness, as we have made appear in the Book. Afterward he
urged the necessity of a direct Command, in the Holy Scriptures of the New
Testament, In totidem verbis.
for the Baptizing Children, in so many Words; whereupon I asked him, If he
believed such a Command necessary; to which he replied, He did: I returned upon
him, I thought it was undecent, if not absurd, so positively to assert a thing
necessary, and offer no Reason; beside, I said if he would give a Reason why he
believed it necessary, I would do that which by Rules of Disputation he could
not oblige me to, (for no Man is bound to prove a Negative,) viz. prove it not
necessary: Hereupon he made a longer Pause than before, and after he recovered
himself, made so long an Harange to those present, I was forced to pull him by
the Sleeve, and desire him not to make my House a Meeting Place, and assume, or
take, so much Considence, as to instruct my People, unless he thought me not
able for such an Employment; which if he did, I desired him to make proof, and
when he had done, to make his complaint to my Reverend Diocesan: Upon which,
with a sort of flattering smile, he complemented me, and told me he thought me
able for my Office, and said, he and I might agree well in all points but one,
viz. Infant Baptism; for he heard I was an Arminian, and so was he: Whereupon I
told him, I somewhat doubted whether he understood the Quinquarticular
Controversy, managed at the Synod of Dort, and knew what an Arminian was; but
whether he did or no, was not material now; but I acquainted him I desired not
to pass under any Character, but that of a Christian; nay, that Honorable
Name, (for the best things may be abused,) in some Cases and Circumstances (if
I understand St. Paul right, where it is used for a Faction in opposition to
Christian Peace) is blame worthy: Now this I say, that every one of you says,
I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13.
and I of Christ; Is Christ divided, was Paul Crucified for you, or were you
Baptized in the Name of Paul: So that there were four Parties in the Church of
Corinth: And therefore did I affect to be called by a Name that should preserve
Universal Charity, I would espouse that of a Reformed Catholic (without
renouncing the Name, Christian.) And then I offered a Reason, why there was no
necessity for an express Text of Holy Scripture, in the New Testament, for the
Baptizing Infants; because it was so long known in the Jewish Church before our
Blessed Savior's days; and as he took the other Sacrament from the Jews
Post-coenium, or After-Supper; so he took this from their way of admitting
Proselytes of Righteousness, before they Circumcised them: And why should we
not for the same Reason debar Women from the Lord's Supper, as Children from
being admitted by Baptism into the Covenant, seeing there is no more Command
for one, than for the other: So that Christ's not saying, whether Children were
admitted to Baptism, is so far from being a cogent Proof, that weighing the
former Jewish Customs, it is the strongest Motive to believe it. But still
(notwithstanding all I said to show the absurdity of his Request, and the
Arguments I offered to signify the unreasonableness of such a Demand, without
answering one of my Reasons) my Adversary importuned me for an express place of
Holy Scripture, in the New Testament, for the Baptizing Children; whereupon I
asked him, if I brought a place of Holy Scripture, whose Sense could have no
other tolerable meaning, but the allowance of Infants to be Baptized, it were
not the same, as if I brought express Words for Baptizing Children? which he
yielded: Upon which it pleased God (as if he would assist the defense of his
Divine Truth; for I thought not on it before; this I own because I am not
willing to ascribe any thing to my self) to suggest to my Mind that place of
St. Paul, For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife, 1 Cor. VII. 14.
and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband, else were your Children
unclean, but now are they Holy: Where Interpreters understand, by the
unbelieving Husband or Wife, an Infidel; and by the Wife or Husband that
sanctifies, a Christian; from whence I drew this Argument, That if Children, as
soon as born, had a right to the Covenant by the Parents Faith, where but one
of the Parents is a Christian, then Baptism being the Sign of the Covenant, and
not the Covenant, (as the Antipaedobaptists own,) It follows [by the Argument,
a Majori ad Minus, from the greater to the less] if the Child when born has a
right to the Covenant, he has a right to the Sign; Omne majus includit in se
minus.
for according to the Logical Maxim, The greater includes the less; and he that
should deny this, would be as absurd, as he that should say, he that receives
Ten Pounds receives not Five. And then I told him there were but two sorts of
Holiness, with reference to Men, (though there may be a Relative Holiness, with
respect to things,) a Personal, and a Foederal Holiness; at which he stared on
me, as if he understood me not; on which I told him I would speak more
intelligibly, and that by Foederal, I meant a Covenant Holiness: Now Children,
antecedent to exercise of Reason, are not capable of a Personal Holiness,
(which is a comprehensive Word for all the Graces of Christian Religion.)

But here the Antipaedobaptists object, We read of two Persons endued with
Holiness before they came to the use of Reason, the Blessed Jesus, and St. John
the Baptist.

To which I answer, Hammond had given the same Interpretation: Upon which I was
pleased I had the concurring Judgment of so learned a Man. (Though I had not
read it in him, or any else to my remembrance; but it was purely the suggestion
of my own Mind, assisted by the Divine Spirit, who is never wanting with his
Grace to help those that are sincerely employed in the Investigation of, and
Enquiry after Truth.) This is the main Substance (so far as my Memory will
reach) of the many hours Discourse we had: If I had had any Thought of printing
it, I would have transcribed it while fresh in my Memory, and then possibly
might have given a more particular Account; but I hope this may be
satisfactory, being as much as I can remember. Toward the end of our Discourse
I told him, if he could make appear he had answered any Argument of mine, or
properly stated any for his Principles, I dare promise to yield the Cause; but
to this (as I remember) he returned no Answer.

After this was brought from 1 Cor. VII. 14. I remember not I had any Answer;
but he did as he used, make an Harangue to the People: And when he could
neither answer my Argument, nor state any proper for his Principles, he
diverted to another Subject, and would needs enter into a Dispute against
Tiths: Upon which I desired we might come to a better Conclusion about the
Doctrine of Infant Baptism, but I could have no further Discourse on that
Subject: But he requested me to show him a place of Holy Scripture, in the New
Testament, for Tiths; which I told him was unreasonable to demand, seeing our
dear Redeemer, and his blessed Disciples lived under Heathen Governors, that
were Enemies to Christianity; and it could not be expected such as were Gentile
Rulers should make Laws in Favor of the Christian Religion: Yet St. Paul
asserts the Reasonableness of Ministerial Maintenance, 1 Cor. IX. 14.
when he says, He that preaches the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. But
when Constantine made Profession of Christianity, he adopted Tiths into the
Laws of the Empire; and then Tiths were to be paid under as high an Obligation
of Conscience, as the Jews were under by virtue of their Judicial Law, which
was a part of their Theocracy, or the Government of God himself: So that a Man,
who after such an Obligation defrauds his Minister, either in whole or part,
may be said to be guilty of the Sin of the Jews which they committed, Mal. III.
8.
(and it is well if none commit it in our days) who are said directly to rob
God; which they that love their Souls, believ a God, and a future Judgment, may
tremble at the Consideration of: Which made me wonder Mr. M. C. should tell me,
he paid Tiths to a certain Clergyman, (I think he said one of the
Residentiaries of Chichester) but he did it (as he said) against his
Conscience. Whereupon I told him he could not be an honest Man; because he paid
that voluntarily, which was against his Conscience: For any Man that pays
what he thinks he ought not to do, without force, does it voluntarily,
because he is under no Compulsion; and he that consents to that which he
believes a Sin, though it be not, yet is a Sin to him; as the Author of The
Whole Duty of Man informs us: Dr. Tillotson, in his Sermon at the Funeral of
Mr. Gouge.
(the best of Books, as our learned, and most rational Archbishop calls it)
Because God judges according to our Wills, not according to our
Understandings. And now to pay my Adversary all the Respect he may look for,
and to do him all the Justice he can expect, I believe from the Fame I have
heard, he could have disputed like a Scholar, more coherently, and congruously,
argued more closely and properly; but without breach of Charity, I think I may
suspect he talked impertinently with a Design to put me in a Passion, (which I
was somewhat aware of, and therefore stood on my Guard; and that I might not be
guilty of self-confidence, I implored the Divine Assistance to prevent my
falling into the Indecencies, and Disadvantages of Passion, because. I knew
from my natural Temper I had some Inclination thereto) and that makes me think
he did not believ the Character I have been told, he heard that Morning he
came: For enquiring, whether I was a Man of Passion, he was answered I was not
easily disturbed, on which I was told he shook his Head. But I believe by his
roving Talk he thought to raise a Passion; (for nothing disturbs a Man of Sens
more than impertinent Talk) and when that would not do, he fell to the mean Art
of Flattery, by commending my Patience; and told me, after three hour's
Discourse, he had often talked with Men of my Coat, but before so long time had
been turned out of Doors: Upon which I told him, his impertinent Discourse
deserved such usage; but I would not give him occasion against me: For then I
supposed he would go into the Town, and boast what a Victory he had obtained.
But being he was there, I would inflict that Penance on my self, as to
discourse till Bedtime, if he would stay, and then leav him; but I would have
the Courage to meet him next Morning: For I now found where his Strength lay,
which was more in evading an Argument, than in rightly stating one, or standing
to it, and learnedly defending it. After this Day's tedious Work (because of
the Impertinency I was troubled with) I saw him no more till New Year's Day,
which happened to be on a Sunday, the Festival engaged me to say something of
Infant Baptism. When Evening-Prayer was done, I sent to Mr. M.C. where he held
forth; and I think it was the first Day he did so in my Parish: He was so kind
as to come, and brought two of my Neighbors of his Opinion. I treated them
civilly, and after a while desired them to withdraw; (because I had a Mind to
speak with my Antagonist alone) which they did; when they were gone, and none
but he and my self, I told him, He might have the same suspicion of me, I had
of him, that when he and I discoursed before a Company, we might be tempted
more to purchase Reputation, than to maintain Truth, but now it was not in the
Devil's power to lay out such a Temptation, there being none but he and I; and
therefore I desired he would allow me to propose something calmly to him, which
since resulted to my thoughts; for I was willing to be his Proselyte, if he
could convince me to be in an Error; and as willing he should be my Proselyte,
if I could prove him in a Mistake: For though I loved the Church of England
well, yet I loved Truth better; and if he could evince or prove she had not
Truth on her side, I would forsake her; but I could have no Answer; for he
diverted to other discourse, and said we had spoke enough on the Argument. He
has since been with me, and desired a Dispute in the Church; I told him, I
would meet him in any Church, if he would submit to two Conditions, which I
thought reasonable; the one was, That he would get my Reverend Diocesan's
leave, or secure me from any Penalty the Bishop, or the Law, might lay on me:
The other was, That he would be at the Charge to hire an Amanuensis, to write
down the Argumentativ part of his Discourse, and I would be at as great a Charge
to hire one that should write down what I offered, and then at the end of our
Conference, the Papers should be exposed to the consideration of the most
Judicious Auditors, to examine which spoke most according to the true Sens of
Holy Scripture, or the dictates of right Reason; but this offer he refused, and
said he would have nothing writ on either side: And the cause why I would
engage him thereto, was, because it would be a kindness, in that it would be a
great Caution, we should speak properly, and would oblige us to circumspection
and care, from the consideration and fear of that shame and reproach we should
be exposed to, by delivering our selves inconsistently and incoherently, and it
would be a satisfaction to the People, because then we should use our
endeavors to speak Truth, and to confirm it by Reason, which, if we did, it
might have a good effect on the People that heard it, to understand who spoke
most properly, according to the sense of Holy Scripture, and so consequently
who had the clearest Truth on his side; but no Argument would prevail with him
to submit to such reasonable terms; and then I told him, I would allow him to
tell, I refused to accept his Challenge: But then I desired him to tell on what
terms I denied to comply; or if not, I should take care to do it; and then he
would have cause not to be satisfied with, but ashamed of the Report. When he
was with me, on New-years-day, 1688. I told him I understood that was the first
day he Held-forth in his Meeting Place, and I supposed he spoke against our
Principles; and truly the Festival engaged me to say something in defense of
our declared Doctrines. I said, I doubted he trusted to such an Extemporary
Effusion, and such an extraordinary Measure of the Holy Spirit, that I thought
he could give little Account of what he said after he concluded; but I told
him, I hoped I trusted as much to the Holy Spirit as he, in a rational way; for
I studied for what I delivered, and then I implored the Divine Blessing on what
I studied, which I thought as much as I ought to trust to; for I believe, since
the Miraculous Aids of the Holy Ghost are ceased, the Divine Spirit does afford
his Blessing in the use of means, and not in an extraordinary manner; and then
I read what I spoke in reference to Infant Baptism, which I desired him to
censure as severely as he pleased, provided he would give me a Reason: The
Account whereof is as follows, Preaching that day on the Institution of
Circumcision, from Genesis XVII. 9.15. I made this Observation, That Heathen
Proselytes, and their Infants, were made Partakers of God's Covenant; whence I
thus argued in the General for Infant Baptism: If this be understood, it will
afford a strong, though not usually brought-Argument, for Baptizing of Infants:
For if this be true, as may be made appear by Jewish Customs, it is plain not
being of the Seed of Abraham, but being of the Faith of Abraham, gave a Person
a right to the Covenant, and to the Sign of it, Circumcision; or else no
Proselytes could be made from Heathenism, and so admitted into Covenant by that
Sign; and then by Parity of Reason, the Faith of the Christian Parent shall be
imputed to the Child: And if the Faith of the Parent gives a Title to the
Covenant, or being a Christian, (Baptism, like Circumcision, being only the
Sign of the Covenant,) by Parity of Reason, the Faith of the Parent (as I have
hinted) gives a right to the Sign, because the Sign is less than the Privilege.
Besides, there is no being a Disciple of Christ, without being Baptized into
his Blessed Name, that being the Sign of the Holy Gospel Covenant, and made as
necessary as Circumcision, which was the Sign of the Covenant under the Law;
not that I would be so uncharitable, as to Damn all that die unbaptized;
because it is here as in Circumcision, the Infant can be in no fault, as not
being capable of Obedience to the Command, or transgressing the Law by
contempt; and so cannot be said to break the Covenant, that does nothing
belonging to the keeping it; and though the Child did not, Ezod. IV. 24.
yet Moses the Father of the Child went in danger of his Life, whom the Lord
met by the way in the Inn, and sought to kill; which, if duly considered, might
make all Christian Parents, that neglect the bringing their Children timely to
Baptism, tremble for fear of some severe punishment falling on themselves;
which may be one reason, why our excellent Church declares in the Rubric of
Private Baptism, and enjoins the Pastors and Curates of every Parish, often to
admonish the People, that they deferr not the Baptism of their Children longer
than the first or second Sunday, or other Holyday, next after the Child be
born: Unless on a great and reasonable Cause declared to the Curate, and to be
by him approved. Moreover, if there be no enjoying the Benefits of the
Covenant, without the Sign, this makes the Sign necessary; and the wilful
neglect of necessary means endangers any Person's Salvation, without the
Interposition of an extraordinary Mercy; and that which is above, or beyond
means, is ever miraculous: And if such a miraculous proportion of Mercy were
indulged, as often as such a wilful neglect gave occasion, it would cease to be
miraculous; because a Miracle is not only an extraordinary act of Power, but a
rare contingency, and therefore cannot often happen; otherwise the Sun's daily
motion about the Earth, would be as great, if not a greater Miracle, than its
once Josh X. 12, 13. 2 Kin. XX. 9, 10, 11.
standing still, or once Retrograde Motion. Lastly, let it be considered, that
our Adversaries think Christian Instruction necessary, before the admission of
the Party to Baptism, and we think it necessary afterward, supposing the Party
lives to years of discretion; and if not, we have more reason to rely on an
extraordinary act of Mercy, that have given the Sign, and all the Party is at
present capable of, (and being also what the Party was commanded to submit to,
under a previous dispensation, and which was never prohibited; and also such an
one as was Typical of the Dispensation we are under,) than they have to depend
on a miraculous proportion of Mercy, who will not use what the Child is capable
of, nor give it that Sign to which the Benefits of the Covenant are annexed, An
Apostrophe to unbaptized Children.
and without which they are not to be enjoyed. Alas! poor helpless Children,
that their Parents should be so unmerciful, as not to allow them as much Pity,
as God vouchsafes Mercy; and refuse that Sign of the Covenant, God has
appointed as the only conveyance of the Advantages thereof; and deny them those
means God has instituted, as the Title to make over the Blessings of Heaven,
and convey that Happiness that is only to be enjoyed in the Mansions of Glory
above. A great part, if not most, of this, has been urged in a Conference for
the establishing this considerable, because comfortable, Truth, the necessity
of Baptizing Infants; which if it had been weighed, and the force of its Reason
examined, (as the importance of the matter required,) there had been no cause
for that which I have been more than once told of, I mean unreasonable, because
undecent singing Io Paans, and making boasting Triumphs before the Victory, by
Men that had rather serve a Faction, and an Interest, than promote that
Religion that is true, because rational, and love their Reputation more than
their Conscience, and value their Credit and Honor more than the Truth in
Sincerity; or to use an Holy Scripture Phrase, (and an Expression by them much
delighted in, and as much abused, and wrested to the deceiving the unthinking
many) The Truth as it is in Jesus. This I read, and asked what he had to say:
He gave me no other Answer than this, that he thought I was a Man understood my
Principles. I thanked him for his Candor; and told him I was not fit to be a
Public Instructor if I did not: And then I added I would make some Enlargements
to the Paper I showed him, and would print it if he would give me a Civil and
Rational Answer.

To which he returned, I might do as I pleased; but he would have nothing to do
with me in Print, because (as he said) I understood my Principles; which was an
Intimation he would have nothing to do with any in Print, but such as he
thought he could confute.

But to do Justice; When I read the Paper, I told him of the Boastings I heard
he made of the Victory he had obtained. He assured me he had not said any such
thing; but pretended a respect for me: Yet I have reason to suspect he might
underhand encourage such Reports (for I am inclined to believe he is not a Man
of that Perfection, but he may be tempted to, and without breach of Charity, I
may suppose him sometimes to entertain with a sort of Pleasure some little
Titillations of the Animal Life, to use the Platonic Phrase, which the best Men
may be too propens to) if what I have heard be true; for I was told by a
Neighbour-Minister, that one in his Parish who was an Antipaedobaptist, told
him he had an excellent Gift of Praying: And he hoped to have an excellent Gift
of Preaching. Whereupon he asked, if he had heard of me, and the Conference I
had with their great Man, and reputed Bishop. He answered, yes, and said I was
a Man of great Noise, but little Sens: I am content for once that pert Fellow
should make a Trial of Skill on me, and employ his little Learning and Art
about me; and if he can prove his Charge, I will be satisfied patiently to bear
the reproachful Accusation. He added, Their Goliath, their great Champion had so
baffled me, that I had not the Courage to appear before him. But I will
entertain such candid Thoughts of Mr. M. C. as to believe he will not give so
mean a Character of me as this Thrasonic Fellow has. However I was a little
after at a Market Town, where I heard he was; and when I found him, I told him
I would give him any thing the House afforded, (for I had a Mind to acquaint
him what his wise Admirer said of him and me) if he would be so kind as to
allow me a little Discourse with him; but he answered he could not then spare
time. Thus I have given as true and fair an Account as possibly I could of the
Conference, as my Memory would serve to relate of what was done some Years ago.
If any ask why I did not publish it sooner; the Reason is, because I was
willing to preach it to my People before I published it.

And that I did not, nor could do it till this Summer, there were some Reasons
I think not necessary to publish. I find a Poet tells of an Author who was so
exact in the composing a piece of Work, that he was nine Years before he
published it.

-- Nonumque prematur in Annum. Horat. I must confess I was not so exact as to
spend half the time in the composure of this Treatise, though it has not
appeared till now. I have endeavored to treat my Adversary with Respect; for I
had much rather persuade and convince the Judgment by Arguments of Reason, than
exasperate an angry Humor, or raise a Passion by a petulant Expression. If any
of the Advers Party shall judge themselves obliged, in vindication of a weak
and almost baffled Cause, to make a Return: If they will do it heartily and
ingenuously, like Scholars or Gentlemen, they shall be entertained with the
same Civility in my Reply. But if they shall answer with Noise and Nonsense,
impertinently, or in a Burlesque way, I acquaint them I affect not Domitian's
Employment; and time does not so hang on my Hands, that I have any to expend in
catching Flies; and I had rather bear with their buzzing, than be so diverted
from Business. And truly I was willing to treat my Adversaries kindly, and
manage this Controversy with Plainness for the Reasons the learned Mr. Walker
gives, Vide Mr. Walker 's excellent Preface to his modest Plea for
Infant Baptism.
to whom I refer my Readers.

And as I have not committed any voluntary Error in this Relation; so I have
taken Care in the Book it self to write with so much Plainness, that if
perchance I have used a difficult Term, I have adjoined a Synonymous Word to
explain my meaning. And because some of my People have desired I would print
all I preached on the Subject of Infant Baptism, I will here transcribe one or
two Papers which I used before I came to my main Argument; and then with this
Preface, and what is in the Book, I shall have delivered what not only my self,
but others of far greater Judgment (if they do not flatter me) think necessary
to be said on the Subject, according to the Method I have handled it in, and
the Topics I have proved it by. What I said next, was, when I had occasion to
preach on that former Text, and quoted 1 Cor. VII. 14. I thus delivered my
self: Give me leave now to say something in defense of Infant Baptism; being
willing to seize on any Opportunity that inviteth me to speak thereof. For
being there is a Sect of Men called Antipaedobaptists, that have set up a
Meeting in this Parish to seduce Men from the Ancient Truth, I think it my Duty
(out of kindness to your Souls Health) to preserve you in the true and
Catholic, because Christian Doctrine of Baptizing Infants, that you may, by
defending your Orthodox Principle of the Church of England, be able to Answer
some of their weak (though they imagine them strong) Arguments.

If then that be true, which I do not in the least doubt, (having no reason for
it,) that the Learned Rabbis among the Jews acquaint us with, (who best
understood their Usages,) That one Reason of Circumcision, was to teach the
derivation of God's Covenant to the Seed of the Faithful. This place of St.
Paul's will hint us a seemingly unanswerable Argument for Infant Baptism, which
with an allowable confidence, and without too much conceitedness of my self,
(for I have labored to mortify such Inclinations,) I may challenge the most
Learned Antipaedobaptist in this Country, or possibly in the Kingdom, to give
any tolerable Answer to, or to offer any Sens of this Text, different from what
I shall now deliver, as its true meaning, provided it be according to the
Testimony of Holy Writ, the Connection of Sacred Scripture, the Analogy of sound
Faith, and the clear Dictates of right Reason. I call this Doctrine an Ancient
Practice, because I do not in any measure Question, but it was used in that Age
of Christianity next to the Holy Apostles, which is as soon as we could expect
it to be used; because in the Holy Apostle's time, there was no one Nation
brought over to the Christian Faith; but because of the swift propagation of
the Christian Doctrine, we may reasonably suppose there was such a Conversion by
the end of the first Century, or Hundred years after the Holy Apostles death;
Viri Apostolici.
and the Fathers of that Century were called Apostolic Men; and if you will not
allow such a Tradition to be Apostolic, I know not what Tradition can claim
that Ancient and Honorable Name. And now I will give you the plain Sens of
that place of St. Paul's abovementioned, such as may confirm what I have
before offered, as its meaning, in a Conference on this Subject: For the
unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife; and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by the Husband; i. e. the Paganish Husband is sanctified by the Wife
that is a Christian, I mean her Foederal or Covenant Holiness is imputed to the
Husband, that the Children begotten and born after such a Marriage, may be
Holy, or Partakers of a Foederal or Covenant Holiness: For a Personal Holiness
cannot be conveyed, (as some Men of ill Principles, particularly the
Antinomians think, for they believ the Personal Holiness of God and Christ may
be transmitted, and therefore they declare a Man may be Godded with God, and
Christed with Christ.) And so the Paganish Wife is sanctified by the believing
Husband. That no other sense can be the proper meaning of this Text, I appeal
to the Context, which is the best way to have a right understanding of Holy
Scripture, (or any other Book or Author,) as will appear by two verses
preceding, If any Brother has a Wife that believes not, and she be pleased to
dwell with him, let him not put her away; and the Woman which has an Husband
that believes not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.
And then the Holy Apostle, as an encouragement for Co-habitation, and a Reason
why the Husband should not Divorce the Wife, or the Wife forsake the Husband,
adds the following Words, for the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the
Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband; which being so
great a Privilege should be a Motive to dwell together, and not by separation
to forfeit so considerable an Advantage; and when there is so plain Sense in
Holy Scripture for the Baptizing Infants, it is unreasonable in the
Antipaedobaptists to demand a positiv Precept of Holy Scripture in express
Words; and therefore having so much Reason on our side, grounded on the plain
sense of Holy Scripture, Why may not we, with as much Reason retort on them,
and demand a positiv Prohibition in express terms? And ask, whether they can
show any Text in the whole Sacred Book of God, that says, Infants shall not be
Baptized? Having therefore so much Reason for our Principles, we may rationally
presume we have the Holy Scriptures, seeing they never contradict Reason,
though they may in some things transcend Reason; but I shall need say no more
from this Text, having spoken so fully to it in the Book, to which I referr my
Readers.

I know but one Objection, An Obj.
I shall need to take notice of here (seeing I have answered so many in the
Book, and in particular This, and therefore shall be the shorter in the Account
I now give; and what I say, shall not be the same with that in the Book,) and
this I am the more willing to, because I know some of the Antipaedobaptists
think it may have some force in it, against our Principle, though few of them
know how to manage it; and I confess it has been started to me by one that
knew not how to use it; and this they think the stronger, because drawn from
our acknowledged Principles; I mean from one of our authorized Books; and so
they take it to be like the Logicians Argumentum ad Hominem, as strong as a
Dilemma, and so hope to gore us with our own Horns, and expect we should say as
the Apostate Emperor of the Christians in his Age, when he was overcome by the
Christians, ^ropriis (...).
with Arguments drawn out of his own Quiver, We are wounded with the Arrows
feathered from our own Shafts. The Objection is drawn from an Answer to a
Question in our Church Catechism: To that Question, What is required of Persons
to be Baptized? the Answer is, Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin; and Faith,
whereby they steadfastly believe the Promises of God made to them in that
Sacrament.

To which I Answer, the Repentance here spoken of consists in forsaking Sin,
which is the same with that Abrenunciation they make at their Baptism, by their
Com-promisers and Undertakers; by whom, and by certain Conditions promised by
their Sponsors and Sureties, they are admitted to an Holy Gospel-state, by the
same Reason as a Child may be admitted to a Worldly Inheritance by Guardians,
who undertake for certain Conditions the Child must perform when he arriveth at
years of Discretion, and for Faith that the Child has in the right of his
Parent, because the Parents Faith gives him a Title to the Covenant, and so by
consequence to the Sign of it, Baptism; beside, that Faith may be thus imputed
from some Instances in the Holy Gospel we see, where we find that Christ makes
the Parents Faith necessary to the recovery of the sick Child: But there is no
necessity of saying any more to this, there being a much larger Answer in the
Book. And now I have but one Account more to give of what I delivered before I
come to my main Argument; and that I am willing to transcribe, because it will
the better prepare the way to those Holy Scripture-Proofs I have offered in the
Book, for evidencing the necessity of Infant Baptism. Preaching at the Festival
of the Nativity of the Holy Jesus, on that Text, Isai. VII. 14. Therefore the
Lord of Hosts shall give you a Sign, behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, and shall call his name Immanuel, I had an Occasion to quote St. Matthew.
XXVIII. 19, 20. Go you therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And, Lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the World. Amen. I thus addressed my self to my People; I beg
leave to give you the true Sens of this Text, that you may not be seduced from
any important Truth of the Christian Religion: And this I am willing to do,
because the Antipaedobaptists do so much triumph in, and boast thereof, as if
it contained an unanswerable Argument against Infant Baptism; but I will
evidently show, it has no force for their purpose. And now I will clearly
evince, and make out, That this Text they so much insist on, has nothing in it
against our Principles: And this I will do by showing what the Coherence of
this Text (they think so much for them) is, and the Design of Christ's
Commission to his Blessed Disciples in these Words, which is the only proper
way of coming to the knowledge of their true Sens, whereby you may understand
this place does not in the least countenance their erroneous Principle. Their
Argument is, because it is said in the Commission, Teach before they Baptize:
Now how could Men understand a Religion, that could not be known but by
Revelation, before they had a knowledge of the Revelation? That being the only
way of making a discovery; and therefore it was necessary the Holy Apostles
Commission should be so worded, that they might by their Instructions preach to
the Heathen World that Holy Doctrine the Blessed Jesus came from Heaven to
reveal; and which could not be known but by such a Publication: For it is
impossible that Men could be made Partakers of the sign of the Covenant, till
they owned, and were admitted into the Covenant. For as the Covenant supposes
some Promise on God's part, so it engages to some Service on ours; and we have
no Reason to expect the Privilege, if we will not undergo the Service. So that
with relation to the Context, and the Design of the Commission, (which as I
have insinuated, is the only way of coming to the knowledge of their true
meaning) the Sens is plainly this: All Power is given to me in Heaven and in
Earth, Go you therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them; i. e. seeing so
great Power is delivered to me by the Father, I impart to you so much of that
Power as is fit to be communicated, and as is necessary for the Message I send
you on, and the business I have entrusted you with, which is to travel all the
World, and instruct all Nations in the Holy Doctrine I came from the Mansions
of Glory to acquaint you with. Now that this is the true Sens, appears from the
following Words of the next Verse, Teaching them to observe all things whatever.
I have commanded you; and then encouraging them with hopes that Success should
never be wanting to the diligent performance of their Duty, And, Lo, I am with
you always even to the end of the World. Amen. Now I do not at all question,
but if the Law had been as extensive a Dispensation as the Holy Gospel, Moses
their Legislator would have given such a Commission to Twelve Elders of the
Twelve Tribes of Israel, as our dear Savior gave his Blessed Apostles, and
said, Go teach all Nations, Circumcising them: But because the Law was confined
to Judea, and the Jews, God's (...), his peculiar People; therefore that could
not be done: But supposing it might have been, I say such a Commission would
have been no Argument against the Circumcising the Jewish Children; and by a
rational consequence, this Commission of Christ to his Blessed Disciples, can
be no Argument against Infant Baptism, because it is directed only to those
that were not in Covenant, and had not the least Instruction in that Holy
Doctrine that was now revealed. For they that were in Covenant, had a Power of
transmitting their Title and Interest in the Covenant to their Children; and it
is not only uncharitable, but irreligious, to believe that because the Holy
Gospel was a more extensiv Dispensation than the Law, it was not as merciful an
one. For our Adversaries allow (and from Evidence of Revelation are forced)
Children under the Law were admitted into Covenant; and then by Parity of
Reason, why may they not under the Holy Gospel? I am certain St. Paul (who I
believe understood Religion much better than any of them) says so in express
Words; for he makes Children holy as soon as born, though but one of the Parents
were a Christian, as I hope I have made unanswerably appear from 1 Cor. VII.
14. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving
Wife is sanctified by the Husband, else were your Children unclean, but now are
they holy; and if so, they must have a Right to the Sign that conveyeth the
Privileges of the Covenant, because they actually have a Right to the Covenant
by their Birth.

And this may answer a seemingly strong Objection of the Antipaedobaptists, Obj.
That it is unreasonable to admit those into Covenant that are not capable of
understanding the Terms.

But not to say this Objection is a Reflection on the Righteousness of God's
Dispensations; which I might do, and prove it.

It is a sufficient Answer to this their great Objection, Answ.
That this Method of Dispensation is reasonable, because according to the Laws
of Heaven and Earth too. For all that understand Instituted Religion, own God
did by Circumcision admit Children into Covenant under the Law: And St. Paul
says, He that is circumcised becomes a Debtor to keep the whole Law; which
the Jewish Children were as incapable of keeping, as Christian Children are of
the Holy Gospel; and so the Objection lies as strong against Circumcising, as
Baptizing Children. And it is reasonable according to the Laws of Men too: For
it is well known to all Lawyers, that it is a common thing to admit a Child to
an Estate by Guardians and Tutors, under several Conditions, which the Child
cannot undertake the Performance of, till he come to that Age wherein he can
exercise his Reason: And is it not full as reasonable to admit Children, on
certain Terms, to an Holy Gospel Estate, as to a secular one, on Conditions
they are incapable of executing. And thus we have the Laws of Heaven, and Men
too, against our Adversaries: Nay, we have three strong Weapons to defend the
Truth, if we know but how to wield and manage them.

1. The Holy Scripture, which is the Sword of the Spirit.

2. Reason, which I may call the Sword of Nature.

3. The Law, which I may name the Military Sword.

And being thus secured with spiritual, natural, and material Armor, we may be
so courageous as not to fear the most violent Attempts that shall be made
against us; and may believ according to an Holy Scripture Phrase, very proper
to our Case, that against Truth, and us too, while we hold the Truth and stick
to sound Principles, no Weapon formed shall prosper, or have its intended
effect; and when I had delivered these three Accounts from the Pulpit in
defense of Infant Baptism, I was thinking that if I could make the Sense of
this last Text, viz. St. Matthew. XXVIII. 19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing
them: I say, if I could prove those Words to be not only not for the
Antipaedobaptists, but against them, and for us, I did believe I should say all
was sufficient to prove its Lawfulness from Holy Scripture. And meditating one
Morning, I employed my Thoughts to give the Words such a Sens, and to justify
it when I had done: And in order thereto I did humbly, and fervently implore
the Divine Assistance, and God (who is never wanting to help them, who with
Humility and Faith address themselves to him) suggested this Account of the
Text to my Mind, that I have offered in the following Papers; which when I had
composed, I penned down, because I was not willing to forget what my Thoughts
had delivered as the proper meaning of the Text, according to my Judgment; and
I made use of no Book, but the Greek Testament, to satisfy my self in the
Account the Original gives of Acts II. 39. which with 1 Cor. VII. 14. I made
use of, as collateral Proofs, to confirm the Sens given: For I did believ the
comparing of one Place of Holy Scripture with another, one of the best ways of
coming to its true Meaning; which when I had drawn out, it made about two Sheets
of Paper, which was all at first I did design to print.

But the Occasion of enlarging it, was this: A Neighbour-Clergy-man (with whom
I discoursed about the Sens given of St. Mat. XXVIII. 19. and the Confirmation
I brought from those two other Places of Holy Scripture beforementioned)
acquainted me he had a Book of an ingenious Antipaedobaptist, that did seem to
invalidate any Proof for Infant Baptism from those two Texts; which I desired
to read, and he lent me. When I came home, I did without prejudice peruse what
he had wrote, and at the first sight I was somewhat surprised; but on
consideration, and retiring into my self, I did find his Arguments against the
Sens I offered, were but weak, as I hope will appear to any impartial Reader by
the Answer I have given. After I had done this, I resolved to use all Means I
could think of, or remember, to establish the Sens I had given of the Text, and
accordingly read over some useful Treatises upon the Subject; and because as
Pliny somewhere says, Ingenuum est profiteri per quos profeceris. Plinius.
An ingenious thing it is to own by whom we have profited, I will give an
Account to whom I am obliged, and more particularly I stand engaged to the
reverend Dr. Hammond, in his Resolution of Six Queries; one whereof is about
Infant Baptism; the other is the Excellent Author of the Case of Infant Baptism.

Which was one of those cases the Reverend Lord Bishop of London did, out of a
pious and excellent Design, engage his City Clergy to state and resolve for the
satisfaction of Dissenters, and to reduce them to the Church of England.

As for Dr. Hammond, I have used his words in a manner; and for the other, I
have in most, if not in all places, altered his words, and taken his sens, that
I might adapt it to my own style, that the Work might look the more alike, and
seemingly appear all of a piece. Something I have borrowed from Mr. Ellis, in
his Book called, Pastor and Clerk; or a Debate (real) concerning Infant Baptism.

As to the Authorities I have used to confirm the sens delivered, I have not
taken things on Trust; but perused and examined good Editions of the Original
Authors, and have been careful neither to mis-report their words, nor
misrepresent their sens, and having made this Ingenuous Acknowledgment, I
cannot be accused of Plagiarism; because I give my Authors all the Reputation
they can desire, by owning what I have taken.

And now, I hope, I may without any conceitedness, say, I have used all the
proper Methods for reducing Gainsayers into the Paths of Truth and Peace: For
besides three Rational Arguments for Infant Baptism, I have endeavored to
prove it from that place of Holy Scripture the Adversaries think against it;
and to engage the belief of the most avers and pre-possessed, I have offered
all the proper methods of Conviction.

1. I have given a clear Exposition to confirm the meaning.

2. I have much enlarged that Exposition.

3. I have proved the Sens by the Coherence.

4. I have confirmed the meaning by the Original; for in some places of Holy
Scripture, no Translation comes up exactly to the Original; for in every
Language there are some peculiar Idioms that cannot well be translated into
another Tongue.

5. I have strengthened the Sens by two other places of Holy Scripture; for the
Holy Spirit, by comparing one place with another, does best interpret his
meaning.

6. I have given some general Observations to establish the Sens of the three
Texts delivered.

7. I have defended the Exposition given by an Allusion to Jewish Customs,
without which Account it is impossible to come to an understanding of some
places of Holy Scripture in the New Testament.

8. I have confirmed what I have offered, as the sens of the three places of
Holy Scripture, from the Authority of some of the Ancient Fathers, who living
nearest the times of the Holy Apostles, may reasonably be presumed best to know
the sens of their Writings; and I could have produced more in defense of
Infant Baptism; but I was not willing to stuff my Book with Quotations from the
Ancients; but only thought good to use those, that might establish the meaning
of these Texts I quoted.

9. I have endeavored to Answer three strong Objections of the
Antipaedobaptists against the sens delivered.

After I had done, I showed it to some of the Clergy in the Country, and I was
told by one, it had been done in part this way by others; I said possibly it
might so, but I had never seen it in any Book or Author: I speak not this to
put any value on, or assume, or take any thing to my self; but only to own a
Gracious Return to my importunate Prayers, while I was employed in the
Investigation and Search after Divine Truth, and to implore his Blessing, that
it might have that good effect I sincerely designed in the composure of it. Non
nobis, Domine, non nobis; sed Nomini tuo sit Gloria.
And if it shall work a Conviction on any that have erred from the way of
Truth, I will say in the Words of the Royal Prophet, Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us; but unto thy Holy Name be the sole Praise, Honor, and Glory given,
and ascribed.

And indeed it is almost morally impossible for a Wise Man to be Proud, if he
duly consider what St. Paul says, Who makes thee to differ from another? And
what have thou, 2 Cor. IV. 7.
that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, Why do thou
Glory, as if thou had not received it? I have so far consulted the
satisfaction of the Vulgar Readers, that I have placed almost all my Quotations
in the Margin, (except where I had occasion to give an Account of the Original,
as to St. Matthew. XXVIII. 19. and Act. II. 39. which I could not well do; and if
the candid Reader shall skip those two Chapters, and what I could not well put
into the Margin, I hope the unprejudiced Person may receive satisfaction from
the rest of the Book.) And that the meanest Capacity may understand the
strength of my Argument, and the sens of what I have wrote, where I have used
any Greek or Latin, I have set in the Book, and could not place in the Margin,
I have put it between these two Marks [] and made the Sens entire without the
understanding, or reading, what is so written. Nay, some of the
Antipaedobaptists are desirous to adorn their Books with the Authorities of
Learned Men, and to make use of Tradition, if it be of their side: In truth it
is usually seen that hardly any oppose Tradition, but those that suppose it is
not of their side, or cast off Authority, but such as believ it against them.
And I suppose for this Reason, Colonel Danvers, a great Patron of, and Advocate
for their Cause, and a Principal Head of their Party has flourished his Book
with many Quotations of the Authorities of the Ancients: But I doubt not if his
Book be examined, it will appear he has either mis-quoted his Authors, or
misrepresented their Sens; and this the Learned Mr. Mr. Walker 's Modest Plea
for Infant Baptism. Prope finem.
Walker has in part already evidenced, in the Postscript to his excellent
Book; and in particular tells us, that St. Cyprian's Epistle to Fidus, has not
yet been demonstrated to be illegitimate; and says that this Author, even Mr.
Danvers, owns not it is yet made out, no not so much as by Monsieur Daille, who
has given the World the greatest discovery of that kind; and we have good
reason to believ it to be genuine; and good ground we have for such a Belief;
seeing it is allowed by Two Learned Doctors of the Church, St. Augustine, and
St. Hierome, as Mr. Walker has evidenced toward the end of his Book by two
Quotations from them, to which I referr my Readers. And truly, I have been told
by some of the Learned, that some worthy Persons of our excellent Church, have
challenged the Antipaedobaptists to stand to the Trial of Antiquity, and to
appear for their Principles no farther than such Authority will allow; but I
have heard they have refused to submit to such a Test; and pretend they will
not be convinced by any other Arguments (how strong soever they may not only
appear, but really be) than the plain Words, or literal Expressions of Holy
Scripture, or its direct Sens; and the making out the Truth, by this way, is
the hearty Endeavor, and sincere Design of this Book; and how far it is done
according to such a Rule, is submitted to the Judgment of the candid and
judicious Readers.

And now, on the whole matter, I hope I may venture to say, if I have given the
true sens of Christ's Commission to this Blessed Disciples for the
Administration of this Holy Sacrament of Baptism, and confirmed it by proper
Proofs; and answered the strongest Objections brought by the Adversaries,
against the sens delivered, in defense of the Orthodox and Christian Doctrine of
Infant Baptism, than he who resists such Evidence renounceth his Belief of the
Sacred Scriptures, the Revelation of the Holy Will of Heaven, and forfeits his
Title to the honorable Profession of Christianity. And truly the Learned and
Judicious Mr. Walker has given the World such a rational Discourse in defense
of this Principle, in his Modest Plea for Infant Baptism, and has proved by
such strong Arguments, the Infants Need for it, Idem Ibidem, In the Title Page.
Benefits by it, Capableness of it, and Right to it, that whosoever will not
believ the comfortable and Christian Doctrine of Infant Baptism, upon the
Testimony he brings for its proof, renounceth his Title to Reason, and
forfeits his right to the Noble Estate of Humanity, and with Nebuchadnezar
degenerateth into the Nature of a Beast: Dan. IV. 32, 33.
Nay, I think I may without too much boldness say, Mr. Walker has so
undeniably proved their Claim and Title to it, that in a Spiritual and
Evangelic Sens, he makes it Sacriledg, and in a Temporal and Legal one,
Robbery, to debar them of admission to it; all, or a great part of which has
been made manifest and apparent, consequentially and implicitly, from the
method we have pitched on, and the Arguments we have made use of: so that there
is no need of borrowing any thing from him, he having done it in his way so
plainly and fully: But they that would have a more particular Account, than I
have thought fit to give, may have plenary and full satisfaction from his
excellent Book beforementioned, to which I referr them. I have endeavored to
answer all the Objections that I ever heard of, or read in any of their Books
that were started by the Antipaeaobaptists, that were material; and I know not
any I have passed by unanswered for their difficulty, but may have omitted some
that were so triffling, they either needed not, or deserved not any Answer.

As for that Objection of the Antipadobaptists, An Obj.
that our way is not Baptism, or Baptizing; but Rantism, or Rantizing.

I Answer, Answ.
Though our Church allows dipping in some cases and circumstances, as
supposing the Parents desire it, and the Party's health is not in the least
endangered, (and of that there may be much greater hazard in our cold Northern
Climate, than in those hot Eastern Countries where Baptism was first used;) and
of the Party's health our excellent Church takes such care in her Rubric, that
she Orders, if it be done at all, See the Liturgy in the Office of Public
Baptism.
it shall be done with great discretion and wariness, and not without the
Sponsors and Undertakers certifying the Child may with safety endure it; but if
the Party's health may in the least measure be endangered thereby, there cannot
by any means be a necessity for it, for this good Reason, Hos. VI. 6. St.
Matthew. IX. 13. XII. 7.3.4. St. Luke VI. 4. Levit. XXIV. 9.
because the God of Heaven will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, i.e. The
Almighty God and best of Beings dispenses with his own Institutions, in such
cases as is plain from the Instance of David eating the Shewbread, when he was
well an hungered, and they that were with him, which was not lawful for him to
eat, neither for them which were with him, because it was lawful for none but
the Priest's alone: So that for the Reason I have offered, the Objection lies
not directly against the Church of England, or any that own her Rational,
because Scriptural Principles; yet the Judicious Mr. Walker has made it
demonstrably, and therefore unanswerably, appear from Divines, Grammarians, and
Lexicographers, Vide Mr. Walker 's (...), or the Doctrine of Baptisms; which
whole Book (with his Modest Plea for Infant Baptism) is very well worthy any
Man's perusal.
that neither the Primitiv Word (...), nor the Derivativ Word (...), signify
only to dip; and that (...) does not always signify a total Immersion, and
that the Word (...) is not restrained to a total Immersion among Christians, by
the practice of the Jews: Nay, farther he has clearly evidenced, that
sprinkling was used in the earliest Centuries, or first Ages of the Primitiv
Church; besides he has given probable Arguments, to incline, if not engage any
unprejudiced Man's Belief, that sprinkling was the Custom in the Holy Apostolic
times, even in those early days, when the first commissionated Teachers went
forth into the several parts of the World to publish the Sacred Gospel; and
more than all this he gives great probability of believing, See Mr. Walker 's
(...), or the Doctrine of Baptisms. Chap. X.
that our ever Blessed Savior, the Holy Jesus, when he was Baptized by St.
John the Baptist in the River Jordan, did not undergo a total Immersion.

And this I think is abundantly sufficient, if not more than enough, to Answer,
if not for ever silence that Objection; but they that would have a more ample
and larg Account, may receiv a full and clear satisfaction from what that
excellent Man has said on that Subject, to whom I referr the Readers.

I know but one Objection (that is any thing at all considerable, for I would
not willingly neglect any that are worth answering) I have not mentioned; and
that I find started by Mr. Walker, in his late excellent Book I have so often
quoted. It may be met with in his Preface; and because he has stated it so
fairly, and answered it so strongly, I will give it you in his own Words,
because I cannot better express it, either as to Sens, or Words.

Antipaedobaptists, than what springs from that bright Evidence they have of
Baptizing Adult Persons in all Ages of the Church, and of Persons deferring
either to be Baptized themselves, or to Baptize their Infants in several Ages
of it, and those especially that were nearest the Primitiv Times; and the
removal of that Prejudice, and answering that Objection, may be a fair
Introduction to their depositing and laying down all the rest.

Antipaedobaptists so greatly insist on in the ancient times, were on other
Grounds from those they alledg in the Case, and plead for a defense of their
erroneous and mistaken Principles; then that Plea of theirs from the Practice
of Baptizing the Adult in the early Ages of the Church, and deferring the
Baptizing Infants, will neither serve their Hypothesis, or Principle, nor
disserve ours. The Grounds, as I understand, on which our Antipaedobaptists
refuse Baptizing of their Infants, and deferr their Baptism till they come to
full Maturity, or Ripeness of Age, are, because as they suppose, there is no
Command in Holy Scripture for it, and because there is no Example in Holy
Scripture of its practice; either of which if there found, our Adversaries
would hold it lawful; and because they find neither of them, they hold it
unlawful. Now if it appear the Unlawfulness of Baptizing Infants for the want
of an Holy Scripture-Command, or Example, was none of the Grounds on which the
Ancients did delay their Baptizings. And if it be likewise evident, that never
any such thing was in the Primitiv Times pretended, or pleaded by any Persons
to justify or excuse that delay; then I hope the Case will be clear, that
their delays of Baptizing, on other Grounds, can afford no Protection to, or
Defense for the Hypothesis, or Principle of our Antipaedobaptists, who deny
Baptism to Infants on the Account of its Unlawfulness. That never any such Plea
was made by any in the Primitiv Times (even for Five hundred years) against
Infants being Baptized, I rationally presume, because I find none yet produced
by any of the most learned of our Antipaedobaptists, who, I believe, have
searched through all the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, and Ecclesiastic
Historians, and ransacked every Page, and rifled every passage in them, for
some Patronage to their Hypothesis, or Principle. And as they are quick-sighted
enough to have espied it, if there had been Quotation, or Authority from them
to have produced it in their behalf; so on the most curious and diligent
Enquiry I have been ever able to make, I profess I have not been able to find
any.

And then learnedly from Tertullian, St. Gregory Nyssen, St. Basil, St. Gregory
Nazianzen, and St. Chrysostom, he gives Eighteen or Nineteen Instances of
several Cases for the deferring of Baptism; and afterward brings in three or
four other Cases, which are all I think could be reckoned up. Upon which he
says, (that I may draw to a Conclusion) and now so many Reasons being alleged
for the delaying of Baptism, so many shifts used for the putting it off in the
Primitiv Times, and yet the Lawfulness of its being administered to Infants
never once questioned, the Unlawfulness of it never urged, it is a plain Case,
that those Times had no such Thoughts of Infant Baptism, as the
Antipaedobaptists in our Days entertain: For had they thought Baptizing Infants
unlawful, for want of an Holy Scripture Command or Example, when any Persons
had been exhorted to an early Baptizing their Children, how easy an Answer had
been at hand? The Holy Jesus never commanded such a thing as Infant Baptism;
the Blessed Apostles never practiced such a thing as the Baptizing Infants:
There is neither Precept, nor Example in Holy Scripture; and therefore it is
unlawful, and we dare not do it.

But in regard there is in all those times not the least appearance of any such
Objection, or of any such Plea pretended for the delay; it is evident, they
thought there was either Precept, or Example, in Holy Scripture, or both; or
else that the want of either or both, did not make it unlawful; and so did not
delay it on the Account of the Unlawfulness thereof: And so all our
Antipaedobaptists boasting of Antiquity for the Baptizing only Adult, Believing
Persons, and against the Baptizing Believers Infant-Children, affords them
little Boast; there is not the least strength added to their Cause, nor
weakness brought on ours.

I heartily wish those ignorant People that are deluded, and cozened with the
great Noise and gay Show of Antiquity, to take notice hereof that they be no
longer deceived, and imposed.

And now this grand prejudice is (as I hope) fully removed, and all Objections
I can imagine any way considerable, have been endeavored to be rationally and
clearly answered in the following Book, I shall now heartily desire my Readers
to join with me in the pious and devout Suffrage of our excellent Liturgy in
the Office of the Litany.

That i^ may please thee to bring into the way of Truth all such as have erred,
and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, Good Lord.

And now as I begun this large Preface with some of the Sens of a Learned
Bishop of our Church, in some of his Prefaces to his Books; so I will conclude
this large Account, not only with some of the Sens, but in the Words of the
same Reverend Bishop, I mean the Lord-Bishop of Ely. In short then, to shut up
all; if it had not been to fill up some vacant Pages (and to be just to the
performance of the Promise I made in the Title Page, of giving a Relation (so
far as my Memory would serve) of a Conference publicly held with an
Antipaedobaptist of no small Fame) I had made almost as short a Preface, as
those Words of the Son of Syrach (according to which I expect the Success of my
Labor) Ecclus. XXI. 15. If a skilful Mad hear a wise Word, he will commend it,
and add to it: But as soon as one of no Understanding hears it, it
displeases him, and he casts it behind his Back.

Examine all things, and judge righteous Judgment.

July, 26. 1692.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. AN Introduction unto the Subject discoursed upon. Page 1 CHAP. II.
Some Rational Arguments offered for Infant Baptism. Page 2 CHAP. III. The true
Sens of the Holy Jesus 's Commission unto his Blessed Disciples, for the
Administration of Baptism recorded, St. Matthew XXVIII. 19. makes for the
Baptizing of Infants. Page 4 CHAP. IV. An Exposition, whereby the Sens
delivered of St. Matthew. XXVIII. 19. is farther cleared. Page 12 CHAP. V. The
Exposition for clearing the Sens of St. Matthew. XXVIII. 19. farther enlarged.
Page 26 CHAP. VI. The Sens of St. Matthew. XXVIII. 19. proved by the Coherance
and Connection of the Words. Page 38 CHAP. VII. The Sens of St. Matthew. XXVIII.
19. farther evidenced from the Original. Page 40 CHAP. VIII. The Sens of St.
Matthew. XXVIII. 19. confirmed by an Exposition of Acts II. 39. in general. Page
48 CHAP. IX. A farther Confirmation by a particular Exposition of Acts II. 39.
Page 53 CHAP. X. The Sens of St. Matthew. XXVIII. 19. strengthened by an
Exposition of 1 Cor. VII. 14. Page 57 CHAP. XI. Some General Observations upon
the Sens and Expositions given. Page 62 CHAP. XII. A defense of the Expositions
delivered from Jewish Customs. Page 68 CHAP. XIII. Authorities of the Ancient
Fathers to establish the Sens of the Three Texts of Holy Scripture. Page 72
CHAP. XIV. The just Complaint of the Jews if this Doctrine be not true. Page 76
CHAP. XV. An Answer unto an Objection that would overthrow the Sens given of
St. Matthew XXVIII. 19. Page 79 CHAP. XVI. An Answer unto an Objection that
would undermine the Sens offered for Acts II. 39. Page 91 CHAP. XVII. An Answer
unto an Objection that would overturn the Sens delivered of 1 Cor. VII. 14.
Page 125 CHAP. XVIII. An Account whence Infant Baptism results. Page 137 CHAP.
XIX. An Appeal unto the Reason of Mankind. Page 140 CHAP. XX. The Conclusion.
Page 142 A Prayer used at the end of these Dicourses, by way of Humble and
Importunate Address unto the God of Truth, sitting upon his Throne of Grace
(his Mercy-Seat, the [ true Scheinah, or] Symbol of his Divine Presence) to
implore the Descent of the Heavenly Blessing upon this charitable and
well-intended Design. Page 145
CHAP. I. An Introduction to the Subject discoursed upon.
SEeing some Men of ill Principles, and Separatists from our excellent Church,
have, with an evil design, set up a Meeting in this Parish, as we may
reasonably conjecture, without breach of Charity; I think it my most
indispensible Duty to confirm and settle you in those necessary and fundamental
Truths our Church holds by the clear Testimony of Holy Scripture, and the
evident Dictates of Reason, that you may not be seduced into dangerous Errors
by weak or cunning Men, that lie in wait to deceive. I have formerly made
appear, I hope, to the satisfaction of unprejudiced, because dis-interested
Persons, that the Place of Holy Scripture, the Enemies of Infant Baptism so
much insist upon, and boast of; viz. St. Matthew. xxviij. 19. Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them, is no more against the Comfortable and Christian
Doctrine of Infant Baptism, than Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the
Heaven, and the Earth. And now I will endeavor to prove, That that Place of
Holy Scripture, if rightly understood, is not only not against us, but for us,
and against them: And this I will attempt to evince and make appear by the
Evidence of Reason, and the Testimony of Divine Revelation.

CHAP. II. Some Rational Arguments for Infant Baptism.
THE Argument I offer, in short, is plainly this, which I will reduce into the
form of a plain and proper Syllogism; That Principle which hinders the
Propagation of Christian Religion, can be no Christian Doctrine: But the
denying Baptism to Infants, hinders the Progress of the Christian Religion;
Therefore such a Principle can be no Christian Doctrine. The Major, all
Christians, even our Adversaries, allow, but the making out the Minor is the
Difficulty; for which I offer this Proof. That Principle which makes the
Covenant of Grace less beneficial and extensive, than the Covenant of Works,
hinders the Propagation of Christian Religion: But the former Principle does
so; Therefore such a Principle hinders the Progress of Christianity. The Major
is undoubtedly so, and I will endeavor to make the Minor to be such by this
One Argument: That Principle which allows not as great Immunities, Benefits and
Privileges to the Covenant of Grace, as to the Covenant of Works, makes the
Covenant of Grace less Beneficial and Extensive than the Covenant of Works: But
the Principle that denies Baptism to Infants does so; Therefore it makes the
Covenant of Grace less Beneficial and Extensive than the Covenant of Works.
Siquidem evidentissimum est, quod semel cum Abrahamo Dominus foedus percussit,
non minus hodie Christiano constare, quam olim Judaico populo: adeoque verbum
istud non minus Christianos respicere, quam Judaeos tum respiciebat. Nist forte
arbitramur, Christum suo adventu Patris gratiam imminuisse aut decurtasse, quod
sine execrabili blasphemianon vacat. Calv. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 16. Par. 6.
And the Judicious Mr. Calvin, in his Institutes, seems to speak the same sense
with this last Argument; for after he had said, It is most clear, that God
entered once into Covenant with Abraham, he tells us, That that Covenant had a
respect and regard to Christian, as well as Jewish People; unless peradventure
we should suppose, that Christ by his Advent, or Coming, had diminished, or
curtailed the Grace of his Father, which would be execrable Blasphemy to
imagine.

CHAP. III. The true Sense of the Holy Jesus's Commission unto his Blessed
Disciples for the Administration of Baptism. St. Matthew. xxviij. 19. makes for
the Baptizing of Infants.
AND now I will endeavor to confirm these Arguments by the Authority of Holy
Scripture; and prove, in particular, That that Text of St. Matthew. xxviij. 19.
must have such a sense, as to evidence, That the Covenant of Grace (or else it
would not be such a Covenant, and so forfeit its Title) is full as (or rather
more) beneficial and extensive than the Covenant of Works; and consequently,
that the Baptizing Infants is a Christian, as well as a Comfortable Doctrine,
which is the Truth to be proved; and then it will plainly appear, this Text,
our Adversaries so much Glory in, and Vaunt of, is on our side. For if there
had been as General a Commission given by Moses to Twelve Elders of Israel, as
the Blessed Jesus gave to his Disciples, and it had been said to them, Go teach
all Nations, circumcising them, this had been no Prohibition to the
Circumcising the Jewish Children, because there was a Positive Command given
them by Divine Revelation, and no After-Commission could discharge from
Obedience to such a Command; And where the same Reason holds for the same
Observation, under a different Dispensation, there is no necessity for the
Publication of a New Command to enjoin its Observance. Now there never was,
since the Creation of the World, but two Instituted Religions that had Truth on
their side, the Jewish, and the Christian. And the Blessings that were
conferred by either of these Religions, and the Duties and Services required to
ensure and consign the Blessings from the Party that was to bestow them, to the
Parties that were to enjoy them, were transacted, transmitted and conveyed in a
Covenanting way. Now the Evangelic Dispensation being in a Covenanting way as
well as the Legal one; those that had a right to the Covenant under the Holy
Gospel, had a right to the Sign, Seal, or Sacrament of the Covenant, as well as
those under the Law. Hereupon that Children under the Holy Gospel had a right
to the Covenant, is not very difficult to prove from St. Mark x. 14. Suffer
little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of God; i. e. the Kingdom of Grace: For in that sense is that Phrase of
the Kingdom of God, in several places of Holy Writ, to be understood; and it
plainly signifies, that his Holy Gospel Dispensation (by which the Kingdom of
God is meant) was as extensive and merciful as the Legal Dispensation, and of
which they were capable of being Members; and having the Benefits and Blessings
therein communicated, consigned to them; which is true not only in respect of
their Innocence and Meekness; (for by reason of their Infantile State, they
were not capable of actual and voluntary Sins, and so might, in some sense, be
fit for his Kingdom of Glory;) but because also they were to be allowed an
admission into his Covenant, by virtue of an Imputation of their Parents Faith,
as the Jewish Children were upon that account capable of being Members of the
Covenant, and of receiving the Sign thereof, Circumcision. So that by this
Argument, which I doubt not is sufficiently founded upon this place of Holy
Scripture, whereby Christian Children have as true a right to Baptism under the
Holy Gospel, as the Jewish Children had to Circumcision under the Law; It may
appear there is no necessity for an express Place of Holy Scripture, (in so
many words) for the Baptizing Children, when the reason of the thing is founded
in Circumcision, for which there was a Positive Command. Now our Blessed
Savior substituted Baptism in the room of Circumcision, for these two Reasons,
as may probably be conjectured.

(1.) Because he was the Author of a more Merciful Dispensation; and that That
might not be said of the Christian Parents, which Zipporah said to Moses, Exodus
iv. 25. Surely a bloody Husband art thou to me.

(2.) Because he was the Author of a more extensive Dispensation; and therefore
he appointed a Sacrament, or Seal of his Covenant, that Females, as well as
Males, might undergo: Whereas under the Legal Dispensation, Females were not
capable of the Sign of the Covenant; and because it was a more narrow
Dispensation, and likewise, for St. Paul's reason, the Man being the Head of
the Woman, 1 Cor. xj. 3.
she was included in, or comprehended under the Man, which there was no need
she should be under the Evangelic Dispensation, that admitting a Sign, or Seal
of the Covenant, she was as capable of as the Man Thus, as our Blessed Savior
took his Holy Supper from the Postcoenium, or After-supper, after the Passover,
(which as I have found in some Authors was only a Sallad of Endive, Lettuce,
and Succory,) so he took Baptism as the Sacrament of Initiating, or Entering
Disciples into his Evangelick Dispensation, (being well known among the Jews,
because it was the Ceremony for admitting Proselytes into their Church;) That
by taking both Sacraments from known usages among the Jews, he might the more
easily and powerfully reduce, and bring over his own beloved Countrymen, the
Jews, to his Holy Gospel; and this being a more gentle way of Entrance into his
Church, might have a better Influence, and be more probably successful to the
gaining the Gentile World to his New Dispensation, and to be professors of his
Sacred Institutions, and obedient Subjects to his excellent Laws. And this did
more suitably answer his Advent, or Coming into the World, who came to be an
Universal Savior for all Mankind. For Moses was but a Legislator to the
Israelites, and Joshua a Savior to the Jews only; and yet on that account
called Jesus, because he delivered that People from their Enemies, and entered
them into Canaan: But he that was to be an Universal Redeemer, and so the true
Jesus in the most extensive signification of the word, thought fit to appoint
such a Sacrament of Admission into his Kingdom, as might work upon, and prevail
with the whole World, even all Mankind

Now from what has been said (and from a custom among the Jews concerning
Proselytes of Justice, which all learned Men know to be so, and Men of Sense
among the Antipaedobaptists acknowledge, that after such a Proselyte was
Baptized and Circumcised, and had thereby a Right to eat of the Passover, his
Child born after such an Admission into the Covenant, had a Right to
Circumcision at Eight days old, as well as a natural-born Jew,) it may appear,
that denying Baptism to Infants now, is an Hindrance to the Propagation of the
Holy Gospel both as to Jews and Pagans. As to the Jew, because he might say to
an Antipaedobaptist, offering Arguments to persuade him to become a Christian,
He would not be of his Religion; because, after he was in Covenant, and had
received the Sign of the Covenant, his Child was not in Covenant, and so had no
Right to the Sign, which he had in his Way by virtue of his Faith, and so
consequently the Benefit and Privilege less in ours, than in his Way. And so
the Pagan might say to an Antipaedobaptist, persuading him to embrace
Christianity; I will rather be a Jew, than a Christian, because as soon as I
own and profess their Faith, my Child, after such a Declaration, is in Covenant
as well as my self, and has a Right to the Sign. So that, by this account, it
plainly appears, that the denying Infants Baptism, is an Hindrance to the
Progress of the Holy Gospel from Evidence of Reason. From whence it may seem
rationally to follow, That he who holds any Principle that derogates from, and
diminishes the Honor of Christianity, and impedes the Propagation of the
Religion of our dear Redeemer, has no true and proper Right to the Honorable
Name and Title of a Christian, which is the natural and pernicious consequence
of Antipaedobaptistic Tenets. So that how General soever the Commission the
Holy Jesus gave to his Blessed Disciples for converting the Heathen Nations,
was, the sense must be plainly this; (which, if I can secure by two other Texts
of Holy Scripture, confirm by Allusion to Jewish Customs, and by the Coherence,
establish by the Authority of the Ancient, Primitive Fathers, and answer the
strongest Objections of our Adversaries, I shall say all that can be thought
necessary by Men of Reason in defense of Infant Baptism,) Go teach all Nations,
Baptizing them; i.e. When you have sufficiently instructed the Pagan World in,
and convinced them of the Excellency of my Holy Gospel, and thereby persuaded
them to embrace my Divine Religion, my Spiritual Worship; and then, after a
public Profession, they have declared themselves my Disciples and Followers,
ascertain them, that they are admitted into my Covenant of Grace, and receive
them into, and give them a possession of my Covenant by the Sign and Seal of
Baptism; and then assure them, that their Children shall have the same Right to
my Covenant that the natural-born Children of Jews have, and the Children of
the Proselytes of Righteousness or Justice had after their Parents were
converted to the Jewish Religion. The Naturalists have learned, by diligent
enquiry, That if a Pearl have a foulness, and happen to fall into the Womb of a
Dove, 1 Pet. ij. 2. Albertus lib. de Gemmis. Vid. Mr. Carpenter's Anabaptist
washed, and washed, and shrunk in the washing, p. 15, 16.
and continue some time there, the Dove will return it fair and clear: So
Doctrines should be proved in the Womb of the Holy Spirit, the true Holy
Scripture-Dove, which Womb is the sincere Word of Truth, (the (...);) and if
the Doctrine be true Pearl, the Holy Spirit will speedily deliver it for such,
and cleanse it from any Foulness or Impurity it has contracted in this naughty
World. This Interpretation is suitable to the Nature of Baptism, because it was
appointed for all that need it; and all should have Baptism, that stand in need
of Baptismal-Grace; and all stand in need of Baptismal-Grace, that would be
cleansed from Original Pollution; and all stand in need of being cleansed from
Original Defilement, that are Polluted therewith. Aeque certa sunt, ac
evidentia quae ex sacris literis evidenter, ac certe deducuntur, atque ea quae
in illis express, and (...), i.e. ad verbum and in terminis habentur. Ex
veronil nisi verum. Principia fides, vel quae ex iis deducuntur, sunt in
Scriptura. Omnis divina Revelatio est in Scriptura vel direct, vel per
necessariam, and inevitabilem consequentiam.
It is a true Maxim, That Matters are alike sure, and clear, which are
assuredly and evidently drawn from Holy Writ, as the Matters which are read
there in their own proper terms and phrases. Or the same Observation may be
thus worded: Consequences are as true as the Principles they are drawn from, if
truly and properly deduced: The ground of this is as certain as Truth it self.
From Truth proceeds nothing, but what is so, if drawn by a right Consequence.
And another Ground may be, because the Consequence so drawn is, in a manner, as
true as the Principle; and Truth so drawn, is the same with that from whence
the Deduction springs and rises. Upon this account we observe, That the
Doctrines of Faith, and what is deducible therefrom, is contained in Holy Writ.
And again, Every Doctrine that is the Discovery and Birth of Heaven, is either
expressly, or by a needful and unavoidable Conclusion, in Holy Writ: And on
this account we declare, That he who believes a Truth, believes all the
Deductions that can properly be drawn therefrom.

CHAP. IV. An Exposition of St. Matthew. xxviij. 19. Whereby the Sense delivered
is further cleared.
IF Christian Children, from the Sense I have delivered of this Text, be not as
capable of Baptism, as the Jewish Children of Circumcision; Upon what account
arises the Distinction? Not from the Nature of Abraham's Covenant, for that, as
to the material part, was the same with ours made over to us by the Holy Jesus;
Nor from the manner of Conveyance, for Circumcision did signify the same thing
under the former Dispensation, as Baptism under the latter: And hereupon,
seeing the two Covenants were, for the Nature of them, alike, and only a
distinction in the manner of Conveyance, why should any bar lie against the
Admission of Children now, more than formerly? Is Baptism an higher
spiritualized Rite, than Circumcision? That is not possible, because
Circumcision is an Evangelic Institution; I mean an Institution of that
Doctrine which was to Abraham delivered of old. And if the Spirituality of
outward Ordinances is to be drawn from the design of their Appointment, then
Circumcision was as much spiritualized as Baptism, because it truly seals the
same Covenant, and assures the same Grace, and was a Rite of Admission for the
same spiritual stock of the Father of the Faithful, as Baptism is among us.
Hereupon, if Circumcision as a Sacrament was the same formerly that Baptism is
now, it must be consequent, That Infants now are as capable of the One
(provided there is no Precept [de novo] (or a new) to exclude them) as formerly
they were of the Other. If it were not absurd that Children then were allowed
to be Members of the Church, why should it be so under the Holy Gospel? If the
Almighty allowed them under the former Dispensation to be imbodied into the
Church, (without a Precept to forbid them,) there is reason they should be
allowed the same favor now: Nay, if Children were made Members of the Church
when the Admission was more harsh, how irrational is it not to allow them an
Entrance now, when the way of Admission is more suitable to the Tenderness of
an Infant? Surely, if Jewish Children were Circumcised by blood made with
hands, Christian Children (without a Prohibition of Holy Scripture) should be
allowed the Spiritual Circumcision, which is Baptism. Whom the Lord has
admitted an Heir to the Glory above, and given an Interest in his Church below,
no Man should dare to hinder his Title that seals the Inheritance, and offers
the Privilege. But yet so impertinent and censorious have some
Antipaedobaptists been, Vid. Case of Infant Baptism, p. 30.
as to say, Children are as unfit for Baptism as the Offspring of Brutes; and
that it is as nugacious and triffing to Invocate our Heavenly Father for the
Descent of his Divine Spirit, as to beseech him to enlighten a Stock, or a
Stone. So that upon this Hypothesis, or Supposition, That Children are not fit
to be Baptized, the Antipaedobaptists generally affirm, That admitting Children
to it is a reproach to the Sacrament, a very Nothing, an uncommanded Duty, and
thereupon, in contempt, term it Baby-Baptism, as I have heard some of them
phrase it; (though, in truth, the strongest Arguments I have heard from them,
or met with in their Books, may more properly be called, a Baby, than a Manly
Defense of their mistaken Principles;) Not remembering at the same time, that
Circumcising Children was no Reproach to the Sacrament of Admission into the
Jewish Church, but had a proper sense and signification; so that the
Antipaedobaptists might as well say there was Baby-Circumcision, and
Baby-Baptism, under the Mosaic Dispensation, both being used to Children among
that People.

Obj. The main Argument they offer against it is drawn from Childrens unfitness
for some Purposes of that Ordinance, which can be performed by none, but such
as are Adult, who have the use of Reason to know the terms of the Covenant they
are admitted to, and to exercise the Graces proper for that Ordinance, and to
confirm those Graces by such an Exercise; but Children cannot undertake these
things, and therefore should not be allowed the use of that Ordinance, whose
design is so much disappointed in the Application thereof.

Answ. But this Argument, or Objection, how pleasing soever at first sight, is
not good.

(1.) Because it is deceitful in its Consequence, and therefore the Conclusion
will not hold.

(2.) Because it is a reflection upon some of the former Dispensations of the
Wiseft Being.

(1.) Because it is deceitful in its Consequence, and therefore the Conclusion
will not hold; and that for a Reason I find urged by a Learned Man in his
Excellent Tract, called The Case of Infant Baptism; which is so strong, that if
well understood, would fully answer, if not for ever silence this Objection.
His Reason is this: Because this way of arguing takes away the difference
between a strict Institution, which is appointed to answer one or more
Purposes, and particularly for persons of one kind; and an Institution of
Latitude, which is appointed for several Purposes, and for different kinds of
Persons differently qualified for those several Purposes. Of the first kind was
the Institution of Fringes, which could only be worn properly by those that
were Adult, because they alone were fit to perform the design of their
appointment, viz. To look upon them, and remember the Commandments of the Lord:
And these you may suppose were those Phylacteries the Pharisees did wear; and
because they were Ostentatious Men, affected to make them broader than others;
which Hypocrisy and Dissimulation our Blessed Savior, the Holy Jesus, did
severely reprove in them, and tartly upbraid them for and with. And of the
other kind is the Sacred Institution of Matrimony, which was Instituted by
Heaven for several Purposes, and for those that are differently qualified and
fitted for those several Purposes, inasmuch as Persons that are not fit for
some Purposes, may yet lawfully enter into that State of Life, because they are
fitted for other ends thereof. All the Purposes for which it was Instituted,
cannot be performed, but by such as are past the Age allowed by all for the
begetting Infants; yet such as have out-grown those years, are not wholly unfit
for that State; Nor is their Matrimony of no force, or an Impeachment of the
Sacred Institution of Matrimony, because they are only fitted for one Purpose,
for which Matrimony was Instituted; and that is the last End for which our
Excellent Church tells us Marriage was Ordained, viz. the mutual society, help
and comfort the one ought to have of the other in prosperity and adversity.
This one Instance declares how deceitful our Adversaries Argument is against
the admitting Children to Baptism, because of their unfitness for some Purposes
for which it was Instituted, they should first offer a Proof for what they
would have allowed; but have no reason to expect, viz. That it was a Sacred
Appointment of the former kind, which I term a strict Institution, and then
their way of arguing would hold: But this I am well satisfied they can never
do, because that Ordinance came in the place of Circumcision, which was a
Sacred Appointment of the second kind; and because the Blessed Jesus underwent
Baptism, in whom there was more unfitness than there could be in Children. The
Baptist, in truth, used the Baptism of Repentance, and thereupon assured the
World of the Pardon of Sins; and on that account, knowing our dear Savior
stood in no necessity thereof, was not willing to admit him to it. St. Matthew.
iij. 14. But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? But our Blessed Savior returned such an Answer as satisfied
him, in the next Verse; Suffer it to be so now: Mat. iii. 15.
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness: i.e. It is just and
equitable that I (who being now Thirty years old, and so qualified by Moses's
Law to Preach, should enter upon my Public Ministerial Office, and being I
intend Baptism as the Sacrament to admit Members to my Church) should undergo
that Ordinance my self, being the Head of my Church, which may be a good Reason
why our merciful Redeemer would not be Baptized before, and may satisfy such
of the Antipaedobaptists (for some of them have urged it to me) as would from
thence draw an Argument against Infant Baptism; and besides, [it is like the
Logicians Argumentum ad hominem,] it is against themselves; for it is well
known, that sometimes they Baptize persons before that Age. And this Account
plainly signifies, That the Ordinance of Admission into the Christian Church,
is a Sacred Appointment of Latitude; and that in such Appointments, the
unfitness of the Party, as to some Purposes, does not unfit him for the
Ordinance, when he is qualified for others.

(2.) Because it is a reflection upon some of the former Dispensations of the
Wisest Being: For it was the Appointment of Heaven that Infants should undergo
Circumcision, though all the Purposes of that Ordinance could not be performed
but by such as were grown to years of discretion, who were only fit to know the
Meaning of the Appointment, and the Obligation of the Covenant they were
admitted unto. So that this Argument is as much against Circumcising, as
Baptizing Children; because Circumcising them was appointed for the same
Purposes, as that used in our Church: And hereupon, when Men were by that
Sacrament received into the Church, they were to believe in God, and repent of
any breach of his Laws, and openly to disown any Idolatrous Belief, or
Practice, and even to forsake their Idolatrous Relatives and Acquaintance; and
yet, on the Request of those Proselytes, their Children were Baptized and
Circumcised, and thereby admitted into their Church, though they were wholly
ignorant of those duties their Parents undertook the performance of. Hereupon
such who oppose Baptizing Children, because it agrees not to all the Uses of
that Ordinance, vilify the Wisdom of God, and undervalue the Wisdom of the
Ecclesiastic Governors among the Jews; not weighing with themselves, that
Circumcising Children then, and Baptizing them now, is an Appointment of great
Latitude, intended by Heaven for Infants, in whom there is a a fitness for
some; nay, the principal uses of that Ordinance, as well as for grown Persons,
to whom all are fit. Rem praecipuam in Baptismo non attendunt, viz.
testificationem divinae benevolentiae in foedus, and tutelam suam suscipientis,
and gratiam conferentis, etc. Nam in Baptismo praecipua res est divina Gratia,
quae consistit in remissione peccatorum, regeneratione, adoptione, haereditate
vitae aeternae, cujus sane gratiae infantes and indigentes, and capaces sunt.
Cassand. de Bapt. Infant.
They neither regard, nor consider the chief thing in Baptism, viz. the
Testification, or Witness, of the Divine Benevolence, taking them into his
Covenant, Protection and Patronage, and conferring and bestowing Grace upon
them: For in Baptism, the chief thing is the Divine Grace, which consists and
stands in the Remission, Pardon, and Forgiveness of Sins; in Regeneration, or
the New Birth; in Adoption, or Sonship; and in a Right and Title to the
Inheritance of Eternal Life; of which Grace Infants stand in need, and are as
capable as the Adult, and full-grown Persons, as the Judicious Cassander
observes in his Excellent Treatise of the Baptizing of Infants. Children are
fitted for all the Purposes of Baptism, as it is appointed by Heaven for a Sign
to us to convey unto us the Advantages of the New Covenant. For their Infancy
is no bar, but they may be accounted Parts of the Church, as well as Members
of any different Company, or Society, of congregated Persons; Nor does it any
more hinder them from being the adopted Sons and Daughters of Heaven, than it
denies them a Right to any Earthly Possession; nor of being the Inheritors of
Everlasting Happiness by force of such Adoption, than by force of any other
Civil Adoption, the Inheritors of an Earthly Estate. For Infants are fitted for
all Testimonies of Honor and Favor from God and Men, and of having a Title to
the Benefits of any Company, though they are not able to discharge the Services
thereof, nor know the least matter of them. Since therefore Infants are as fit
to receive, and do as greatly want almost all the Advantages of the New
Covenant, and the Immunities of Church-society as grown persons; Is it not as
reasonable that the Seal, which confirms those Advantages and Immunities,
should be given to one, as well as the other? If a Monarch adopts the meanest
Man's Infant, and Embody him into his own Family, and make over to him some of
his Revenue and Empire; and to establish and strengthen to him this, should, in
allusion to Circumcision, take away a piece of his flesh; or in resemblance to
Baptism, should order him by Water to be purified and cleansed; who would
reckon this a Ceremony of no signification, or declare the Infant not fit for
the Sign, when he was fit for the Principal matters, of which the Rite was a
signification? Or to give you another Similirude, that may more properly suit
our present Case: Imagine a King should order an Attainted. Traytor's Infant to
be brought before him, and before many people gathered for that intent, should
thus deliver himself: You understand the Blood of this Infant is Attainted by
his Parent's Crime; the Title to his Father's Honor and Possessions is
confiscated by Law, and he is wholly ruined, though he understand not his
miserable Estate. My Pity for him is great, and here I give him a Title to his
Blood and forfeited Estate; and for the future he shall have as proper a Right
as if his Ancestor had not been Attainted: I heartily pardon him, and hereby
publish, that I take him into my Favor; and that no stain may be imputed to
him, I do in the presence of you, called together, sprinkle him with clean
Water, to show that he is purged from all Guilt upon his own, or his Father's
account. Now imagine this transacted for an attainted Infant; Will any declare,
that what is done signifies nothing, and is of no force, because the Infant
understands it not? or that he was not fit for the Sign, when he was fit to be
cleansed from the Guilt transmitted to him by his Parent, and had his Estate
re-convey'd to him, which was the Principal matter thereby signified? What I
have now offered, ought to be seriously weighed by those that are Adversaries
to the Baptizing of Children, to whom I might propose the Precedents of
Circumcision and Baptism used among the Jews, both which (as I shall show
hereafter) were used for Children, as well as for the full-grown under Moses's
Law: And hereupon, though the Father of the Faithful did believe, and openly
own that his Belief before Circumcision; yet I presume the Antipaedobaptists
will not acknowledge, That the Wisest Being did imprudently in laying
Circumcision upon Isaac, before he knew the Intent of the Ordinance, or could
Actuate Faith, or make declaration of it. He was by Sacrament admitted to the
Covenant, before he knew the terms thereof; yet I hope the Antipaedobaptists
will not declare his Circumcision to no purpose, though he was as unfit to
understand why he was Circumcised then, as Children are, in our days, why they
are Baptized now.

Obj. If any of the Adversaries to this Principle shall say, All that I have
offered does not amount to a Command for Baptizing Children, or in express
words. In totidem verbis.


Answ. To which I will give a short (yet I hope full) Answer: There is no need
(after what has been already said to prove it) there should be a Command, or
Example, to approve the Usage of admitting Children to Church Membership in the
New Testament; but it is enough to make it practicable under the New
Dispensation, that it is not any-where in Holy Scripture prohibited. Nay, as I
may possibly take occasion to show hereafter, there is greater ground to
believe, that Christians ought to have had a direct Precept to let alone the
Custom of admitting Children into the Church; Because it was expressly enjoined
by God in the Circumcising Children, and had his Approbation in the Baptizing
Children (which the Jews super-added unto their Circumcising Children) under
Moses's Law: Precepts are ordinarily delivered, when a New Custom is
introduced, which was not formerly used to be done; But to vindicate the
continuance of a formerly-appointed, or practiced Custom, it is enough, That
the Authority which did appoint and allow it, does not prohibit or revoke his
former Injunctions. And this being the Original Case of allowing Children a
Right to the Covenant, and by a Sacramental Rite admitting them to the
Possession of the Benefits of that Covenant, the Admission of Children into the
Church under the New Dispensation by Baptizing them, must by a necessary
Consequence be enjoined, or approved of. And if the Case be thus, as
undoubtedly it is, then Fathers, Guardians, and Undertakers for Children, are
obliged by indispensible Duty to offer them to be Baptized in submission to the
Church's Authority. For the Church is a Company of persons in Covenant with
Heaven; and in this Company, as in Humane Societies, there are such as give
forth Rules, and such as practice those Rules; such as enjoin, and such as
submit: And hereupon, if the Universal Church, or any part thereof, enjoyneth
her Members, the practice of any Doctrine, not forbidden by an higher Power,
which must be the God of Heaven, they are obliged by the known Rules of all
well-governed Societies, and by the Commands of the New Dispensation (which
has a respect unto Church Government) to submit to, and practice her Precepts,
as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews asserts, Chap. xiij. 17. Obey them
that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they do watch for your
Souls. And for this end it was that we find the Holy Apostle of the Gentiles,
when he traveled the Grecian Countries, giving unto the Christians the Orders
which the Holy Apostles had decreed at Jerusalem to be observed. But there is
no necessity of speaking further to Evidence this Truth, which all Separatists
from our Excellent Church do allow: For though they disagree amongst
themselves, as well as diffent from us, as to the subject of true Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction; yet they all own there is such an Authority; and that all
Precepts enjoined thereby, if not contrary to the Laws of Heaven, should be
submitted unto; which will force our Adversaries (from their own acknowledged
Concessions) to allow the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism, or recede from, and
renounce one of their owned Principles; neither of which, I fear, they will be
willing to do, though, in Reason, they ought to do one of them.

CHAP. V. The Exposition for clearing the Sense of St. Matthew xxviij. 19.
further Enlarged.
AND now I will offer some further Account to strengthen the Sense I have given
of the Holy Jesus's Commission to his Blessed Disciples in St. Matthew. xxviij.
19. From the Exposition I have delivered, it is not a proper Question for the
Antipaedobaptists to ask, Whether the Holy Jesus has appointed Children to be
admitted unto Baptism; but, Whether they are by him forbidden, or denied it:
Because upon a consideration, that the Mosaic Dispensation allowed Children to
be not only Circumcised, but Baptized, it will necessarily follow, That a
Precept delivered by the Blessed Jesus to admit Disciples from all Parts of the
World, to his Holy Institution, will, without a Prohibition, be interpreted to
include Children, as well as the Adult. As for instance: Imagine our dear
Redeemer had not altered the Sign, but in the room of Baptism had declared to
his Followers, Go, teach all Nations, Circumcising them. Now I make appeal to
the Conscience of any considering Person, whether by such terms it can be
supposed the Children of such as were Proselyted from Heathenism, could be
denied Circumcision; and then what ground is there from such Expressions, that
our merciful Savior designed the Children of such as were converted from
Paganism, the being Baptized? This is so reasonable, that it was necessary the
Commission should be so expressed: For who can suppose, but that they who were
Enemies to the Institution of the Holy Jesus, were to be first instructed, and
made Disciples before they were admitted to Baptism? For imagine a Commission
should be given to certain Men, among whom Baptism is customary, Go, and teach
the Indians, baptizing them. Can any one believe the design of it was to bar
the Children of those Indians from being Baptized, when Baptizing Children was
an usual Custom among those to whom the Commission was delivered? So that this
being the clear sense of the Commission, the Blessed Jesus could not well
express it in words more plain, and easy to be understood by his own People,
to whom he spoke; for they must necessarily apprehend those capable of
Church Fellowship under the New Covenant, that were allowed it under their own
Dispensation. Common sense would oblige them to interpret the words according
to their known Custom. Moreover, with what sense can any person suppose, that
he who drew several Appointments from the Jews, should leave out this, and in
this alone vary from what the Jews practiced, when there was Reason for the
Continuance: Children are as capable of the Seal of Divine Grace, and of the
Advantages thereof now, as they were under the former Dispensation; There is as
much Reason for the Baptizing them now, as for the Circumcising and Baptizing
them formerly; Their Admission under the Law, and Holy Gospel, have something
alike Reason in it; and though the Seal be changed, the Covenant continues. In
short, there was no engagement on our merciful Redeemer to disuse the Custom
of Baptizing Children, as being disagreeable to the Ingenuous, Catholic and
Generous Notion of his Divine Institution. And surely these things, being duly
weighed, there is much greater ground to infer our Blessed Savior would have
forbidden Children being Baptized, had it been his Design not to have had them
admitted thereunto; than that he would have enjoined that Holy Ordinance, if it
had been his Design (as undoubtedly it was) the Custom thereof should be used,
and allowed under his New Dispensation; For there was no necessity to enjoin
his Disciples to observe what without a Command they would practice, unless he
had forbad them; and that he did not forbid them the use of this Holy
Ordinance, is plain, in that he did not forbid Children being Baptized: For if
he forbad Children that Holy Ordinance, he either did it by a direct
Injunction, or by Consequence, by confining the use of that Holy Ordinance only
to Adult persons; That he never did debarr them by a direct Injunction, all
Antipaedobaptists of sense allow, because we read it not in his Sacred Gospel.

Obj. But they say it was his Purpose, that those alone that were Adult were to
be admitted thereunto, because antecedent to Baptism Men were to be instructed
to believe, and to repent; which they seem to prove from this Text of St.
Matthew. xxviij. 19. and St. Mark xvj. 15. and Acts ij. 38. Now they allege
these are only suited to those that are Adult; and therefore they only should
be admitted to Baptism. These are the Texts by which the Antipaedobaptists
would evidence that Christ did so far confine that Holy Ordinance as to debarr
Children its use.

Answ. But I Answer, They herein notoriously err, for these Places do no more
evince or prove, that only those that are Adults should be Baptized, than what
St. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. iij. 10. will infer that the Adult only should eat:
For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any man would
not work, neither should he eat. On which account, in a fallacious manner, this
Argument might be drawn; because St. Paul says, Those that eat must work, but
now the Adult only can work; therefore they only must eat, whereby we should
starve Children, and infirm People, that cannot work, and Aged persons that are
past it. I have given this Example to signify how impertinent the Arguments
against Baptizing Children are; and that it can never be evinced, or made out,
from any place of Holy Scripture, that That Ordinance is limited only to the
Adult, because such only can be instructed, can believe, and can repent. The
falseness of this way of arguing will appear from an easy Similitude, (that,
as I remember I have read in the Learned Cassander's Excellent Tract of
Insant-Baptism,) which the weakest Man may apprehend. Imagine there was a
mortal and infectious Distemper in a populous City, and Heaven should appoint a
set number of persons to acquaint them with an Infallible Remedy that should
cure this Distemper, and it should be declared to them; Travel to such a City,
and assemble the Inhabitants, and acquaint them with the good this Remedy will
do; and ascertain them, That whosoever has Faith to receive it from you, for
that purpose shall recover; but he that doubts the truth of what you say, shall
perish. Upon this allowance, which is reasonable to allow) I ask any
Antipaedobaptist if the terms of such an Order were enough for those that had
it; or any else to infer, That it was the Design of Heaven that they ought to
communicate this Remedy only to the Adult, because only such could be assembled
to know its Worth, have Faith in its Efficacy, or doubt of its Power? Surely
such a conclusion would not be allowed, because Infants would be as fit to
receive the Remedy as the Adult, though they did not at all know the Advantages
thereof. Now then, because Infants were fit to receive the Advantage of that
Holy Ordinance, and the Disciples to whom the Order was imparted so understood
it, and were not unacquainted with its Usage under the Old Law; how was it
possible to suppose, but that it was the Holy Jesus's design, that Children
should be admitted to Baptism as well as those that were Adult. That which was
really true, is this: Their Order was an Instruction how they should Disciple
the Enemies to the Blessed Jesus, Jews and Pagans to his Holy Institution,
according to the manner of Publishing a New Dispensation in Foreign Parts.
Hereupon they were Commissionated to Proselyte grown Persons by Preaching to,
and Baptizing such as should thereupon believe and repent; but notwithstanding
that according to Order they should do so, as the Jews used to do with those
that they Proselyted to their Religion; and this was no bar to their admitting
the Children of such Proselytes according to their known Custom.

Obj. The Antipaedobaptists lay great weight in one Phrase, relating to the
Commission, as it is expressed by another Evangelist, St. Mark, Chap. xvj. 16.
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.

Answ. To which I answer. Now if they did but seriously ponder what follows,
they might thereby understand that Children are not thence to be denied the
Right of being Baptized, because it is afterward declared in the same Verse;
But he that believes not, shall be damned. So that what takes away the Right
of being baptized, takes away the Right of being saved; and therefore not to be
applied to Children, except they will declare with the Petrobrusians, Vid.
Cassand. Praefat. adv. Anabapt.
the Foundation of the Antipaedobaptistic Sect; That the same want of Faith
that unfits for being baptized, unfits for being saved. So that it is clear
from that place, That the having, or wanting Faith, is to be applied to those
that are able to understand, and by Faith embrace the glad-tidings of
Salvation. Thus much I have said to make appear how impertinent and
unconcluding the Arguments of our Adversaries from Holy Scripture are, to deny
Children a right of being Baptized; because all the places I have mentioned, or
they insist upon, do signify the Duties, Virtues and Graces of those that are
Adult, before they are admitted to Baptism. Having said thus much for the
Necessity of Baptizing Infants, I need not say any thing as to the Benefits
thereof, to make appear how useful it is: For if it be necessary, it will
absolutely, and by unavoidable consequence follow, that it is useful. However,
they that desire to receive an Account thereof, may be fully and excellently
satisfied from the Learned Author of the Case of Infant Baptism, who acquaints
us with five or six Benefits; and from the Reverend Bishop Tailor, Bp. Taylor^s
Life of the Holy Jesus.
who reckons up eight Effects or Blessings of Baptism in his Grand Exemplar;
and likewise from the Judicious Mr. Walker, Mr. Walker's Modest Plea for
Infant Baptism.
who gives an account of ten Advantages thereof; to whom I referr my Readers.
And now having given you the true sense of this Text, and a large Exposition to
confirm it, let me make this one Observation: Our dear Savior, in the
Translation of his Church from the Law to the Holy Gospel, did not annul or
revoke the old Custom of Baptizing Children, but he designed the Administration
of it as large as under the Law, otherwise he would not have been so merciful
and extensive a Savior, as Moses was a Legislator; and so consequently had not
been so faithful in his House as Moses was, which he certainly was, as the
Author to the Hebrews plainly insinuates, Chap. iij. 5, 6. If therefore it be
so, (as undoubtedly it is,) then it will follow, There is as great an
engagement upon Fathers and Tutors (separated from the Church's Authority) to
bring their Infants to be Baptized, as for those that are Adult, and
full-grown, to request for it. Now seeing Christ did not revoke the Old former
Custom, it is an evident Declaration to the World, That it was his Will it
should remain as it was, and had been formerly used; and that, being Children
were admitted into Covenant, under the Law, by a Sacramental Sign, they should
be admitted unto Covenant under the Holy Gospel by a Sacramental Rite likewise.
It was the Custom of the Jews before our Blessed Savior's Advent, or Coming;
and the Custom of his Followers within a while after his Illustrious Ascension
unto the Mansions of Glory. And there being an agreeable Harmony between the
former and the latter Custom, we may reasonably believe, that what was
Antecedent to, and Consequent upon, his Advent, or Coming, was used in the
Interval; I mean in the Holy Apostolic Age, as his supposed design and desire,
who never declared or acted any matter (that can with tolerable Reason be
urged) against the Old Usage of receiving Members into Ecclesiastic Society. So
that his and the Holy Gospel's not saying any thing whether Children were
Baptized or no, is so far from being a cogent Proof against it, that weighing
the former Custom, it is the strongest Motive to believe it, as the most
Excellent Dr. Nam cum Paedobaptismus in Ecclesia Judaica in admissione
Proselytorum ita fuit notus, usitatus and frequens, ut nihil fere notius,
usitatius, and frequentius: (1.) Non opus erat ut alique praecepto roboraretur
[cum Baptismus jam in Sacramentum evaderet Evangelicum] nam Christus Baptismum
in manus suas atque in usum Evangelicum suscepit, qualem invenit, hoc solum
addito, quod ad digniorem finem atque largiorem usum promoveret. Novit satis
gens universa parvulos solitos baptizari. Illud praecepto opus non habuit, quod
communi usu semper invaluerat. Si prodiret jam edictum regale in haec verba,
Recipiat se unusquisque die Dominico ad publicum conventum in Ecclesia,
insaniret c^rte ille, quicunque olim hinc argueret, non celebrandas esse die
Dominico in publicis conventibus preces, conciones, psalmodias, eo quod nulla
in Edicto de in mentio. Nam canit Edictum de celebratione d^ei Dominicae in
publicis conventibus in genere, de particularibus autem Divini cultus speciebus
ibidem celebrandis non opus erat, ut esset mentio, cum istae ante datum
edictum, and cum daretur, semper, and ubique notae essent, and in usu assiduo.
Ipsissimo hoc modo res se habuit cum Baptismo; Christus eum instituit in
Sacramentum Evangelicum quo in professionem Evangelii omnes ad^^itterentur ut
olim in Proselytismum ad Religionem Judaicam. Particularia eo spanciantia,
modus scilicet baptizandi, aetas baptizandorum, sexus baptizandus, etc. Regula
and Definitione opus non habuerant, eo quod haec vel lippis, and tonsoribus
satis nota erant ex communi usu. (2) Econtra ergo plana and aperta prohibitione
opus erat us inflantes, and parvuli non baptizarentur, si eos baptizandos
nollet Servater. Number qum per omnia saecula praecedentia usitatissimum esset, ut
baptizarentur parvuli, si aboleri istam consuetudinem vellet Christus, ap^rte
prohibuisset. Silentium ergo ejus, and Scripturae hac in re Paedobaptismum
firmar, and propagat i^ omnia saecula. Dr. Lightfoot Horae Hebraicae in
Ma^thaeum, Cap. iij. ver. 6.
Lightfoot does irre^^agably make appear in his Commentaries on St. Matthew,
Chap. iij. 6. called Horae Hebraicae in Matthaeum; which, because it is in
Latin, and the Account large, I will give you the plain sense of it in English
For when Infant Baptism, in the Jewish Church, in admitting Proselytes, was
known, usual and frequent, so that nothing was more known, usual and frequent,
there was no need of a particular Precept to strengthen it; For Christ took and
translated it into his Holy Gospel, as he found it, only with this addition,
That he employed it to a larger use, and exalted it to a more noble End; For
the whole Nation of the Jews knew very well that little ones were wont to be
Baptized, so that there was no need of a Precept to establish that which was
grown into use by common Custom. If a Royal Edict should be published in these
words, Let every one repair on the Lord's Day to the Public Assemblies in the
Church: Certainly that Man would be distracted that should argue, Prayers were
not to be offered in the Public Assemblies on the Lord's Day, nor Sermons
preached, nor Psalms sung, because there was no mention of them in the Edict,
when antecedent to the publishing the Edict these things were known to be in
common use and custom. It is the very same thing with Baptism, when Christ made
it an Evangelic Sacrament, whereby all should be admitted to the Profession and
Privileges of his Holy Gospel, as formerly Proselytes were to the Jewish
Religion. There was no need of Rule, or defining the particular manner of
Baptizing, as what Age should be Baptized, or what Sex, etc. because these
things were by common usage known to the weakest understanding: So that there
was a necessity for an express and open Prohibition that Infants and little
ones should not be Baptized, if our Blessed Savior would not have them so to
be admitted into his Covenant. If then Christ would have had that Custom
abolished, he should have openly prohibited it; His and the Holy Scripture's
silence therefore does for ever confirm and maintain the Baptizing of Infants.
So that if Baptizing Children be not only needful, because the Church has
instituted it; but the Church has instituted it, because it is needful, and
by all means to be continued; then this preceding Needfulness is the greater
Motive to Fathers and Guardians to bring them thereunto, as correspondent to
the Custom of the first Planters of the Blessed Gospel, and the design and
desire of our merciful Redeemer; because it may reasonably be believed it had
their Allowance, or Command, being it was used in the times immediately
succeeding to the Holy Apostles; and also, if it had been disagreeable to the
Mind of Christ, it is very probable he would have forbid it, or some way or
other declared his Aversion, or Dislike. In short, to conclude the Exposition
of the Sense I have delivered of this Text: Nothing can more disparage the
Wisdom of Heaven, and the long-approved Custom of the Jews, than to affirm
Children unfit by Sacramental Seal to be admitted to Covenant under the Holy
Gospel, that were admitted under the Law, and which Heaven and the Jews allowed
them; For Heaven enjoined Circumcision for Infants, and the Church of the Jews
enjoined them Baptism as well as full-grown Proselytes; and under the Law they
were allowed both. It is highly unreasonable then, that under the Holy Gospel
they should be denied one, or any other Token of Admission into the Covenant,
as they must necessarily be by Antipaedobaptistic Principles.

CHAP. VI. The Sense of St. Matthew xxviij. 19. proved by the Coherence and
Connection of the Words.
AND now that I may engage you to believe the Sense I have offered, I will
prove it by the Connection of the Words. Whereas the Antipaedobaptists say,
Children are to be Instructed before Baptized, I will endeavor to evince, That
the Coherence of this Text seems to be of our side, and that Children are to be
baptized before taught.

Obj. I know the Antipaedobaptists, by the placing of the Words in the
Commission, would insinuate, that Infants must be Instructed before Baptized.

Answ. To which I return, That if the placing of the Words be a sufficient
Objection against our Practice, we have the same Argument, by way of Retortion,
to urge against their Custom of Teaching first; and if they do not like our
Argument in that Case, we have the same Reason not to like theirs: For we find
in St. Mark i.4. John did baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins. Where we may observe Baptism precedes,
and Preaching is subsequent thereupon: The same we may find in our Text, with
respect to the Verse before; and that which follows, ver. 18. And Jesus came,
and spoke to them, saying, All Power is given to me in Heaven, and in Earth*
i.e Now I am exalted to the right hand of God, I am the great King of all the
World, the Supreme Pastor and Head of my People, the High Priest of my Church;
Go you therefore, and teach all Nations; or, as St. Mark expresses the
Commission, Chap. xvj 15. And he said unto them, Go you into all the World; i.
e. Travel into all the World, and from every Nation gather me Sheep into my
Fold, make Subjects to my Kingdom, and then by Baptism receive them as Members
of my Church: And this is your Office of Discipling all Nations; and then the
Instructive part follows, ver. 20. Teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you.

CHAP. VII. The Sense of St. Matthew xxviij.19. further evidenced from the
Original.
IN truth the Term it self, if seriously considered, will not conclude what
they would have it do; for the Word in the Greek has a peculiar signification,
and is not properly translated, [(...) is the Word, i. e.] make Disciples, or
receive into Discipleship all Nations, baptizing them: And let this Form of
Baptizing be the Rite for their Admission into my Church; you may find the Word
so rendered in another place of the Holy Gospel, not unlike hereto, St. John iv.
1. When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized more Disciples than John; where to Baptize, and make Disciples, is the
same thing [with (...),] where the Baptizing being immediately annexed to the
making, or receiving Disciples; and the making Disciples not granting any
foregoing Teaching, but looking to it as a consequent Duty, (in like sort as in
the next Verse, ver. 20. (...), [Teaching] subsequent to (...), Baptizing,
which must signify different from what he used for Discipling, else why should
he not continue the same word?) must needs infer the no necessity of Teaching
before Baptizing; so that all that are thus admitted [ ad Discipulatum, or] to
Discipleship to be taught and improved in the Religion of the Holy Jesus, and
such that shall and will be instructed for the future, may certainly, by being
Baptized, be admitted into the Church, the Rite appointed and instituted,
whereby Disciples may have a Reception and Entertainment in his Family the
Church.

Obj. And now give me leave to offer something further to an Objection of the
Antipaedobaptists, in reference to the Commission. Their Objection (as I have
already hinted) is from the Order of Words, because Teaching is set before
Baptizing; Therefore none but the full grown can be admitted to Baptism.

Answ. Now all that I shall say, or need to say, in return to the placing of
the Words, is this: Teaching, according to the sense we have given, may go
before Baptizing, as in the Adult; and Baptizing before Teaching, as in
Infants: So that without altering the Order of the Words, there is nothing in
the true sense of the Commission that condemns the Baptizing of Children; and I
may say of Teaching and Baptizing, or Baptizing and Teaching, as it may be said
of Faith and Repentance: Divines do generally say, Repentance is the fruit of
Faith; and yet in the Holy Gospel it is said, Repent ye, and believe the
Gospel, St. Mark i. 15. And now what I have said of the Order of Teaching and
Baptizing, the same may be said of Faith and Repentance; There may be a Faith
that may go before Repentance, and a Faith that may follow it; That which
precedes, may be said to be that Faith that fills the Head, and informs the
Judgment; That Faith which may be said to be subsequent, is the Faith that
influences the Heart, and saves the Soul; The one may be called a sound Faith,
the other a saving Faith. My meaning, in short, is this: I must first believe
the great Love of Christ, which is a sound Faith, or else I cannot so truly
grieve for those Sins that pierced the Holy Jesus's side, and put him to death;
and so Faith precedes Repentance: But then I cannot exercise the other sort or
kind of Faith, until I really detest, and hate, and fully purpose to
relinquish and forsake those Sins that put my dear Lord and Master to so much
shame and pain; and then I may safely and comfortably make an Application of
Christ's Merits to my self for my Salvation: And this is that which is properly
called a saving Faith; and this is that which may be said to be consequent
upon, and follow true Repentance. And this I do think may sufficiently satisfy
us, that the ordering or placing the words destroys not, nor evacuates the
sense I have given of the Commission. And now seeing the Antipaedobaptists are
so peremptory, positive and stiff for an express Command out of Holy Scripture
for the Baptizing of Infants, (though there can be no Reason given for such a
request or demand; for what need of direct words, when we have plain sense
against them,) Why may not we with equal Reason, and with the same Importunity,
return upon them by way of Retortion, and ask where they find any Command for
the Baptizing Elder persons? If they shall reply, that is included in the
Commission, St. Matthew xxviij. 19. Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them, we
may with equal strength of Argument return upon them again, Children are
included as well as the Adult, they being by all Men of Sense acknowledged and
owned to be a part of the Nations, to whom the Commission is directed; and
whatsoever they are upon the account of the smallness of their Number, or
weakness of their Understanding, they are a considerable part of a Nation.

Obj. But if the Antipaedobaptists shall object, that Children are in the
Commission, as soon as capable of Teaching.

Answ. I Answer: The Commission intends those should be taught that are
capable, but excludes not those from the Seal of the Covenant, that have a
right to the Covenant, as Children have: Besides, if the placing of the Words
be for them in St. Matthew, the Order of Words is for us in St. Mark, where we
read the Baptist did Baptize before he Preached. So that the Methodizing the
words is neither for, nor against them or us. So then, seeing Children are not
by any necessary and rational Consequence shut out of the Commission, let the
most Learned Antipaedobaptist of the whole Christian World show the least
passage of Holy Scripture that excludes them; and if they cannot produce any
such place of Holy Writ, they are bound by the Obligations and Principles of
Conscience (unless they will renounce Reason and Truth too) to confess the
Children of Christian Parents, having a right to the Covenant, have as
undeniable and unquestionable a right of being admitted to the Holy Sacrament
of Baptism as the Adult and Full-grown.

Obj. But if the Antipaedobaptists shall urge, That we have Instances and
Examples in Holy Scripture of Elder persons Baptized.

Answ. To that I Answer, That an Example, or Instance of Holy Scripture, is not
as of the same Force, so not of equal Authority with a Positive Command: And
further, I observe in answer to this Objection, That there was no need of a
Precept, or Example, for the Baptizing of Children; and my Reason is this,
Because there was an Institution of the Abrahamic Covenant, and also of the
Sign or Token for admitting Members thereunto, and a Conveyance of the
Privileges thereunto belonging. Surely the sense of those Texts in the Holy
Gospel, that enjoin a Declaration of Faith, and an Exercise of Repentance,
before the Adult were baptized, was known to the Primitive Doctors of the
Church, they unquestionably had seriously weighed, and fully understood the
Usage of Baptism in the Apostolic Acts related by St. Luke; but yet they never
inferred this unreasonable Conclusion from them, That because Faith and
Repentance were to precede the Baptismal Sacrament (which is an Institution of
Latitude) in full-grown People, that therefore Baptizing was not to precede
Faith and Repentance in Infants, and little ones, as Circumcision and Baptism
did under the Jewish Dispensation: They understood a Distinction between Actual
and Potential Believers; and likewise understood it was very absurd to draw
Conclusions from the Graces and Virtues of those to the excluding these.
Besides all this, to be somewhat more particular:

(1.) There are different ways of Instruction, as well as different methods of
Faith or Believing; and the Holy Jesus does not declare, instruct each Party
personally, and that presently on the place, (which may be almost Morally
impossible, for it is not probable that though there were Three thousand Souls
converted by St. Peter's first Sermon, and immediately baptized, that he could
personally instruct so many in so short a time, as we may suppose between his
Preaching and their Baptizing;) it is enough if they be instructed, though in
their Fathers, as Levi paid Tithe in Abraham's Loins, as the Author to the
Hebrews acquaints us, Hebr. vij. 9. So Children are by the Blessed Jesus
directly termed Believers, St. Matthew. xviij. 6. (which, by the Coherence,
cannot be understood of the Adult, as the word sometimes is, particularly St.
John xxj. 5.) But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe
in me. Infants are supposed to believe by their Father's Faith; so that as they
fell from the Divine Life in their Forefather's the Protoplast's or first
Adam's Loins, so they may be instructed by their natural or legitimate Fathers
to be Disciples to the Holy Jesus.

Obj. Chapter Blackwood's storming of Antichrist in his two strong Hold,
Compulsion of Conscience and Infant Baptism.
But I have read an Objection to the Sense I have offered, started by a
seemingly Ingenious Antipaedobaptist, who would make these little ones to
signify such as are little in their own Apprehensions.

Answ. But to this I Answer: It is impossible that this can be the meaning; for
it plainly is meant not of such as are little in Understanding, but of such as
are little in Age and Stature: For in St. Mark, Chap. ix. 36. the Blessed
Jesus, who best understood the Divine Writings, expounds it of such an one as
he took up in his Arms. Now it is not usual to take up Youths that are arrived
at years of Discretion (which is about the Age of Sixteen years) in our Arms.

(2.) They were to teach them all things, whatsoever their Lord and Master had
commanded them. Now our Blessed Savior continued in the World after his
miraculous Resurrection, sometime above a month, speaking of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, as St. Luke acquaints us, Acts i. 3. And how
know we but this Doctrine of Baptizing Children he then instructed them in, if
he had not done it in the time of his public Ministration upon Earth, before
his Passion and Sufferings, because the nature of the Doctrine may seem to
imply and require it; and in all likelihood some, if not all the Holy Apostles
did use it: For it is probable that it begun in their Age, seeing in the Times
immediately succeeding them, we are by Ecclesiastic History assured of its
Practice.

CHAP. VIII. The Sense of St. Matthew xxviij. 19. confirmed by an Exposition of
Acts ij. 39. in General.
AND now that this Exposition may be the more firmly believed, and readily
embraced, I will confirm and strengthen it by the consequential Sense of two
places of Holy Scripture; The one from St. Peter, the Holy Apostle of the
Circumcision, or the Jewish Church; and the other from St. Paul, the Holy
Apostle of the Uncircumcision, or the Gentile World. I come now to the
Exposition of the first place, that of St. Peter, the Holy Apostle of the
Circumcision, or the Jewish Church, for the confirming the Sense I have given
of the Holy Jesus's Commission, to his Blessed Disciples, for the bringing
whole Nations over unto Christianity. And that I may speak fully hereto, I will
give, (1.) A General; and, (2.) A Particular Account. First then in General;
The Text is Acts ij. 39. For the promise is to you, and to your Children, and
to all that are afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall call. An Obj.
That is true, says the Antipaedobaptist, As many as the Lord our God shall
call by the public Ministry of his holy Word; so that they would insinuate,
that Children are not to be admitted into Covenant, or the Sign thereof, till
converted. But hereto I answer, i. e. after you have forsaken the beggarly
Elements of Moses, and embraced my holy Religion, my more excellent
Dispensation, your Children (while Children) shall (after such a public
Profession of your Faith in me, and my heavenly Doctrine) be made capable of
being Members of my Covenant of Grace; and by the Sign and Seal of my Covenant,
Baptism be admitted and received into the same, and to all that are afar off (a
usual Phrase in holy Scripture, to express and signify the Heathen Nations by)
as many as the Lord our God shall call, i. e. as many of the Gentile World as
shall be converted by the public Ministry of the holy Word, shall have the same
Privileges which the Proselites of Righteousness or Justice had, in your
Church; i. e. after such a Conversion and public Profession of the Christian
Faith, your Children likewise shall be received into my Covenant of Grace, and
by the baptismal Seal have a Right and Title thereunto; and now that any other
Interpretation must distort the Words from their proper meaning, and that this
I have now given, must be the true Sense of them, will clearly appear from the
Original. For what the Antipedobaptists would make the meaning of this Text is
true in one sense, though not to their purpose; i. e. That Children cannot be
called or converted to the Christian Faith (because of their natural
Incapacity) by the public Preaching of the holy Gospel; and therefore it could
not be (...), but must be (...). So that the holy Apostle, St. Peter makes this
comfortable Promise to those of years of discretion in the Pagan World, that
should embrace the Christian Faith, upon the Conviction they received in their
minds from the public Ministry of the holy Apostles. And St. Peter uses a word
of the Masculine Gender, because that agrees with a Greek word of the same
Gender, that signifies Men (I mean (...)) and that being the more noble Sex,
includes the Feminine, and so takes in the Female; and that when Persons of
Discretion were brought over into the Christian Religion, their Children should
have the same Privilege with natural born Jews, or the Children of the
Proselytes of Righteousness (who had publicly owned and been converted to the
Religion of Moses) may appear plainly and evidently from the Literal and
Grammatic sense of another Phrase in the Text, where there is a Dative Case
applied to the Pagan World in the same sense that he applies two words to the
Jewish Nation, that have the same Case in the Original [which are (...), which
do answer unto (...), i. e.] the Promise is to all that are a far off, must
have the same sense with the words preceding in that Verse, The Promise is to
you and to your Children; which no Antipedobaptist that has sense, but must
own that they refer to the Jewish Nation, otherwise the words could have no
force upon those to whom St. Peter spoke them: So that when St. Peter says,
The Promise is to you and to your Children, the meaning must necessarily be
this, if you will have him speak consistently and with any tolerable good
sense. If you of the Jewish Nation will embrace the Christian Religion, and own
and submit to the Faith of the Holy Jesus, the Benefits, Immunities and
Privileges of the New Covenant of Grace, are by us Apostles promised to, and
shall by the power of the holy Ghost (the Gift of which for the use of the
Church is communicated to us) be conveyed and made over, conferred and bestowed
upon you and your Children; and the same Promise St. Peter makes to the Jewish
Nation; and their Children he also makes to the Heathen World, and their
Offspring, which enlarges the sense I have given: And that this must be the
sense, may appear from the Original Word used for Promise [(...)] which is of a
like sound, and of the same derivation, and of a near signification with (...),
which is the Greek word for the holy Gospel; which is as it were the
counterpart of the new Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace, that contains all
the Parts and Articles thereof. So that by virtue of your Faith, the Title and
Blessings of the Covenant shall be imputed to your Children, that thereby they
may be made as capable of Baptism (the Sign of Admission into the Christian
Church) under the holy Gospel, as your Children are now by virtue of your
Jewish Faith capable of Circumcision (the Seal that gave a Title to the old
Covenant under the Law) and if you will not allow the words this sense, what
St. Peter spoke must rather confirm and harden the Jews in their own way, and
their Mosaic observations then persuade, and bring them over to Christianity;
and upon this undeniable sense of the former part of the Text, the latter must
be allowed the same Exposition; because any other Sense and Interpretation will
be an impediment, bar and hindrance to the Progress of christian Religion. So
that if we have any love for the blessed Jesus, and desire exactly to observe
his divine Institutions, this Phrase [And to all that are afar off] must be
expounded and interpreted from unquestionable parity of Reason; according to
the sense we have already given of the former part of the Text [The Promise is
to you and to your Children] which answers the true meaning of our blessed
Savior's Commission to the holy Apostles, according to the Account we have
offered, and may be called a Logical Demonstration; as convictive to Reason, as
a Mathematic Demonstration is to the Senses of Mankind.

CHAP. IX. A further Conformation by a particular Exposition of Acts ij. 39.
BUT Secondly, I will give you a more particular Account, that I may offer all
that is necessary to be said upon this Text: And here that I may deal fairly
with our Adversaries, I will give them two Concessions, which I think is all
they can reasonably ask. Peter designed to support their Spirits, as to their
Infants, upon their outcry (when the Roman President declared himself innocent
of the Blood of that just Person, St. Matthew. xxvij. 25.
upon which they exclaimed) His Blood be upon us, and upon our Children. (2.)
Peter did in this Promise include their Children, they had not been strongly
supported under the Curse they wished for themselves and their Offspring, upon
supposition they should depart this World before actual Repentance. (3.) Ver.
41. And the same day were added to them about three thousand Souls, viz.
Masters of Families, becoming Christians, Infants, and all in their House,
according to the Terms of the Covenant and Usage of the Jews, were admitted and
received to Baptism, otherwise how should three thousand Souls be particularly
taught; for it is not probable, that St. Peter's Sermon did reach the ears of
all that were there present; and moreover, (as our Adversaries would persuade
us) they must every one be treated with, and spoken to, which was morally
impossible for so few Apostles, as may probably be conjectured to be there, and
in so short a time, as we may reasonably suppose they stayed where they were.
But to all this our Adversaries gainsay, because the Text tells us not, An Obj.
they and their Children were received to Baptism, but they only, that gladly
received his Word. Answ.
To which I make this return: Abraham of old time, the Administration made the
sole distinction. (4.) to the Church, they could not be admitted Members
thereof without Baptism; and this being all done in one day, it is not in the
least probable they could all be adult Men; or if they were, it is as highly
improbable, so few as the Holy Apostles then were, could have time (which our
Adversaries think necessary) to treat with, Acts xxij. 16. Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away they sins, calling on the Name of the Lord, declaring
the Scope and Design of Baptism, as well as how necessary it was; and it is
probable had there been reason to rehearse this Account related Acts ij. as
there was of St. Paul's other matters, possibly this of admitting Infants to
Baptism had been inserted. Matthew. xxviij. 19. nor Acts ij. 41. to be baptized,
both being rendered by the Greek in the Masculine Gender; I may therefore,
according to their way of arguing, urge, because it is not declared in the
Sacred Text, that they who gladly received the Word with their Wives were
baptized, I might therefore, according to their manner of disputing, say, no
Women had as yet received Baptism; for it was after this time, that we read in
Samaria, Women were baptized by St. Philip. Acts viij. 12.
So that though the Design of the Covenant be known, yet not always declared in
Holy Writ, and the baptizing of Infants may verily be believed to be of this
kind.

CHAP. X. The Sense of St. Matthew. xxviij. 19. strengthened by an Exposition of 1
Cor. vij. 14.
THE second place is that of St. Paul, the Holy Apostle of the Uncircumcision
or the Gentile World, 1 Corinthians. vij. 14. For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband,
else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. This place of St. Paul
is a strong confirmation of the Sense, and a clear conviction of the truth of
the Interpretation I have given of the first Text of the last quoted place of
St. Peter. St. Paul was a Pharisee, (the most learned and strictest Sect among
the Jews) and was so well instructed in the Christian Religion, that he himself
says, he was not a whit behind any (the best, and most knowing) of the Holy
Apostles, and for the encouragement of the Pagan World to embrace Christianity,
he publicly declares, and assures them, that the believing Paganish Husband,
or Wise, should have a Power and Privilege to transmit and convey their Faith
to their Seed; so that their Children, after such a conversion of the Parent,
should be capable of a Federal, or Covenant-Holiness, which should be of such
efficacy and virtue, as to impute and make over to them a Right to the
Covenant, and then, by the Seal of Baptism, to be received into the Church,
admitted to the favor of God, and made Heirs of Heaven by virtue of their
Membership in the Covenant of Grace. Thus we plainly see, by the Testimony of
Holy Scripture, and by the Evidence of Reason, (a Reason so infallible and
unerring, that it is conducted by the Light of Divine Revelation) what is the
plain, natural, and proper sense of the Holy Jesus's Commission to his Blessed
Disciples, St. Matthew. xxviij. 9. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them. So that
he who shall from a mistaken sense of that place of Holy Scripture, deny
Baptism unto Infants, hinders the Propagation and Progress of Christian
Religion, makes the Covenant of Grace less beneficial and extensive than the
Covenant of Works; and so consequently does not allow as great Benefits,
Privileges and Immunities to the Covenant of Grace which he does to the
Covenant of Works, all which are the dangerous Consequences of Antipedobaptism,
as I hope I have sufficiently proved, and convincingly made out; and in the
evincing, or proving this Argument, I have plainly showed, that we have the
proper meaning of three Texts of Holy Scripture, which I think to any Man of
sense is as clear a Proof, and as powerful an Evidence to engage our belief to
the truth of any Doctrine propounded to us, as if we had brought the positive
and express Words of Holy Scripture, which is as strong a conviction as any Man
can with the least show of reason desire. So that if the true sense of the Holy
Jesus's Commission to his Blessed Disciples be duly considered, and that no
other meaning can tolerably be put upon them, being backed with the Authority of
two other places of Holy Scripture, (and a threefold Cord is not easily broken)
no Antipedobaptist, that is a Man of sense, will hereafter press for a positive
and direct place of Holy Writ, because he has no reason to expect a Tautology
in Sacred Scripture, to please an Humor, or serve an Interest, and because he
will thereby weaken his Cause, and then have great reason to be ashamed of, if
not repent for the Injury he does his Principles, and he will see the vanity of
demanding express words for a confutation, when he has plain sense against
him; for the Holy Scriptures are to be expounded and interpreted by their
Sense, and not by their Sound; by their Spiritual Meaning, and not by the bare
Words, Syllables, and Letters; for they are best understood by their proper
Design and Purport, or a true Relation to their Coherence and Connection with
what preceeds, and follows after. And now give me leave to offer one thing that
will confirm the sense of the Texts I have delivered, and will also further
show how unreasonable, and absurd, weak, and trifling, the Antipedobaptists
are, for being so peremptory and positive in demanding an express place of Holy
Scripture for the baptizing of Infants, and this I will endeavor to evince
from Customs among the Jews, well known to all learned Men. Three things were
required by the Jews to make a Male Proselyte of Righteousness, Circumcision, a
kind of Purfication by Water (which was an Allusion to Baptism) and Oblation,
which was commonly two Turtles, or Pigeons; To a Female Purification by Water,
and Oblation. Now because the Jews, since their Dispersion, have neither Altar
nor Sacrifice, they say, For the Male, Circumcision, and Purification by Water,
are sufficient: For the Female, Only Purification by Water. In David's time,
they tell us many Thousands were added to the Church without Circumcision, by
Purification only. Hence we may observe, that a kind of Admission by Water into
the Church, was long in use among the Jews, though it were not Sacramental till
the Blessed Jesus's Institution, therefore it may seem to be used by them,
because they looked for it as a Sacrament at the coming of the Messiah, as is
evident by their coming to St. John the Baptist, not so much scrupling his
Baptism, as his Authority, by what Power he baptized: St. John i. 25. And they
asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that
Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet? By which three different words they meant
the Messiah, because he was well known to the Jews by those Terms or Phrases to
be foresignified; so that had he owned himself for such, they would not have
doubted his Commission; but Christ being plainly proved the Messiah, he was
Lord of the Sacrament, as well as of the Sabbath, and so had a sufficient Power
to institute a New Sacrament, and so substituted Baptism in the room of
Circumcision, which whosoever believes not to be as extensive as the other, is
so irrational as to make the holy Jesus not so merciful a Legislator as Moses;
which shows the unreasonableness and absurdity of demanding an express Text of
holy Scripture for Infant Baptism, which was the Truth to be cleared; and I
hope is sufficiently made apparent and manifest.

CHAP. XI. Some general Observations upon the Sense and Expositions delivered.
LET me now offer some general Observations upon the Sense and Expositions of
those Texts I have brought for the Proof hereof; and I will begin with the
Observation of Chemnitius, in his Plea he makes against the Antipedobaptists of
Germany: Ego sane qui simplicitatem amo etiamsi nec intelligam nec explicare
possim quomodo Infantes, qui Baptizantur credant; judico tamen suffitire
firmissima illa testimonia explicata. Infantes esse Abaptizandos, neque enim ab
illis propterea discedendum, etsi non possim vel intelligere, velexplicare
quomedo credant Infames. Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid. part 2. Tit. de Baptismo ad
Canon. 13.
I do so truly love Simplicity and Truth, that although I cannot tell how
Children who are baptized believe, yet I judge the Testimonies from Holy
Scripture abovenamed, most strong Evidences, and a sufficient Proof for this
Christian Practice; neither ought Christians to depart from this Truth, though I
cannot understand or explain how Children believe. In some things we should
take St. Paul's Advice, And become Fools that we may be wise, 1 Cor. iij. 18.
Obedience being more acceptable than burnt Offerings, 1 Samuel xv. 22. And we
should offer up our Understandings to divine Revelation, where there is clear
Reason to submit to it. Faith is the wisest, and most well-pleasing Service we
can offer to God [Nescire ea quae docere non vult Magister maximus erudita est
inscitia] not to know those things our great Master would have us ignorant of,
is (if I may so speak without a Solecism) a learned Ignorance. But praised be
Heaven, I have yet met with no Arguments of the Adversaries so strong, as to
need such an Apology or Plea. We find not any Accusation laid to the Charge of
Christianity, by the Jewish or Pagan World upon this Account, which certainly
would have been done by some of the Enemies of our holy Religion, if the Jewish
Believer had not enjoyed the same Immunities, when Christian, that he did
before: Or if the first Planters of Christianity had preached the same Doctrine
the Antipedobaptists do now, how would the Enemies of our holy Religion have
declamed against us, and declared the Doctrine they preached, was not the same
Covenant God offered to the Father of the Faithful, and the People of Israel,
because that included Father and Son, as to the Covenant and the Sign that
conveyed the Benefits of the Covenant. An Obj.
Now because the Antipedobaptists call upon us for an Example of any baptized
in a gathered Church without Faith, and that herein the holy Scripture is
silent: Answ.
To which I will give a full Answer; and for which, I shall in great part, Vid.
Mr. Ellis's Treat. called Pastor and Clerk: Or a Debate [real] concerning Inant
Baptism, p. 182, -- 195.
be obliged to the Judicious Mr. Ellis. (1.) I am not obliged to make any
return. (2.) This is a perilous Method of arguing to Religion. (3.) That it
does not further their Cause. (1.) I am not obliged to make any return: For we
may well continue the Custom, seeing we have so strong Reasons from holy Writ
for it; and seeing we have so long enjoyed and used it, by so many Instances
from the Primitive times (as may be proved;) so that we have Prescription to
plead, and that Lawyers tells us, in some Cases, is a good Bar against all
other Titles. It is upon these Accounts your duty, that contradict it, to
declare any one Instance or Proof, that these Reasons, and this continued
Custom of all times since the holy Apostolic Age, should not be continued;
which I am satisfied they will not be able to perform, if they should be so
courageous as to undertake it, and therefore it will be in vain to make any
attempt that way. (2.) Essex, that married more than one at a time, and as it
was supposed for that Reason. (3.) It does not further their Cause, or do, we
are not to stop or stay our belief, or defer acting, till we have an Instance
from Holy Scripture: What Command or foreknown Instance had the Holy Apostle of
the Circumcision to admit the Centurion of the Italian Band and his Family to
Baptism, seeing they were not circumcised, only that he collected it, that
because he had a Title to the Covenant, (by the miraculous Gift of the Holy
Ghost) he had right to the Sign that conveyed the Privilege of the Covenant.
The Commission the Holy Jesus gave to his Blessed Disciples at his leaving the
World, in relation to the persons, is in the Masculine Gender, and the Account
of St. Peter's baptizing his first Converts was in the same Gender; Why then
did St. Philip admit to baptism, Women as well as Men, Acts viij. 12? And why
do the Antipedobaptists, as well as we, admit Women to the Communion, when
there is neither Command nor Rule to enjoin it? To conclude all, I shall need
to say by way of Exposition upon these three Texts, As the Obligatory Power of
the Ceremonies and Rites among the Jews was abolished, because they did not
agree with the ingenuous temper of the Christian Institution; so more
principally was it taken away, as being disagreeable to the Notion of its being
an Universal Society, for it would have impeded the Propagation of the Religion
of the B. Jesus, had it been burdened with the Ceremonies and Rites of the
Jews, which were grown hateful, as well as nauseous to the Heathenish part of
Mankind; and, to name no other Instance, he was upon this account engaged to
alter the Sacrament for Admission into his Church, or the Sign of the Old
Covenant Circumcision, I mean, whereby the People of Israel (excepting some few
Nations, as the ancient Egyptians, Ethiopians, Ishmaclites, and Colchians) were
differenced from the rest of Mankind: They were, I say, Vid. Case of
Infant Baptism, page 20.
grown nauseous and hateful to the World for the use thereof; as it is
insinuated by several of the Poets, as Martial, Horace, Petronius, and Juvenal.
Is any man called, being circumcised, let him not become uncircumcised; i. e. 1
Cor. vij. 18.
Let him not use means to attract the [ Praeputium, or] Foreskin, which the
Jewish People were frequently wont to do, to shun reproach, and to deliver
themselves from Persecution in Paganish Kingdoms. And upn this account it would
have been a great hindrance to the propagation of the New Dispensation, should
the Heathen World have been admitted to the New Covenant by that way; no Sacred
Ceremony could be more unacceptable to Mankind in general; and hereupon the
Wisdom of our. Merciful Redeemer, as well as New Legislator, is to be commended
in altering the old antiquated Sign into a more gentle, pleasant way of
admission by Water, which was as of a more universal use, so of a more general
signification, because the Heathen World, as well as the People of Israel used
it, (For Heathenism was little else but the Jewish Religion abused by the
Prince of Darkness, and Father of Lies, as Christianity was little more than
pure Natural Reason exalted, and improved by the King of Light and Purity.)

CHAP. XII. A Defense of the Expositions delivered from Jewish Customs.
AND now, that I may engage you to the belief of the sense I have given of
these three Texts of Holy Scripture, I declare the Account I have offered is
according to Jewish Custom, and the sense of things well known among them;
which is the only true and proper way of coming to their right meaning, and
without such an Exposition or Allusion, it is impossible to understand several
Phrases and Places in the New Testament. Dr. Hammond's Case of Infant Baptism
in his Resolution of six Queries.
And this may appear from an excellent Account given by the Reverend Dr.
Hammond, in eight. Particulars, which I will only mention, but not enlarge
upon, referring you to the Account he gives, and then add one memorable
Instance to confirm this way of expounding H. Scripture. (1.) Lightfoot, a Man
of the greatest knowledge in understanding the Custom of the Jews and Rabbinic
Learning; The Text is St. Matthew. xvij. 20. If you have faith, as a grain of
mustard seed, you shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place,
and it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Now this is
naturally impossible in a literal sense, but to such as are acquainted with a
customary Saying among the Jews, this seemingly difficult place has an easy
and intelligible meaning; for it was an usual Saying among them, of a learned
Rabbi, (that had a skilful Faculty in the expounding hard places of Holy
Scripture) That he was a Man of such Learning, he could remove Mountains. Now
this Phrase the H. Jesus applies to a true, sound, saving Faith, (of which it
is properly meant, and not of the Faith of Miracles, as some perchance may
believe) and his sense is plainly this, (as may appear by the last words of the
Text, And nothing shall be impossible to you.) A right, orthodox, strong Faith
in the Almighty God, will be of such power and efficacy, as to support and bear
you up under the sorest Pressures of Human Life; and when your Faith and
Patience are sufficiently tried and exercised, your Belief in the same God
shall work a deliverance, and no difficulty or distress shall be insuperable
to, or conquerable by such a Faith, because so great a Faith shall (like Jacob,
when he wrestled with God Almighty, prevailed with, if not overcome Omnipotence
it self) obtain what it desires, Genesis xxxij. 28.
as the Canaanitish Woman's importunate Faith did with the B. Jesus, when he
said unto her, Mat. 15.28.
O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee as thou will. And, to encourage
to the exercise of such a Noble Act of Faith, St. Paul speaks the same sense
with that Exposition I have given of that place of St. Matthem, 1 Cor. x. ^^.
when he says, There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to
man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that you may he
able to bear it. And that I may the better engage your belief to the sense I
have given of these three Texts, I have interpreted them according to Jewish
Customs and Phrases. As to the first, St. Matthew. xxviij. 19.
I have explained it according to the sense it must have, if Moses their
Legislator had given such a Commission to twelve Elders of Israel, as the H.
Jesus gave to his B. Disciples. As to the second place, Acts ij. 39. we have so
expounded it likewise; for it is well known, [By those that are afar off] the
Jews constantly meant the Heathen Nations, or the Gentile World. Lastly, For
the third place, 1 Cor. vij. 14. we have interpreted the word Holy, according
to the Jewish custom and manner, who always understood the word Holy so, and
applied that Phrase to any Thing or Person that was dedicated and peculiarly
set apart to the Service of God; and therefore, neither according to the
coherence of the place, nor the Jewish way of interpreting H. Scripture, can
that word be understood of a Matrimonial Legitimacy, that should render the
Children clean after such a Marriage, and free them from the odious Character
of Bastardy, as we shall make more fully and clearly appear, when I come to
answer a seemingly strong Objection of the Antipedobaptists against the sense
of that Text, which we have given as its proper meaning.

CHAP. XIII. Authorities of the ancient Fathers to establish the Sense of the
three Texts of Holy Scripture.
AND now, that I may engage you to believe the Sense I have given of these
three places of H. Scripture, I will confirm it by the best Authority, the
Testimony of three of the most ancient Primitive Fathers, who lived near the
Age of the H. Apostles, and therefore may be reasonably supposed best
acquainted with their mind. The first shall be the Authority of Justin Martyr;
(...). Resp. ad Orthod, or whosoever was Author of that Primitiv Book.
Children are allowed to enjoy the good things that come by Baptism, by the
Faith of them that bring them to Baptism. Punctually correspondent to the sense
(and so fit to establish the meaning) we have given of 1 Cor. viij. 14. where
upon the Account of the believing Husband's living with the unbelieving Wife,
and the reason allowed, that one may build up the other in the Christian
Doctrine, and accordingly, christianly educate their Children, the Children are
Holy, i. e. vouchsafed the Privilege of Baptism, and the Benefits thereupon
consequent. Next we find Irenaeus speaking to the same sense, who flourished in
the first Century after such as had an occular view of the H. Jesus, who
declares the Messiah to be an Universal Savior; and mentioning Infants, [and
Parvulos] small Children, as well as [ Pueros, Juvenes, and Seniores, Boys,
Youths, and Elder Persons] says further, all, Omnes inquam qui per cum
renascuntur in Deum. Iren. l. 2. adv. haeres. c. 39.
who by him are reborn to a Divine Life, where Children being renewed, or
reborn, must needs be expounded according to the H. Scripture Phrase of (...),
being renewed or reborn by the Laver of Regeneration, and all that are
acquainted with the Primitive Fathers, know they thereby mean Baptism, (
Dominica and Apostolica phrasi, according to the sense of H. Scripture, as
delivered by the B. Jesus, and his dear Followers) and as he concludes there,
Sanctificat Infantes he renders, Children holy, according to the Interpretation
we have given of that place of St. Paul, 1 Cor. vij. 14. Lastly, Tertullian,
who flourished much about the same time, gives a much like account; for
speaking of the [Fidelium filii] (the Sons of the Faithful) he affirms,
Sanctitatis Candidati, hinc enim Apostolus ex Sanctificato alterutro sexn
Sanctos procreari ait Sanctitam ex seminis Praerogativa, quam ex Institutionis
disciplina, Tertull. L. 1. de Anima, C. 39.
They are Candidates of Holiness, and Holy, as upon different regards, so from
the prerogative of their Birth, punctually adequate to the sense we have given
of the Text to the Corinthians, and according to our Exposition thereof; and as
it is a Testimony, it was so used by the Christians then, so it is an Evidence
of the Custom of the H. Apostles in that Age, to allow the Infants of Christian
Parents to be baptized. And now to conclude the Authorities, I will add two
more, with the Canon of a Provincial Council; and the first of the two I will
bring, shall be that of the famous Bishop of Carthage, St. Cyprian, who lived
at the end of Origen's time, who flourished about fifteen Years after
Tertullian; what he writes is in that which he sends to his Friend Fidus, and
in it there is so clear a proof for baptizing Children, that it is sufficient
to satisfy any person in whom prepossession and Interest do not Rule; Fidus
had sent to him to acquaint him, that he did not think fit that Infants should
be admitted unto Baptism before the eighth day, as the Jews were under Moses's
Dispensation; whereupon he sent this Return; Quantum ad causam Infantium
pertinet, quos dixisti intra secundum vel tertium diem quo nati sunt
conllitutos Baptizari non oportere, and considerandam esse legem Circumcisionis
antiquae, ut infra octavum diem eum qu^ natus est Baptizandum and
Sanctificandum non putares, long aliud in Concilio nostro visum est; In hoc
enim, quod to putabas faciendum esse, nemo consensit, sed universi potius
judicamus nulli hominum nato misericordiam Dei, and gratiam denegandam, St
Cyprian, Ep. 58. ad Fid.
That he and the Council, wherein were 66 Bishops, were of a different
Judgment, having declared, that as the Lord had no respect of Persons, so no
regard for Age, but that Children might be admitted to Baptism presently after
their Birth, to cleanse them from their Original Guilt. The second shall be
from St. Augustine, the Reverend Bishop of Hippo, which I will the rather do,
because the Pelagians have been mistakenly supposed by a Consequence from their
Doctrine, to deny the baptizing of Infants for the Remission of Sins, (which
they that did, have been censured by the Church for Heretics in all Ages) as
may appear both by St. Ambrose Hine evacuatio Baptisinatis parv^^orum q^^ sola
aco^tione donar^, nullo ^^rem rea^^ ^^cerentur ab^o^vi, S. Ambr. Ep. lib. 4.
Dem^tradi Virg.
. From Pelagius's Doctrine follows the evacuating or making void the baptizing
of Infants, who would by his Opinion be said to be adopted, but not absolved
from any guilt. And in like manner; by the definition of the Council of
Milevis, where, speaking of the H. Catholic Church's understanding, Original
Sin, we have these words; Propter hanc regulam fidei, and Parvul qui nihil
peccaforum in semetipsis committere po^^erunt, deo in peccatorum remissionem
veraciter Baptiza^^ur, ut in eis regeneratione m^ndetur, quod generatione
trarerunt, Conc. Milev. Can 2.
Upon this Ruse of Faith (the sense of the H. Catholic Church [ubique semper]
everywhere, always) it is that Infants are baptized for the remission of sins,
that what they have contracted by Generation may be purged by Regeneration. Now
the words of Caelestius, as quoted by S. Augustine, are these; Infantes
Baptizari remissionem peccatorum secundum regulam universalis Ecclesiae, and
Evangelii sententiam, S. Aug l. 2. cont. Pel. and Cael. c. 5.
That Infants are baptized for Remission of Sins, according to the Rule of the
Universal Church, and the appointment of the H. Gospel, whereby it is probable,
that he meant this Text of H. Gospel, according to the sense we have given of
it, because none can be admitted into Covenant with the guilt of their sins
upon them, and to signify, that he must make absolute and sincere renunciation
of them; which may be one reason why the H. Church appoints Sponsors and
Undertakers to make such Promises in the behalf of the Child. I will now finish
my Proofs from the Testimony of the Ancients by the Authority of a Council: the
Provincial Council of Milevis. The Church of Afric was one of the most famous
Churches of the Primitive Times, for Piety and Learning, and the determination
of the Council, (which, Case of Infant Baptism, p. 152.
as St. Augustine observed an 100 Years after, was not a New Decree, [Novum
Decretum] seems to allow baptizing Children in that Church, to be a long and
uninterrupted Custom. This Council was held about the middle of the third
Century, about 150 Years after the decease of St. John. This Council, in its
second Canon, thus declares, It is decreed by the Council, i. e. [Placuii
Spiritui Sancto, and nobis] it is decreed by the H. Ghost, and by us; ^^em
placuit ut quicunque parv^^los receates ab uteris matram baptizandos negat; aut
dicit in remissionem quidem peccatorum baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere
originalis peccati quod regenerationis lavacro expi^^^r; undo fit Consequens ut
in eis form a baptizmatis in remissionem peccatorum non vera, sed falsa
intelligatur Anathema sit. Synod. Milevitana. Can. 2. apud Carazam.
That whosoever will not allow Children to be baptized presently after they
come out of their Mothers Womb, or says they are baptized for remission of
Sins indeed, but draw nothing of Original Sin from Adam, which is to be
explated by the Laver of Regeneration (whence it does follow, that that form of
Baptism for the remission of Sins in and to you, is understood not to be true,
but false) let him be declared Accursed; and this I think Proof enough from
Antiquity, however they that desire more may be excellently satisfied from the
learned Mr. Walker's Modest Plea for Infant Baptism, where he not only asserts,
but proves its usage for about fifteen Centuries of years.

CHAP. XIV. The just Complaint of the Jews, if this Doctrine be not true.
AND now what Reason can be offered why those Christians that were converted
from Judaism, who were scandalized at the omission of Circumcision, should not
have been more highly scandalized, if the first Planters of Christianity had
denied an admission of Infants unto Covenant under the H. Gospel Dispensation,
when they had been ever allowed it under the Mosaic Economy? Is it not
rational to imagine, that they who made so great Complaints, only because the
H. Disciples instructed the Jewish People that dwelt in Heathen Countries, that
they were not bound to use Circumcision, would not have made greater Complaints
if they had not admitted them and their Children unto Baptism, but wholly shut
them out, like the Children of Infidels, and not allowed them to be Members of
Christ's Mystical Body? It certainly, in all likelihood, would have been a sore
Grief to them, to observe their Infants used as bad as the Infants of Pagans
and Foreigners, and to have no clear distinction between such Children, whose
Parents received the H. Gospel, and such as with stood Christianity. For they
ever esteemed Heathen Infants as unclean and common; but the Infants of
Believers they reckoned Holy and Consecrate, according to the Exposition we
have given of 1 Cor. vij. 14. But now had the H. Disciples publicly preached
that the Infants of such as were admitted into Covenant with God, had no other
Title to an admission into the Church by Baptism, than the Infants of Pagans,
who were not in Covenant; they had preached a Doctrine, which would assuredly
have been a higher Scandal than whatever they had preached against the
necessity of circumcising Males, and the observation of Moses's Law of
Ceremonies: Whereupon since we do not find among their grievous Accusations on
the change of the Jewish Usages, that they murmured or repined that their
Infants were not baptized, and so made capable of the Benefits of the new
Covenant of Grace; It is a much more probable Reason to believe, that the first
Planters of Christianity and their Associates, admitted Infants to Baptism,
than the not showing a plain Example or direct Precept for it under the H.
Gospel Dispensation, is that they were not at all baptized. And now having
given such Reasons and Authorities for this laudable and christian Usage,
before I come to answer the Objections, which is the last part of my
Undertaking, give me leave to make one Observation. Menno, who was one of the
greatest Scholars of the Adverse Party, who lived about 100 years since, Vid.
Cassand. adv. Anabapt. Case of Infants Bapt. p. 47, 48.
was so close put to it by this sort of Argument from Authority, that he owned
the Ordinance of baptizing Children as ancient as the H. Apostolic Age, but
then declared it came from counter felt Pastors of that Age; but if so, how
happens it, we find not any thing recorded of it in the sacred Epistles, nor in
the Books of any of that Age; such as S. Clement, S. Ignatius and S. Polycarp?
How happens it that S. John, who lived the longest of all the H. Apostles,
mentions it not? Or how happens it that the Inditer of the Apocalypse, that
censured several Errors of that Age, should take no notice hereof? It is very
wonderful that none of the inspired Writers, such as assisted them (...) should
not mention so reproachful a practice, that would stock the Church with
counterfeit Professors, and in a short time Unchurch it. In the same sort if it
happened by erroneous Guides in the times immediately after the H. Apostles, how
came it to pass that none of the Illustristious Confessors that lived in that
Age contradicted it, as a Doctrine that might endanger the overthrow of
Christianity, nor told us any thing in the least of it? They published Books
against the Errors of Simon Magus, Menander, Saturninus, Cerinthus, Ebion,
Valentinus, Basilides, Marcion, etc. but we read not any thing in their
Writings against baptizing Children, though we are assured from Iraenus and
Tertullian, that it was used in their times, as we have made it appear.

CHAP. XV. An Answer to an Objection that would overthrow the Sense given of
St. Mat. xxviij. 19.
THe Antipedobaptists do object, An Obj.
that the Command for baptizing all Nations does not help the cause of
Infant Baptism, because there are some places of H. Writ of a like sound, are
not to be interpreted as if they took in all indefinitely, but only such as
have a capacity to act the Duty, as worship God, and sing to him all you
Nations. To which I return (1.) da^^ sed non concesso, as the Logicians speak)
that the sext, S. Mat. xxviij. 19. does not conclude (tho it do not forbid)
that Children should be brought to Baptism, I say this Allowance being given,
the Antipedobaptist can never prove his Principle from it. (2.) nemo tenetur ad
Impossible, none is bound to Impossibilities, as the Civil Lawers speak) yet
in a Precept in acting that for others, of which all are alike able to whom the
Precept is delivered (as certainly there was no more difficulty for the
commissionated Teachers to administer Baptism to Children than to adult
Persons) there is no ground to limit or confine it: And that this is the truth
may appear, because the Precept is not delivered to all Nations, to fit and
qualify themselves for Baptism, but to the H. Disciples to disciple them, and
administer Baptism to them; and of being brought to the Church, and admission
into the number of the Members of Christ's Mystical Body. And of cleansing by
the Baptismal Waters, the Infant is capable, though not of worshipping God, or
Singing (at least Musically and Harmonically.) An Obj.
Again another Objection they fetch from the Original [(...)] baptizing them
into the Name; because the baptized should not only catch for themselves the
Profession and Name, but also be deeply immersed in the thing named and
professed. An Obj.
But still they object against [(...)] them, and perceiving it to be of another
Gender, and not the same with (...), they find out a word to lay it on, which
themselves have obosen, and that is [(...)]. Disciples, and thus, they would
have [(...)] them, not applied to Nations, Rev. xx. 8.
but to the Disciples of the Nations. To which I return, we have the same
Conjunction in H. Writ, I mean of [(...)] Nations and them, and they are both
mentioned in one verse, with relation to one another: And why may not we more
naturally draw a Companion from the common Custom of Speech, and rather
substitute (...), a word appliable to all Ages Men, Women and Children, and
bind up all in the end of the Construction with [(...)] out of all Nations.
Neither is the Conjunction of (...) and (...), Nations and Them, improper,
because (...) is most expressive in the Original Tongue, and so fit to make the
Construction perfect; Nations being made up and composed of Men, Women, and
Children: And seeing now we are criticizing upon the Text, let me offer
something should have been brought in at the Coherence, Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them. If we correct our Translation by the Original, it will run
thus, [(...)] Disciple you all Nations, not [(...)] Teach you them: The meaning
of the Term is, Separate such and such Persons from the rest of Mankind, and by
initiation admit them to be my Disciples, or dedicate them to the Service of
Heaven, and then by Baptism set a Mark upon them, that they may be known to be
my Disciples, and let them be afterward instructed, who in respect of their
present unfitness cannot immediately become Disciples by personal Instruction;
and the ground of this Interpretation is strongly laid, because an Active Verb
of Injunction should be allowed such a meaning; for being made to People, and
Nations, it must have such a sense as must extend it self to all, to whom it is
made; and assuredly little ones on account of their Number are a larger Portion
of People, and Nations, than they are upon account of their Stature; and that
Infants may by this way be made Disciples, Fieri. Facto esse, not as being
personally instructed, but as being placed so as to be reckoned the Servants
and Scholars of the blessed Jesus, and so really looked upon, and accounted his
Disciples: We put little ones to places of Instruction not so much for their
growth in Knowledge, as to be secured from Mischief. And after this manner
Infants are kindly admitted into the Institution of our great Master from the
hazard of their departing out of the World without the Seal of the Covenant,
and for fear, because they have not the Divine Mark, either they or our selves
may undergo punishment. To all this I may add, (which is sufficient to stop the
mouth of Gainsayers) That the placing Instruction before Baptism) does not any
more infer, that Instruction should go first, and should have the preference,
than that Repentance, as being enjoined before Faith by St. Mark, Repent you,
St. Mark 1.15.
and believe the Gospel, ought to challenge the precedence, which is the proper
product of Faith. Faith in this place being consequent upon Repentance by an
elegant (...). Such Transpositions in Holy Writ have caused this Observation to
be made; Non datur prius aut posterius in Scriptura.
There is not a former or a latter allowed in Holy Scripture. And now I pity
mine Enemy, being so beset that he cannot stir out of the Circle; which calls
to mind the Observation of one of the ancient Fathers, Quid est miserius misero
non miserante seipsum. S. Aug. Confess.
What is more miserable, than for a miserable Man not to commiserate himself.
But still the Antipedobaptists object and say, The altering the placing of the
words, An Obj.
inverts and discomposes the Method of the Holy Jesus's Commission, because
that principally relates to the adult, and such as have entertained
Christianity. 2 Timothy 1.15.
Grandmothers. If we were to Preach unto perfect Infidels the same that Christ
commissionated his holy Disciples to go unto, those that were adult before they
embraced Christianity, we must first instruct them, and then Disciple them;
which word in the Original the Antipedobaptists are very fond of; and yet I
suppose, with due submission, I have made clear proof, that the true sense of
it does not in the least assist or strengthen their Principle: The phrase
Discipling is the principal word in the Commission, and Baptizing and
Instruction the formal modification of the Commission; tho if the words were
otherwise placed, and Instruction in express words had preceeded Baptism, their
turn would not have been served thereby; for the Commission naming no Sex or
Quality, neither for Age, nor on any other account, must necessarily take in
whatsoever particulars can be comprehended under that Phrase; and the
Antipedobaptists cannot possibly make a difference from the words themselves.
Hereupon it is clearly evident, that if the blessed Jesus intended all
Capacities, when he used the Phrase, all Nations, then it is all one as if he
had declared all Capacities of Reasonable Beings, both as to Sex and Age,
should be admitted unto Baptism, the sign of admission into his holy Gospel
Covenant. Now that this General Commission takes in each several Capacity of
Reasonable Beings, we will evidence from three things, (even the several
Circumstances necessary to any Human Action) the Place where, the Time when,
and the Parties concerned in the Action. (1.) The Place where: Judea, where it
is acknowledged by all Parties, that the Usage of admitting all sorts of
Gentiles, that embraced the Jewish Religion unto Baptism was constantly
practiced. (2.) Israel were most strict and exact in the observation of their
ancient Rites and Usages. (3.) Judea, to his immediate Followers and
Attendants, his dear Friends, that were Natives of the same Country, and
thereupon it is not in the least improbable, but that they well knew the
constant and general Usages then transacted by the Jews. Now upon these
Accounts it is evident, that Christ's Commission for Discipling all Nations was
as genuine and clear, as if he had descended unto Particulars. For he that gave
the Commission, and they unto whom it was granted, fully understood what
Persons were capable of the Ordinance of Admission into his Holy Church; and
hereupon an Universal Usage and an Universal Commission were most
proportionable and correspondent to the Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of our
Great Legislator. It was a constant and uninterrupted Usage with the Jewish
People to admit unto Baptism whole Households (wherein we may reasonably suppose
Men, Women, and Children contained) of Gentile Proselites; so that it being the
usage to leave none unbaptized, there was no necessity for a particular Order,
or mentioning who should be baptized; so that if there were need of exempting
any, we may well imagine the Holy Jesus would have excluded them; but we read
of no such Exception in Holy Scripture: So that the Question ought to be thus
stated, Whether Infants are prohibited Baptism, and in what Place, or at what
Time? We appeal to all the Christian World, if this be the sense, as is most
probable, whether the Commission is in the least obscure, or more obscurely
published for Infants, than for those that are adult, can be no Exception,
because no particulars are named. Three Thousand Converts are baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. Acts 2.38, 41.
Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the
Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost. Which no whit disagrees from the Command, St. Matthew. 28.19.
Go you therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. For the Form of Baptism in those
first days of the Holy Gospel (of which the New Testament gives the Story) may
be considered under a threefold Condition. (1.) St. John the Baptist baptized
in the Name of Messiah, or Christ, that was then ready to come, but that Jesus
of Nazareth was he, he himself knew not until he had run a great part of his
Course; And I knew him not, St. Joh. 1.31.
but that he should be made manifest unto Israel, therefore am I come,
baptizing with water. (2.) Nazareth were he, or no? All the Nations
acknowledged a Messiah, but most of them abominated that Jesus of Nazareth
should be thought to be he; therefore those that by the preaching of the Holy
Gospel came to acknowledge him to be the Messiah were baptized in his Name, as
the Critical Badge, (the (...)) or Characteristick Mark of their embracing the
true Messiah. (3.) Among the Gentiles, baptized in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; so that the baptizing in the Name of Jesus
was but for a season, for the settling of the Evidence of his being the Messiah.
And when that was thoroughly established, then those Gifts ceased for ever. It
is said, Acts 2.44. All that believed were together, and had all things common.
The Children of those that believed must come under the Title of Believers too,
or they must famish, (which affords no weak Argument, that the Parents Faith is
imputed to the Child; and if for the use of the Body, why not for the service
of the Soul, by an Argument [a minori ad majus] from the lesser to the
greater?) For this Community of Goods being for the relief of the Poor, the
Children, Babes and Infants of believing Parents must be taken in under this
Expression, [All that believe] or else how did they for support? If the
Community of Goods reached them as well as their Parents, the Title must reach
them too. The Community of Goods may be considered under these two
Animadversions, (which, because it may be useful, I hope will not be thought
too impertinent a Digression). her Poor, it had not only the Synagogue for an
Example, but would have had it for a Reproach, if they had neglected so needful
a Duty, which that took care for so conconstantly and tenderly. (2.) Meum and
Tuum] as if one rich Man should have as good interest in another rich Man's
Estate as himself, but it was intended mainly for the relief of the Poor, not
to bring any that had Estates, to voluntary Poverty, nor to level Estates, (as
some Fanatic People among us, the Fifth-monarchy-men, (whose Principle is
Dominium fundatur in Gratia, Power is founded in Grace, and so the Saints must
have the Riches, and Rule the People of the World) would persuade the World
unto) but to relieve those which stood in need; for it is said, Acts 2.45.
that they sold their Possessions and Goods, and parted them to all Men, as
every Man had need; and again we are told, they laid them down at the Holy
Apostles Feet, Acts 4.35.
and distribution was made unto every Man, according as he had need.
Distribution then, I say, was made to them that preached the Holy Word for
their maintenance, and to the Poor for their relief. When a Master of a Family
was baptized, his Children, were they never so young, were baptized with him;
and hence the mention of the baptizing whole Households, Acts. 16.15.
And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying, If you
have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there.
And, again, Acts 16.33.
he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was
baptized straitway, he, and all his. They that, pleading against
Infant Baptism, An Obj.
do cavil, That it may be there were no Infants in those Families that are
mentioned, bewray that they little understand the manner of administering
Baptism in its first use; and therefore to give satisfaction to such of the
Antipedobaptists as start this Objection, I answer;

CHAP. XVI. An Answer to an Objection that would fore-undermine the Sense
offered Acts 2.39.
NOW that the Sense I have given of Acts 2.39. may be the better secured and
confirmed, I will endeavor to answer an Objection made against it, A. R. in
his Tract, called, The 2d. Part of the Vanity and Childishness of
Infant Baptism.
which may be of some seeming strength, until duly weighed and considered, and
then I hope it will appear to be of no great force; and this I find to be
started by an Ingenious Antipedobaptist, a Man of some Learning: And therefore
that I may do the Party justice, An Obj.
I will state the Objection in his own words, that our Adversaries may see I
deal fairly with them. He argues from the Coherence and Sense of the 15, 16,
17, and 33. Verses of Acts 2. and recites Verse. 38. And that by you and your
Children, are meant the same which are mentioned, Verse. 17. under the term of
Sons and Daughters. the Holy Scripture seems plainly to assert, and has been
sufficiently, convincingly and undeniably proved by Learned Men, which may
supersede any Attempt of mine to evince it, or make it plain and evident)
because it was Repentance and Baptism, gave a Title to the Promise; and till
they did Repent and Believe, i. e. Embrace the Holy Gospel, they had no Right
to the Promise; for it is said, Repent, and be Baptized, and you shall receive
the Gift of the Holy Ghost. But they were to be in Covenant by Repentance or
Faith, before they enjoyed the Privileges of the Holy Gospel, and until then
were in the same Case with them afar off, who were not in Covenant; and so had
no right unto the Promise, until they did Repent or Believe. But here it may be
further objected by the Antipedobaptists, An Obj.
that the gentile Converts of Cornelius's Family, had this Gift of the Holy
Ghost antecedent unto Baptism, so that that was not necessary unto the Gift:
Act. 10.44.
For it is said, While Peter spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell upon all
them which heard the word, i. e. that believed; and upon their hearing, St.
Peter was convinced of the Truth of his Blessed Doctrine, and thereupon embraced
the Faith of the Holy Jesus, and became Christians. So that the same
Qualification that fitted them for the reception of the Holy Ghost, capacitated
them for Baptism, as appears three Verses after, Act. 10.47.
Can any forbid Water that these should not be Baptized that have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we? Vid. chapter 8, 9. page 43. 51.
according to the rational and true Exposition we have already given of that
Text, in this Book, to which I refer my Readers. But here, An Obj.
like the monstrous Hydra, another Objection springs up and arises. It Is true,
says the Antipedobaptist, though we own by the Promise the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, yet we do not believe that Gift excludes from Baptism, but we deny
Baptism unto those that are not qualified, as those first Converts were, i. e.
endued with the Gifts and Graces of Repentance and Faith. Heir unto an Estate,
has a Right and Title unto the Instruments that convey that Estate. Moreover
add to this, Children have one of these Graces, though not the other; and if one
be sufficient, the other is not necessary; I mean Faith, which in some, and a
true Sense, they may be said to have (otherwise the Blessed Jesus would not
have cautioned Persons against offending little Ones that believe in him, Mat.
18.
by whom he meant small Children, as I hope we have made sufficiently to
appear. Vid. chapter 7. p. 42, 43.
And that this was a true Faith, we may be assured not only because it was
spoke by Truth it self, who would not therefore impose upon Mankind, but also
because Christ is the proper Object of Faith, and him the Text expressly tells
us, they believed in;) and for Repentance it is not indispensably necessary,
which I shall thus endeavor to prove: I may say of Hatred as is usually said
of Love [Ignoti nulla Cupido] for that which is unknown we have no Desire or
Affection. So of Hatred the odiousness and deformity of that I am wholly
ignorant of, I cannot properly be said to hate: Now before Hatred, there
usually preceeds Grief and Sorrow; and I cannot be said truly to lament or
mourn for a Thing, if I understand not any loss or damage I thereby sustain.
Now to apply this to our present Case, there may be a Sin pardoned in some
Cases, and in some Persons without Repentance, as that word imports Grief and
Sorrow, Detestation and Hatred, Dereliction and Forsaking; by all this I mean
Original Sin of which Infants are guilty as well as the Adult Person, by the
imputation and transmission of the Protoplast's or first Adam's Guilt. Now
Children by reason of their Infantile capacity are not allowed the ability of
exercising these Passions, and cannot be said to be afflicted and grieved, to
detest and hate, to abandon and forsake that which was not their own proper and
voluntary Act. So that upon this Account, Repentance is not necessary for their
state and condition, because of their Incapacity to act the proper parts of
Repentance; and because they lie not under such a Personal Guilt, as may be
said in a more especial manner to be proper and peculiar to the exercise of
some parts of Repentance. But for Faith, so far as it is necessary, that
Children in some sense may be said to have it, as they have the Benefits of
their Parents Faith derived to them. But that Faith and Repentance are not
always, and in all Cases indispensably necessary unto Baptism, may appear
plainly from the Instance of the Holy Jesus [who was Nullius Poenitentiae
Debitor] in him was no Guilt, and so consequently no necessity of Repenting;
there was was no necessity of Faith in him; For of Faith he was the Author and
Finisher; as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews acquaints us, Heb. 12.2.
and yet he submitted to St. John's Baptism, which was in order to Repentance,
and therefore called the Baptism of Repentance; and hereupon it is that Faith
and Repentance are not always absolutely and indispensably needful to the being
baptized. And this may sufficiently solve an Objection lately made to me
against Infant Baptism, An Obj.
by an Antipedobaptist, from our excellent Church Catechism, (who promised me,
upon conviction, to return to our Church, which Promise he is obliged in
Conscience to perform, if he give not a Rational Answer to what I have said,
and shall offer, for the solution of this seeming Difficulty.) What is required
of Persons to be baptized? Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin; and Faith,
whereby they steadfastly believe the Promises of God made unto them in that
Sacrament. which Promise (or Graces) Children, when they come unto Age, are
bound to perform. It is a good Rule in the Civil Law, [Nemo tenetur ad
Impossible,] No Man is obliged unto the performance of that which is
impossible to be done by any human power. And then we cannot believe, that he
who is the God of Reason, as well as Truth, will oblige his Creature to a Duty,
which he is not able to perform by any Powers he has created him with; and
suppose God should infuse into a Child an extraordinary and miraculous measure
of Grace as well as Reason, as he did into our blessed Savior and St. John the
Baptist, who were sanctified from, or in the Womb; yet we read not (though they
had so great a proportion of the Gifts of the Holy Spirit) that during the
state of their infancy they magnified God, and spoke with Tongues, (antecedent
to the use of Speech) the manifestation of which Miraculous Power, and the
discovery of which Divine Gift, the Jews at the Feast of Pentecost, Acts 2.4,
8, 11. -- 10.46.
and the first Gentile Converts showed. But to return, Though these Graces are
not needful to all in all circumstances, for where there is not a capacity to
act them, there can be no obligation to their exercise; yet that the Children
of Believers have a right to the Covenant as soon as born, and so have a right
to the Seal that conveys the Title, and are obliged to its Use, if they will
enjoy the Privileges of the Covenant, I hope, has been made appear beyond
contradiction, yet they are needful for some that are admitted unto that Holy
Ordinance; and this Distinction ought to be well understood and weighed. If
Baptism be allowed to those, who have not the proper Qualifications, then those
Qualifications are not absolutely needful unto the Undertakers of that Holy
Ordinance; Faith is sometimes needful, when Repentance is not so; sometimes
Faith and Repentance conjoined, and otherwise sometimes. Acts 8.37.
When St. Philip admitted the Ethiopian Eunuch to Baptism, he only enjoined
Faith, -- 2.41, 38.
not Repentance; St. Peter, when he made three thousand Converts at his first
Sermon, enjoined Repentance only. In short, It is as the condition is, or the
needs of the Party require. In Infants, the matter is plain as to Repentance,
the nonperformance whereof cannot hinder their being baptized; because they
(having committed no sin) are not obliged unto the Duty; and yet this is as
needful for being baptized as Faith: So that this evidences they are not
absolutely needful, not to all, not to Children, but only accidentally so; and
if they may be baptized, if they want one, why not if they want the other, is a
Mystery that will not (nay, I am inclined to believe, cannot) be discovered by
those that (because they think the contrary) are engaged to make the
Revelation. Besides, I add, Actual Faith is needful not to the undertaking, but
to the subsequent Products of that Holy Ordinance; because the first Planters
of Christianity admitted some (though adult) to Baptism, who had no Faith, but
were only formal Professors, and of this sort were Simon Magus, Alexander the
Coppersmith, Demas, and Diotrephes, and Judas, (if baptized) and also the
Gnostic Heretics: For the Effect is from the Searcher of Hearts, who knows our
secret thoughts, but the External Ordinance may be performed and undertaken by
those who know not such Secrets. And this is a clear Proof, that that Faith
which is needful to the product of the Holy Ordinance, is not needful to its
undertaking; and if formal Professors may be partakers of it, much more
Children; if to such as actually impede or hinder the product, much rather to
them that do not so. If it be objected by the Antipedobaptists, An Obj.
The Church cannot tell but that those that say they have Faith may have it,
but she certainly knows Children have not. I answer, St. Matthew. 18.6. St. Mark
9.42.
as we are told in Sacred Scripture, in express words, recorded by two
Evangelists, if one be not enough, (And that this is a satisfactory and
sufficient Proof, the Holy Scriptures do assure us, when they tell us, St. Joh.
8.17.
that the Testimony of two Men is true;) and this witness and evidence (it
appears) we have for the truth of this Doctrine, that Children have Faith; and
that this their Faith was true, sound, and such as God will accept, we may with
good reason believe, because he that is truth, and will not therefore deceive
us, does seem so to assure us, Vid. page 89.
(as we have already made appear in this Chapter) Whosoever shall offend one of
these little ones that believe in me; and therefore fit for his Blessing, which
is Divine. The exercise of our understanding is no more necessary to make us
fit for Grace than for Reason; but we have seeds of Reason congenite and
innate, antecedent to the exercise of our understandings, otherwise there would
be no distinction between a Rational Creature and a Brute, when first produced
into being and brought to light. Sparks and Seeds then of Reason there may be,
to use the words of the great African Father, Per Infantis animan non ubi ratio
nulla erat. sed ubi adhuc sopita erat. St. Aug. Ep 23. ad Bonifac.
The Soul of an Infant has Reason, but as yet not capable of use, like Fire
raked together in the Embers. So likewise there is a possibility of Grace being
infused by the Divine Spirit, as is clear in the fore-quoted Instance of the
blessed Jesus, and his [ Praecursor, or] Forerunner, St. John the Baptist, who
were sanctified in or from the Womb. Or else they may be said to believe by the
Faith of those that present them unto the Holy Ordinance in the Sacred Place;
Fide gestantium. Idem ibidem.
For to this I may add, the Child has the Faith of the Parent imputed to it,
and that the Faith of the Parent is imputable to the Child, and available for
great purposes, is apparent, because we read in the Holy Gospel, That the
Blessed Jesus makes the Faith of the Parent necessary unto the Healing of the
Child. From whence I argue thus, That if the Faith of the Parent may be imputed
for the recovering of the Bodily Diseases, why may not the same be imputed for
the curing the Distempers of the Soul, I mean Sin? And is it not as reasonable,
that seeing the Guilt of another's Sin is imputed to us to make us miserable,
the Faith of another should be conveyed and made over to us, to qualify and
fit us for a participation in such an Ordinance as should procure our Pardon,
and deliver us from our Guilt, and thereby make us Happy, which is done by
being washed in the Laver of Baptism, which is called by St. Paul, Titus 3.5.
[(...)] the Washing or Laver of Regeneration. And this is a proper Term, it
being rational, that we, who have the imputation of our Forefathers guilt,
should have an imputation of our Fathers faith, to bathe us in that Fonntain,
that was set open to wash away the defilement of such an imputed Guilt and
Uncleanness. And that there is reason for such an Imputation, may appear from
the relation Children have to their Father, which is that of Members with the
Head, and of Parts with the Whole, the Father and Son, both in Holy Writ and
Customary Usage, (upon some Accounts) being taken for one. Hereupon the
Covenant made with the Proto-plast, or first Man, was transmitted unto his
Posterity, and the Deluge, or Noah's Flood, the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the perishing of the Rebels in the gainsaying of Core, St. Jude 11.
included Infants, as well as the adult and full-grown. Now Reason as well as
Religion in this matter, requires help for Children; for if the Son be
reckoned one with his Father, and so obnoxious to punishment, without any
acting by the consent of his own will, solely by the transmission of his
Father's guilt, certainly then, when the Father is one of the Faithful, they
ought so far to be reckoned one with him, as upon that account to receive some
advantage, and so to be allowed an Imputation of the Father's Faith, which may
render them fit for a reception of the Benefits of the Covenant, and the Seal
that ensures them. Hereupon the Covenant given to Abraham is the same with that
transacted with Adam; Gen 17.7.
I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in
their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and unto
thy seed after thee. But here the Antipedobaptists object, An Obj.
That this Covenant is not the Holy Gospel Covenant, but the Jewish Covenant
made with Abraham; because it is said, a Covenant between me and thy Seed, and
this Covenant to continue to him and his Seed after him, and that in their
Generations, i.e. in the Generations begotten by his Seed. I have thus strongly
stated the Objection, that the Antipedobaptists may see I deal fairly with
them, and give their Argument all the strength it can have, and possibly more
than some of them would or could afford it. Answ.
But (for Answer hereunto) if you will allow St. Paul to understand this Text,
(which I believe he did as well and better than any Antipedobaptist in England)
he in express terms makes this Covenant with Abraham to be the Holy Gospel it
self, and then it must needs be the Holy Gospel Covenant; Gal. 3.8.
and the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, Genesis 12.^.
in thee shall all Nations be blessed; which is a Quotation from the Book of
Genesis, which must needs be more extensive than the Covenant to Abraham and
his carnal Seed, the Posterity of the Jews, which was so small a part, that it
could not include all the Families of the Earth, and comprehend all Nations.
And therefore Abraham's Covenant must certainly be the same with the Holy
Gospel Covenant, because it was that which was to be published to all the
World, and take in all Mankind. But if any Antipedobaptist shall object and
say, An Obj.
The Covenant made with Abraham when Circumcision was instituted, is not the
same with the Gospel St. Paul mentions in his forecited Epistle, because that
is a Quotation from Genesis xij. 3. To which I answer, I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee; so that it plainly signifies, it was the
Confirmation of a former Covenant, not the Institution of a new one; and that
this is true, may appear by the Coherence, for it is said but three Verses
before, As for me, behold my Covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a Father
of many Nations; or, as the Original, and the Margin of the Bible has it, Genesis
xvij. 4.
Thou shall be Father of a multitude of Nations; which Abraham could not be as
a Father of the Jewish People, Jewry being so small a Continent of the Earth,
and so little a Part of the World, that it could not comprehend a multitude of
Nations. So that by virtue of this Covenant, Abraham was to be considered, as
the Father of all Christians, as well as Jews, being the Holy Jesus, that was
to be an Universal Savior, for the whole World proceeded, and came forth from
his Loins. Hereupon we may strongly press home St. Romans v. 12.
Paul's Argument, and say, Because the Blessed Jesus and his Holy Dispensation
convey a greater measure of Divine Assistance, and promise higher Rewards than
the Protoplast's, or first Adam's Fall did Evil and Punishment; If the Parents
Guilt be transmitted unto Father and Son for Death and Condemnation, both shall
have interest in the favor of the Holy Jesus, the first unto Justification and
Life, the second so far as to take him into the Covenant, and consequently by
the sign thereof to give him a right and title unto the Benefits and Advantages
of the Covenant. So that we may declare the Holy Apostle's words and say, Acts
x. 47.
Can any forbid Water, that these should not be baptized? Which St. Peter spoke
not only because the Gift of the Holy Ghost was fallen upon them, but because
that Gift was a Proof of their Title to the Covenant; and if by any different
method a Man can prove his Title to the Covenant, he has a Right to the Sign
that ensures the Benefits thereof. And therefore being the Holy Gospel Covenant
now preached is the same with that made unto Abraham, is there not a true
consequential Implication, that the same Privilege is now to be enjoyed that
was under the former old Economy or Dispensation, viz. That upon the account
of the Faith of the Principal of the House, each of that House that did not
contradict or gainsay was included, and by Sign admitted in Covenant? And if
this be not allowed, Christian Doctrine will be very hard, and there may seem a
sort of Impeachment to lie against the Divine Justice; for by the Protoplast's,
or first Man's Fall, Sin imputed was enough to damn the Child; and shall not
the Father's Faith in the Blessed Jesus and his New Dispensation be available
so far as to put him into a state of salvation? Now that the Promise is imputed
to the Children, may appear, Abraham, as the prime Guardian, the Holy
Gospel Covenant was given, and the Sign of it applied to Infants; hereupon the
same must be to all that believe, and their Offspring. For all that believe
shall inherit the Promise, and be Heirs as well as the Father of the faithful.
This St. Paul speaks clearly in express words; Gal. iij. 29.
And if you be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise. Abraham was not a particular Privilege to him alone, or to his
People, the Jews, but it was the Holy Gospel Covenant, that all Nations were to
be interested in, and concerned with; what it was to Abraham, it was to be unto
the whole Race of Mankind, and therefore called a Covenant of Grace, as may
appear by the forequoted place of the Holy Apostle St. -- 8.
Paul; and from St. Matthew we are assured, St. Matthew. viij. 2.
that the Heathen World shall sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven, as equal unto
Abraham, Ephesians. ij. 19.
because they are fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God.
Now the Covenant made with Abraham, included Father and Son, as I have (I hope)
proved, and upon this account, possibly, it might be the Holy Jesus called the
Chief of the Publicans a Son of Abraham, St. Luke xix. 9.
and so consequently a Son of God; for it was usual to call the People that
worshipped any God, the Children of that God, whether the God they worshipped
were true or false. Mal. ij. 2.
Now that there is a necessity of Baptism, this Consideration may prove it,
That Children as soon as born (by reason of Adam's transgression) are under the
Sentence of Death and Damnation, except secured from it, even while Children;
if they dye without (according to any outward means yet revealed) they cannot
ordinarily be happy; and except this be cleared, the Fathers can have little
comfort in them. Now there is no other Method appointed by Heaven for the
Pardoning and Purging of Guilt, but the Blood of Jesus, and the Covenant that
Blood gives a Title unto; and there is no other external [ Medium, or] Means
discovered to us by God to make this Blood so efficacious as to procure us
pardon and peace, but only the being baptized. St. Paul tells us, that those
that are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his Death. Romans vj 3.
So that if we are not cleansed by this external Baptism, supposing the neglect
to be with our own consent, (which cannot be the condition of Children) we have
no interest in his Merits. When we thus declare, we intend only the external,
common, appointed Means of Salvation. The Holy Ordinance of Baptism is the
Instrument that sues out and purchases, through Christ's Blood, a Pardon to our
selves and our Infants. How far Heaven extends its Mercy to those that are
without Means and cannot use them, is a Mystery hid from us and known only unto
God. But now to return to a more particular defense of Acts ij. 39. Besides,
this particular and express Gift of the Holy Ghost was only in the infancy of
the Church, and then that Gift was indispensably necessary to enable the
Blessed Apostles to perform the Holy Jesus's Commission, which he gave to them
presently after his Miraculous Resurrection, and not long before his
Illustrious Ascension unto the Mansions of Glory, which was to teach and
publish his Holy Gospel to all Nations, which they could not do without this
Gift of Tongues; because they knowing no more than their own Native Language,
had been Barbarians to a great part of the Gentile World, and therefore could
not have spoken so intelligibly as to be understood; and this appears by the
effusion of the Holy Ghost on the first Jewish Converts in this Chapter, and
upon those of the Gentile World, as appears eight Chapters after this, Acts x.
46.
they heard them speak with Tongues, and magnify God, which Children were
incapable of, not being arrived to the use of Reason or Speech, which might be
for the greater encouragement of the Gentiles, because the Holy Gospelstate
assures a more plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit than the weaker Economy
or Dispensation of the Law. Besides, seeing the Antipedobaptists object and
say, Infants are excluded from Baptism by this Text, An Obj.
because this Gift refers to Sons and Daughters, mentioned Verse 17. To which I
do answer, Answ.
I may say Children are not excluded for a like reason; because Sons and
Daughters may in reason be supposed to mean more adult and full-grown persons,
and because this Promise referring to the Gift of Tongues, could not belong
unto Children capable of Baptism; for they had not the use of Speech. Infused
Habits must suppose the Subject capable of them, or by the Infusion render them
so; as in this Instance of the Gift of Tongues, when it is supernaturally
infused, it must either suppose the Subject predisposed with understanding, or
must make him so by that Infusion. Now we read no where, that this Gift of
Tongues was bestowed, but it found the Subject predisposed with understanding;
for upon all, on whom this Gift was conferred, it is said they spoke with
Tongues, Acts ij. 4, 6, 8, 11. -- x. 46.
i. e. in different Languages, which we never yet read, or heard any
Infant-Children did, which evidences beyond denial, to you and to your
Children, must be meant of Sons and Daughters, that were adult and of
full-grown Years. Lastly, I may urge this descent of the Holy Ghost, was the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and of Fire, prophesied of and foresignified by S.
John the Baptist, St. Matthew. iij. 2. St. Luke iij. 16.
and that he who was [Praecursor Christi,] the Forerunner of the Messiah,
should be the Minister of, and dispense and deal forth to the World; and this
may appear true, because when St. Luke describes this Advent, or Coming of the
Holy Ghost, he tells us he descended in cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, i. e.
having a resemblance like unto Fire; Acts ij. 3. St. Mark 1.8.
and this St. Mark calls expressly the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. And this does
not vacate or make void the other Baptism of Water, because St. Peter makes it
the assurance of the Messiah's Baptism, Acts ij. 38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
Remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. An Obj.
And though it is objected and said by the Antipedobaptists, i. e. by Faith
embraced and received it, and yet this does not exclude Infants from Baptism,
as appears from the reason already offered. To all this, let me add in short,
what is meant by the Promise as recorded by Joel, and cited by the Text; 1 Cor.
xij. 29, 30.
his powerful Aid and Assistance; for it is clear by St. Paul, the Gift of
Miracles was not imparted to some, and the Kingdom of God, or Grace, that good
Christians enjoy in this World, Romans xiv. ^.6.
consists in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and that
these very persons had this Communication of the Holy Spirit, appears at the
latter end of this Chapter, for this reason, Acts ij. 46.
Because they did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of Heart. And
further, Another Communication of the Holy Spirit they had, in that they were
willing to leave their Possessions, and deliver them to be disposed of as the
Holy Apostles thought most useful for the good and benefit of the Church; --
iv. 34.
which were clear and great Testimonies, that the Divine Spirit resided and
dwelt in their Souls. I know a great and learned Man says he will not defend
the Arguments from this Text, because he thinks it inconcludent, for this
reason, because he believes the word Children, there used, is really the
Posterity of the Jews, and not their Infant-Children. And I believe so too: And
yet, with deference to my Superiors, and with submission unto better Judgments,
I take the Argument to be concluding upon this account, because it would be a
great Incentive to encourage the propagating Christianity, and a Motive to both
Jews and Gentiles, to embrace and come in and own themselves Professors of the
Holy Gospel, and Disciples of the Blessed Jesus. And it is very probable, in
his first Sermon, St. Peter would use the most prevailing Argument with the
Jews, that he might remove the Prejudice that lay upon their Hearts, to hinder
them from believing in a crucified Savior; and it is not improbable his
numerous Auditors understood him in this sense, because we read in the latter
part of this Chapter, the same day were added to the Church about three
thousand Souls: Acts ij. 41.
So that when St. Peter says, the Promise is to you, and unto your Children,
it is as much as if he had said these words, O you Jews, that now hear me, if
you will repent, and be baptized, you, and your Posterity, and the Children of
you, and your Posterity, if you will repent, i. e. own your Guilt, in
crucifying the Lord of Life and Glory, and embrace his Holy Gospel, and live
according to the Rules thereof, and be baptized, i. e. receive the Sign of
Admission into the New Covenant of Grace, you and your Children shall have the
same Privilege you had in your own Dispensation under the Law, i. e. your
Children shall be in Covenant, as well as your selves, and equally with you be
admitted to the Sign of the Covenant, Baptism, as your Children are now
admitted to Circumcision, the Sign of the antiquated Covenant in your way; and
this might be a great Argument to the Gentiles to become Christians, because
they should not only enjoy the same Privilege as the Jew, if one of their
Proselytes, but much greater by being a Disciple of the Blessed Jesus; as much
greater as the Holy Gospel did exceed the Law, as appears by St. Paul's
Argument. But if the Ministration of Death, or the Law written and engraven in
Stones was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold
the Face of Moses, for the Glory of his Countenace, which Glory was to be done
away, how shall not the Ministration of the Spirit or Gospel be rather
glorious? For if the Ministration of Condemnation, or the Law, be Glory, much
more does the Ministration of Righteousness or the Gospel exceed in Glory; for
even that which was made glorious, or the Law, had no Glory in this respect, by
reason of the Glory or Gospel that excels; for if that which was done away,
or the Law was glorious, much more that which remains, 2 Cor. iij. 7. -- 12.
or the Gospel is glorious. Thus, I hope, I may say, without assuming or taking
too much to my self, I have rescued this Text from the Antipedobaptists
Objections, and drawn a concluding Argument from it for Infant Baptism; but
because the Reverend Dr. Hammond thinks he has founded the Practice upon a
better Basis, give me leave to mention it, because it will corroborate and
confirm what I have said, and when I shall have answered the Objections brought
against the other place of Holy Scripture, I hope I shall for ever silence the
Objections of any Antipedobaptist from Holy Writ, from having any influence or
prevalency on unprejudiced minds, that love Truth better than Interest, and had
rather comply with the Sacred institutions of the Holy Jesus, than carry on and
promote any Faction against him and his Holy Religion. The Argument is this,
Baptism, or Washing, was a known Rite, solemnly used among the Jews (as it is
now among Christians) for the initiating or entering Jews and Proselytes into
the Covenant of the Lord, and so into the Congregation of the Jews, as among us
it is into the New Covenant, and into the Church of Christ. Many Branches of
that Custom there were, I shall briefly gather them together, and farther
testify the truth of those Affirmations, which any way seem questionable to
any. (1.) Moses. This that learned Doctor makes appear by several Quotations
from their great Rabbis, and tells us, nothing can be more clearly affirmed by
them. (2.) Schecinah, or] Divine Majesty, and to undertake the Yoke of the Law,
he was bound to have Baptism, Circumcision, and a Peace Offering; and if it
were a Woman, Baptism and Sacrifice. And again, the stranger that is
circumcised, and not baptized; or baptized, and not circumcised, Arrianus in
Epictet. l. 2. c. 9.
is not a true Proselyte until he be both. A clear Testimony we have of this in
Arrianus, the Stoic Philosopher, where the Jewish Proselyte is by him called
[(...)] Dipped; and he that is so only in show, not indeed, is termed [(...)] a
counterfeit baptized Person. So that it is observable, that the Baptism of the
Native Jews, was the Pattern by which the Baptism of the Proselytes was
regulated, and wherein it was founded. By all this it appears how little
needful it will be to defend the Baptism of Christians from the Law of
circumcising Infants among the Jews, the Foundation being far more fitly laid
in that other of Jewish Baptism, a Ceremony of Initiation or Entrance for all,
(especially for Proselytes, who were by Water to be cleansed from the
Pollutions and Defilements of Heatherism, before they were to be admitted into
Covenant, by the Token, thereof, Circumcision) as well as that of Circumcision;
and whereas that of Circumcision belonged only to one, the other was common to
both Sexes; and yet from that Example of Circumcision, among them, thus much
must needs be gained to our present Design, that the Child's not being able to
understand the Vow of Baptism, does no way prejudice the baptizing of such, for
if it did, it must necessarily be an Objection against circumcising the Jewish
Child at eight days old, who could then no more understand the Covenant, of
which that was made the Sign, nor the Wickedness that the Eutrance into the
Covenant obliged to abstain from, than the Christian-Infant now can, and yet
(under pain of Excision, or cutting off) was commanded to be circumcised, which
being so far vindicated from being unreasonable and incongruous, Vid. Dr.
Hammond's Resolution of Six Queries, (whereof Infant-Baptismis one), p. 179, --
181, and p. 189, 190.
by the Example of Circumcision, (which is alallowed by all Dissenters) there
will be little ground to fear the Objections from Reason, or upon that score,
to doubt of the Practice of that which is so reasonable, when it has, besides
this, the Example of Baptism among the Jews, (from which it is immediately
deduced) so adequately proportionable, and directly parallel unto it. And here
I shall found Christian-Baptism, rather than in Circumcision; but if any shall
overthrow the Argument commonly taken from Circumcision, my Return is, That it
may be made use of by the Rule of Proportion, and though it may not directly
prove, yet it clearly illustrates the truth; for, Argumenta symbolica sunt
magis illustrantia, quam probativa.
according to the excellent Lord Bacon's observation, such Arguments do rather
illustrate than prove. Yet it may be reasonably inferred from the Judgment of
Heaven, (in a Case exactly like) that such may be admitted in a Sacramental
way, to be partakers of a Covenant, who do not, at their admission into it,
clearly apprehend the terms of it, as is evident in the circumcising of the
Infant. Now against this Account of Circumcision, the Antipedobaptists Argument
or Objection infers, An Obj.
and proves nothing, As that Types infer nothing, unless a Precept attend them,
An Obj.
that the Circumcision used in Abraham's and Moses's days, was a Type of the
Sacrament used in Holy Gospel Times. Now, to evidence, that the Jewish
Sacrament of Admission, was not a Tipe of the Holy Gospel one, we must (by way
of Answer) observe (if we will speak pertinently) there was a like distinction
between the thing typifying, higher and more exalted Sense appertain to the
Antitype, than to it self. Accordingly the Mosaic Offerings that had a tendency
to cleanse the outward Man, were but weak Representings of the more powerful
force, and greater value of the Blood of the Holy Jesus, the Sacrifice of whose
Blood was of such great Efficacy, (as the Author to the Hebrews tells us) that
it was able to purge the Conscience from dead Works to serve the living God.
Heb. ix. 14.
But it is not thus with the Old and New Sacrament, because the former had not
such a Resemblance unto the latter, nor any thing the same with it, which does
not as truly appertain to it, as to Baptism. Is Baptism an Ordinance of
Admission into the New Covenant of Grace in our times? So was Circumcision in
the days of Abraham and Moses. Romans iv. ij.
Is not Baptism what St. Paul calls Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness
of the Faith? So that what Baptism does now, Circumcision did then;
Circumcision was then a Sacrament, as well as Baptism is now; the one did as
truly admit Members into the Covenant, as the other did. Moreover if we look
back unto the first rise of baptizing, as a Mosaic appointment, we shall be
satisfied Circumcision could not be a Type thereof: Because a Type in its
genuine Notion is a representation, or a prefiguring of somewhat that is to
come. A Type, so far as that word has a Theological Sense or Divine
Acceptance, Typas quatenus vox ista sensum habet Theologicum ita definiri
posse videtur, ut sit futuri a^icujus symbolum, aut exemplum ita a Deo
comparatum, ut ipsius plane institutio futurum illud praefiguret, quod autem
ita praefiguraturillud Antitypus dici solet. Outramus de Sacrificijs, l. 1. v.
18.
may seem thus to be defined, That it is a certain representation of something
future, or a resemblance ordained by God, that by his institution and
appointment should plainly prefigure something future, or to come: What is so
prefigured, is that which is wont to be called the Antitype. But baptizing was
an institution or appointment under Moses's Dispensation, and therefore
Circumcision could not be a Type and Representation of it; because it was for
some Ages administered at the same time therewith: I allow Circumcision to be a
Divine Institution, a Rite of entering Jews and their Infants into Abraham's
Covenant: And I allow Baptism in this to be the like, by a correspondency
therewith of entering us into the Holy Gospel Covenant; that it is a Rite of
Entrance for the Proselytes of Christians and their Infants into the Covenant
of Grace, not after the way of Circumcision, but the Jewish Baptisms. For the
making out of which Principle, if I had only the proof of the Circumcision of
the Infants of the Jews, and the concurrent usage of the first Planters of
Christianity and their Successors, in the early times of the Church that
followed their Example, I should not infer it from the Jews circumcising
Children; because though by the instance of circumcising Children under the old
Law, it has been defended from several Objections brought to disprove it; Yet
I understand there is not a proper and infallible Consequence, that whatsoever
is not Irrational must instantly be; that a thing is therefore true, because a
possibility it may be so, according to the old Logical Maxim [ Ab esse ad posse
non valet Consequentia; or,] that what is allowed must therefore have an
Institution. An Obj.
But when the Antipedobaptists object and allege, That though there be a
correspondency of Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism, yet is there no
correspondency of Identity. Though (by way of Answer) I own with the Learned Dr.
Hammond, Answ.
I know not the Sense of this latter Term, and therefore understand not why
they use it; yet I own the agreeableness does not suit with all Circumstances,
especially in one particular; because I find Females were not, nor could be
circumcised (there being no Foreskin, of which there could be an abscission)
which is no more an Objection against Christian Baptism, than the Jewish one. I
think it fitter to fix the agreeableness, where there is greater reason for it;
and seeing, as the Author to the Hebrews says, He tasted death for every Man,
Heb. ij. 9.
it was fit that he, who upon that account was an universal Savior for all
Mankind, should make choice of such a Sacrament of admission into his Church,
as should be correspondent with, and agreeable unto both the Sexes. An Obj.
But under this Head I meet with another Objection of the Antipedobaptists,
which I am very willing to remove. They seem to offer an Argument why
circumcising should be more proper for Infants than baptizing them; because
Circumcision left a Character in the Flesh, which being impressed on Children
did its work, when they were Adult, and baptizing left no remanent Character.
But (in Answer hereto) this has no force, Answ.
if we lay the Foundation of the Christian Sacrament in that which was used to
Jewish Proselytes, which had no outward Mark on the Body (for Water being
fluid, though it has a Dew, leaves no Impression or Sign, but what is
immediately transient) and not in Circumcision which has; yet I will not
wholly neglect it, but if it be of any seeming strength, own it to be allowed
in some measure against our Principles; but in truth I believe it has not; for
though there be a small distinction in reference to Circumcision and Baptism,
the first Maims, the second Cleanses; the first Hurts, the second Washes only;
yet that Objection is of no great strength in this concern; for upon different
Accounts (but solely in respect of the Infants) in regard of God and the
Assembly, there is nothing that differs; for in regard of both, both are alike
Signs of the Covenant. And whereas it differs in regard of the Infant, sure it
is that at the season of Administration it signifies not at all; because then
the Child has not the power or faculty of understanding the Character; and
that he knows when he becomes Adult, arises from Teaching and Discipline: For
the Character imprinted, when he is circumcised has no signification by
Nature, but only by the will of him that appoints it, or because it is
instituted; else Ishmael was in Confederation and Covenant with God, as well as
Isaac, and consequently the Infant can never know it by the force of natural
Principles, but as he is taught when he is at Age, how he was used in his
Infancy, and the reason of it; and therefore the Law that enjoined
Circumcision, enjoined Instruction; and of that the Christian that has
Baptism, when a Child, is as capable as a Jewish Child that has Circumcision
in its Infancy; and the diligence of the Church may be as exact in our days, as
the care was great in the Synagogue formerly. An Obj.
As for the Objection the Antipedobaptists make, That Christ baptized none: I
Answer thereunto, Answ.
That will hold against baptizing at all; for the Text is clear, Christ
baptized not, but his Disciples. St. John iv. 2.
(1.) The negative Argument holds on our side, they were once reproved for
doing something of such a Nature, as you may read in the Holy Gospel) as it can
be reasonably supposed they did not Baptize any, St. Mark x. 14.
but indeed neither is conclusive. However (2.) Cor. vij. 14. and then there
will be no imaginable ground left, but that the Holy Apostles did administer
Baptism unto such, or at least (which is much the same) did well like it; and
by such their approbation did strengthen the same: And that we may confirm the
Sense we have given of that Text of Holy Scripture, and prove, and make appear,
that what we offered is its true and proper meaning, we come with our
endeavors to give a satisfactory Answer unto the strongest Objection that ever
was started by the most Learned of the Antipedobaptists, or any of the Adverse
Party.

CHAP. XVII. An Answer to an Objection that would overturn the Sense delivered
of 1 Cor. vij. 14.
THE same Ingenious Antipedobaptist makes this Objection to the Sense we have
given of 1 Cor. vij. 14. An Obj.
That the word Holy, there used, is only such an Holiness as is opposite to
some kind of Uncleanness, which (says he) I take to be this, as if when they
are said to be Holy, it is no more than to say they are not Unclean, viz. no
Bastards. To which I answer, If 1 Cor. vij. 14. Answ.
may seem rationally to be interpreted of Matrimonial Legitimacy, and thereby a
Privilege of freeing from Bastardy, then [a fortiorl] with more strength it may
signify a federal Holiness, that gives them a Title unto the Sign of the
Covenant, and thereby makes them the Legimate Sons of Heaven by Adoption, which
is a greater Privilege than a Matrimonial Legitimacy; and this might be a
greater Motive unto the Gentile World to be proselyted to Christianity, as much
as the Spiritual Legitimacy is to be preferred before the Matrimonial one, and
the Holy Scripture is to be taken in the more favorable and exalted sense,
rather than in an inferior or subordinate one; and besides this is agreeable to
the Jewish Custom, where when any married to an Heathen, the Male-Children
after such a Marriage were circumcised, (whether the Children were born before
or after such a Marriage) which caused the Holy Apostle, in allusion thereto,
to use that Phrase of Baptizing whole Households (which makes the Argument
concluding, whether there were any Children in those Families mentioned or no)
by virtue of one of the Parents Faith. And without the allowance of this sense,
it is impossible to (come to the right interpretation of this and many other
places of Holy Scripture in the New Testament. Add to all this, that though this
Hypothesis, or seemingly fair Principle of the Matrimonial Legitimacy, may seem
plausible to the inconsiderate Many, yet it cannot be a true Interpretation, as
will appear unto any judicious considering person, for this reason, because it
offers no greater encouragement to the Gentile to become Christian, than what
he enjoyed in his Heathen state. For I doubt not but it may be proved from
several Testimonies taken from the Authorities of good Classic Authors among
the Greek and Roman Writers, that where a Man or Woman were lawfully married,
according unto the Rites and Customs of their several Countries, their Children
were legitimate, and if that should be the sense, they might be Holy in their
Heathen state, which may seem to be [contradictio in adjecto] (to use the
Logicians Phrase) the highest absurdity being a contradiction in terms; whereas
our Interpretation offers a considerable Privilege, so far that it cannot be
interpreted of a Matrimonial Legitimacy, as is evident by Ver. 16. For what
know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband; or how know thou,
O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? Which shows, that the preceding
Coherence cannot contradict the subsequent Connection; and the Holy Apostle,
doubtless, would not have said this, if his meaning in the 14th Verse, had
carried only the sense of a Matrimonial Legitimacy, to free the married Couple
from the great and crying guilt of Adultery And this may be a sufficient Answer
to the two Objections started against Acts ij. 39. and 1 Cor. vij. 14. by A. R.
in his Tract, called, The Second Part of the Vanity and Childishness of
Infant Baptism, Printed May 3. 1642.
.

And truly I was the better satisfied with the account my thoughts suggested of
this Text, when I found it supported by the concurrent Judgment of the very
reverend and most learned Dr. Hammond, who I think, beyond exception, has
evinced, that the Antipedobaptic sense of a Matrimonial Legitimacy, cannot be
the true and proper meaning of this place; and because I cannot better express
it, I will give it you in his own words, as I find them in one of his excellent
Books, Vid. Dr. Hammond's six Queries Resolved, whereof Infant Baptism is one,
P. 203. -- 202.
A Remain, or Footstep of the Holy Apostles Practice, is the Reasoning of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. vij. Which supposes it then received, and known in the Church, (at
the writing of that Epistle) that Christian Children were received unto
Baptism; the sum of which will be best discerned by the setting down a few
Verses, and a brief Paraphrase upon them, (whereby the preceding Connection
appears to be as little for them, as I have made the subsequent Conherence to
be.)

i. e. Verse. 12. If any Brother has a Wife that believes not, and she be
pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
If any Christian-Husband has an Heathen-Wife, and she be desirous to continue
with him, he ought not to put her away, Unbelief being no sufficient cause of
Divorce by the Law of Christ.

i. e. Verse. 13. And the Woman which has an Husband that believes not, and if
he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.
And so in like manner for the Christian-Wife that is married to an Infidel, if
he be desirous to live with her, let her by no means separate from him.

i. e. Verse. 14. For the unbelieving Husband [(...)] has been sanctified by
the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife has been sanctified by the Husband, else
were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy.
For (beside the Command of Christ, St. Matthew. v. 32. who obliges to this)
other advantages there are to the believer's living with the unbeliever worth
considering, for by this means it has often come to pass, that the unbelieving
party has been brought to the Faith by the Company and Conversation of the
believer.

And considering the efficacy of good Example, and seasonable Exhortation, 1
St. Pet. iij. 1.
and Instruction, on presumption of the great Zeal, (and consequent Endeavors
and Diligence) that by the Laws of Christianity the Husband will have to the
eternal good of any so near him as a Wife, there is great reason to hope, that
it will be so, that their living together may produce this effect in the
unbeliever, and the intuition and prospect of that (more than possible, because
highly probable) effect may move the Christian Party not to forsake the other
voluntarily; and this one probability, that the conversation of the believer
should gain, that is, bring the unbeliever to the Faith, and the reasonable
presumption, that it will be so, is the reason why the young Children of
Christians which cannot as yet be deemed actual believers, are yet admitted to
Baptism; because by their living in the Family with Christian Parents, they
probably, and by the Obligation lying upon the Parent, ought to be brought up
in the Faith, and kept from Heathenish Pollutions, (and the Church requiring
and receiving Promise from the Parents) it may be reasonably presumed they
will; and upon this ground it is, that though the Children of Christians are, the
Children of Heathens are not admitted unto Baptism: That this is the true
importance of the Holy Apostle's words, and force of his arguing, does for the
former part of it appear evident, that it should signify to (that to which is
the sign of the Dative Case) [sanctified to the Wife (as Meat to the Believer)
made lawful to live with] is never once found to belong to it in the New
Testament, nor can with any tolerable congruity or Grammatic Analogy be affixed
to it; (whereby the Antipedobaptists Argument for Matrimonial Legitimacy is
totally overthrown) And that the Greek Preposition is thus to be accepted, the
learned Dr. Hammond proves from the Original, in no less than five particular
places of the New Testament, and so still the rendering it [to the Wife] will be
without any one Example, and the turning it into quite another phrase, as if it
were (...), without (...), which to do, without any necessity or reason, (save
only [(...)] to serve the opposers turn upon the place, and support his false
Opinion) must needs seem to be very unreasonable. (3.) This appears most
irrefragably by the express words added on this Argument, Verse 16. where [the
unbeliever having been sanctified by the believer] used as an Argument (why
they should live together) is farther explained by these words, of an undoubted
perspicuous sense, For what know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy
husband? Or how know thou, O husband, whether thou shall save thy wife?
Where the word [(...)] [save] which ordinarily signifies, to reduce (or as it
is 1 St. Pet. iij. 1. [(...)] to gain) to Repentance from Heathenism or wicked
Life, is set parallel to [(...)] sanctifying, and makes it clear what was
meant by it, which being once yielded to be the true meaning of the first part,
there will then be little reason to doubt but that this of the Admission of
Christian Children to Baptism on this score, is the improvement of the latter
part, that and no other being it, which exactly accords with the former
reasoning, and it being not imaginable that this should be here added in that
argumentative style, [(...), whereas, (or for) elsewhere, etc.] if it were not
an enforcing of the foregoing Position, thus proved by him. For the confirming
of this sense it may be remembered, Ezra ix. 2. the Holy Seed, and in the
Epistles of the Blessed Apostle called [(...)] Holy, and reasonable it is
Children should have an imputed or relative Holiness; because they have the [
Prohibens, or] Obstacles, which kept the Holy Jesus from them, or them from the
Blessed Jesus, (I mean Original Guilt) taken away with this reserve, when they
shall be able to perform the Terms of the Covenant they are admitted to, as
[the (...), Vid. Dr. Hammond's Query of Infant Baptism.
as Arrianus calls it] the Promise of every reasonable Creature, when he has
first leave to become such, [the (...)] the Oath consubstantiate with us, the
Engagement that our Creation ties every Son of Man to, is actually required of
those only that are of age to practice it, but may in the mean time be presumed
even in the Womb of the Parent, to be undertaken by us; this by our being in
tended for the use of Reason, as Holiness from our being made Proselytes unto
the Christian Religion. And (2.) Acts x. 14.
is used by St. Peter for those that must not (as he conceives) be received
into the Church, as [God's having cleansed] is God's reputing them fit to be
partakers of that Privilege, whereby it appears how fitly receiving, and not
receiving them unto Baptism, may be expressed by those Phrases. (3.) that they
were the cause of removing from the Congregation, they that were so [(...)]
Unclean might not partake of the privilege of the Temple, till they were
washed and sanctified; and that is proportionable to the Notion here given of
it, That the Christian Children are Holy, i. e. not inherently (they are not
capable of that) but in the Account of God and Man, capable of separation for
the service of God, of being entered into the Church, into Covenant, which
denominates Men Holy (as the Gentiles, as long as they were out of it were
Unclean and Unholy, Acts x.) Now are they Holy, i. e. it is the present
practice of the Church, that Holy Apostolic Church of St. Paul's time, to admit
to Baptism such Infant Children of Parents, of whom one is Christian, though
not of others; and the ancient Fathers who certainly knew the Sacred Dialect
called, Baptism, Sanctification. So St. Cyprian, Eum qui natus est baptizandum
and sanctificandum S. Cypr. Ep. 59.
He that is Born, must be baptized and sanctified: So St. Gregory Nazienzen,
(...), St. Greg. Naz. orat. 40.
It is better to be sanctified without sense of it, i. e. baptized in Infancy,
when they are not sensible of it, than to depart or dye without the Seal of
Baptism: And again, (...), page 648.
Let him be baptized from the Infancy, i. e. baptized then; and many the like.
This Passage being thus interpreted, is a clear proof of the point in hand.
Were not this the Import of it, there were no Privilege imaginable, no
Sanctity could be attributed unto Christians, which would not belong to the
Infants of Heathens also, which yet is here directly affirmed of the one, and
denied to the other by the Holy Apostle; and as this evidently concludes such
a Custom known and acknowledged among Christians at that time, so it is
directly the thing that the Jewish practice (in which Christ founded his
Institution) has laid the foundation of in baptizing Proselytes and their
Children, and to which the primitive Church conformed: And so though that
Judaic practice taken alone were not deemed any demonstrative evidence, that
Christ thus instituted his Baptism for the Gentile World; yet being taken in
conjunction with this Holy Apostolic practice, and the primitive usage, it
brings all the weight with it that a divine Testimony, interpreted by practice,
can afford, which is as great as any such matter can be capable of. And thus I
have sufficiently, I hope, answered the Objection that would overthrow the true
Sense I had before given of this place of St. Paul, and offered Reasons so
strong and so plain, as may satisfy any unprejudiced reasonable Man. For
Reasons must be plainer than the Matters they are brought to give a Proof of;
because when we go about to prove a Matter that is questionable, we must do it
by such (Mediums and) Methods that are apparent as well as cogent. And now from
this Text of St. Paul, I have made it evidently appear, That Children have a
right unto the Covenant, under the new Dispensation, as our Adversaries own and
acknowledge they had under the old one; and then let the most learned of our
Adversaries make appear at what time, or when they were excluded and shut out,
and we will acknowledge and own our selves in a Mistake: And if they cannot do
that, they ought to confess and declare, we have Truth on our side, and that
they are in an error; which though Men (out of love to their Reputation or a
mistaken Interest) they are unwilling to come to, yet I am certain it is their
Duty to do it.

CHAP. XVIII. An Account whence Infant Baptism results.
AND now the business may be determined in this one Enquiry, Whether the
baptizing of Infants do appear to be a divine Institution and holy Apostolic
usage? And if it do, we have all we can desire in the Case; but if it do not,
we are obliged and bound to disown the Method we have taken for the asserting
our Principle, or drawing from it what we would conclude thereupon; and because
the best Method for the solving of this doubt is the urging home what we have
said, laying the foundation upon a divine Institution, and the usage of the
holy Apostles: Therefore give me leave to press it close upon the Consciences
of such Men as love the Truth, and value their Souls above all Worldly
Considerations, in six Particulars. (1.) Children of such Proselytes, i. e.
unto their Proselytism) that he affirms them to be the Pattern of those of whom
his Kingdom consists; and though he be not affirmed in the holy Gospel to
baptize such (when indeed the blessed Jesus baptized not at all, St. John iv.
2. St. Mark x. 16.
but his holy Disciples) yet he took them in his Arms, and laid his Hands upon
them, and blessed them (which being the Rite customary in the holy Church, for
those that were qualified for Baptism, and directly preparative to it) they
that were by the Christ allowed, that cannot be esteemed by him less fit for
Baptism than for that. (3.) of this Doctrine, without the least pretense of
theirs (who were best acquainted with their Customs) that this was not an holy
Apostolic usage, and therefore continued in all the times of the ancient Church
successively.

CHAP. XIX. An Appeal unto the Reason of Mankind.
AND now I have one Consideration to offer by way of Appeal, unto all
disinterested and unbyassed Persons, to engage their Belief unto such a
comfortable and christian Doctrine, as well as so necessary and useful a
Practice: That whatsoever appointment or precept has God the Father for its
Author (whether discovered by the Revelation of the holy Prophets, or by the
service of those ((...)) Ministering Spirits above, that are sent forth into all
the Parts of the World to Minister for them, who shall be the Heirs of
Salvation (as the Author of the Epistle unto the Hebrews acquaints us) or the
Holy Jesus for its Institutor (whether directly from himself, Heb. 1.14.
or mediately by his Successors the holy Apostles, and those that succeeded
them, holy Apostolic Men) is not of Infallible Obligation unto all to whom it
was given (and so each Institution of Christ unto all Christians) and that the
peculiar way of its Derivation unto us, whether by the Inspired Discoveries of
the Law or Holy Gospel, or any different Method, is but of an extrinsic
Consideration to any such Divine Appointment or Command; I say, upon this
Consideration, I have, I hope, in the Judgment of all sober and rational Men
(for the full clearing of this Doubt, and satisfying this Case of Conscience,
concerning Infant Baptism) by proper, and the most highly probable Arguments
manifested, That by appointing Baptism as a blessed Sacrament to be used
amongst Christians, the blessed Jesus and his immediate Followers, did not deny
Children the use of that comfortable and holy Ordinance, but freely and
willingly admitted them thereunto.

CHAP. XX. The Conclusion of the whole Matter.
AND now I have one Proposal to make, (by way of Importunate Request) which I
hope is reasonable for me to desire, That none of the Antipedobaptists will
look upon, or account me as their Adversary, because, according unto the Duty
of my Place, and the Obligations of my Conscience, I declare unto them what I
verily believe to be true, and have no different purpose or intention in the
management of this Controversy, but to bring Men to a Great Regard, and
Reverend Esteem for, and an humble and dutiful Submission to the Holy Jesus's
Ordination and Appointment. Upon the whole Matter then, and an impartial and
serious Consideration of what has been offered, I cannot imagine what Plea
(except such as is conducted by Interest, Humor, or Covetousness) any
understanding Man can with the least probability use to throw off the
concording Agreement of so many Testimonies and great Authorities for so
necessary a Practice, as well as comfortable a Doctrine: And I shall with all
Hearty Affection and Brotherly Love conclude, and presume no farther than these
Arguments and Testimonies will allow me to do, (surely not be so Censorious as
the Antipedobaptists, and Anabaptists are, when they declare heinous Matters of
us, and affirm, that we, by Baptizing Infants, Pollute the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant) God forbid, that we who heartily Pray in our Public
Liturgy, (which all Clergymen are obliged and engaged unto the daily use of)
That it would please thee, good Lord, to bring into the way of Truth, all such
as have erred, and are deceived. The sense of which is, That all Separatists
from the Holy Catholic (or any Orthodox National) Church, that is a true Part,
or sound Member thereof, may return home unto Christ's Fold, and be received
into the Bosom of the Holy Church, and cannot be thought, without breach of
Charity, to have the prospect of any other purpose, but the Everlasting
Happiness and Welfare of Men's Immortal Souls; I say, that we should ever
entertain a thought of persecuting, killing, or damning those that differ from
us, while they profess the Holy Name of the Blessed Jesus: Our Mind is the same
with St. Ignatius (...). St. Ignat.
, that Holy Martyr, to soften the sharp Humor, by tender and skilful
Applications of the Gentle Word, (like pouring Oil into the Samaritan's Wounds)
I mean to heal by Embrocation, or the most tender Methods, and not by
Scarifications, and Caustics, (to use the Chirurgion's Term of Art) and I do
esteem it my Obligation, to deprecate that deceitful Prosperity, that should be
strong enough to breath into the Spirits of persons any higher measure of
sharpness in the Fathers, Vid. Dr. Hammond's Query of Infant Baptism, Page 312.
or Sons of the Holy Church, than what I now believe to be a powerful
Engagement to bring Men to the Church.

THE END.
A PRAYER used by the Author after the public Preaching and Delivery of these
Discourses.
O THou holy, ever-blessed and illuminating Spirit, the Fountain of Wisdom, who
was sent by God the Father, and promised by God the Son to conduct and guide
Men into all necessary Truth, who would not the Destruction of any of the
Sons of Men, but art really and truly desirous that all Persons should come
unto the saving Knowledge of thy revealed Will, and have formerly
Commissionated peculiar Messengers; and at last did send the beloved Son of
thy Bosom to reduce all People from dangerous Mistakes and Errors, and to lead
them into the Paths of divine Truth; that at the end of their days they may
arrive at, and be placed in the Mansions of Glory and Happiness above, to live
an immortal and never-dying Life, with thee the best of Beings: Give thy
Blessing, we humbly beseech thee, unto these Discourses, and render them
serviceable unto those excellent Purposes unto which they are sincerely
intended Prepare and qualify the Spirits of those that have, or shall hear
them, to embrace whatsoever is discovered in them according to thy revealed
Will, with a Spirit of Love and Meekness: Mollify and soften all obdurate
hardened Souls, all callous brawny Consciences that are seared, as it were with
an hot Iron; enlighten the darksighted that they may discover and understand
thine holy Will, when it shall be powerfully offered unto them; and give them
the Assistance of thy divine Grace, and the Aids of thine holy Spirit to live
according to such Convictions: Take away from all Men Conceitedness and strong
Prepossessions, secular Interests and fond Humors, or whatsoever may put the
least stop unto the Operations and Workings of thy divine Spirit, in the
Proposal of thine holy Will unto the Sons of Men; and make these Discourses
useful unto such as know and are acquainted with thine heavenly Doctrine, unto
the Conviction of those that scruple the Truth, and are therefore unwilling to
own and acknowledge it, and unto the recovery of such as are apostatized and
fallen therefrom; and if thou should be so merciful unto me, as to make me
the unworthiest of thy Servants, in the least measure an Instrument for the
advancing thine Honor and thy Churches good, by curing our Divisions, and
reducing any wandering, straying Sinner from the Error of his Way; deliver me
from any Tumors or Swellings of Spirit, any undecent Exaltation of Thought or
Mind, any assuming or taking the least thing unto my self; and grant I may
ascribe and return all Laud and Praise to thee, who art the Fountain of Light,
and the Author of Truth; and that I may acknowledge that the Improvement as
well as the Talent proceeds from thee, who art the Giver of every good and
every perfect Gift. Grant these Requests for the Merits and Mediation of thy
dear Son, who is not only the Way and the Life, but also that bright Day Star,
who by his irradiating Beams lightens every Man that comes into the World, even
our only merciful Savior, and most powerful Redeemer the Holy Jesus, Amen.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be given and paid
all Honor and Glory, as is most due from Angels and Men, henceforth and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata Corrigenda.
IN the Preface. Page 15. Marg. Lin. 7, 8. read, P. 103, 104. P. 24. l. 7. r.
been. P. 53. l. 11. r. hit. P. 60. l. 26. r. Roast. P. 62. l. 8. r. Man.

In the Contents. Page 5. Lin. 8, 9. read, Schecinah.

In the Book. Page 3. Marg. Lin. 18. dele sine. P. 17. l. 4. r. as are not. P.
35. Marg. l. 22. r. cavit. P. 50. l. 25. r. (...). P. 58. l. 3. del. of. P. 70.
l. 20. r. prevails. P. 75. Marg. l. 25. a Baptizari in. P. 80. l. 14. r.
Harmoniously. P. 91. l. 3. del. fore. and in the same line, r. offered for. P.
92. l. 27. r. were. P. 93. Marg. l. 4, 5. r. 48. 53. P. 94. Marg. l. 3. r. 46,
47. P. 100. Marg. l. 4. r. 94. P. 120. Marg. l. 16. r. instituto. P. 127. l.
ult. r. Antipadobaptistic. P. 133. l. 3, 4. r. Obstacle. P. 136. l. 21. del.
they. P. 138. l. 15. del. the.


