His Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND's Speech; with the Lord
Chancellours, to both Houses of Parliament in Dublin, at the Prorogation on
Thursday the third of November, 1692. to Thursday the Sixth of April, 1693.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
UPon the opening of this Session I did acquaint you with the Motives which
Induced Their Majesty's to call this Parliament, which were no other than what
entirely regarded a happy settlement of this Kingdom upon such Foundations as
might not only secure the Peace, but bring you into a Prosperous and
Flourishing Condition.

I am sorry I cannot say there has been such a Progress made by you Gentlemen
of the House of Commons toward those ends, as Their Majesty's had just reason
to expect; And I am the more troubled, that you who have so many and so great
Obligations to be Loyal and Dutifully affected to Their Majesty's, should so
far mistake your selves, as to entrench upon Their Majesty's Prerogative, and
the Rights of the Crown of England, as you did on the 27th. of October last,
when by a Declaratory Vote you affirmed, That it is the sole and undoubted
Right of the Commons of Ireland, to prepare heads of Bills for raising of
Money; and also again on the 28th. of the same Month, when you rejected a Bill
sent over in the usual form, Entitled, an Act for granting to Their Majesty's
certain Duties for one year; you Voted that it should be entered in your
Journals, that the reason why the said Bill was rejected, was, That the same
had not its rise in your House

These Votes of yours being contrary to the Statutes of the 10th. of Henry the
7th. and the 3d. and 4th. of Philip and Mary, and the continued practice ever
since: I find my self obliged to assert Their Majesty's Prerogative, and the
Rights of the Crown of England, in these particulars, in such a manner as may
be most Public and Permanent; and therefore I do here in full Parliament, make
my Public Protest against these Votes, and the Entries of them in the Journals
of the House of Commons, which Protest I require the Clerk of this House to
Read, and afterward to enter it in the Journals of this House, that it may
remain as a Vindication of Their Majesty's Prerogative, and the Right of the
Crown of England, in these particulars, to future Ages.

After which his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant delivered the Protestation to
the Lord Chancellor, who delivered it to the Clerk of the House, and he Read
it; then the Lord Chancellor upon his knee conferring with his Excellency, said
as follows,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HIs Excellency having been acquainted, that both Houses intended severally to
present some Heads upon which they desired Bills to be prepared of such as his
Excellency and the Council should approve of, Commands me to aquaint you, that
he will take them into his Consideration, and that against the meeting of the
Parliament, after this intended Prorogation, such of them as shall be found
requisite, shall be in readiness to be brought into Parliament.

That which I have further in Command from his Excellency is, to let you know
that it is his Pleasure that this Parliament be Prorogued till Thursday the
Sixth day of April next, and this Parliament is prorogued to Thursday the Sixth
day of April next.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, 1692.


