THE Abyssinian Philosophy CONFUTED: OR, TELLVRIS THEORIA Neither Sacred, nor
agreeable to Reason. Being, for the most part, a Translation of Petrus
Ramazzini, Of the Wonderful Springs of Modena. Illustrated with many Curious
Remarks and Experiments by the Author and Translator. To which is added, A New
Hypothesis deduced from Scripture, and the Observation of Nature. With an
Addition of some Miscellany Experiments.

BY ROBERT St. CLAIR, M. D.

Non mihi, sed rationi, aut quae ratio esse videtur.
Milito securus quid mordicus hic tenet, dut hic.
Scaliger.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by W. Newton, over against St.
Bartholomew-Close-Gate, in Little-Britain, 1697.

To the Truly HONORABLE Sophronius Philalethes.
THIS Treatise of the Wonderful Springs of Modena, published in Latin by Bernard
Rammazzini Physician of that Town, and Translated by me, tho^ it has upon view
had the approbation of the most Knowing Mr. beside the most Eminent Physicians
of the College, and others, as the most admirable piece of Natural History
that has yet seen Day in our English World* for therein are at once discovered
the changes that Nature has not made but in some thousand of years; yet I
thought it not advisable for me to expose this stranger, how ingenious, soever
to the public view, and consequently censure, without providing him a friend
beforehand; especially seeing he is to appear against an Author, whose
Reputation for Learning, and this his Hypothesis is so far established, that he
has already brought it to many Impressions. Among all that I have the honor to
be acquainted with, worthy Sir, I thought I could not address my self, to a
fitter Patron than your self. Whether the Dignity of the Subject, or the
Modesty and Ingenuity with which the Author sets it out, be considered, this
Treatise will merit your Approbation. Suffer therefore, worthy Sir, amidst the
Crowd of your other more Important Affairs, this Curious Searcher of Nature,
and Stranger, under your Patrociny, to do that service to the Lovers of
Knowledge, that Sir Matthew Hales makes the Clock-Maker to do to the
Philosophers; for he supposes that in a Country abounding with several Sects of
Philosophers, yet unacquainted ^i^ll then, with the noble Invention of Watches
and Clocks, a curiously contrived Clock were exp^s'd to public view, yet so
that they should have no access so look into the inside of it, The Epicureans
would likely attribute it to the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, the P^rpate^ick
to the contemperation of the Four Elements and the Cartesian to his three
Principles, every one according to the Fancies he was prepossest with, but the
Clock-Maker, whom he supposes behind the Curtain to hear all they say, steps
out, and by opening the Clock, shows how wide they a^ all of the Truth, by
letting them see the Spring, and the contrivance of the Wheels, on which the
Motion of his Engine depends, and that it was he who made it. In the same
Manner, Nature her self, by the Pen of this Observing Italian, seems modestly
to give a check to the presumption of her pretended Interpreters, who will pass
a Judgment on her most hidden Works, where they never could pretend to make the
least observation, on which to found their Judgment. The respect the Author
shows to Scripture Authority, is the rather remarkable in him, that he is a
Roman Catholic, who by us are charged with the contrary Vice, which makes the
fault of the Theorist, a professed Protestant, more black, that is so bold in
contradicting it, and making it speak untruth to accommodate it self to the
capacity of the Vulgar, which though some P^ous Divines have allowed in passages
of Scripture, where the Phenomenon of Nature are spoken of by the by, (which
yet I prove to be a mistake in the Confutation of the Theory) yet to make the
whole first chapter of Genesis, wherein the Spirit of God does e composito,
give an account of the Creation false, is a piece of Presumption few have been
guilty of besides our Theorist.

As for the Confutation of the Theory, though the performance may be short of
what the Subject required, yet I hope the design will please you, which is to
vindicate the truth of the Scriptures, for which I know you have a great
veneration, from the false glosses and perversions of some that seem to have
studied Divinity, for nothing else but to ridicule it, which they do the more
remarkably, that almost in the same breath they pretend a great respect to it,
in which I endeavor to prove, that the passages the Theorist cavils at, are to
be understood to speak according to the Truth of the thing, and not according
to the false Opinion of the Ignorant vulgar. If in this my small endeavor, I
may find your Patrocin, I shall not care for the displeasure of these men of
Ephesus, whose made it is to make Shrines to this their Diana of Hypothetical
Philosophy, I mean who in their Closets make Systems of the World, prescribe
Laws to Nature, without ever consulting her by Observation and Experience, who
(to use the Noble Lord Verulams words) like the Spider, with great labor, spin
a curious Cob-web out of their Brains, that is good for nothing but to be swept
down, which though it has a great show of reason, in effect, has no better right
to that venerable Title, than the Fancies of those who are said to make
Wind-mills in their Head. I have given the whole Book the Title of The
Abyssinian Philosophy confuted, because as the Preface is a confutation of the
Theory, so if you read Rammazzini from page 88, at the end, to page 102. you
will find that the Theory is much the same with the Abyssinian Philosophy, if
not taken from it, which being evident to be a mere fiction, is ground enough
for the Title, and Confuta^^^n enough though I should say no more. I shall not
farther incroach upon your time, but here make an end, after I have subcribed
my self,

Worthy Sir, Your most Affectionate, and Devoted Servant. Ro^ St. Clair.



TO THE READER.
WHen this Book came first to my hand, by the favor of a Friend, who about a
year and a half a go, brought it from Italy, after once reading I was so taken
with the principal matter of Fact therein contained, and the ^^genious things
with which the Author Illustrates it, that I would not part with it till I
could send it abroad in an English Dress, as being better than any other
Argument, to show the vanity of these Men's Labors, that would describe to us a
World of their own Fancying instead of one of God's Making, who when they have
set it out to the best advantage, can discover to us at the best, but a bare
conjecture, which leaves the Mind uncertain, instead of satisfying it with
solid Reason, and is unprofitable either as to Life or Religion; yet if that
were the worst of it, might be born with as other luxuriances of Humane Wit,
that oftenspends it self on superfluities, when it is not sufficient for things
of real use. Hoc habet ingenium humanum ut cum ad solida, Non sufficit in
superracua se effundat. Verulum. But when they come to overturn the Scripture,
to establish their own Profane Fancies, as our Theorist has done, in favor of
a Spurious Brat, of which he will needs be counted the Father; in this I think
every one according to his ability ought to oppose it. Yet what satisfactory
account can we expect from such, of the Old World, and its great Change, so
remote from us, that can give us so little account of the Present World, and
the things in it, which yet would be by far more useful to us.

The Theorist has indeed set out this Fiction of his, with all the advantages
of a smooth style, which I believe has procured it so good a reception with
the generality, who are more taken with fine Words, than plain, though solid
Reasons; but if we may judge of the Buyers Inclination by the tendency of the
Book, I am yet willing to have the Charity for the Theorist, that 'twas not the
design of the Author; they are the same Persons, who pretend they will not
believe many things in Scripture, because they cannot see a Reason for them,
and yet they do greedily entertain this Theory, and the Fictions of Des Carts,
which differ little from the Abyssinian Fiction or Hypothesis, as will appear
to any that compares both, with what is in this Book translated from the
Italian, only they have new vamp'd it, and set it out in another Dress to make
it pass for their own. But after I had taken a nearer view of the Author's
Opinion, and what he advances in favor of it, I found it so full of
contradictions to Scripture and Reason, yet joined with a very high conceit of
his own Fancies, (a fault I find very common among the Abyssinian Philosophers)
that I had once thought of not meddling with it, as an endless labor, upon
which account also, I have not meddled with a Book Printed at Oxford, Anno De
Antris Laethiferis, especially seeing the Learned and Pious Mr. Warren has
already done it so fully, that he has left little to be added to it; but
considering that the bigness of his Book might obstruct the attaining of the
end for which he designed it, viz. to undeceive the generality of Readers, who
being the least considering, perhaps have not allowed themselves Time to read
so large a Treatise, or at least so attentively as it deserves; upon this
consideration, (I say) I resumed my former thoughts, with design to be as brief
as possible, yet without omitting any thing material in the Theory that
deserved an Answer. The Author begins Tell. Theor. chapter IV. The Form of the
Antediluvian Earth, was different from the present Form of it, which that he
might not seem to dictate with an (...) he promises to prove first from
Scripture, secondly by Reasons, both a Priori and Posteriori.

Now that we may see if the performance answer to so great undertakings, we
shall first examine his main Arguments from Scripture, and especially that of
St. Peter, 11. chapter 3. 5, 6. ver. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that
by the Word of God the Heavens were of Old, and the Earth standing out of the
Water and in the Water. v. 6. Whereby the World that then was, being over
flowed with Water, perished. Upon this Rock (says the Theorist, profanely
alluding to our Saviors words to St. Peter) do we chiefly build the Theory as
to Scripture Authority; and we always thought this an unmovable foundation,
Which yet we shall find upon a due search, to be unstable as Water, and
therefore cannot hold.

The words of the Text the Theory explains thus, The Apostle manifestly
distinguishes between the Old World and the New, and especially because of the
different natural states, or their different shapes and qualities of Mat^er.
Secondly, He intimates that the ^orm of the Antediluvian World was ^he cause of
the Deluge. Thirdly, He says expressly, the World perished in ^he Deluge.

The Author himself ^ays, That the Sacred ^riters, Theor. l. 1. p. 114.
when they treat ^f Natural things, do not thereby intend to instruct us in
Natural Philosophy, but to infuse into our Minds Holy Affections, and a
Veneration of the God of Israel, whom they Preach. May we not thence infer,
that to have prosecuted this noble design, would have been fitter for a Divine,
than thus to abuse the Scriptures to another end, than that for which they were
Written, when he founds a point of Philosophy upon this Text; and farther, that
seeing what he founds upon it, was contrary to the common opinion of the times
that the Apostle wrote in, the Theorist has mist the meaning of the Text. For
whom among the Writers of the Apostles time, or before, can he produce that was
of the opinion, that the Earth did encompass the Waters, as an Egg-shell does
the White and Yolk; surely, seeing he seems so conversant in Antiquities, he
might have thought it his interest to find at least one passage among them, to
favor this Paradox of this, that it might not be reproached with being the
Opinion of one Dr. only.

And further we may infer, that as the Penmen of the Scripture, did not write
to teach us Philosophy, so neither does the Apostle here reprove Men for
Ignorance in a point of Philophy, (especially Abyssinian) but for Atheistical
Principles, as first in denying God's Providence, v. 3. There shall come in the
last day Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and saying where is the
promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue
as they were from the beginning of the Creation. Where the Apostle reproves
Scoffers, who imagined that things went on by chance, and continued so in this
first state from the Creation, without God's Direction, which he carries yet
higher, that they disown the Power of God in the Creation, For this they
willingly are ignorant of, that by the Word of God, etc. and as the charging of
Men with wilful ignorance in a point of Philosophy, that there was no
possibility of knowing, before this new found Philosophy, would have been very
unjust, so it would have been a Coque a lasne, to have thus past from his
subject and design of reproving Atheists, to reprove ignorance in a point of
natural Philosophy, and that without giving any notice of it before hand, and
such a reproof would have been no more suitableto the scope of the Apostle,
than to have reproved them for ignorance of such a place as America, which was
discovered but of late.

But farther, this Text which the Abyssinian makes his unmovable foundation,
if the scope be seriously considered, gives a strong foundation of an Argument
against him. The Apostle (as we have already proved) reproves those who are
willingly ignorant of the Power of God, and who either denied it altogether, as
the Epicureans did, who were a famous Sect at that time, and who disputed with
St. Paul at Athens, Acts 17. 18. Or else such as pretended to give an account
of the first Formation of all things, without taking notice of the Power of God
in it, which was or among the Greek Philosophers in those times; now this is
the fault the Theois guilty of in the account Creation, all the Six days Works
are in Scripture said to be performed by the Word or Power of God, but in the
Theory all is said to be carried on by the Laws of Gravitation, without any
mention made of the Power of God, which is the very thing that is ^ere
condemned by the Apostle, and therefore what the Theory thinks ^o make most for
it, militates most against it. This Charge is justified from the Theories own
words, Tell. The. chapter 6. I have followed the most common Laws of Gravitation
and Levity, and by their guidance alone, we have seen the Promogenial Mass
after one or two alterations, and an unconstant shape, to have come into that
stable form of the Earth built upon the Waters, that was to continue for some
Ages. Seeing therefore the Theorist has willingly left out any mention of the
Power of God in his whole Theory, contrary to the Tenor of the Scriptures,
which ascribes all the Works both of Creation and Providence, to the Wisdom and
Power of God, he may be said to be willingly ignorant of both, and to have
written rather like a Disciple of Orpheus, than a Disciple of Moses.

And yet his Laws of Gravitation, if rightly considered, will not answer the
Phenomenon of the Creation, for the World was then but a making, and might be
then compared to the Materials of a Clock, before an Ingenious Artisicer, which
could never point out the Hours and Strike, imitate the motions of the Sun and
Moon, as some are made to do, till the Artificer had first made the several
Wheels, etc. in due proportion, and fitted them together, and last of all put a
Spring or Motion to them, which I judge to have been completed about that
time, when he said all was very good, which Motion has been continued ever
since, except when he has been pleased by his Finger, to put a stop to some of
the Wheels, as he did when the Sun and Moon stood still, or to make them run
backward, as he did when the Shadow went back on the Dial of Ahaz, or to
accelerate their Motions more than ordinary, among which may be reckoned this
of the Deluge, of which, and the Creation, it is as easy for the Theorist to
give an account, as if he had been one God Almighty's Counsel at that time. One
might think that the sense of our natural blindness, even in things that most
concern our selves, and that we have daily in our hands, might give a check to
this presumption, but vain Man would be wise.

Beside this Achillean Argument and Foundation of the Theory, from which ^he
Author hopes never to be beat, he has others, which at the first view, and as
he is pleased to explain them, ^eem to favor his Cause very much, yet after
examination, will be found to make no more for him than the former. One is
taken from Psalm. 24. 2. For he has founded it upon the Sea, and established it
upon the Floods, or upon the Rivers. What could one think of, more favorable
for the Theory than this? But if we compare this with other places of
Scripture, it will not be found to make for his purpose; for example, Psalm. 2.
ver. 3. And he shall be like a Tree planted upon the Rivers; no body I believe,
will make a Philo^ophical Argument of this, to prove that Trees in David's time
were planted upon the surface of Rivers, but contenting himself with the scope
of the Psalmist, which is to hold forth by this Simile, the flourishing
condition of the Righteous, will never once call it in question, if Trees did
grow on the surface of Rivers, and take it for granted, that by upon, the
Psalmist meant upon the Banks of Rivers, in which sense we say, Lands lie upon
such Seas as they are adjacent to, and Houses or Cities, seated upon the Banks
of Rivers, to stand upon the Rivers: For the word (...) in the original,
imports this, and in this sense may be explained, Prove. 6. 27. When he set a
compass upon the Face of the deep, of which the Theorist says, If I rightly
understand the matter, this is the place of the Earth firmly encompassing the
Abyss, and what else can be understood by this Girth, (...) with which God is
said to have encompassed the Abyss, what is there in the present form of the
Earth that can answer it, or to the Bounds or Globe which he has put about the
Sea. Yes the Theorist might have found another meaning in, Job 38. Who has
shut up the Sea with doors, etc. ver. 11. And set Bars and Doors, and said,
hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here shall the pride of thy Waves
be stayed; these Bars or Bounds are by all judged to be the Sea shore, by which
God has limited the Sea, that it shall no more return to overflow the Earth as
it did before, as in Psalm. 104, 9. Thou have set bounds that they pass not
over, that they turn not again to cover the Earth. And in the common way of
speaking among our Hydrographers, this Bounds is called a Girth, so they call
the Coast round about England, the Girth of England. Since the Theorist
contrary to his own position, will adduce Scripture to prove his Philosophical
Paradoxes, by the same liberty we from ver. 5. of this Psalm, Who has laid the
Foundation of the Earth, that it should not be removed for ever. Infer that the
Theorists Foundation is none of God's making, since it is supposed by him to
have been removed, by falling under the Abyss, whereas before it was above it.
And may not we infer from God's challenge to Job, chapter 38. ver. 4. Where wast
thou when I laid the Foundation of the Earth? Declare if thou have
understanding, v. 6. Whereupon are the Foundations thereof fastened? (the very
thing the Theorist pretends to tell) and to which Job (whom without
disparagement to the Theorist, we may imagine both a better Man and a
Philosopher than he) answers, chap. 42. ver. 3. Therefore have I uttered that I
understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not; may not we (I
say) infer, that the Theorist is very presumptuous in thus taking up the
Argument against God Almighty? And may not we without breach of respect say,
Theorice quid animum minorem aeternis consilijs Fatigas?

This is the Philosophy the Apostle Paul bids us beware of, Col. 2. 8. Beware
lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceits, which will be very
clear if we consider, that the Hypothetical was at that time the Philosophy in
vogue among the Grecians, to whom being puffed up with a conceit of their own
Knowledge, the Gospel appeared Foolishness; surely, the Apostle does not hereby
condemn him that studies to know the nature of things, with their causes, etc.
Vt varios usus meditando extunderet arts. Which is Natural Philosophy; for
Solomon the wisest of Kings, is in the Scripture commended for this, or him
that studies the nature of, and way to manage his own Spirit, and its Thoughts,
etc. which is Metaphysics and Moral Philosophy, both in their places very
subservient to Religion; but he condemns the Abyssinian Philosophy, or the
imposing of Poetical Fictions instead of solid Truth, on the understandings of
People.

Now that we have viewed the Theorist's strongest holds, and I hope beat him
out of them, I think it will not be worth while to seek him out any where else,
as to his pretenses to Sacred Authority; we come next to view his Philosophical
holds, I hope though it be War time, we may view them without danger from
Canons or Grenades, or at the worst they will be but Paper ones, and will do no
great hurt; and this comes in course, for after the Author has made the best he
can of this place in St, Peter he distrusts the strength of his own Argument,
for in the beginning he confesses, Tell. Th. l. 1. c. 5.
that the meaning of these words seems not to be so express and open, that the
form of the Anted^luvian Earth may be thence concluded; and therefore he has
recourse to his Abyssinian Philosophy a very good second, as we shall find:
Dignum patella operculum.

He supposes the Chaos to have been made up of Particles, Tell. Th. c. 5. p.
35, 36, 37.
different as to shape, bulk, weight, etc. and that the grossest solid
Particles by their weight falling downward, suddenly toward the Center, formed
the Kernel of his Primogenial Earth, and that immediately there followed a new
division of the remaining part into two, and no more, viz. Fluid and Volatile,
or Air and Water, of which the thinnest and lightest part keeping uppermost,
made the Air, and the grosser the Water, out of which were separated the Oily
parts, which being lighter floated above it; and last of all he supposes
another purgation of the Air, from its Earthy Particles, which falling upon the
Oily Particles, were by their viscidity entangled, and thus hindered from
descending into the Abyss, and these Earthy Particles he supposes by the heat
of the Sun, to have been burnt unto a hard crust, which made the Shell of the
Primogenial Earth.

This is the substance of the Hypothesis, from which as a Corollary, though not
heeded by the Theorist, we may infer, a new set of Principles, viz. Oil and
Earth, unknown to the Learned World before this Abyssinian Philosophy. Now may
Paracelsus keep to himself his three Principles Salt, Sulphur and Mercury,
Aristotle his four Elements, Des Carts his three Principles of Materia
subtilis, globuli secundi elementi, and materia tertii elementi, and the most
experienced Van Helmont, his Axiom Of Water and Seminal Principles all things
are made; though experience taught him, and others since him, that not only Oil,
but also Salt, Earth, etc. are made of Water, which is known a posteriori, or
by the effect, or experiment (the Foundation of all the Knowledge we have of
Nature.) But as for the Antediluvian World, since it does not so much concern
us now, I shall leave the consideration of its Principles to the Abyssinian
Philosophers, who demonstrate all things a priori.

And yet in these separations, the Theorist is not so Philosophical as he
pretends to be, for his division of the Chaos, into Fluid and Volatile, Water
and Air, this is purely Abyssinian or Fictitious, the Air being owned by all
Philosophers Eluid as well as Water, nay rather more.

But the Fifth and Last Separation of the Earth from the Air, is contradictory
to common sense, as well as his own Laws of Gravitation; for how could it come
to pass that there remained so much Earth in the Air (which is 1000 times
lighter than Water) after the four Separations mentioned, as to be sufficient
to make up the crust of the Antediluvian Earth? Why was it not carried down
toward the Center, as fast as the Water, or at least the Oil? The simile of
Snow and Hail falling down from the Air, will not answer the case in hand, for
they rise into the middle Region of the Air in form of a Vapor much rarified,
by which ^^refaction the Surface of every particle of Water, being made larger,
the body becomes lighter than so much Air, and so ascends till it come to the
middle Region, where by its cold, it is condensed, and so falls down in Rain,
Hail or Snow, according to the different degrees of cold; that I may not seem
to say this gratis, I shall illustrate ^t with an experiment, that will
quadrate better with what I have said, than the Theorist's Simile; let us
suppose a small Carps Bladder, with the Air squeezed out, and the Mouth close
tied, to be thrown into a wide mouthed Glass full of Water, it will sink to the
bottom, but if the Vessel and all be put into the Pneumatick Engine or
Air-Pump, and a Receiver fitted to it, upon exhausting the Air from the
Receiver, that little which remains enclosed in the Bladder, will expand i^
self very much, and so both togethe^ will make an aggregate, lighter than
Water, upon which it will rise to the top, because it has more Surface exposed
to its Pressure, than it had before. Now if the Theorist can prove that his
Earthy Particles were thus capable of expansion and dilation, this Assertion of
his, though but the Opinion of one Dr. shall have place among the probable ones,
otherwise we will take it for no other than Abyssinian, or Fictitious. But
suppose it to be true, we have no reason to think Fabulous or Strange Pliny's
and Livy's Stories of Showers of Flesh, Stones, etc. seeing the whole Earth,
the Mother of All did this Shower down out of the Air. And since our Author is
Arbitrary in supposing, I think he might as well have supposed the Abyss to
have been shut up in a Bag of Raw Hides, which would have supported the Earth
from falling into his Abyss, till by being baked into a hard crust, it had been
able to support it self; and this will better fit his Interpretation of Ps. 33.
7. where the Sea is by him said, to be gathered as in a Bag, for the hard crust
of the Earth might be better compared to a Bottle than to a Bag. I would not
have the Theorist think I put a jest upon him, in mentioning this of the Raw
Hides, because notable Feats, past belief, in the laying of Foundations have
been performed by this means, a memorable instance of which is to be seen to
this day in the English Church at Vtrecht, where is a great Massy Pillar that
was thus founded; the account I had of it when I was at Vtrecht was this, when
the Bishop of Vtrecht was building the Church, as they dug to lay the
Foundation of this Pillar, they came to a Quick-Sand that swallowed up every
thing that was put upon it, so that the raising of it was looked upon as
unpracticable, till the Bishop proposing a great reward to any that could bring
the Foundation to bear, a Friezlander found out the way, and being overjoyed at
the discovery, he told it to his Wife, which his Son hearing, told it to his
Play-fellows in the Street, by this means it came to the Bishop's Ears, so that
when the Ingineer came to demand his Reward, he refused to pay him, saying, he
knew it already, which so incensed the cruel Friezelander, that he killed his
Child and Wife for divulging his Secret, and the Bishop for defrauding him of
his Reward; in memory of this there is a Picture of an Ox upon the Pillar, with
this Inscription, Accipe posteritas quod per tua saeculaa nerres,
Taurinis cutibus fundo solidata columna est.
Upon a Pillar at the end of the Church, are twenty or thirty Hexameter Verses,
giving an account of the whole Story. The Theorist needs not object, that the
heat of the Sun, which is supposed to bake the Earth into a hard crust, might
burn the Hides, for the Water in the Abyss will secure him from this fear, a
confirmation of which may be seen in Buchanan's History, where he gives an
account of a way practiced in these times for boiling of Meat in raw Hides, by
which they became hard like Iron, and were not burnt. But if we admit that the
afterbirth of the Earthy Particles, did (in the order supposed by the
Theorist) fall upon the Oil, and there were by the heat of the Sun, baked into
a hard crust, how will this agree with the Scripture? Genesis 1. 9 Let the Dry
Land appear, and it was so; ver. 10. And God called the Dry Land Earth, etc.
How was the Earth hardened by the heat of the Sun that was not yet made? For
the Earth was made on the third, and the Sun on the fourth, ver. 16. God made
two great Lights, the greater (...) Rule the Day, and the lesser to Rule the
Night. But suppose the Sun could do this under the Line, how came it to be so
soon baked under the Poles, (where according to the Theory's supposition of the
Poles, of the Ecliptic and Equator coinciding) the Sun could never rise above
the Horizon? Seeing now though the Sun shines half a year to these places, the
Air is always very cold, and the Earth covered with Snow.

But let us suppose the Earth to have been thus hardened by the heat of the Sun
and Winds, then it must be granted, that it hardened sooner under the Line,
than toward the Poles, and that before the crust was hard enough to support it
self from falling into the Abyss, it had acquired some considerable weight, by
reason of which pressing on the Surface of the Abyss, it would, according to
the nature of all Fluids, give way, and rise toward the Poles; where by reason
of the greater rawness of the Crust, the Water would meet with less resistance,
and so break the continuity of the Egg-shell; for I do not see by any thing the
Theorist advances, how the Water which in the natural Balance alters its place
with the 1/200000 of its weight, more on one side than on another, should in
this case hold firm, except by the above mentioned supposition of the raw
Hides. Methinks I see the Oil'd Cake or Crust, thus falling in at the sides,
and rising toward the Poles, and so the whole Fabric of the Egg-shell
spoiled: and therefore Gentlemen I will by your leave take the liberty to
entertain you with another Hypothesis, while the Theorist is making a surer and
better foundation than Water for his Primogenial Earth, or Egg-shell, but first
crave leave to make an end of this search. The Theorist does not tell in what
proportion the Earth was mixed with the Oil, for Nature does all her Work in
proportion; this the Apothecaries know in making their Plasters,
where according to the Rule of Art, there is of Oil and Wax each an ounce, and
of Powders half an ounce, for a soft Plaster; and for the hardest Plaster
there is one ounce of Oil, two ounces of Wax, and Powders six drachms, which
being cold makes a Mass hard, almost like a Stone; but this, seeing it melts
again with the heat, will not answer the end; the good Women know a certain
proportion of Butter and Flower, which, though I am ignorant of, yet seeing it
bakes into a very hard substance, might do here, were it not very brittle. The
Theorist may think this a ridiculous comparison, yet this I may be bold to say,
and can make out if needful, that a good Woman that makes Buttered Cakes to
sell them again, does more service to the Public, than the Doctor has done by
his Theory. But he does very well to decline this, as being a thing
impracticable, except he had been then on God Almighty's Council, or dispensed
out the Ingredients; for if he had been then present, and but a bare Spectator,
he could have done no more than now, i. e. to make a Conjecture good for
nothing.

But farther, the Oil must have been of some depth, to incorporate so great a
quantity of Earth; now the Theory does not tell where so great a quantity of
Earth did stop in the Oil, whether near the surface, in the middle, or near the
bottom, if they settled to the confines of the Oil and Water, the heat of the
Sun, even under the Torrid Zone could not reach so far as to bake it into a
hard Crust, except he be supposed to have been far more vigorous in his
Actions, in his own, and the World's Infancy, than he is how in his old
declining Age; for at Sea, within the Tropicks, we do not find now, that the
Sunbeams penetrate much below the surface of the Water, this is known by the
experience of the Seamen, when (under the Line) they let down their Plumets;
for after they have been some time under Water 200 fathom deep, they bring them
up so cold, that one cannot long hold his hand upon them, which observation the
Mariners have improved to the cooling of their Liquors, better than we do here
with Ice and Snow. It will be most convenient therefore, in my judgment, to
suppose this forming of the Crust, on or near the surface of the Oil; but by
this means it is very likely there would be a great quantity of Oil under that
never incorporated with the Earth, or was never baked, so that when the
Egg-shell broke, the Sea would be covered with it, like so much fat Broth,
which, there being no more Earth to Rain out of the Air to incorporate with it,
must have continued so to this day, except consumed with the superfluous Waters
after the Deluge. Yet further the Egg-shell or Crust was made before the Fishes
and Fowls were produced out of the Water, which was on the Fifth day, Genesis 1.
20. And God said, let the Waters bring forth abundantly, the living Creature
that has life, and the Fowls, etc. ver. 23. And the Evening and the Morning
were the fifth Day. Now how can this be consistent with a Crust of the Earth
encompassing the Abyss, in which there must be no opening or hiatus? Or else
how could the Crust when it was first forming, be kept from falling in? In
which case this Abyss must be a very improper place for Fishes to live in, far
more for their increasing and multiplying; for it is observed now in Fish Ponds,
if the Water be quite Frozen, that the Fish dye for want of Air, and therefore
in Holland where they have a great many Fish Ponds about their Houses, and
great Frosts, they break the Ice from time to time, lest their Fish should dye
for want of Air.

It Is remarkable that the Plants were produced the same day with the Earth,
before the Sun and Moon, but the living Creatures, viz. the Fishes and Fowls
were not made till after the fourth day, in which the Luminaries were made,
that they might have the benefit of the Sun and Moon to direct them by their
Light, in their removing to and fro to seek their Food; but the Plants which
receive their Nourishment standing still in the Ground, had not so great need
of that Light, and therefore were made before.

From this we may infer, that the order kept in this short History; is not only
to comply with the weak capacities of the Ignorant People, but to tell the
Matter of Fact, and that there is no less reason for the Order of all the other
parts of the History, though the Theorist has the confidence to ridicule it, as
being fitted only to the capacities of Ignorant Slaves, newly come out of
Egypt.

But supposing Fishes might live there for 1600 years as the Faetus does in the
Mothers Womb, shut up in darkness, from the Air, and the Prolifick heat of the
Sun; how can our Theorist give an account of the production of Fowls out of the
Water, that is consistent with the Scripture, for the Earth was made the third
day, and firm enough to produce Plants, how, or at what ^ent got the Fowls out
into the open Air? Suppose they could make their way through the Egg-shell, in
places nearer the Poles, where 'twas still but like Mudd; or was our Oil'd Cake
not strong enough by this time to keep the Birds from flying out? if not,
surely they would be so daubed with Oil or Earth, that they would never be able
to raise themselves out of the Mudd, or when raised, to fly.

But again, if the Fishes were thus enclosed within the Crust, how could the
Blessing of God upon Man take place? Ver. 28. viz. That he should have Dominion
over the Fishes of the Sea, seeing for 16 hundred years they were so far
removed from his Habitation, likely some hundreds of miles, the whole Crust of
the Earth being interposed between him and them. (...) (...)

and expand it self with heat, which would be derogatory from the subtlety of
the Cartesian Ether, upon which he and Seignor Spoletti the Venetian
Ambassadour's Physician, were pleased to honor me with a visit at my Chamber;
the Experiment was this, I had a Glass Pipe, such as they make the Baroscopes
of, blown into the shape of a round ball at the end, that was Hermetically
sealed and bended into a Siphon, whose legs were parallel; but distant from
another three inches, so that the leg on which the Ball stood, was nine inches
long, but the other two feet long; the shorter Leg, and the intermedial Pipe I
filled quite with Water, to the lower end of the great Leg, so that there was
no Air left in the space, then I put into it some filings of Steel, about a
dram and an half, and after the filings were laid along in the intermedial
Pipe, I put to it Oil of Vitriol 30 or 40 drops, which mixing with the Water
(for otherwise strong Oil of Vitriol does not work upon the filings) did
immediately corrode the Iron, and sent up to the Ball so great a quantity of
this generated Air as to fill it, and half the shorter Leg in a very little
space, in which it was remarkable, that applying my warm hand to the Ball, it
did expand it self in an instant, so much as to drive out the Water at the
longer Pipe, but on withdrawing my hand, it contracted it self into half the
Ball, where it has stood ever since December last year, now it is November;
another thing very remarkable in this is, a considerable heat that is to be
observed ever since, on the top of the Ball, such as is observed in the great
end of fresh Eggs, and this though the Water, the other half, be very cold, and
at the same time some of the Vapors got out into the open Air. At the first it
had a saltish taste on the top of the Ball, which I could not observe in the
Summer, but now in November I observe it very remarkable with the heat, and so
it appeared to a young Gentleman that was with me at that time.

Before I come to apply this to the subject in hand, it will be necessary to
remark from Scripture, Genesis 7. 11. that there were then and still are, great
Cavities in the Bowels of the Earth, full of Water, to which agree the
Testimonies of the Authors mentioned in Ramazzini. These Cavities, seeing the
Scripture says nothing to the contrary, we may suppose to have been made from
the beginning, not as Deformities, Ram. p. 58, 76.
but for noble and excellen^ uses, and that by taking off the upper Crust from
some parts of the Earth, and laying it on others, the everlasting Mountains,
and a Bed for the Ocean were framed at the same time, and thus a passage was
opened for the Waters, that before encompassed the Earth, to run into these
Cavities: it is not material for our purpose, whether this was all done in one
day, as the Theory objects, or whether the Water could run so fast away from
the Inland places, as to leave them quite bare, it is enough, if in that day
the dry land did appear, as doubtless a great part of it did. The Theorist
thinks this a very laborious Work: as if it were a hard thing for the Author of
Nature (who tells his Servants, that if they had Faith but as a grain of
Mustard Seed, they might remove Mountains into the Sea) to remove the Mountains
out of the Sea.

2. That this Abyss did communicate with the Ocean, which is a consequence of
the first, and supported by the Testimonies of Ram. p. 125, 158.

3. That in these Cavities might be generated Minerals and Metals, Ram. p. 32.
and that by the colluctation of several contrary Salts in the Abyss, might be
generated an Air and sometimes so suddenly as to make Explosions; of which, and
the first Supposition, Earthquakes, and the rocking of the Earth seem to be a
pregnant instance, Vid. Brit. Bac. P. 73. Where it is related that the Earth
rose nine foot high, and was thrown some distance off, which sure was from an
Exhalation or Wind pented in, and suddenly expanded.

5. We may allow also that there were Mountains in the beginning, which seems
to be plain by Psalm. 90. 2. in which the formation of the Earth, and the
Mountains are mentioned as coaeval, and therefore are called everlasting
Mountains, Genesis 49. 26. This may be by good consequence also inferred from the
second chapter of Genesis wherein it is said, there were Rivers, one of which, viz.
Euphrates is to this day known by the name that it had then: from whence we may
safely conclude, that the same Rivers had the same Mountains, from which they
descended, that they have now. Now if we suppose, that at the time of the
Deluge there happened such a conflict of contrary Salts, Acid and Alcali, as we
have now mentioned in the Bowels of the Earth, there would be an Air generated,
which in many places being penned up, might cause Earthquakes, and at the same
time some of this Exhalation might escape into the open Air, from which might
proceed the great Rains of forty days continuance, accompanied likely with
great Thunder, Lightning, etc. to strike the greater terror into the Wicked,
that in their fright they might not find the way to the Ark they had formerly
so much despised, and that if they had thought of such things, they might be
hindered by the great Rains; by the Air enclosed in the ^owels of the Earth we
may (as it happens in our Experiment) imagine, that the Water of the Abyss was
dislodged, and so came out to overflow the Earth: (by which we may interpret
the opening of the great depths) and this at the passages by which the Abyss
and Ocean did communicate, which so swelled by degrees, till the top of the
highest Mountains were covered; Further we may infer, that the Antediluvian Air
being infected with the Mineral Seams, and in a great measure composed of them,
might occasion that shortning of Man's Life, which happened quickly after the
Deluge; which though it did not so visibly affect the stronger Constitutions of
Noah and his Sons, might lay such a foundation of infirmities in their
Posterity, as might in Moses days shorten their Life to 70 or 80 years. We may
suppose likewise that (as in our Experiment) when the heat of the Effervescence
was over, the Water fell in the greater Pipe, and rose in the shorter, so when
this Ebullition was over in the Bowels of the Earth, the Waters returned by
degrees into the Bowels of the Earth, and so the Ocean into the bounds set to
it by God, as in Psalm. 104. 6. Thou coverest it with the deep as with a
garment: The Waters stood above the Mountains. ver. 7. At thy rebuke they fled,
at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away, ver. 8. They go up by the
Mountains, they go down by the Valleys, unto the place which thou have founded
for them, ver. 9. Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over, that they
turn not again to cover the Earth.

One might represent the whole of this to the Eye thus, let there be a round
Ball to represent the Earth, (with a hole at the end, standing for the North
Pole, at a, which Kircher supposes the Ocean to circulate through the Earth) of
glass f f f, full of risings to represent the Mountains b b b, let the Ball be
filled with Water, and at the hole insert a Pipe g g g, which cement to the
Neck, throw in by this Pipe some filings of Steel, after which some Oil of
Vitriol, and keep the Ball inclining, so that the steams arising may not get
out at the hole, but being pented in may drive out the Water at the Pipe, which
if the Ball were the Center of the Earth, would over flow all the surface of
the Glass, and cover the Mountains of it, but this being wanted, we may imagine
another glass c c c divided in two as you see, so that they may be cemented
together when the other glass ball is enclosed, all the Water that runs out at
the mouth of g g g, will overflow the Hills b b b, etc.

This is the substance of what I have to say of my Hypothesis, which if
furnished with a good Library, with large Indexes, it were easy to make swell
into a Volume big enough to deserve the title of a Theory; among which I might
perhaps find, even in the Relicts of the Fiddler Orpheus himself, so much
esteemed by our Theorist, or at least among the other PLACITA PHILOSOPHORVM,
enough to favor it. Sed non equidem hoc stude o bullatis ut mihi nugis
Pagina turgescat, dare pondus idonea fumo.
And with this I leave the Theory at present, hastening to make an end.

Of Perpetual Lamps.
THere has been much written of Perpetual Lamps, said to be found in Burying
places of the old Romans* which at first seems past all belief; for how can it
be that a Lamp should have fuel for some hundreds of years, to maintain it in
life? And if it had fuel how could it in those close Vaults escape being
suffocated in its own smoke? I believe that the appearing of some light by the
Work-mens Tools, hitting against some hard Stone or Brick in the dark, and so
striking fire, might give rise to the first report, which Fame; that never
loses by going, has increased almost to a Miracle. For they say of them, that
upon the Air's coming to them, they, contrary to all other fires, do presently
die. Or they might have met with such an* Observation as a noble Lord told me
he had communicated to him when at Rome, by a Gentleman of that place who made
it; and it was this, that searching Roma Subterranea for Antiquities, he came
to a Brickwall, which ordering to be dug through, he found to be the Wall of a
Vault, or Burying-place, in which before the Light was brought in, he observed
something like a Candle burning, which he lost sight of as soon as the Candle
was brought in: and therefore removing it again, and directing himself by his
Hand kept between the Light and his Eye, he found it, and by the description I
had of it from that noble person, it was of the nature of Mr. Boyl's Glacial
Noctiluca, for it was solid, and in a fortnights time did run per deliquium.
But whatever be of truth in it, the Ingenious have made many Conjectures about
the salving of this wonderful Phenomenon. Des Carts has attempted it by
applying his Principles to it, but seeing they are Abyssinian, i. e.
precarious, and the explication hardly intelligible, we pass it in silence.
Athanasius Kircher, (...) has given us his conjecture, which seeing it depends
upon a Mechanical Principle, is by far more intelligible than any we can expect
out of the Mint of a mere Abyssinian. He supposes that these Lamps are seated
upon the opening of a Vein of Petrol^um* running under ground, of which Italy
and other hot Countries afford many* and the Wick to be made of Linu^ Asbeston
which never wastes in the fire; so that Nature constantly furnishing fresh
fuel, and the Wick never ^alling, the flame may continue forever. But how
plausible so ever this Conjecture be* it will be of small use, because it
cannot be had every where. Therefore the Ingenious Dr. Hook has contrived, and
imparted to the World several pre^^y ways, which are found to answer very well;
for by the poysing of his Lamp* he orders it so, that the Oil may always be
kept to the same height, upon the Wick, and consequently the flame, and that
therefore the Wyck can never waste, because always in the flame, for it wastes
not though in the midst of the flame, till it be exposed to the open Air; of
which one may see more at large in his Treatise of Lamps: but with submission I
am of opinion, that the weight of the Oil when the Lamp is full, will make the
Lamp move heavily, and also make it wear out quickly. I have therefore a good
while ago, thought these inconveniences might be prevented by some
Hydrostatical contrivance, seeing the main thing sought for here, is to keep
the flame at the same height on the Wyck; my way is this, let a Vessel a a a,
be shaped after the fashion here marked, an inch or more deep, and as broad as
you may think fitting for the quantity of Oil you are to burn, let also a Pipe
b b b, coming from the bottom almost as high as the Cistern, be filled first
with Water c c c, so high as to cover the hole of the Pipe at the bottom, that
the Oil d d d poured in afterward may not get out at the Pipe b b b, and so be
lost; let the Vessel being almost brimsul, have a covered pierced with as many
holes as it is designed to have Wycks, be fitted to the mouth of the Vessel,
when the Wycks are lighted, if Water falls in by drops at the Pipe, it will
keep the Oil always to the same height, or very near (the weight of Water to
that of Oil, being as 20 8/11 to 19) which in the depth of an inch or two, will
make no great difference of height in the Oil, if the Water runs faster than
the Oil wastes; it will only run over at the top of the Pipe, what does not run
over coming under the Oil, will keep it to the same height, this it will do
perpetually without any fear of rub or let, the cover will keep the Soot of the
Lamp from falling in^^ the Oil, and keep it from thickening with it, The main
use of such a contrivance is, where there is occasion for long digestions with
a gentle heat.

Some Thoughts about the way of making Oil of Sulphur Per Campanam.
SUlphur at all times has been counted a wonderful product of Nature, and
therefore by the Greeks is called (...). Several attempts have been hitherto
made by Chemists to analyze it, which they have hitherto done but in part (that
I know of;) yet by this they have discovered it to be a Mineral Oil, coagulated
by a mineral Acid, and also the same is made evident, by the composition of it;
for if you mix Oil of Sulphur with Oil of Turpentine, they will coagulate into
a gummy substance which being sublimed, give true Brimstone. The main
experiment insisted on is the making of Oil of Sulphur P. C. Only two or three
ounces of Genuine Oil, can be had this way out of a pound, and all the (...)
seems lost, which I believe mostly to proceed from a defect in the way of
making it. It is about fifteen years ago since first reading Le(...)
Preparation of Ol. Sulph. P. C. I thought it might be improved to the catching
of all, or most of that which flies away thus. Suppose a ^at glass Cup, b b b,
to have two or more Pipes coming in at the bottom, and rising pretty high in
the glass a a a, suppose likewise another shap^d like a Mattress, fitted to the
mouth of b b b, with a Ring at the bottom c c c, to keep it from falling into
the Cup, and that the same Mattress is wide enough at top to admit of a crooked
Pipe e e e, to come into it, and to be luted to it, to which must be fastened
Adapters, with some Water in them, that the Acid Spirit passing, may find in
the way wherewith to embody it self: now if Brimstone be put into a Cup, and so
put into the Glass below, with the cautions usual in that case, and so kindled,
and the Mattress fitted to it, the Air coming in by the Pipes will keep the
flame in life, and carry up the lighter fumes by the neck, into the Adapters f
f f, which with the Water may condense into an Acid Spirit. This Experiment
might be varied, by inserting the Neck into the Wall of a very large Room, made
tight for the purpose, as they do for Flower of Br^mstone, to see what dry
Flowers it gives, and of what nature they are.

Of Phosphorus.
I Have seen in the Parisian Memoirs, lent me by the curious Dr. Sloane, an
Experiment said to be made by one Mr. Homburg, about producing Phosphorus out
of Quick-^^me and (...) Armoniack; it is that which I casual^y lighted on, when
living with the honorable and never to be forgotten Mr. Boil; for after I had
by the force of the fire melted these two together into an Opack Glass, and the
pieces of it were still hot in my hand (during which time they are very hard) I
had the curiosity to see what the pieces which were very hot would do, if
strock against one another in the dark, and was su^priz'd to see it not only
strike fire, but also to retain a glimmering light in the places where the
pieces hit one another, which I judge to proceed only from the Sea salt of the
Sal-Armoniack remaining with the Quicklime, p^t in a violent motion by the
collision, and perhaps deserves no more the name of a Phosphorus, than the Sea
Water that shines in the dark night, or refined Sugar, when it is scraped; a
proof of which seems to be the dark spots that appear in the shining parts,
which is in all probability from the greater quantity of the Quicklime in the
mixture, for of two (...) there is but (...) (...) IV. of the Glass, so that
only (...) IV. of the Sal-Armoniack may be concluded to be there.

This when cold; runs p. d. which it continues for a long time; and when set to
evaporate, does retain its fluidity while upon fire a long time, but when
removed, in an instant it coagulates into a hard Mass, which upon the least
heat melts again, and therefore by Mr. Boil was called the fusible Salt. I
will not say that Mr. Hemburg had that from Mr. Boil, or any of his friends;
for why might not he ^all on it by chance, as well as we, though this account was
Printed two years after the honorable Mr. (...) death? But to pass this, this
Liquor is very remarkable for dissolving sublimate corrosive, in the cold of
which it dissolves its own weight. (...) makes a Spirit of this Solution thus,
(...) of this Liquor, p. 111. dissolve in it sublim. (...) p. 1. imbibe the
Solution with brown Paper, and Destill, it comes over in form of a brownish
colored Spirit, smelling like Musk (says my Anthor) some of the Mercury is
revived in the Receiver: three drops of this Liquor taken in a convenient
vehicle, do greatly purify the Blood, as he says; as for the smell, it is so
far from having the smell of Musk, that rather it stinks of an Empyreuma; and
as for its use in Physic, it is so far from having the promised Effects, that I
have known it given from three to sixty drops, without any visible effect, and
also that a Woman, to whom an hundred drops were given in a Venerial Distemper,
had such pricking pains all over the body following, as could hardly be removed
again: yet this, with all its Mistakes, has a famous Plagiary in Town, copied
out in a Book called the Land. Dispens. this man it seems has no regard to what
he Writes, so he make a bulky Book, I could instance many cases in which this
Rhapsodist has thus without any judgment played the Plagiary, if time would
permit; it were to be wished that a severe Censure were put upon such, who for
a little Lucre; will thus set out a Wildfire to lead People into dangerous
Mistakes, instead of setting up Beacons for them, by which they may be guided
in so important a business as the practice of Physic, at least an Index Expur
gatorus, made by an impartial and judicious Pen, might remedy the ill Effects
of such Books, and prevent the multiplying of them for the time to come.

ERRATA.
PAGE 44. in the Margin, Tab. 11. f. p. 69. in the Margin, Tab. 11. f. 2. p.
70. l. 14. r. The Water overflowing and falling. ibid. l. 23. or being, r. are.
p. 81. l. 18. by hidden passages, and the Sand it self.

THE Abyssinian Philosophy CONFUTED: OR, TELLVRIS THEORIA Neither Sacred, nor
agreeable to Reason. Being, for the most part, a Translation of Petrus
Ramazzini, Of the Wonderful Springs of Modena. Illustrated with many Curious
Remarks and Experiments by the Author and Translator. To which is added, A New
Hypothesis deduced from Scripture, and the Observation of Nature. With an
Addition of some Miscellany Experiments.

By ROBERT St. CLAIR, M. D.

Non mihi, sed rationi, aut quae ratio esse videtur.
Milito securus quid mordicus hic tenet, aut hic.
Scaliger.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by W. Newton, over against St.
Bartholomew-Close-Gate, in Little-Britain, 1697.

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
IF the Searchers after Nature, of which this Age has not a few, whose study is
spent about things of greater Concern, and therefore are deservedly admired;
if, I say, these found it as easy to search into the inner parts of the Earth,
as it is to the Anatomists to take an exact View of the Bowels of a Man, and
other Living Creatures, the one needed not envy the other; and we should have
as full a Knowledge of the Earth, as we have now of Living Animals, by the
Industry of Anatomists. We know now, yea to our own no small Satisfaction, with
our Eyes we see, how the Blood circulates, what is the Motion of the Chyle, the
Lympha; and other Fluids; so that now to use Hippocrates his own Words, The
Fountains of Humane Nature, and the Rivers with which the Body is watered, seem
to be opened. But as for the Earth, out of whose Treasures we draw our
Nourishment, we can observe nothing but its outward side, and therefore we are
ignorant of the more beautiful things that are hid; and, which is to be grieved
for, there is no way by which they may be known. For although the Miners have
gone down into the Bowels of the Earth many Fathoms, yet they have never gone
much deeper than half a Mile, which by Agricola is said to be the greatest
Depth of the Mines. But what is that to the Depth of the Earth, whose Seem.
diameter is said to be 3600 Mile. Wherefore, to tell the Truth, we know the
Body of the Earth only superficially, and not within: Yet it is lawful to judge,
that it is neither a sluggish nor unshapely Body, nor yet that all its Dignity
is placed in its outward Surface, as in Statues, but that its more beautiful
Parts are inward; yea, we must think that it is so shaped and figured by the
Great Creator, as to contain a Specimen of the Vital O Economy, and that the
wonderful Functions thereof are performed in its Bowels, by a Law no less
certain than unknown to us, especially the Circular Motion of the Waters; of
which, though they cannot be demonstrated to the Senses, yet by what appears
outwardly, it is evident that the matter is so; neither has the Wit of Men
stopped, till they had by all Art searched into the State and Condition of the
Subterraneous Regions, as far as could be. But seeing there is no other way by
which we enter into the Earth, but by such Apertures, as either Nature has made
of her own accord, or by Mines and Wells, which the Covetousness of Men has
dug for Metals, or Necessity has put them on, for finding Veins of Waters;
and seeing that in this City there is a frequent digging of Wells to a notable
Depth, (as much as can be in a very plain place, and remote from Mountains)
from which a wonderful Spring of Water rises; I thought good therefore to
examine these Secrets of Nature, and to communicate to the Professors of
Natural Knowledge, what I have observed of them, and my Thoughts threupon,
seeing none has Written of these things expressly. I am not ignorant that some
idle Men will speak ill of me, and others will not be wanting who will accuse
me, as having spent may time about a thing of no moment: But that does little
disquiet me, seeing I have the Examples of the most Learned, who have been
taken up with the most minute things, of whom Virgil says, In tenui labor, at
tenuis non gloria --

But I can Answer such Men with the Words of Seneca treating of Natural
Philosophy, You will say, what Profit is there in these things? No greater can
be; To know Nature. Neither has the treating of this Subject any thing more
beautiful, seeing it contains many things that may be useful, than that its
Greatness takes up a Man; nor is it followed for Profit, but for its
Wonderfulness.



Of the Wonderful Source of the SPRINGS of Modena.
CHAP. 1.
The Structure of these Fountains is described, and the most curious things
which appear in the Digging of the Wells, and when the Water springs up, are
remarked.
WE may be bold to say that Modena, a most ancient City, which Tully has of old
Dignified with the Title of the most Noble Colony of the Romans, has been well
situated by its first Founders: For seeing it stands in a great Plain, ten
Miles distant from the Foot of the Rising Hills, it has such a Situation, that,
with the wholesome Temper of the Air, and a fruitful Soil, it has a great
abundance of most pure Water, which neither can cease through length of Time,
nor be ever vitiated or diverted by the Craft of Enemies: For this City has
under its very Foundations a great Repository of Waters, or whatever else it
may^ be called, out of which it draws an inexhaustible Stock of Waters; and,
which is very rare, is got at a very small Charge; seeing for the getting of
this Treasure (for Water, according to the Testimony of Pindarus, is the best
of all things) there is no need of great stir, in digging through Mountains, or
keeping a great many Workmen, as is usual elsewhere, and such as Rome formerly
had divided, as Frontinus says, into Searchers, VVater-Fil^^ers,
VVater-Bayliffs, Conveyors, Distributers, and many other Workmen.

But that I may not keep the Reader longer in Suspense, you must know for a
certain Truth, which many Thousands of Experiments have already confirmed, That
in any place within, or without the City, for some Miles round, one may open a
Spring which shall constantly send forth most pure Water.

And seeing every Citizen may take out of this great Stock, as much Water for
his private Uses as he pleases, without fear of wronging the Public, or being
Fined for it: Therefore when any will have a Spring in his own House, he calls
some Workmen, and having agreed for the Price, which for the most part does
not exceed the Sum of Forty Crowns, he shows them the place which he thinks
most fit, and they without further consideration dig a Well in a place marked
out for them; and when they have come to the depth of about 63 Foot, they
pierce the bottom with a great Auger, which when it has been driven down 5 Foot
deep, immediately the Water gushes out with so great Force, throwing up Stones
and Sand, that almost in a Moment all the Well is filled to the top, and the
Water flows out thence constantly.

Moreover, that which in digging these Wells gives the greatest Trouble to the
Workmen, is, the great abundance of Waters flowing from the sides, by which
they are sometimes much troubled, till they come to the depth of 28 Foot, where
first the Potters Clay begins to appear: And therefore to keep off these
Waters which are none of the cleanest, when they first break Earth, they make
a Well pretty large, drawing out the Waters that flow together on every side,
till they come to the Bed of Clay; then they build upon it, as on a solid
Foudation, a Wall round about of Lime and wellburnt Bricks, made for the
purpose, that so the Well may be narrower; and they carefully plaster the
outer Surface of it with Clay, well wrought, pressing it with their Feet; and
thus they continue to do till they come to the Surface of the Earth: For by
this means they hinder the Influx of Waters from the sides, which being done,
as if all were safe, and there were no more fear of the Water coming from the
sides, they carry on their digging to the lowermost place so successfully, that
from the appearing of the Clay, they observe no more water to drop; yea, which
is wonderful, they are forced sometimes to moisten the Earth with Water, that
it may be more easily dug.

It Is also no small Disadvantage to the Diggers, before they come to the
beginning of the Chalky or Clayie Ground, that the soft Earth falls in upon
them by the Force of the Side-VVaters; which Impediment is not overcome but
with great Labor: But when at length they come to the Bed of Clay, and from
thence to the greatest Depth^ there is nothing to hinder them form getting by
the usual boring the usual Eruption of Water. For no Case is remembered in any
place whatsoever within the City, or without the City, for some Miles, in which
upon opening a Hole, and giving Vent to the enclosed Waters, they did not
immediately spring up on high. For the Diggers do with as great Assurance and
Confidence fasten down their Augers in the bottom of the Wells, as one being
to draw Wine, would pierce a Hogshead when it is full. I was often present when
this Phlebotomy, if I may so call it, was practiced; and I always observed the
Water to break out almost with the same Force, which at the first is muddy and
full of Sand, but the next Day it appears clear enough. But when the Water has
broke out, and the Borer is pulled out, sitting on the Arms of the Auger,
immediately two or three Workmen that are about the Mouth of the Well draw
out the Water with all possible Diligence; for seeing at that time the Force
of the Water drives out much Sand and Gravel, they say that by this means the
Course of the Water is promoted, and the Wells are made to send forth Water
more plentifully; neither can the Stuff settling to the bottom stop the Hole.
The Diggers of the Wells say, That some new-made Fountains have thrown up
sometimes so much Water with the Gravel and Sand, that the Ground giving way
on every side, and threatening the Ruin of the adjacent Buildings, they have
been forced to fill up the Fountain again with Earth and hewn Stones. But the
Pebble Stones, which are thrown up by the force of the Water, differ not much
from those which are seen in the adjacent Rivers; neither are they small, but
some of them weigh 3 or 4 Ounces: Some of these are adorned with Veins of Gold,
and pretty hard; others are harder, and like the Rudiments of Pebble Stones. In
some places where the Situation of the City is lower, the Water arises above
the Plain, from whence it runs easily down, but in higher places it stops below
the Surface of the Plain; so that it is necessary to make Conduits under Ground,
through which it falls into the public Canals, which afterward meet into one
Canal that is Navigable, and by which they Sail conveniently enough even to
Venice. For this Canal falls into the Scultenna, and the Scultenna into the Po.

The Number of these Fountains is very great, so that now almost every House
has one; and their Numbers being increased, the old Fountains become fewer, as
may be seen in the most Illustrious Family of the Sadalets, now belonging to
the Castelvitrys, where the Pipes that now send forth no more Water, are
higher than those that at present do. These Fountains also are in the Gardens
about the Town, and in the adjacent Villages, some of which rise above the
Surface of the Earth. Moreover, the Diggers of the Wells say, that they have
on Trial found them seven Miles from the City, beyond Scultenna: For having
made an hole with an Auger, they say the Water did boil up freely enough,
throwing up Sand and Gravel. Wherefore the Limits of this hidden Spring are
not known enough; yet it is reasonable to think, that it is extended farther
from East to West, than from North to South, seeing in this Tract they are not
found extended above four Miles.

This is remarkable, that when the Hole is bored, and the Water begins to
break out, the next Fountains cease from running for some time; yet after a
little time they run again. I have been told by a Person of Credit, that when a
Well was bored in the Cloisters of the Nuns of St. Francis des Sales, he saw
in another Well near it the Water sunk in a moment, which afterward ascended,
till both the Wells being in an Equilibrium, the Water settled in the same
Horizontal Surface. I have often observed this Decrease, but not with so great
Swiftness, in which the Water did not sink so deep on a sudden, but rather by
degrees; and raising a few Bubbles, I observed it to decrease; but when the new
Well was filled, it ^ose again to its former height.

Having often understood by the Diggers of the Wells, that they heard a great
noise of the water running under the bottom of the Wells, and that when it
first begins to be heard they take it as a sign, that it is time to Bore. To be
assured of this, I went down into the bottom of a Well in the beginning of
February, holding a lighted Candle in my Hand, the Well being built in a place
of no great light; having staid there a little, I perceived a manifest Murmur
and Noise, yet not such as I expected. Then I stamped on the Ground with all my
force, upon which the Ground made a hideous Noise, so that I thought I had to
do with Hell, and therefore quickly gave notice to those that were above, to
pull me up with all possible speed, remembering that once the force of the Water
throwing up the Earth prevented the boring. But though I did not stay long
there, seeing nothing beside occurred to be observed but the oise of the Water,
yet I felt so great a Heat there, that I did run down in Sweat; and it was no
small Pleasure to me to observe, when I was drawn up from that Thermometer, in
so small an Interval of time, so many gradual Changes of Heat and Cold. At
another time I tried what was the temper of these Wells, in their greatest
Depth, by letting down a Thermometer in the midst of Winter, and I found that
it differed little from the Heat of the Dog Days in our Climate. The Diggers
perceive no less Cold in the Summertime in these Wells, and upon that account
they refuse to undertake such a work in the middle of Summer; seeing, beside
the great Cold which oppresses them, such a difficulty of breathing also seises
them, that they are almost suffocated; a great quantity of Smoke rises likewise
at the same time, so as to put out the Candles, which never happens in the
Winter, for then they breath easily enough, and the Candle stands unmoved. The
Diggers complain much of a bad Smell, when they dig in the Wells in a hot
Season; especially when they light on Stumps of Trees: For the rotten wood
sends forth a most vile stink, which in the Wintertime they do not experience,
though at that time they perceive a great Heat in these Wells.

But seldom are these Wells dug, in which they do not meet with several
sorts of Trees, as Oaks, Walnut-trees, Elm, Ash, some of which stand upright,
and some lie along. But it appears not by any Mark, that they have been cut by
Men's Hands; and therefore we must think that these Woods were only the
Habitations of wild Beasts in former times. These Trees when they are cut by
the Diggers are soft enough, but when they are exposed to the Air, they grow
hard like Coral.

When they were making such a Well as this in the middle of April, I observed
the rising of such a smoaky Exhalation, that the Digger could scarcely be
observed in the bottom; who also said he was very cold; and that he could
hardly breath; and at the same time was troubled with a Cough: But when the Air
on a sudden was changed to Cold, immediately the said Exhalation evanisht, and
the Digger could breath freely enough; and he said, he felt a moderate Heat.
Being to try what Temper these Wells were of in the Months next to the Summer,
I went down into a Well which a French Jeweller was digging in his House about
the end of May, before it was bored, and I found such degrees of Cold, as are
observed in this Climate about the beginning of Winter. During the time that I
staid there my Chest and my Breast was so straightened, that my Heart did pant
very much. I did not perceive a great noise of Waters in this as in others, yet
the Ground being beat, did give a frightful Sound as before.

While I was writing this, I thought fit to try the Temper of the Subterraneous
Air in a Well that was then digging, by letting down into it at the same time a
Thermometer and Barometer to several Depths, and marking the difference that is
between the open Air, and that which is in the Wells when they are a digging*
and especially in the Summer Months, in which the Workmen seldom undertake such
a business, by reason of the Inconveniences aforementioned. Wherefore I have
set down the following Table, that it may be better known what is the
difference between the Subterraneous and the Open Air; which would be also very
convenient and curious, if tried in the VVinter time: But I do not doubt but
the quite contrary things happen then which I will try with the first
opportunity. The 12 day of June. The 23 day of June. The 27 day of June. The 1
day of July. The height of the Liquor in the Thermometer without the Well, G.
80. The height of the Liquor in the Thermometer without the Well, G. 77. The
height of the Liquor in the Thermometer, G. 74. The height of the Liquor in the
Thermometer without the Well, G. 78. In the Well to the depth of 18 Feet, G.
64. In the Well to the depth of 30 Feet, G. 51. In the Well to the depth of 45
Feet, G. 44. In the greatest depth of the Well, G. 40. The height of the
Mercury in the Barometer, G. 80. The height of the Mercury in the Barometer,
without the Well, G. 80. The height of the Mercury in the Barometer, without
the Well, G. 78. The height of the Mercury in the Barometer, without the Well,
G. 79. In the Well to the depth of depth of 15 Feet, G. 82. In the Well to the
depth of 30 Feet, G. 84. In the Well to the depth of 45 Feet, G. 85. In the
greatest depth of the Well, G. 86.

It Is also fit to be known, that no Force of Man is able to drain such Wells
dry: For if the Water should be drawn incessantly with great Buckets, it were
very much if the Water should be depressed 6 or 8 Feet; the more the Water is
drawn out, these Fountains run more briskly: So that ^ it happen at any time,
that any of these flow something flowly they draw out the Water as fast as they
can; and by this kind of Remedy (even as in Men's Bodies the Blood is taken
away, that it may move more quick through its Passages) the Load being as
'twere taken off, they easily drive away the Sickness of these Fountains which
is their flowness of Motion For the same end, they also either make a new Hole,
or open the old one with an Instrument made of many wooden Cylinders, which
they let down into the Wells with great Auger fastened in the end of it.

But these Fountains are subject to no other Fault; they maintain the same
Purity of their Waters uncorrupted; and as in moist Seasons they feel no
Increase, so in the greatest Droughts (such as we observed in these last Years,
in which the whole Region on this and the other side of the Po did exceedingly
want Water) they suffe no Decrease. Moreover, these Waters are very warm in
Winter, so that they send forth a Smoke; but in Summer they are very cold. Some
Days after the Eruption is made, when the Water has settled, they usually cover
the Well with a Marble Stone, and as it were seal it, and afterward convey the
Water by Earthen Pipes from the same into Vessels of Marble, or of Stone, from
which afterward the Water is, by other Conduits, continually (...)

Bed of Clay is about 11 Feet, and sometimes it is full of Cockle-shells; it
ends therefore about the depth of 39 Feet; after that there appears another Bed
of marshy Earth, about 2 Foot thick, composed of Rushes, Leaves of Plants, and
Branches. This marshy Bed being taken away by the Diggers, another Bed of Clay
of the same thickness with the former, presents it self, which terminates in
the depth of about 52 Foot; which being dug up, another Bed of marshy
ground, not unlike the former, is seen; which being removed, another Bed of
Clayie Ground of the same nature with the former two, but not so thick,
appears; which lies upon another Bed of marshy Earth, which at last terminates
on that last Plain, in which the Auger is fixed, which is soft, and sandy, and
mixed with much Gravel, and sometimes full of Sea-Products. These several Beds,
with their Intervals, are observed in all the Wells, as well within the Walls
of the City, as in the Suburbs, in a constant Order.

Seeing in digging they often fall on Stocks of Trees, as I have frequently
observed, which gives great trouble in the boring, to the Undertakers, it is a
manifest Proof that this Ground was once exposed to the Air; but I could never
observe those Stocks of Trees in the Beds of Chalk, but in the marshy ones
only, or in that space which lies between the Foundation and the beginning of
the Clay. There have been also found in the greatest Depths of these Wells
great Bones, Coals, Flints, and pieces of Iron. I do willingly pass by many
things here, which the common People report, of extraneous things cast up by
the Violence of the Waters at their first breaking forth, as Leaves of Oaks,
Chestnut, Millet, Bean-husks, and many other things; contenting my self with
telling those things only of which I have been an Eyewitness, or have heard
from Persons worthy of Credit. These are the things which belong to the History
of the Wells of Modena, and which I have observed as I had occasion.

CHAP. II.
That these are not Standing, but Running Waters; upon this occasion some
things are brought in from the Hydrostaticks.
Seeing the Nature and Original of this hidden Source deserves to be as much
inquired into, as that of the Nile did formerly, let us pass through these
Subterraneous Waters with the Sails of our Reason, seeing we cannot do it
otherwise. First, we may freely affirm, That these Waters are not standing, as
they are when shut up in a Hogshead, but are in con^inual motion, and that
pretty quick: For the Noise of that wa^er which is heard before the Per^oration
in the bottom of the Wells ^oes make it manifest enough. Neither can any
object, that even stagnant Waters are subject to great Commotions, as is known
of the Vulsinian Lake, Thrasumenus and Benacus, of which the chief of the poets
says, Teque adeo assurgens aestu, Benace, marino!
O Benacus, which like the Ocean roars!
For that is not constant; yea, these Lakes for the most part are very still:
But the Noise of the Water before the Terebration is constantly heard, which I
always perceived distinctly as often as I descended into these Wells; and to this
agree the Undertakers of these Wells who by the noise of the Water guess that
they have done with digging. But seeing the VVate rises so suddenly to the
height (...) 68 Feet, casting forth Sand and Stones with force, it is most
certain that these Subterraneous Waters descend from a high place, and are
continually pressed on by others that follow. Neither do I think that such a
sudden rising of the Water can be attributed to the weight of the
superincumbent Earth, which drives the Water upward by its Pressure. I know
indeed, that Water may be elevated above its Surface, when it is driven up by
some force lying upon it; as Scaliger, writing against Cardan, demonstrates, by
the Example of a Cylindrical Vessel with Pipes on both sides, and a Plug fitted
exactly to its Capacity; into which, being full of Water, if you force down
the Plug, it will raise the Water in the Pipes, above the Surface of the
Water that is in the Vessel. But if, by the weight of the incumbent Earth,
these Waters were elevated, the Earth so superincumbent would be broke off
from the rest, which is altogether improbable, there appearing no Marks of it.
Beside, by what way could it come to pass, that these Waters should be so
excellent, as to surpass all others, if they were without Motion, and kept as
it were captive? For every body knows, that standing Waters do no less differ
from those that are moved, than dead Bodies differ from live ones, seeing we
commonly call such as run, Living Waters. These Waters therefore do move, and
stand not still here, but run down constantly either to the Sea, or are
swallowed up in some Gulf.

But whilst I conclude these Waters to be running, an Objection of no small
Value does occur, and it is this: If the Waters run away so violently, there
seems to be no Reason why these Wells being dug, they should rise upwards.
But it may be demonstrated by a Physical Experiment, that the Water cannot
ascend in such as case. For let there be a Vessel full of Water, Fig. 1.
at whose side near the bottom, a Pipe is inserted at right Angles pierced with
many Holes, EFG; and in the lower part let it have a Slit, HI. If now you give
the Water free vent to run out, not only it will not ascend at the Holes, but
neither will it descend at the Slit, but will all run out at the wide Mouth of
the Pipe; and it will be pleasant to see the Water hang out at the Slit, and
not fall, (till at the latter end) the Vessel being almost empty, the Water
will no more run out at the wide Mouth, but will all run down through the Slit.

If therefore this Experiment hold, the supposed running of the Waters to
places farther off, and their manifest ascent into these Wells at the same
time, seem not to agree with the Laws of Hydrostaticks: For if they flow
freely, and without stopping, without doubt they cannot rise on high; which is
confirmed by what the most Learned, Scaliger says in his Exercitations, Exer.
100.
who, enquiring whether Waters may run under other waters, says, That near the
River O^tus there is a Well on a high Hill, and that at the bottom a Stream
runs swiftly and with great Noise.

Although all this seems to be true and obvious to the Senses, yet the further
Progress of these waters may in our case consist with the rising in these
Wells* which may be demonstrated in the same First Figure. For if you put your
Finger to the Mouth of the Pipe D, yet so as not to stop it altogether, the
Water will leap out on high at the same time, by the holes E, F, G, and flow
down by the Slit H, and withal at the Mouth of the Pipe, the one Action not
hindering the other; and so according as there is more or less of the Orifice of
the Pipe stopped with your Finger, more or less Water will be raised by the said
Holes; but it will never be raised to that height it would be, if the Mouth
were quite stopped. It does not therefore disagree with the Laws of
Hydrostaticks, if these Subterraneous Waters are running and go further, that
at the fame time they should be raised to the height of 68 Feet in the Wells,
yet so as not to exceed the height of the Cistern from whence they come,
because the Passage at which they flow out is not large enough.

It Is convenient that some Account be given of these Phenomenon, observed
hither to by none that I know, seeing there is no part of Philosophy more
curious, yet less cultivated, than Hydrostaticks. First therefore, it is no
wonder that the Water (while it has a free Course and Passage through the wide
Mouth of the Pipe) does not run also at the Holes; yea, of necessity it must be
so: For the Water has a free Descent, neither does it meet with any Obstacle to
make it rise, as it does in Pipes bended upwards; so neither will it descend by
the Cleft, because of the Pressure and the Force it has acquired in descending,
like a solid Body, which suffer it not to turn from its Course; in the same
manner as Bodies thrown, are carricd in a Horizontal Line for some space, while
the Force continues.

But the Reason why the Orifice of the Pipe being straightned, the Water
presently leaps on high, and runs down through the Slit, in my Opinion is this:
That when the lower parts of the Water are pressed by the upper (as the most
famous Mr. Boil has made evident in his Hydrostatical Paradoxes) and are urged
with Violence to run out, the Passage being straightened, by applying the Finger
to the Mouth of the Pipe; some of the Water when it cannot overcome the
Obstacle, seeks a Passage to it self where it can: From whence it comes to
pass, that the less the Water runs out at the Mouth of the Pipe, with the
greater Force it runs out at these Holes. But when the Pressure is abated, and
the Vessel is almost empty, none runs out at the Mouth of the Pipe, but what
remains, runs slowly through the Slit, being the shorter way.

From hence it appears, that the direct Pressure must be estimated by the
weight of the Pillar of Water, whose Base is equal to the Horizontal Surface it
rests on, and its Height equal to the perpendicular Depth of the Water. For
Example: In a Vessel constituted in a Horizontal Plain, any part of the bottom
that can be assigned may be a Base to a Pillar of water of the same Height with
the whole water in the Vessel. And in the foregoing Figure, when it flows
freely through the Pipe C D, it is pressed by a Pillar of water, which has the
same Base with the Orifice of the Pipe CD; which Pillar of water forces it self
by a lateral Pressure into the Pipe, and so to run out; by the force of which
Pressure it comes to pass, that all the water in the Vessel runs out by this
Imaginary Pillar. Many things are said of this Pressure of the water by
Hydrostatical VVriters, to wit, that the under parts are pressed by the upper,
and the upper parts are pressed by those that are under. Moreover, they are pressed
side ways by one another; which Diversity of Pressures they endeavor to prove
by several Experiments; and in effect, every one may experience this lateral
pressure in himself, when he is in the watery up to the Neck; for he will feel
a pressure on every side, and some difficulty of Breathing, which yet is not to
be thought to proceed only from the lateral pressure of the water, but another
Cause: For when the Expansion of the Chest is necessary to Respiration, it is
not so easily performed in the water Element, as in the Air, by reason of its
Grossness: For as Fishes need a greater force for swimming, than Birds for
flying, De motu Anim. P. 1. prop. 215.
as Borellus demonstrates, by reason of the grosser Body of the water, which
must be moved out of its place, and circulate into that left by the Fish: So a
Man sunk in the Water up to the Neck, needs a greater force for opening his
Chest, than if he were in the Air. And from hence it is, that Inspiration in
the Water is more difficult than Expiration. This happens only because the
pressure is unequal; for the pressure of the Pillar of Air and Water on the
Chest without, exceeds the pressure of the Pillar within the Chest, that is
only of Air, so much as the weight of the Pillar of Water which covers the
Chest, exceeds the weight or pressure of the Pillar of Air within the Lungs,
and of the same height with the Water about the Chest; for Fluids press only
according to the perpendicular heights, and not the grosness of their Pillars,
as is plain in Siphons, in whose Legs, though of different thickness, the Liquor
rises but to the same Horizonal Height.

Likewise all do agree, that not only the bottom, but also the sides of the
Vessel are pressed; which pressure some say is considerable, but others not. Tho.
Cornelius thinks it to be equal to the perpendicular Pressure: For supposing
the Water to press by inclined Lines, and that a Body sliding down by inclined
Lines, acquires as great a Velocity as if it fell down by a Perpendicular,
equal to the height of the Plain, he thinks the lateral Pressure to be equal to
the Perpendicular. On the other Hand, Becher, in his Physica Subterranea, says,
That the Water presses directly on the bottom, but far less on the sides; which
Conjecture he grounds on this, That the little Ramparts of Earth sustain the
Pressure of the Ocean it self, that it overflows not the adjacent Fields; yea,
he endeavors to make it out by a Mechanical Experiment, that the Pressure of
the Water is only upward and downward.

If Mr. Becher had considered that Hydrostatical Axiom, viz. That Fluids press
only according to their perpendicular Altitudes, he would not have been
frighted by the Extent of the great Sea at Amsterdam, from owning so evident an
Hydrostatical Truth as this is, That the Lateral Pressure of Fluids is equal to
the Perpendicular: For suppose the Banks there to be Three Fathom, or Eightteen
Feet, above the Harlem Mere, and the adjacent Lands, which they defend from the
Inundation of the Sea, and that the weight of every Cubical Foot of Water is 76
lb. 9, and 48 gr. this multiplied by 18 f. the Perpendicular Height will amount
to 1381 lb, 1. g. 384. which is the Weight or Lateral Pressure that lies on a
Square Foot at the bottom, which a Rampart of Earth, made strong for the
purpose, and 100 Foot thick, may be well allowed able to support. It Is true,
this Computation is made for fresh Water; but the addition of Salt in the
Seawater, which is about 1 lb of Salt to 41 lb of Water, will not so much
alter the Reckning.

For my part, as I do not believe the lateral pressure of the Water to be
equal to the perpendicular, so I do not think it despicable; for it may be
shown, that the lateral pressure is less than the perpendicular, by taking
notice of this only, That there is a greater Endeavor of the Water to descend
by a perpendicular Line than an inclined one: But suppose that some parts in
the sides of the Vessel suffer a pressure, equal to the perpendicular pressure,
as are these which be at the bottom, and in which those inclined ones would
end, which have the same Depth with the whole Water; yet in other parts the
lateral pressure cannot be admitted so great.

The Author here seems like one groping in the dark for the Truth, and yet when
he has got it between his Hands he lets it slip: For he supposes, that the
Pressure by inclined Lines is, at the bottom, equal to the Pressure by
Perpendicular Lines; yet he will not own the same in the intermedial parts.
Indeed the Pressure by Inclined Lines in the intermedial Parts is not equal to
that Perpendicular Pressure which is at the bottom; but it is equal to that
perpendicular Pressure which is on the same Horizontal Surface, which may be
made evident thus: Take a Glass Tube, such as they use for Baroscopes, but open
at both ends, a b; stop the upper end a with your Finger, and so immerse it
into the Vessel e f g h, filled with Water to m l, inclining, till it come to
the Horizontal Surface i k, and then take your Finger off, the Water will rise
by the Pressure at the Orifice b, till it has come to the Surface m l, which is
the same height it would have come to if the Pipe had been Perpendicular, as in
c d. Farther, Suppose a Pipe bended in the end at the right Angles p q,
immersed to the same Surface i k, as before; upon taking away your Finger form
p, it will rise up as high as before, to the Surface m l: Now it is evident to
any that considers the Figure of the Pipe, that the Pressure at q is Lateral,
and as forcible as if it were Perpendicular: This may be made more pleasant to
the Eye by putting Oil into the Pipe, as the Honorable Mr. Boil shows in his
Paradoxa Hydrostatica, Paradox. 7.

And yet it is not to be thought so little of as Becherus says: for seeing the
sides of Vessel are no small hindrance to the Fluid that it descends not, the
Force which the Fluid exerces on the sides cannot be small.

Seeing then, as was before said, the parts of a Fluid are crowded on one
another, as if they were in a Press, it is not without Reason that Moderns from
this do fetch a Solution of that old, yet difficult, Problem, which has wearied
subtle Wits, Why a Diver, in the bottom of the Sea, is not oppressed by the
incumbent Water. They commonly say that it happens, Because the Diver is
lifted up by the water under him, and on the sides the parts of his Body are
pressed with the same force; neither can they be driven inward, seeing all is
full; so that there is no fear of the Luxation of a Member, or painful
Compression. Yet the most ingenious Mr. Boil thinks the Difficulty is not
answered enough; for though by reason of the equal Pressure of the Ambient
Fluid, there follows no Luxation, yet there appears no Reason why there is no
Pain felt by the compression of the Parts one against another. Wherefore the
same Author recurs to the strong Texture of the Animal, which can resist the
Pressure.

It might be solved thus. There is an Air lodged in the Pores of all Animal
Juices, which two together keep distended and full the Fibers, which are
tubulous, as Sir Edmund King has very ingeniously discovered long ago; and it
is by the Pressure of the Ambient Fluid (which is equal on every side) that
this Air being forced into less Compass, the sides of the Fibers come closer
together, which causes no more pain to the Fibers, than the Bladder, (which yet
is a very sensible part) suffers upon its being contracted, when the Urine is
expelled.

If it were not Rashness to think any thing can be added to the Reasons of so
many most famous Men, I would say, that seeing the Body of a Living Man is
specifically lighter than Water, though not much; and therefore being more pressed
by the Collateral Water, according to the Principle of Archimedes, the Siphon
in which the Diver is that is less pressed ought to be lifted up, and therefore
he ought to feel no Pressure. But because the Diver under water may be diversely
considered, either as he descends by a perpendicular Line, or ascends by it, or
is moved by inclining Lines, or as being fastened to the bottom, and sticking on
a Rock, he remains immovable; in any of these cases he cannot be subject to a
dolorous Pressure. I have learned from a skilful Diver, that when a Swimmer
will descend perpendicularly, and go to the bottom in a straight Posture, he
drives the water upward with his Hands as with Oars; and when he will rise
again, driving the water with his hands toward the bottom, he returns the same
way. From whence it comes to pass, that such as are unskilful in Swimming, when
they strike the water contrary ways, are stifled. It is worth the while to
enquire into the Reason of these Effects, having never seen them in any Author,
though there were need of a Delian Swimmer here, as they say.

I think then, that when a Swimmer drives the superincumbent water with his
hand upward, he therefore descends; because such a Siphon being so smitten is
less pressed, and therefore is lifted up, the other being deprest in which the
Swimmer is; just as in a Scale suspended, and put in an Aequilibrium, if one of
the Scales be hit below, that will be lifted up, and the other of necessity
will descend. Therefore the Body of the Swimmer being put in the Pillar that is
more pressed, will of necessity descend; but when at the same time he does this
with both hands, he makes his Descent more easy.

But when he will rise perpendicularly, and in a straight Posture from the
bottom, by striking the water with his hands toward the bottom, he makes that
Siphon more pressed; and therefore the Swimmer being placed in the other, must of
necessity ascend: Just as when the Scale is put in an Aequilibrium, if I hit
the Scale in the hollow part, that will be deprest, and the other lifted up.
The same Reason holds, when he ascends or descends by Lines inclined to the
Horizon. Therefore whether he ascend or descend, or whatever way he move, he
ought to be under no dolorous Pressure, how deep soever the Water be. For
seeing, according to the most ingenious Borellus, Bodies do not appear heavy
but when they are in rest; a^ appears in an Example given by him of two Sacks
of Wool, one of which being put on the other, does not exerce its weight, or
press it, but when it is resting, and not when it descends.

Therefore the Swimmer descending in the Water perpendicularly, ought not to
suffer any Pressure in the Water descending with the same Swiftness. But when
he is carried up by the same way, seeing by his Body he thrusts upward the
Water lying upon him, which he does not by his own Strength, but by the help
of the Collateral Siphon, and therefore needs no help of his Muscles to
overcome the Resistance of the superincumbent Water; neither ought he to have
the sense of a dolorous Pressure, to which the Circulation of the Ambient Fluid
coming in behind, does not a little contribute, by not suffering any part of
the Body to be moved out of its place. Upon the same Account he ought not to
feel any dolorous Pressure, if he ascend or descend by inclined Lines, or stick
without Motion to the bottom: For the other Collateral Siphon being more pressed,
does always exerce its Force, and the subjacent Water lifts up the Diver, that
is specifically lighter than its self upward.

The Author here supposes the Body to be specifically lighter than Water, which
I judge to proceed from the Air enclosed in the Chest; for when that is out,
the Body sinks by its own weight; and this gave perhaps the first rise to
Anatomists to discover whether a Child was Still-born, or not; for if its Lungs
do swim in the Water, 'twas not Still born, but has breathed the Air; but if
they sink, then they conclude the Child to have been Still-born. As for the
Diverse rising or falling by the Motion of his Hands, it is the same Case as in
an Oar, when the Blade of it moves with greater force than the Water, it makes
resistance to the Oar, which therefore not advancing, the Boat of necessity
must: So when a Man presses the Water quickly downward, it makes resistance to
his Hands; and therefore the Water not giving way fast enough, the Body must be
thrust upward; just as in the Air, if a Man between two Chairs did forcibly
thrust them down with his two Hands, he must be lifted up, because they do not
give way. The Author says, the Pressure is not felt when the Diver is ascending
or descending, because the Water being in motion, does not press upon the Body:
But it might be made manifest that it does; and Experience makes it beyond
Contradiction, that they feel no Pressure when the Water is at rest; and the
Diverse do own, that they feel a Pressure rather in the going down in the
Diving-Bell, than afterward; as the Honorable Mr. Boil told me be had
communicated to him by the Lord of Melgum, who practiced this way of Diving,
in these Words; The Compression of the Air being such, as going down did hurt
me; but below, and staying there, was as familiar to me as that above.

CHAP. III.
That these Fountains cannot be derived from a Subterraneous River.
Seeing then that it is clear enough from what was said before, that the flowing
of these Waters toward the Sea, may consist with their rising here, and in any
place, it seems to follow, that there is a great subterraneous River under it,
from which these Fountains do spring: And truly this is the common Opinion
among us, which yet I cannot assent to. I am not ignorant, that there are some
Rivers that hide their Head under Ground, and after some time do rise again.
Some again there are that never rise above Ground, as it happens in the Veins
of the Body; some do appear in the Surface, and some do never. Of this Seneca
speaks very well. Nature governs the Earth as it does our Bodies, in which are
Veins and Arteries; and Nature has so formed it like our Bodies, that our
Ancestors have called them Veins. Pliny says, That the Nile is often swallowed
up in Gulphs, and after a long time is spewed up again. They report the same of
Niger, a River of Aethiopia, which rising out of the same Lake that the Nile
does, and running toward the West, when it meets with a Chain of Mountains,
it finds hidden ways; and appearing again on the other side of the Mountains,
discharges it self into the Atlantic Ocean. In like manner, Tigris in
Mesopotamia being stopped by the Mountain Cancasus, hides it self under Ground,
and is lost in a great Cave; but afterward breaking out near to Babylon, is
mixed with Euphrates. To say nothing of Alphaeus, a River in Achaia, whom the
Poets feign to pass a great way not only under Ground, but also under the Sea
it self, and to rise again in the Fountain called Arethusa: This is known by
the Offals of the Sacrifice, which being thrown down the River, were, every
fifth Summer, at the time of the Olympiack Games, cast up by this Fountain. And
also the Seas themselves are thought to communicate by occult Passages, as the
Mediterranean with the Red Sea, and the Caspian with the Euxine, as the most
Learned Kircher makes out by good Conjectures.

Father Avril a Jesuit, in his Travels into Tartary, says, that it is more
probable that it discharges its self into the Persian Gulf, of which this is
his main Proof; That they who inhabit about the Persian Gulf, do every Year at
the end of Autumn observe a vast quantity of Willow-Leaves: Now, in regard this
sort of Tree is altogether unknown in the Southerin part of Persia, which
borders upon that Sea; and for that quite the contrary, the Northern part,
which is bounded by the Sea of Kilan, or the Caspian-Sea, has all the
Seacoasts of it shaded with these Trees; we may assure our selves with
Probability enough, that these Leaves are not carried from one end of the
Empire to the other, but only by the Water that rowls them along through the
Caverns of the Earth. So far Father Avril.

Who further, for establishing a Circulation of Waters from Pole to Pole,
describes a great VVhirlpool under the North Pole, of which also Olaus Magnus
and Helmont have written, by which a great quantity of Waters is absonb'd,
which falling into the Bowels of the Earth, is returned by the South Pole.

Some say that this changes its Course once in half a year, going in at the
South Pole, and coming out again at the North.

Though all this be true, supposing also that within the Bowels of this Earth
there is exercised something like an Animal O Economy; and that one may, not
without Reason, imagine diverse Ebbings and Flowings of Waters, seeing, as
Seneca says, the whole Earth is not folid, but hollow in a great many parts;
yet I cannot allow as some do, that this is a great broad River, from which
these Fountains break forth. This Opinion of a great River has so firmly
possessed the Minds of all Men, that if a little Earth quake happen, the
Inhabitants are in great Foar lest the Town, which otherwise is greatly shaken
with Earthquakes, should be swallowed in a moment of time; imagining it to be
placed on the arched Roof of a great River.

I confess the Conjectures are not slight, on which may be grounded the Opinion
of such a Subterraneous River, which gives Water to these Fountains; especially
the Noise of the Waters in the bottom of the Well before the Perforation, and
the assurance Men have, that in every place where a Well is dug, Water will
boil up, casting up Sand, Pebbles, and many other things; which seem to
evidence its being some great River, or at least some great Receptacle. But one
Reason, to wit, the super-exceeding Greatness of this imaginary River, which
must be admitted of Necessity, is of so great weight, that it overturns all
Conjectures that would seem to confirm the Opinion of so great a River running
under this Ground. For Europe has no River so big as this subterraneous River
must be, to which neither the Po, nor the Rhine, nor the Danube, are to be
compared. It Is known well enough by what we have before said, and all the
Inhabitants are convinced, that not only within the Compass of the City, which
is a Mile in Diameter, in any place, may be made a Fountain, which will
constantly send forth Water; but also without the Town for some Miles, without
having any regard to the Situation, such Fountains may be made, but especially
by the Aemilian way; as also beyond the River Scultenna a great plenty of these
Springs and Fountains is observed. Therefore the breadth of this subterraneous
River (unless its Course were along this way, in which case it would be
extended 4 Miles) should be extended 6 or 7 Miles.

But who can believe that under this Plain, on which this City is placed, a
River of so great Extent should continually flow, with so great a weight lying
upon it! I will not deny, that from South to North the Source is not so much
extended, seeing these Fountains are not observed above 4 Miles; which, whether
it be for want of Experience, or that this is truly its Bounds, I dare not
affirm. But if we will suppose a subterraneous River, which has a Channel of 4
Miles, every one I think will doubt it: Nor will he so easily give Credit to
this Opinion, especially seeing this Arch that must keep up so great a Weight
68 Feet deep, is not of Flint or Pumice-stone, but altogether made up of Earth
gathered by degrees. Truly, if this Prodigy of Nature were situated in a
Mountainous Region, I should not be much against admitting the greatest
Subterraneous width. For if we take notice of the Caves and Subterraneous
Recesses which are famed in Geographers, we shall find them to be made amongst
the Rocky and steep Caverns of the Earth, seeing Rocks and Stones are the Bones
and Strength of it. From whence Ovid says, Magna parens terra est, lapides in
corpore terrae,
Ossa reor dici --
The Earth is our great Mother, and the Stones
Therein contained, I take to be her Bones.


We find the Corycaean Cave in Cilicia (of which Pliny, Solinus, and others
write, that being a very large Promontory with a wide Mouth, and full of Woods
within; 'twas 52 Miles broad, so as to be very light, and both a Cave and a
Port) to have been placed in the Mountain Corycus. The River Tigris, which we
have often mentioned, hides its Head, and as often rises again, but only when
he sees himself stopped with a Chain of Mountains. For disdaining that any stop
should be put to his Swiftness, from which he takes his name, he finds himself
a way by the wide Bowels of the Mountains, and runs hid, till being swelled
with the accession of Waters, he runs out into the open Plain. The River
Timavus, famous enough among the old Poets (about whose true place, whether
'twas near Padoua, or Tergeste in Istria, there were so many Contentions among
the Learned of the last Age, as may be seen in Leander* Albertus, Bernardinus
Scardeomus, Johannes Candidus) though he seem to draw all his Water from ^ine
Fountians, as Breasts sticking out in the Mountain Timavus* yet he borrows them
from another place, viz. a Subterraneous River, discharging it self by the
Cavernous VVindings of the Mountains, into the Sea; for which he is so proud as
to be called, the Father and Fountain of the Sea.

Seeing we have made mention of Timavus, and wonderful things are told of him
by VVriters, viz. That he Ebbs and Flows according to the Motion of the Sea;
and that he increases so much, as to overflow the adjacent Country; but in the
ebbing of the Sea he runs gently enough, and carries with himself the Sweetness
of his Waters even to the Ocean, without mixture. Ut Doris amara suam non
intermiceat undam.
Ecgl. 10. That Doris mix not her salt Wa^^es with thine.
As the chief of the Poets did formerly say of Alphaeus: Therefore I am willing
to (...) the Contemplation of so curious things.

The most Learned Kircher does very well explain the Cause of this prodigious
Increase, and how the River keeps its Waters free from Saltness, even to its
Mouth. For he says, That a great abundance of Water is cast out from the
Bowels of a Mountain near a Village called St. Cantians, about 14 Miles
distance from the Nine Fountains of Timavus, and that there it is swallowed up
by a manifest Gulf, nor does it appear more: He thinks therefore, that the
Water being swallowed up by hidden Channels, runs into the Sea; and that
therefore in the flowing of the Sea; the Salt Water drives back the Fresh that
meets it with great Violence, as being of less Force; and so this Subterraneous
River is stopped in its Course, which not finding room to which it may retire,
breaks violently out at the forementioned Fountains in the Mountain Timavus,
communicating with the same Subterraneous River. Vnde per or a novem vasto cum
murmr montis,
It mare praeruptum, and pelago praemit arva sonanti.
Aen. I. 1. Whence through Nine Mouths a Sea from Mountains raves,
Which the whole Country drowns in foaming Waves.
By this means it is not hard to understand, how according to the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea, there appears so proportionate a Vicissitude of Ebbing and
Flowing in Timavus. and yet the Waters remain fresh: For the Sea does not beat
back the Waters of Timavus, nor stop his Course in the Surface, but meeting the
Subterraneous River swallowed up in the foresaid Valley, forces it to flow
back, and throw out its Waters by these Nine Mouths; and from hence is the
prodigious Increase of the River Timavus. But when the Sea ebbs, and gives
leave to that Subterraneous River to run, Timavus also at the same time, when
that great Regurgitation of the Water ceases, runs quietly enough, and with all
his Sweetness, into the Adriatic.

Neither Kircher nor Falloppius, determine what Sea they suppose to flow into
these Cavities; for the Mediterranean does not rise high enough to answer the
case, seeing it flows but a Foot at the most, which is in the Adriatic; if
they meant the Atlantic, which in some places is observed to rise 9 Fathom, in
many to 2 1/2, to 3 or 5; yet perhaps that will not answer the case neither;
for it has a great way to come, before it can come to reach the place; and when
it has swelled to the height there, considering the Nine Mouths of Timavus are
in a Mountanous Country, which may be justly supposed elevated far above the
Sea when at the highest, this Solution of the Phenomen will not hold. It seems
to me more rational to explain it thus: I suppose the Water comes from St.
Cantians, to run under Ground in a Canale (...), which it fills quite (so that
there is no passage for the Air that way) till it come to the Basin a b c,
which it fills so, as to overflow into the Sea below, and that this Basin is
not much lower than the Mouth of Timavus; for thus the Ascent of the Water into
these Nine Mouths will be more easily procured. I suppose likewise, that this
Basin a b c has another Passage g h* by which the outer Air communicates with
the Water in this Basin, and by which the Water in the Flux of the Sea runs out
at h; then the Water that overflow^ and fall into the Sea when it is at the
Ebb, because the Air gets out at the Holes below near the Surface; when the
Surface of the Sea k k k is elevated by the Waters flowing into this lower
Basin through Subterraneous Passages, and the Holes near its Surface (by which
the Air got out before) being now stopped, the Air is crowded between the Surface
k k k below, and that in the Basin, and thus* acquires a greater Elasticity
than the Air that presses the Surface within the Pipe g h; and therefore,
according to the Laws of Hydrostatisks, the Water in that Pipe must ascend: Now
if the Sea flow two Eathom below, it may raise the Waters in the Pipes g h near
as much, so that it may run out at h. I think, the flowing of Springs and
Lakes, such as the Ingenious Mr. Walker told me is reported to be found in
Cornwall on the top of a Hill, and in other places, may be explained very well
after this manner.

Our Countryman Falloppius gives a Reason of this surprising Phenomenon of
Nature, not much differing from this, whose words I thought fit to add here:
But you must note, that although the River th^n abo^nd with Water, yet that
Water is fresh, as ^tis also when it decreases; for it is always fresh; but from
whence does that come? You must understand, that in the Country of Carni there
is a Castle called St. Cantians, from whence rises a great quantity of Water,
which when it has scarcely appeared, is swallowed up by the Earth, and appears
no more. Now the Village of St. Cantians is 14 Miles distant from the River
Timavus.

I believe therefore that the Water flowing from the Mountain in abundance, is
the Cause of the Increase of Timavus; for I think that this Water flows
plentifully by these Subterraneous Passages, which meets with other secret
Passages, by which the Sea runs into the Mountain next to the River; and that
so there is a Congress made, and dashing of the Sea Water against the other,
which runs down from the Mountain farther off; and seeing the flowing of the
Sea is more forcible than the fresh Water, (for the Salt Water is more gross
than the fresh) it happens that the fresh Water flowing from the high
Mountains, yields to the other when it meets with it; from whence it comes,
that when in cannot run to the Sea, it recoils up to the top of the Mountain;
and from hence it is, that all the Mountain abounds with Water, and the Timavus
increases and decreases.

Such Phenomenon of Nature sporting it self, may be more easily observed in the
Mountainous Countries than elsewhere, seeing the Mountains, because of their
solid Texture, have empty Spaces and Kettles, which serve not only for Cisterns
of Water, but also for Receptacles of Fire, as in Sicily; which therefore
Aristotle calls, full of Caverns. So Virgil, describing Aristaeus going down
into the secret places of Paeneus, a River in Thessaly, running between Olympus
and Ossa, wrote these Verses. Iamque domum mirans genetricis and humida regna,
Speluncisque lacus clausos, lucosque sonantes
Ibat, and ingenti motu stupefactus aquarum,
Omnia sub magna labentia fl^mina terra
Spectabat diversa locis. --


In English thus:

He wandering goes through Courts, and Crystal Realms,
Loud Groves and Caves, which Water overwhelms;
And with tumultuous Waves ^stonisht found
All the great River's running under Ground.


There are many of these Subterraneous Rivers in this and other Countries:
There is one very remarkable at Bourdeaux in France, which runs under the
Church of St. Sorine; and it seems under or near a Pillar of that Church, in
which there is made a hole large enough to put in ones Head, which has another,
hole at the bottom going down through the Pillar to the River, to which if you
apply your Ear, you may hear the noise of the Water falling down, even at the
time when the Organs (which make a great Noise) are playing: There is upon the
Right Hand a broad pair of Stairs, with a great Arched Gate, that take down to
this Subterraneous River, from which they force Water into a Marble Cistern
that stands in the Churchyard covered with another great Stone, yet open on
the sides, at which the ignorant People take up Water; believing, by the
Insinuation of the Crafty Priests, that it is by the Gift of St. Sorin an
Excellent Collyrium for sore^ Eyes This Water as they force into the Cistern by
the Pipes laid under ground on the Waxing of the Moon, so they let it gradually
out by other Pipes on the Wane of the Moon; which makes the People think that
it depends on the Course of the Moon. Populus vult decipi.

Let us hear Seneca, speaking to the purpose; There are also under the Earth
less known Laws of Nature, but as sure; believe the same to be below, that is
above: There are also great Caves, there are great Vaults and wide Places
formed by the Mountains hanging over them. Then although we must confess, that
in some places Rivers of great bigness flow under the Earth, we must not
therefore believe that in this great Plain on this side the Po, there is so
great a subterraneous Cavity, and that Fields of so great a largeness could
stand without Ruin for so long time. I must add moreover, that the Depth of
this River, in respect to its Breadth, ought not to be small, because Nature
builds all her Caves and Subterraneous Passages Archwise; which all must have a
Depth proportionable to the Breadth, otherwise they lose their Force; and
commonly they are of a Circular Figure, or coming near to it, i. e. As deep as
they are broad, which in this case must be at least 4 Mile.
But this Cavity is of no Depth almost, yea, but a few Feet, viz. As much as
the Auger had made in boring: For passing an Iron Rod throw the Hole, the
bottom is presently found, as I have often tried with others that have been
with me.

Moreover, seeing the Diggers in the very Terebration, often fall on Stocks of
Trees, as my self have often observed; we must confess therefore, that these
Trees have been before in open Air: And seeing in the bottoms of these Wells
are often found Bones, Coals, and Pieces of Iron, we are likewise forced to
believe, that People have formerly lived on that Ground; or we must think, that
this great River at that time had a Cover of 6 or 8 Foot, and that this our
Plain did afterward grow higher, by the daily Descent of Waters from the
Apennine, and the paring off of the upper Ground. But the above mentioned
Difficulties do still occur.

But let us suppose this great River runs this way, and that hitherto he has
suffered a Bridge; from whence, I pray, comes so great a plenty of Water to
fill this great Cavity, which we must always suppose to be full, to make the
Water rise up in the Wells? Seeing to sustain the Royal Dignity of the Po,
scarcely so many Rivers running into it from the Apennine and the Alps are
sufficient? And on the other hand, we may affirm that the Po comes far short of
this Subterraneous River. Lastly, If this River must be 4 Miles broad, I do not
see why in all the Extent of this Source, the Depth of the Wells is always
found the same; for the Wells which are dug near the sides of this great
Arch, would be deeper than those elsewhere: But there is almost no difference
in the Depth of these Wells. We cannot therefore give way to the Vulgar Opinion
of this Subterraneous River, notwithstanding the Conjectures mentioned, which
we shall shortly Answer. And far less must we believe, that there are many
Subterraneous Streams flowing from the same Cistern, and distinguished by
Intervals, which give Water continually to these Fountains. For how can it be,
seeing there are so many thousands of Fountains, and continually such Wells are
made both in the City and Suburbs, that the Undertakers never fell upon such
Interstices in the boring? As I have often told; and which one can never admire
enough, there is no need of any Caution here; no need of Diligence in choosing
a place, seeing any place marked out either in the City or without, for many
Miles, is fit for the Building of these Wells; and all the Difficulty in
digging these Wells, is in keeping out the Side-waters, which sometimes flow in
in great quantity, so that they need a Wall of Bricks to keep it out: But when
the Workmen have come to this last Bottom, then as having got their wish, they
begin their Perforation with as great Assurance of getting Water by their
Auger, as if they had Moses his Rod. Neither is the Opinion of some to be
entertained, who think that the subterraneous Spaces from which these Waters
flow, were formerly the Channels of Scultenna and Gabellus, between which two
Rivers Modena is now placed; which Rivers, as they imagine, after they had
descended from the Apennine, did join their Waters in this place; and
therefore, through length of Time, the Mountains decreasing and the Fields
rising, the Water rises to this height in these Wells when they are dug; or
in a hole made with Sand wet with Water, which is supplied from these Rivers by
hidden Passages; And the Sand it self, that they may give Credit to so
plausible a Thought, they give an Example; for they say, That near a Stream, a
Hole being made in the Sand, though dry on the Surface, the Water appears; which
also by the Observation of Pliny the younger, is known to be done in the
Seashore. For after this Author, with his accustomed Elegancy in a Letter to
Plin. Gallus, described the Pleasantness of his Countrey-Village by the
Seaside, in the end of his Epistle he makes this Relation, as worthy to be
taken notice of: It has Wells, or rather Fountains; for the Nature of all that
Shore is wonderful; in whatever place you move the Ground, you meet with Water;
and that so fresh, as not to have the least saltness from the Vicinity of the
Sea. By these words the most Learned Man seems to give some Specimen of our
Fountains, seeing there also, in whatever place the Ground is dug, there is
Moisture: Yet it is gathered, by the same Pliny's words, that the Waters of
these Wells did not spring up. I believe the same will happen in any
Seacoast, except some Bed of Clay intervene, for the Waters do easily follow
the Sand: Therefore it is no wonder, that in any place of Pliny's Countrey-House
the Water appears fresh, being strained through the Sand from the nearest Sea,
and so deprived of its Saltness. But it is no way probable, that the Case is so
in our Ground: For though I do not deny that these Rivers did formerly run in
deeper Channels, yet that that they give Water to this Spring, I can no ways
be induced to believe.
For these Springs are perpetual, neither do they know any Increase or
Decrease; when yet these Rivers, not only in Summer, but also sometimes in
VVinter, have their Sands dry, as we have seen of late Years, by reason of the
hot Season; seeing all the Wells except these, though dug deep, gave no
Water in the Neighboring Countries, to the great loss both of Men and Cattle.
But the flowing of a most pure Water from these Fountains is so uniform and
constant, that it is improbable they should depend on the unconstant and unequal
state and course of these Rivers; for the Water decreasing in the deeper
Veins, the Pressure would also decrease, and so these Fountains would be
diminished. Moreover, seeing the Country of Rhegium, Parma, and all on this
side the Po, is placed in the same Plain; and many Rivers descending from the
Apennine, glide over these Countries. I do not see, why they do not enjoy the
same Prerogative when Wells are dug deep in them. But no where that I know
of are such Fountains observed, so everlasting, and subject to no Alteration.
Therefore we may lawfully judge the Cistern that furnishes Water at the same
rate to this Source, to be perpetual, never failing, and not temporary.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Ancient State and Form of the Country on this, and the other side of
the River Po.
THerefore having discussed the Opinions which take most among our Countrymen,
of the Nature of this hidden Source, it may be thought fit that I should now
tell my own: But before I do that, I think it worth while to enquire, and as
far as Conjecture will allow to discover, what was in those times the outward
Face of this Country which we inhabit; seeing by the digging of these Wells
in the Land of Modena, it is known enough, that the Situation of this Country,
which is called Gallia Cispadana, and Transpadana, was very low and deprest in
old times, in comparison of what it is now. Plato, when he brings in Critias
speaking, writes, that there are two things which bring great and sudden
Changes in the Earth, and totally abolish the Monuments of the most ancient
Countries. The World felt the first Calamity in the Universal Deluge, the
other being reserved against the Day of Judgment, and the Destruction of wicked
M^n, as Peter says, Ep. 2.
when a New Heaven, and a New Earth shall appear. It Is most certain, that the
Face of the whole Earth was most notably changed, in that Universal Drowning
and Overturning of all things. But some think that such a Change followed, that
the state of the World before the Flood was quite different from what 'twas
afterward, which yet I cannot assent to. There is lately come from England a
Book, whose Title is, The Sacred Theory of the Earth, by Thomas B^^net. This
Learned Man endeavors to demonstrate, that the Earth before the Deluge in its
first Original, had another Form than now it appears to have; so that there
were neither Seas nor Isles, nor Mountains nor Valleys, nor Rivers any where,
but the whole Body of the Waters lodged in the Caverns of the Earth. Now he
feigned such a Face of the Earth, to the end that it may be perceived without
the Creation of new Waters, from what Storehouse a quantity of Water may be
drawn sufficient to cover the Face of the Earth, though it had Mountains, which
we must imagine to have been higher by far than the present ones: So that,
according to his Reasoning, neither Rains, how great soever, nor Theo^^ Rabbah
of Moses, viz. Abyss of Waters hid in the Caverns of the Earth, could be
sufficient for that Universal Deluge. But he thinks that the Mountains,
Valleys, Seas, Isles and Rocks, might have appeared in that great cleaving of
the whole Body of the Earth, pieces of it being broke off here and there, and
swallowed up in the great Gulf; while those, which stood in their former
state, made a show of Isles, Mountains, and Rocks; but these which were wholly
covered by the Waters, had the Name of Sea and Lakes; and so the Earth
appeared after the Deluge all broken, torn, and of a quite different Aspect.

This Fancy, however it may be taken for new, yet certainly is not the Fiction
of our Times, but more ancient by far. Franciscus Patritius, a Man famous
enough for Learning, in a certain Book of his, Of the Rhetoric of the
Ancients, written in Italian, and Printed at Venice by Franciscus Senensis,
Anno 1562. The first Dialogue has a pleasant Story, which he says Julius
Strozza had from Count Balthazzar Castillon, and he had from a certain Abyssine
Philosopher in Spain. This wise Abyssinian did say, That in the most ancient
Annals of Aethiopia, there is a History of the Destruction of Mankind, and the
breaking of the Earth: That in the beginning of the World the Earth was far
bigger than now it is, and nearer to Heaven, perfectly round, without Mountains
and Valleys, yet all Cavernous within like a Sponge, and that Men dwelling in
it, and enjoying a most pure Ether, did lead a pleasant Life; and that the
Earth brought forth excellent Corn and Fruits without Labor. But when, after a
long Flux of Ages, Men were puffed up with Pride, and so fell from their first
Goodness, the Gods in Anger did shake the Earth, so that a great part of it
fell within its own Caverns; and by this means the Water, that before was shut
up in dark Holes, was violently squeezed out, and so Fountains, Lakes, Rivers,
and the Sea it self, took its Original: But that Portion of the Earth, which
did not fall into these Caverns, but stood higher than the rest, made the
Mountains: That the Isles and Rocks in the midst of the Sea, are nothing but
Segments of the Earth remaining after the sudden fall of its Mass. I am
willing, for the satisfaction of the Curious, to give the Author's own words,
as more tending to our purpose.

In the first Ages, said the Reverend Old Man, after the last Renovation of the
World, the Earth we dwell on was not of that Form, nor so little as it is at
present, but far greater, and of a perfect roundness; because then it did take
up as much place, as it now takes up with the whole Water and Air together: So
that between it and Heaven there was not any thing interposed, but a most pure
Fire, which is called Ether, being of a most pure and vital Heat. The Earth
then was of so large an Extent, and so near to Heaven. But within, and in the
Surface, 'twas very Cavernous, within which were scattered the Elements of Air
and Water; and toward the Center was scattered a Fire, to warm the places
remotest from Heaven, and therefore obscure and cold. Because the other Caverns
nearer the Surface of the Earth were illuminated from Heaven by the Openings
above, and by its Warmth filled with Life; and all these Caverns were
inhabited by Men, and other Animals, for the use of which the Water and Air
were scattered over the Caverns. The Earth then was like a Sponge, and Men
dwelt within it; their Life was very happy, and without any Evil, because there
was not among Men either War or Sedition. Nor did they live enclosed in Cities,
as they do now, for fear of wild Beasts and other Men; but they lived
promiscuously, and the Earth produced its Fruits for their Necessity, without
any Labor of theirs. Further, the Mildness of the Air and Ether were so
great, that the Seasons did not vary as they do now: And knowing then the Truth
and the Virtues of all things, they found they were good; they knew also the
Virtues of the Stars, their Senses being nourished in a most pure Ether, from
whence they had the Knowledge of things Celestial and Elemental. It Is come to
our Knowledge, that in the most ancient Annals of Aethiopia, among many others,
were found Egypt, Aethiopia, Persia, Assyria, and Thracia. Now hearken, O
Count, says the Ethiopian, attentively, what occasioned the Fall of the Earth,
and the Ruin of Mankind. The Men of Assyria knowing all things, and by means
of their Wisdom doing Wonders, were well pleased with it; from this Self
conceit grew in them a great Love of themselves; by which the Flower of their
Wisdom being darkened by degrees, they waxed proud, and began to think
themselves Gods, and to compare themselves to Saturn, that then had the
Government of the World; who, as he is slow to Anger, and ripe in Counsel, was
not at all moved at the first: But when their Pride increased, he in Anger
deprived them of the Influxes of his Mind; from which Privation there grew in
them Ignorance, from which flow Pride and Insolence; and they began to seek how
to get up into Heaven, and dethrone him: which when Saturn saw, being in his
great Wisdom unwilling to defile his Hands with Humane Blood, of himself
resigned the Government, and gave it into the Hand of Jupiter his Son; who,
after he had taken on him the Government of the World, being born to Action,
made a League with his Brother Pluto, who Reigned in the Roots of the World
toward the Center: The one began to shake it terribly below, and the other to
thunder upon it from above, with which terrible shaking and thundering, the
Earth opened in many places, and broke, so that it fell into its own Caverns,
which by that were raised and filled up. From whence it came to pass, that it
both became less, and infinitely further off from Heaven, and was buried in its
self, with all the things contained in it. And the Elements which stood
highest, were, by its weight and restriction, squeezed out, the lighter and
purer did fly higher, and drew nigher to Heaven; but of them which were shut up
in the Ruins, and were before lodged in the Caverns, part remained below, and
part changed their place. And it came to pass, that where the great Bulk of
Earth fell, and could not be swallowed up of the Caverns, it remained on high,
and afterward being pressed hard together by its own weight, and condensed by
the Cold, because of its distance from Heaven, became Mountains and Rocks; and
where in the fall great pieces of thick Earth were swallowed up, the Waters
were by this discovered, from whence came Seas and Lakes, Rivers and Fountains,
great and little Isles, and Rocks scattered up and down the wide Sea. The Gold,
the Silver, and other Metals, which in the beginning had been most fair and
precious Trees, were covered in the Ruins. But there are some Remains of the
Seeds shak'd off at that time, which now are dug with so great Labor, being
neither so pure, nor of great Virtue, as formerly: And the Diamonds,
Carbuncles, Rubies, Emeralds and Chrysoliths, Saphires, Topazes, and other
Jewels, which be now found, are the thickning of the Rocks of the first Age;
and they are, in memory of these first times, to this day had in great Esteem,
admired and reverenced as the most ancient things. The Porphyres, the
Alabasters, Serpentines, and other fair Marbles of different Colors, are no
other than some Particles of the Virgin Earth, which was nearest to Heaven, and
in the Fall were thickened, and united, either by their own Weight, or some
other, or by Cold: From whence it is, that by the Searchers after Metals and
Marble, there have been found many both Sea and Land Animals, turned into Stone
and Volatils; yea, many times Men's Bodies that have been all taken hence,
enclosed in their first shape in most solid Stone, without any opening. And
from hence it is, that there are seen so many thousands of Fishes, Oysters, and
Cockles congealed, and Figure of diverse Animals; which some through ignorance
of things pa^ admired so much. These terrible things did at that time hap^pen
on the Earth; but the Animals and Men that were foun^ Dwellers in the Caves,
remain'^ all buried by the Earth falling o^ them; and an infinite numbe^ of
those who dwelt in the oute^ parts, by the terrible shaking be^ neath, and the
frightful Nois^ above, died of Fear; and amon^ the others, all the Assyrians.
I^ the other Countries few remained alive, and these also conti^nued, either by
the Fall, or thro^ Fear, many Days in a Transe^ and without Pulse. But afte^
they were recovered, they con^tinued astonished and full of great Fear, that
shortened their ow^ Life, which at the first was ve^ry long, and their Childrens
There was also among Men a Stupidity, which made them ignorant of all things,
and was the Effect of the first Astonishment after the Fall of their first
Fathers; and yet if they seemed to know any thing, they saw it through a thick
Cloud. Moreover, since the Fall, if a Man had the Truth revealed to him by
chance, Fear made him keep it secret; for in all remained a Memory, the
Knowledge of Truth being the occasion of their Parents Pride, and that of their
Ruin. For if any had the Boldness to discover it, he darkened it a thousand
ways, for fear of being reproved, and severely punished by another. For this
Reason the Sciences have been taught in dark Sayings, in Fables, in Figures and
Numbers, in Sacred Rites, and in a thousand other hidden ways. And from thence
it is belike, that Princes and others, who would be powerful in the Earth, have
chosen to follow the Opinion of the common People, and have persecuted with all
Rigor those that would tell the Truth. Fear therefore having possessed all
Men, by which they were dispersed, such as remained began to join themselves
together, and to beget Children, to help them and defend them; they encompast
themselves with Fences and Ditches, in which time they reverenced and performed
Obedience to the Aged. After this as the number of their Posterity increased,
and the Ties of Affinity decreased, they divided their Goods that were hitherto
common, and so parted Friendship. After which all things went into Confusion,
every one robbing, cheating, and killing another, and inventing new Tricks to
defraud his Neighbor: From this, as Boldness grew in those that were of
fiercer Spirits, and more ingenious to hurt, others became more fearful; which
Fear sharpened their Wit, so that consulting together, they found out the Name
of Peace and Justice. Afterward they contrived a long Chain of Words, with
which tying Justice and Peace by the Feet, by the Arms, by the Middle, and by
the Neck, in a thousand ways, they thought to keep her, that she should not
depart from their State, committing the keeping of these Chains, which they
called Laws, into the Hands of wary Men, and of their own Temper, which they
called Judges and Magistrates.

By these Artifices did the timorous secure their Lives and Goods from the
Injuries of the more powerful; till at length one that was bolder than the
rest, associating himself with the fearful and weak, became their Patron. These
also were thrust from their place. After this rate have the Societies of Men
been managed hitherto, and so they are at present, and will be for the time to
come. When the timorous joined themselves together, there arose Counselors;
and when they were called into Judgment, there arose Judges. This now, Noble
Sir, is the great History which the wise Abyssinian told the Count, worthy to
be had in great Veneration, and highly to be esteemed.

Helmont seems to have entertained an Opinion about the Face of the Earth
before the Deluge, not unlike to this; his Words are these: From whence I
conceive the Earth to have been in one piece, and undivided; for as much as
'twas be-water'd with one Fountain; and lastly, to have had no Isles, but the
whole Globe was Sea on one side, and Earth on the other. This was the Face of
the World before the Deluge, after which the Earth did open into several
shapes, and out of the Abyss of these Chinks did the Waters break out.

But let us leave the Opinion, no less disagreeing with the Interpretation of
the Sacred Scriptures, than with Nature it self. Scaliger speaking of the
Asserters of that Opinion, about the Generation of the Mountains, says, That
they piously dote, who have told, that the Earth was pulled out of, and saved
from the Deluge. Yet it is certain, that the Earth in that Universal Deluge did
not suffer an ordinary Change, so that the Fortune of things being changed,
Thetis and Vesta changed their places; from whence Ovid says, Quodque fuit
campus, vallem decursus aquarum
Fecit, and eluvie mons est deductus in aequor,
E'que paludosa siccis humus aret arenis.


In English thus:

Torrents have made a Valley of a Plain,
High Hills by Deluges born to the Main;
Steep standing Lakes sucked dry by thirsty Sand,
And on late thirsty Earth now Lakes do stand.


I believe it has not happened otherwise to this Country of ours: For I
conceive, that in the first beginning of the World, all this Plain, than which
Italy has not a greater, and which the Po does now divide into Gallia
Cispadana, and Transpadana, was once a Sea, and a part of the Adriatic. So in
the Universal Deluge, the Mountains being pared off, and barred, so that they
looked like Bodies extenuated by a Disease, as Plato wrote of the Atlantic
Island; we have reason to think that this Bay of the Sea was filled with Sand,
and so became a Valley; and afterward, in process of time, by continual
Descent of Waters from the Apennine, and the Alps, and other particular
Deluges, (such as was that which happened Anno 590. in Gallia Cisalpina, than
which it is thought there has not been a greater since the Days of Noah, as
Pa^^^vin^us says in his Fifth Book of the Antiquities of Verona) this Ground
did grow up by degrees, and by many Lays or Beds, to the height we do now see
it of. Both Ancient and Modern Writers judge the same of the most famous and
greatest Plains in the Earth, as in Egypt, etc. which Aristottle says formerly
was a part of the Sea; and Herodot calls it, the Gift of the Nile (seeing the
Etymology of Nile is derived from Limus, Slime) which he likewise says of the
Countries about Ilium, Teuthrania, and Ephesus, to wit, that they were sometime
a part of the Sea: Yea, the same Herodot has left it in Writing, that if the
Nile turned its Course into the Arabic Gulf, it would at length cover it all
with Slime. Lib. 4.
Polybius says, that the Lake Maeotis and the Euxine Sea are constantly filled
with plenty of Sand, which great Rivers do continually bring into it, and that
the time would be when they should be made even with the Continent; taking an
Argument from the Taste of the Water, viz. That as Maeotis is sweeter than the
Pontick, so the Pontick is sweeter than the Euxine. Modern Writers think no
less of the great and plain Countries, among whom is the most Learned Kircher,
who in his Mundus Subterraneus, says, from the Arabic Antiquities, and other
Observations, That the great Plain, which lies between the Arabic and Persian
Gulf, before the common Deluge, was covered with Sea-waters. And he also
thinks, That the Sandy Deserts of Tartary were formerly the place of Waters,
and all one with the Caspian Sea, and afterward in length of time to have been
raised to a greater height, and turned into great Fields. Neither need we to go
so far off for Examples. We understand by History, that Ravenna, as well as
Venice, was placed in the Sea; but seeing now it is 5 Miles from the Sea, no
body knows how much Land has accrew'd to it by the retiring of the Sea; a
Prodigy truly worthy of Wonder, that where Ships did sail before, now there are
Groves of Pine-trees. Upon the same account may we call the Land of Ferrara,
the Gift of Eridanus, by reason of the slimy Water which this Royal River did
by many Mouths discharge into the Adriatic for some Ages; by which it came to
pass, that a Colony of Fishes was by a true Metamorphosis changed into an
Habitation of Men; for which Ovid says, -- Vidi factas ex aequore terras,
Et procul a pelago conchae jacuere marinae.
I Have seen the Seas often turned to a Plain,
And Lands were tilled where was before the Main.


Though I dare not absolutely say, that all the Country which lies between the
Apennine and the Alps, was a Sea formerly; yet by what is observed in the
digging of the Wells, Oyster-shells, and other Sea Products being found in
their greatest Depth, it may be not without Ground conjectured, that the
Adriatic did at least come thus far, or that the Bays communicating with the
Sea, did stagnate here.

Yet it is without doubt from the Writings of the Ancients, that between the ^
Aemilian Way (in the middle of which is seated Modena) and the Po, there was a
Lake reaching from the Adriatic even to Placentia, which, from the
Neighborhood of the Po, they called Padusa, into which many Rivers descending
from the Apennine, discharged a great quantity of Waters. Virgil makes mention
of this Lake in these Verses: -- Piscosove amne padusae
Dant sonitum rauci per stagna loquacia cygni.
Or murmuring Swans that sound their fanning Wings
Padusa's Fishy Banks upon, or Ecchoing Springs.


But John Baptista Aleottus, in his most Learned Book against Caesar Mengolus
of Ravenna, shows, by strong Reasons and Authorities, that no River from
Splacentia to the Coast of the Adriatic Sea, did come into the Channel of the
Po, but that they all discharged themselves into this Padusa; for which he
brings the Authority of Strabo, who writes, That this Lake was a great
Hindrance to Hannibal, when he would have passed his Army into Etruria; which
Lake being not long after, by the Diligence of M. Scaurus the Surveyor, dried
up, was turned into most fruitful Fields, many Rivers being brought within
their own Banks to enter into the Po, as Tarus, Parma, Entia, Gabellus,
Scultenna, the Rheine, and other Rivers of no small Note. Upon this account we
may reasonably think, that the Po was not so famous of old, nor had the Name of
Royal, till by the Accession of so many Rivers he had enlarged his Power. And
therefore Herodot, a most ancient Writer, denied that there was any River
found, called Eridanus; which was no small matter of admiration to Pliny, that
when Herodot wrote his History at Thurium in Italy, he knew no River by the
Name of Eridanus. But seeing Herodot, as Pliny relates, made his History 310
Years after the founding of Rome, we may thence conjecture, That the Po did at
that time run with less Glory, and in a straiter Channel; or that the Historian
spoke of another River.

There is distinct enough mention made of this Lake in the forecited Johan. de
Argenta, and especially in Leander Albertus in his Description of Italy, who
measures the Length of this Lake from Lamon by Ravenna, even to Scultenna, and
tells all the Rivers which within this space descended from the Mountains into
this Lake, and there ended their Course; and that Hercules, the first Duke of
Ferrara, suffered the Bononians to bring the Rheine within his Banks, that so
he might enter into the Po; by which it came to pass, that many Valleys of
Ferrara, and also Bononia, were turned into most fruitful Lands. But when
afterward the Rheine had broke over his Banks in the time of Hercules the
Second, when the Fields were again turned into Water, and many Contentions
arose among the Bononians and Ferrarians; at length the same Prince granted,
that the Rheine might be again brought into the Po.

Therefore we must observe, that the Situation of this Country, in which
Modena is now placed, was very low, seeing this Country bordered upon Padusa,
into which so many Rivers did run; of the lowness of which Rushes, Coals,
Bones, Stocks of Trees, found in the Depths of 63 Feet, are most sure Proofs;
all which make it evident, that this Ground was sometime exposed to the Air,
and that it had no other Aspect than now the Valleys of Como have.

Therefore it is not without cause, that Cluverius, in his Description of Italy,
thinks a certain place o^ Pliny deserves amendment. For Pliny, when he had
described certain Islands floating in several places, like the Cyclades, as in
the Caecuban Lands, the Reatine, the Lake of Vadimon, writes, that the same is
observed in the Land of Modena. But Cluverius for Matiensis placed Mutinensis;
forasmuch as one may see such floating Islands made of Slime and Reeds in the
Valleys of Como. Yet it is out of all question, that the Situation of this Town,
together with the adjacent Lands, in the space of 1800 Years, has grown 14
Foot; for in this Depth Causways of Flint, and Shops of Artificers are found by
digging, which certainly then was the Plain of the Town, when the Colony of the
Romans was brought hither: Further, when I was writing this, there was found a
Piece of Adrian the Emperors Coin, of Corinthian Brass, in the Depth of 18
Feet.

History testifies, that Mantuae at that time was not far from the Marshes; for
Appianus Alexandrinus tells us, that Marcus Antonius and Pansa, in the Siege of
Mutina, did fight amongst the Fenns, and in Grounds overgrown with Reeds; and
afterward near Mutina, in a little Isle of the River Labinius, (when at that
time the Land of Modena was extended so far) the Triumviri met, and established
that horrible Banishment of their Countrymen; when yet in this our Age there
are no Vestigies either of Fenns or Islands, only most pleasant Fields are to
be seen. So that with the Prince of Poets we may cry out, Tantum aevi long
inqua valet mutare vetustas.
Such wondrous Changes great length of time does bring.


Yet this growing up of the Ground, which is observed by the great Depth of
these Wells, (I do not speak of the deeper parts, whether Humane Industry
cannot reach) was but slowly made, and by Slices, as it were, through length of
time, as the several Lays of Earth do witness, which are observed in all Wells
constantly in an equal Order and Distances when they are dug; so that this
growing up of the Ground so well distinguished, and so remarkable in the
digging of all Wells, ought to be thought rather the Product of so many Ages,
than the tumultuary and confused Work of the common Deluge.

This doubtless then was the Face of the Country on this and the other side of
the Po, which being formerly covered with Waters, and not habitable, now is
remarkable for its Largeness, and the Fertility of its Fields, and has in it
many Towns and Cities: For if we turn over old Authors, we shall find no
mention made of Towns or Cities below Brixillus and Cremona, near the Po, even
to the Adriatic; but as many as were, and yet are in the Region on this side
the Po, were built either near the Roots of the Apennine, or not far from them,
as Bononia, Modena, Regium, Parma, etc. But we may infer, both from what was
said before, and also from the little that this Sandy Bed, through which these
Subterraneous Waters do run, wants of being in the same Level with the Sea,
that the Sea did cover this Country in the beginning of the World. For if,
according to the Observation of Aleottus de Argenta, a most diligent
Hydrographer, whom we before cited, the Rheine, from the Foot of the Hills near
Bononia to the Po, into which it does now no more run, has a Declivity of 123
Feet, 7 Inches; and the Po from thence to the Sea has a Descent of 15 Foot 7
Inches; and therefore the whole Declivity of the Rheine, and perpendicular
Height to the Seashore, will be 139 Foot, omitting the smaller measures, the
Plain out of which these Fountains spring, and that Mutina stands on (which is
distant about 10 Mile from the Roots of the Mountains) will differ no more than
20 or 40 Foot from the Level of the Sea, as one may conjecture, seeing I have
not leisure to examine these matters exactly, nor is it any great matter: But
if we might dig further down, other Beds would doubtless appear, till we meet
at last with the Plain, which was formerly the bottom of the Sea. But it is
better to search into other things, and to get out of these profound Abysses,
if we can go no further.

CHAP. V.
What is the Nature and Condition of this hidden Spring.
AS in the Works of Art, it is not so safe from the Similitude of Effects which
fall under our Eye, nor without fear of a Mistake, to infer the same Artifice
of Mechanical Parts; as may be seen by the Example of two Watches, which though
they have the same outward Form, and exactly perform the same Operations as to
time, yet may have the inward Structure quite different; so it is less safe to
make the same Judgments of the curious Works of Nature, and to determine what
Instruments it uses, and what is its ways of working: Wherefore it is much, as
Aristotle says, if things obscure and hid to our Senses be explained by
Possibilities. Seeing I am come so far, that I must at length tell what I think
of the Nature of this admirable Spring, I believe I have done the part of a
good Guesser, if by sounding this Ford, I can tell things probable and
agreeable to the Laws of Nature, instead of things certain.

We may therefore conjecture, that the Sea in this our Country had secret
Commerce with the Appennine, to which it was adjacent in the beginning of the
World, and that it still has; and that it laid a Foundation by several
subterraneous Passages in its Bowels for several Storehouses of Waters, of
which this may be believed to be one, from whence these Fountains derive their
Original, and that the Water is expanded over all this Vein of Sand, in which
such a Spring is discovered: But when the Stop is taken away, and the
Floodgates are opened, it rises on high as in Aqueducts. And this Thought of
mine, as it does not contradict Nature, so it shuns those Difficulties, which
the forementioned Opinion of an Immense Space, through which a subterraneous
River flows, does incur. That a great abundance of Waters may secretly flow a
long way, through Sand, is neither against Reason nor Experience, seeing it is
the Property of Sand easily to drink up Water, and therefore has the Name of
Sinking Sand. Pliny and Solinus say, Lib. 5. Hist. Not. c. 9. c. 35.
that the Nile, the greatest of Rivers, being swallowed up in the Sands, runs
hid a great way, though nothing of that is known in our Times. Lib. 3 Quaest.
Not. c. 28.
Seneca also testifies, that some Rivers fall into Caves, some are by degrees
consumed, and never appear again. The most Learned Kircher says, that in
Westphalia, near the Village Altembechem, there is a certain sandy Plain, in
which every Day the Water breaks out with great Violence, so as to overflow the
whole Country, and afterward sinking into the Sand, disappears, the Surface
of the Sand remaining dry. The River Guadiana in Spain, as some relate who have
observed it, when it has come to a certain Plain, is gradually swallowed up,
and without noise of the Earth; which is a most certain Proof, that this River
does not fall into a Gulf, but runs away by these Beds of Sand. In like manner
I do believe, that the Water descends by secret Passages from a Cistern in the
Roots of the adjacent Mountains, that communicates with the Sea, till it come
into this deep sandy Plain, mixed with much Gravel; so that there is no need to
conceive any Plain of great width and depth, by which these subterraneous
waters may constantly run down, but a few intersperst spaces may suffice,
because of the Mixture of Sand and Gravel.

Helmont says, that Sand is Original Earth, and the Seat of the Waters, but
that the rest of the Earth is the Fruit of this Original Earth, and that not
without Reason, seeing the reducing of this Sand into Water is more difficult
than of any other Body. This same Author makes this Sand the last Bounds of
digging, beyond which to proceed were lost Labor, because of the continual
Conflux of Sand and Water. But he thinks that this Sand is extended from the
Shell of the Earth to the Center, and abundance of Water lodges in it; so that
the Water which is kept in it is a thousand times bigger than what is in the
whole Ocean. All Seas, Rivers and Fountains, even in the top of the Mountains,
owe their Original to this invisible Ocean, so that the Water does every where
follow the vital Sand. Telesus seems to have been of the same Judgment, who
said, the bottom of the Sea was a Fountain of that Interior Ocean, which
agrees with that Opinion of Plato concerning the Gulf, from whose Bosom all
Waters go out, and into which they all fall back again.

Whatever be of Truth in this Opinion, of an Invisible Ocean lurking in the
Sand, which Helmont conceived ingeniously, and upon probable enough Arguments;
yet I think none will deny, but Water may run a long way through Beds of Sand;
and when some Passage is open, may be raised again, especially if it be urged
by Water descending from a higher Ground. And I think that it is probable the
matter is so in our Fountains, to wit, the Water flows out of some Cistern
placed in the neighboring Mountains, by subterraneous Passages, where the
Earth is firm and hard; but when it has come into the Plain, it expatiates far
over the Sand, and in the way is lifted up to this height when a Hole is made
with an Auger, according to the Laws of Hydrostaticks.

And I think this is a more expeditious and easy way of explicating the Nature
of this never-enough-admired Spring, than to imagine a great Vault, (of which
there are no Marks) and a Town with a whole Country hanging over it.

To give some Specimen how ^his flowing of the Water may be according to my
Explication: Suppose, as in Fig. 2. that there is a Cistern in the Bowels of
the Apennine, drawing Water from the Sea, and that the Water is carried by
subterraneous Pipes from the same Cistern, and spread over this deep and sandy
Plain A B C, mixed with much Gravel; which sandy Plain being brought into much
lesser Bounds, the Water is forced to run down by a more narrow space than it
had in the beginning, and to follow its Course till it come into the Sea, or
some great Gulf. Therefore Wells EFGH being dug, without any Choice in all
the Tract lying upon this Spring, and a Hole being made by the Auger, the Water
of necessity must be lifted up on high, being forced by another, which
descending from a higher Ground, presses on that which goes before, and drives
it up. By this means these Waters receive a plentiful Supply from their Father
Apennine, as does the Well of Waters which flows from Lebanon, of which there
is mention in the Sacred History.

But it is, Cant. 4.
by far, more probable, that the Water is sent from the Sea into such a
Cistern, than from Showers, or melted Snows, seeing Rain and Snow-waters run
away for the most part by Rivers above Ground; neither can they enter into the
ground so deep; as Seneca also testifies, L. 3. Quae. Not. c. 7.
That there is no Rain so great, which wets the ground above Ten Foot: For as
he says, when the Earth is glutted, if any more fall, it shuts it out. And
truly, how could it come to pass, that they should flow at the same rate as
well in moist as in dry Seasons, if the Rainwater came hither, and they did
not rather get their Waters from the Sea, which being strained through the
Sand, and deprived of all Salt, they return to the Sea again with Interest.
Truly, I could never yet understand, how that secret Cistern, from which
Waters are sent to these Fountains, should not be unconstant, if they received
Moisture for a time from the Rains and Snows; and sometimes increase, sometimes
decrease; and therefore, according to the Increase and Decrease of the
Pressure, some Alteration should appear in these Fountains.

But the Beds of Clay, which divide the impure from the most pure Waters, as
most strong Fences, do hinder the Rain Waters from being mixed with these
subterraneous Waters. And Plato thought, De Leg. Dial. 8.
that a clayie Ground was the last Bounds of digging in the search of
VVell-waters, obliging every one to dig to the Chalk; and if there was no
Water found in that Depth, he suffered as much to be taken from the Neighbors
as they had need of, to which Pliny subscribes, saying, That when Potters Clay
appears, there is no more hopes of getting Water, nor need Men dig longer;
which yet agrees not with what is observed here.

As I have deduced the Original of this Water from the Sea, so I do not deny,
that many Fountains owe their Originals to Rains and melted Snow; yet with this
difference, that the Fountains which have their Spring from the Sea by hidden
Passages continue perpetual, but those which rise from Showers and temporary
Springs at some time of the year, are diminished, and quite dry up; as happens
in great Droughts; such as Baccius mentions to have been Anno 1556. in which
not only all the Fountains, but also great Rivers dried up. The Country on
this and the other side of the Po did experience such a Season almost for two
Years together, viz. in 1687. and 88 in which time the Lands were unpleasant
because of the Drought, and Wells were dug in other places, but to no
purpose; yet little alteration was to be observed in these our Fountains, nor
yet in the moistest Season of all; which made the Year 1690. fatal for Dearness
of Provision, and Epidemick Diseases; so that these our Fountains seem to be of
the same nature with that Fountain in Tyanus, consecrated to Jupiter, of which
Philostratus says, That it suffered neither Increase nor Decrease; and
therefore by the Natives is called Unquenchable. Or like the Well of
Aesculapius, which as Aelius Aristides, a most famous Orator, relates, was a
Well of Pergamus a City of Asia, of such a nature, that it was always full to
the brim; and how much soever was drawn from it, it never decreased.

Neither have we Reason only to think, that many Fountains take their Original
from the Sea, but also many Lakes communicate with it. The Lake of the
Vulsinians, whose Depth is not yet found out, for discovering of which I have
seen between Narthana and Bisentina Ropes let down for some Hundreds of
Fathoms, but in vain. This Lake, I say, both Summer and VVinter, discharges it
self by the River Martha perpetnally into the Tyrrhenian Sea, neither does it
receive any Rivers, and the Mountains which encompass it are never white with
Snow. Beside, in the same Lake, when the Air was very calm, and the surface of
the Water was smooth, I observed often intestine Motions like Currents in the
Ocean, which was known by the Fishermens Nets, which being sunk under Water,
were snatched violently from their hands; an evident Proof of some hidden
Commerce with the Sea. Julius Obsequens, in his Book of Prodigies, relates,
That the Lake Albinus, in the Consulate of Valerius and M. Valerius, was
suddenly raised up, when no Rain fell from Heaven, neither could there be known
any Cause of so sudden a swelling. I cannot be ignorant that the Original of
Fountains and Rivers from the Sea is called in question. Gaspar Bartholinus,
who follows the glorious Footsteps of his Ancestors, Printed a Treatise at
Hafnia, wherein he endeavors to prove that Opinion to be absurd, which deduces
the Original of Fountains and Rivers from the Sea; so that all Fountains, as
well temporary as perpetual, according to him, owe their Original to Rain.
Suppose, as he ingeniously endeavors to prove, that for maintaining the
Perpetuity of the Fountains in a dry Season, a Collection of the Water of the
precedent Rains in some Receptacle within the Cavity of the Mountains is
sufficient. But truly, I cannot see how in some Fountains their Regularity and
equal flowing can hold out for so long a time, as is observed in ours for so
many Ages; seeing in whatever Season, either dry or moist, there appears no
sign of Increase or Decrease.

But Scaliger answers to those things which use to be objected against the
Opinion of the Original of the Fountains and Rivers from the Sea, in opposition
to Cardan, saying, There is no reason why the Seawater, before it come to the
Mountains, does not break out every where, in these words: But, O Cardan, he
whom in the 2d of Genesis, the Divine Man says to have finished all things, was
so good an Architect, so wise a Water-Bailif, that Julius Frontinus is nothing
to him: He therefore did so skilfully join the Pipes of his Aqueducts, and fit
them for bearing the Burden, as to free you from this fear. But truly, this
Difficulty which is objected about the sufficient strength of the subterraneous
Passages, gives no less trouble (excepting the greater distance) to the
Asserters of the other Opinion, who attribute the Original of Fountains and
Rivers to Rains.

But how Water is furnished to the Fountains from the Sea, which being heavy of
its own nature, must flow back into the Sea from whence it came, making as it
were a Circle, is not agreed upon among those, who admit the Original of
Fountains to be from the Sea, as may be seen in Gaspar Schottus, who rehearses
many Opinions of the Ancients and Moderns, and examines them. So true is it
what Aristotle says, That 'twas an old Doubt, why seeing so great a quantity of
Water runs to the Sea, it does not thereupon become bigger. Some think that the
Seawater ascends above its own Original by the attractive force of the Earth,
some by shaking and the Sea-tide, some by force of the enclosed Spirit, which
drives up the Water to the top of the highest Mountains; others do attribute it
to the Pressure of the Air, which by perpetually breaking down the Surface,
lifts the Water up on high; some recur to the Divine Providence: There are
others who say, That the Seawater flows with a natural Motion, whether from
the bottom of the Sea, or the sides, to the Springs of Fountains placed in the
most high Mountains, because the Sea is higher than the Earth, as the same
Schottus thinks. But I like better the Opinion of Des Carts, of which was also
our Countreyman Falloppius, who thinks that the Seawater, by reason of the
subterraneous Heat, is raised in form of a Vapor to the highest Mountains; and
there, by reason of the ambient Rocks condensed into Water, as is usual in
Chemical Distillations, so that the Mountains are like Heads of the Alembicks,
by the Cold of which the exalted Vapors are condensed into Water, which
afterward breaks out into Springs. Julius Caesar Recupitus tells, in his
History of the burning of Vesuvius, that at the same time it did send forth two
Streams, one of Fire toward the shore, another of Water on the other side that
looks to the Plain of Nola, the Fire not only keeping time with the Waters, but
also producing them: For it is to be thought that by force of the violent Heat
diffused over the Mountains, so great a quantity of Waters was exhaled from
some Cistern that held the Seawater, that it was sufficient for making a
Torrent.

Perhaps it might be as convenientby deduced from the Rarefaction of the Air
enclosed within the Bowels of the Mountains, pressing down the Surface of the
Water, and so forcing it out another way.

Neither do the Beds of Stone and Chalk, which Bartholine objects, withstand
the lifting of the Vapors upward: For supposing the Mountains are, as all
confess them to be, cavernous within, such Beds as these might afford this use,
to stop the Vapors lifted upward by force of the Heat, and let them fall down
by various Chinks as Veins, to which these Beds, especially such as are
gravelly and stony, are passable; from whence the Fountains arise, which are
called Mouths of the Veins. Therefore it is a more ready way, and more agreeable
to the Laws of Nature, to draw the Original of Fountains, which are perpetual,
and subject to no Alteration from the Sea, by the continual Ascent of Vapors in
the great Receptacles of Nature. And it is reasonable to think it so in our
Case, both from the old state of the Country on this side the Po, and also the
perpetual Fires that the Neighboring Mountains maintain, which at their wide
Mouths sometimes throw up much Fire and Ashes, with Stones, with so great a
Noise and Crashing, that it is heard sometimes 12 Miles off; which truly is not
new, seeing Pliny mentions this, who writes, That in the Land of Modena the
Fire comes out on set Days; and tells it as a Prodigy, that two Mountains met
together, Smoke and Fire coming out; and that in the Day time a great multitude
of Roman Horsemen and Travelers were looking on. But that is especially seen
in Mount Gibbius, where there are many Fountains, from which Petroleum flows.

An Account of some very remarkable ones I had from my Brother who saw them,
and was confirmed to me by Seignior Spoletti, Physician to the late Ambassadors
from Venice, and Professor of Physic at Padoua, when he was at my Chamber.
They be seen on a side of one of the Apennine Mountains, half way betwixt
Bologna and Florence, near a place called Petra Mala, about Five Miles from
Fierenzola; it is in a spot of Ground of three or four Yards Diameter, which
incessantly sends up a Flame rising very high, with no Noise, Smoke, or Smell,
but gives a very great Heat, and has been observed to be thus in all times,
except of great Rains which put it out for a while; but when that is over, it
burns with greater violence than before; the Sand about it when turned up sends
forth a Flame, but within 3 or 4 Yards round about it there are Corn Fields.
The People that live near to it, believe that there is a deep Hole there; but
he found it to be firm Ground. There are 3 or 4 more of those near, but they do
not burn so vehement by as this.

When I was thinking on a more exact History of these Fountains of Petroleum,
than is in Writers. I understood by Letters from Malliabecchius, (to whom, as
Prince of the Learned) whatever happens new in Learning is presently brought)
that the most Learned D. Olinger, the Kings Professor at Copenhagen, had lately
Published a Book, which he found among some Manuscripts, under the Name of
Franciscus Areostus, of the Oil of Mount Zibinius, or the Petroleum of Modena,
which Book that most Renowned Author Dedicated to the same Malliabecehius, with
a Preface to the Reader: A great Reproach of our floth, who stay till some rise
from the remotest Countries to illustrate our Matters by our own Writings.

Though I derive the Original of our Fountains from the Sea first, then from
some Cistern of Water placed in our Mountains, into which the Vapors, sent up
by the enclosed Heat, are returned in form of Waters. I would not thence
infer, that this Cistern is placed in the tops of the Apennine Mountains, but I
believe rather that it is placed in the Foot of the Mountain, than in the top;
for though, as I showed before, it is not always, necessary, that the Waters,
though enclosed within Pipes, should reach to the height of their Cistern,
which happens as often as their Passage being stratinted, they have not free
Liberty to flow out, as in Fig. 1. But if we should place this Cistern in the
tops of the Apennine Mountains, probably the Waters might rise higher in them,
when yet they do not rise to the surface of the Ground. But I cannot certainly
conjecture in what part, whether near the foot of the Mountain, or in their
inner parts, this Cistern of Waters is placed by the Divine Architect. I have
spared no Labor nor Experiences to find out the Head of this Spring, and
therefore I diligently viewed not only the Plain toward the Mountains, but the
Mountains themselves, and could find no Marks of it. I observed indeed some
small Lakes, but such as dry up in the Summer, and so become Pasture for
Cattle; of the number of which is the Lake Paulinus, 25 Miles distant from
this. I thought best therefore to fetch the Original of these Waters from
another source, viz. From some secret Cistern of water placed in the inner
parts of the Apennine Mountains. And it is certain, that the inner parts of the
Mountains are cavernous, and that there are in them Cisterns of water, from
whence Fountains and Rivers draw their Original. Lucan feigned to himself a
great Cistern of water in the heart of the Apennine, from which all the Rivers
of Italy did flow, that run into both the Seas. I am willing to bring in here
his Verses, seeing to reason in so abstruse matters with the Philosophers, or
to conjecture with the Poets, is the same thing. Fontibus his vastis immensos
concipit amnes,
Fluminaque in gemini spargit divortia ponti.
In laevum cecidere latus veloxque Metaurus,
Crustuminumque rapax, and junctus Sapis Isauro,
Quoque magis nullum tellus se solvit in amnem,
Erldanus fract as deducit in aequora silvas;
Dexterior a petens montis declivia Tybrim
Vnda facit --
Hence from vast Fountains do great Rivers flow,
And into double Seas divorce do slide
In several Channels, down on the left side
Metaurus swift and strong Crustumium flow.
Isapis joined to Isaurus, Sonna too, And Aufidus the Adriatic beats.
Eridanus, than which no River gets More Ground,
Whole Forests rowls into the Sea o'return'd.


But seeing it is known enough by what we have related in the History of these
Fountains, that this Spring is not so old as the world, seeing the last Plain
in which the Auger was fastened was formerly in the open Air, as the Trees in it
make evident. If in the beginning of the World these Waters had flown as they
do now, the force of the water would easily have thrown off that weight, as it
happens sometime when the boring is delayed. Then one will say, When, and how
had this admirable Source its Original? To this I may answer, That there are no
Monuments of this, nor can it be absolutely known when these waters began to
flow; yet it is certain, that this Accumulation of the Ground has not happened
but after great Land-Floods, they leaving a great deal of Mud here; otherwise,
as I was saying, the force of the water would have thrown off the weight.
Therefore I am inclined to believe, that after the Plain was thus raised, some
new ways were opened by a great Earthquake, so that the waters might flow from
the Cistern placed in the adjacent Mountains, which receives them by a continal
evaporation from the Sea, and so might flow from that sandy Ground, and so to
have kept their Course for many Ages, before the wit of Man reached hither, and
opened the Veins of the Earth with the Auger as with a Lance. And it is known
by many Observations, that some Fountains die by Earthquakes, and some rise; as
Ovid says, Lib. 15. Met. Hic fontes natura novos emisit, and illic
Clausit, and antiquis tam multa tremoribus orbis
Flumina prosiliunt, aut excaecata residunt.


In English thus:

Here Nature, in her Changes manifold,
Sends forth new Fountains, there shuts up the old;
Streams, with impetuous Earthquakes, heretofore
Have broken forth, and sunk, or run no more


CHAP. VI.
The Progress and End of these Waters is enquired into, and a Reason is given
of those things which are observed in the digging of the Wells.
IT IS worth the Enquiry, What is the Progress of these our waters that flow
under ground, and whether they go? But here I stick, and there is no place but
for Conjecture. I have often inquired of the Undertakers, Whether they felt the
Auger to be carried by Violence to any side; but I could understand nothing
certain of them. But seeing the length of this Source is far greater than its
breadth, I think it more agreeable to truth, that these waters flow from East
to West, according to the lenghth of the Aemilian way, which Tract of Ground
is six Mile long, and but four broad, as far as I have had occasion to observe;
but when it has passed the way, we may judge that either it is sunk into these
Wells of the Earth, or by secret turnings and windings falls into the Sea,
according to the Laws by which the water circulates in the Body of the Earth,
which we read described by Ecclesiastes in these words, All Rivers enter into
the Sea, yet it does not overflow; the Rivers return to the place from whence
they came, thither they return again. And the Heathen Poets, as Lucretius, in
these Verses, Lib. 1. Debet ut in mare de terris venit humor aquai.
In terr as itidem manare ex aequore salso.
As Rivers run from Earth, and fill the Main,
So some through secret Pores retur^ again.
But also is proved by the most grave and modern VVriters, with many Reasons,
as Arias Montanus, Varenius, Vossius, Becher, and many others, whom the most
famous Lanzon, Physician of Ferrara, cites in his Animadversions, full of
variety. It may be doubted, and that not without reason, whether the course of
these waters must be for ever. And truly, seeing from the times of the Roman
Commonwealth, even to this Age, there has been so great an accumulation of the
Earth, as well in the City as in the adjacent Lands, and in the Channels of
Rivers, there is no place left of doubting, but the course of these Fountains
will at length cease, the Causes continuing the same, to wit, while the next
Rivers take away with them the spoil of the Mountains, and therewith cover the
Plains that lie under. Therefore, as these Fountains for a far better use did
rise many Feet above the Surface of the Earth, but now rarely reaches its
Surface; so we must think, that the time will come in which these waters must
stand in their Wells, having no descent by which to run down: And these
Changes, which succeed in great length of time, and without a VVitness, if we
consider the present state of things, hardly deserve Credit; yet the thing it
self speaks that they have truly happened, and will still follow: But because
(to use Aristotile's words) the things are done in great length of time in
respect of our Life, they are hid from us, and the ruin of all Nations does
happen before the change of these things, is told from the beginning to the end.

But this is the common Fate of Cities that are placed in the Plains, that
after many Ages they are almost half buried; or, (as the Egyptian Priest in
Plato says of the Cities of Greece) are carried by the force of the Rivers into
the Sea; though on the other hand, Towns which are placed on the tops of the
mountains, their Foundations being pared, do tell the Injuries of Time: A sure
Proof, that there is nothing constant and firm in this world, but that we must
look for the City that is on high, and is to continue for ever.

But why these Fountains, seeing they are supposed to take their Original from
the Sea, have no ebbing or flowing, as some Fountains, of which Writers take
notice; as is that which Pliny the Younger mentions in the Land of Como, which
ebbs and flows three times in a Day. I think this to happen, because water is
furnished to these Fountains from the Sea, by the Ascent of Vapors; which
evaporation, though it be not always equal, because of the subterraneous Fires
sometimes weaker, sometimes stronger, yet it is enough if it be such as is
sufficient to keep the Cistern full always to the same height, on which depends
the Equality of Flux of these our Fountains for so many Ages, whatever come of
the water that sometimes overflows, and is dispersed another way. But why some
Fountains at certain times flow, and at other times ebb, many Causes are
brought, of which (I mean those which draw their Source from the Sea) the Cause
is the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, by force of which it comes to pass, that
as the Sea ebbs and flows, these Fountains are sometimes observed full, and
sometimes empty.

We said, that in the Wintertime a great Heat was perceived in these Fountains,
and in the Summer time a great Cold; as appears also by the The^ mometer let
down to several Depths, and the Table before marked shows: Which Observations
seem not a little to favor the Defenders of an Antiperistasis; and so much the
rather, that these Observations were not made in a Mountanous, but in a
Champion Country. For I do not think it safe to try it in Mines, and the
Caverns of the Mountains* because of the Metallic Exhalations, and diverse
Salts and kinds of Marcasites, with which they are pregnant; for when such
Substances are sprinkled with Water, they grow hot like Quick lime, and raise
diverse Exhalations, which the Mineral Waters do testify that break out hot; to
which you may add, there are many Store houses of Fire, which may not a little
alter the subterraneous Region, which happens not in great Plains, as is the
Country on this and the other side of the Po.

Indeed, the most Learned Mr. Boil has gathered many things of the Temper of
the Air under Ground; all which yet he says he had from such as made
Observations on many Mines; where he also relates, that in the same places, and
at the same times of the Year, there is found a different temper of the
subterraneous Regions, because of the different Nature of Salts. And he says,
That from some Mines are felt hot Effluvia in the Summertime. And it is
observed, that not only out of the Caverns of the Mountains, hot Exhalations
breath in the Summertime, but also frequently a most cold Air. In Etruria, near
the Lake of the Vulsinenses, near the Town Martha, is a little Cave at the foot
of a most high Mountain, which is not above 6 or 8 Feet deep; but in the side
of the Cave at a little Chink the Wind blows so cold that it may be compared to
the Coldness of the North Winds. The Fathers of the Order of the Mimims of St.
Francis de Paula, who have a Church with a Monastery near it, use this Cave as
a Vault for their Wine; and in the Summertime draw their Wine from thence as
cold, as if it had been in Snow; yea, if they keep their Summer Fruits there
sometime, they draw them out sprinkled with a cold Dew, as I have observed,
during my stay with them, in the Dog days.

But in the great Plains where all the Earth is solid, and does not keep so
many kinds of Salts or Fires enclosed, if we might go down deeper by digging, a
greater Certitude might be had of this subterraneous Temperature. But in these
Wells of ours I perceived this Reciprocation of Heat and Cold sensible enough,
as often as I descended into them at different times; but that there might
happen no Deception by the Senses being preposses'd with Heat or Cold, I
observed it manifestly by a Thermometer exactly sealed. But whatever is the
nature of Cold or Heat, (for it is not proper in this place to enquire whether
they are bare Qualities or Corpuscles causing such a Sensation in us.)
Antiperastis, as I think, ought not to be banished out of the Schools; for it
may be explained right enough both ways. Whether therefore, according to the
Diversity of Climates and Countries, there be a different Temper of the Air
under Ground, yet it is certain that the Thermometer being let down, does speak
with distinct Notes, that there is at least in the first Region of the Earth,
(whatever be of the deeper and Central parts of the Earth) this Reciprocation
of Heat and Cold, according to the different Changes of the Year; and always in
a quality opposite to that which the external Air, in which we live, has: So
that here may be used that Sentence of the Noble Hippocrates, Lux orco tenebrae
Iovi; Lux Iovi tenebrae orco.

But before we come out of these Wells, it will be fit to give the Reasons of
some Phenomenon that are observed in the digging of them. It was said before,
that there is a great Rest in the Air in the VVinter-time, so that the Candles
continue burning; there is no smoaky Exhalation, and they easily draw their
Breath; but in the Summertime there is raised a thick Cloud, the Lights are
put out, and the Diggers are almost killed. But from whence this? When rather
in the Wintertime, because of the Heat, more intense at that time, and equal
to the Summers Heat, it might seem consonant to Reason, that in a moist place a
smoaky Exhalation should be raised, which should trouble the Air, and put out
the Lights; but in the Summer, by reason of the Cold which lodges in these
Wells, not much unlike the Cold in the VVinter, it would seem reasonable that
the Air should be more pure, nor so entangled with gross Vapors, as to be
unfit for Respiration! Whether it is that the Heat, which in the VVinter-time
is in these Wells by reason of an Antiperistasis, being greater, has force to
dissipate these Vapors; but in the Summertime, by reason of the Cold, they
cannot be dissolved! Or rather, that the Exhalations in the Winter, that are
raised by the Heat in these Wells, are lighter than the external and thicker
Air, and so do ascend more easily, but in the Summer are heavier than the
external Air; and therefore stagnating there, cause a difficulty of breathing,
and put out the Lights when kindled. But here I cannot but wonder, why in the
Mines, though of great depth, as are those in Hungary, the Miners continue any
time of the Year with their Candles lighted, and that in any season; nor do
they feel so great an Inconvenience in breathing: But in our Wells that are in
the open Air, and communicate with the open Air, not by turnings, but in a
straight Line, the Workmen in the Summertime are almost suffocated, and their
Lights put out; so that in the Dog Days there is no hiring of them to work.
Perhaps this falls out, because the Mines in the Mountains and dry places have
not so gross an Air, but such as is sufficient for Respiration; but these being
dug in a Champion Country, and moist Ground, send forth Streams more
plentifully; so the Air being filled with them is unfit for Respiration. I deny
not but in the Mines the Miners are sometimes troubled with shortness of
Breath, partly by reason of their own Breaths, and partly because of the
Metallic Exhalations; yea, are sometimes killed; so that to prevent the Danger
of being stifled, they use Air-Pumps, for taking up the fowl Air, and letting
in fresh; a Description of which you may see in Agricola. Lib. 7. De re
Metallica.
Beside, they dig a Pit some distance from the Mine, tending downwards, from
which a Mine is extended to the place where the Diggers work, which serves for
a Wind Pipe; and by bringing in fresh Air, and driving the old to the Mouth of
the Pit, does much refresh the Workmen, and frees them from the danger of
being stifled; but that is only done in the deeper Mines, as Agricola and Mr.
Boil relate. The Lights therefore are put out in the Summertime in these
Wells, and the Diggers are seized with a great Difficulty of breathing,
because the Air in it is filled with gross Vapors; which thick and ponderous
Vapors cannot ascend in the hotter and lighter Air, but are to lodge there by
reason of their weight. But the Vital Light requires of necessity a thinness,
and empty spaces in the Air, in which it may lay down its Fulginous Effluvia,
and needs fresh Air for its Food, otherwise it quickly dies.

It was observed before, in rehearsing the curious things that occur in the
digging of these Wells, that there are three Beds of Clay two of 11 Foot,
another below it of less thickness, with marshy Beds between them of two Feet
thick. I have often times studied to find out the Generation of these-Beds,
examining with my self how they are distinguished in this Order of time through
the whole Tract. I know there have been amongst our Countrymen some who think,
that these Beds of Clay are the Product of the Universal Deluge. But this
Author, whose Name I now pass in silence, lest I should seem to contend with
the Ghosts, (for he died this year) though he was born in this Country, yet
having lived always abroad, was surely never present at the digging of those
Wells, but has had from others all that he says of them: For if he had seen
the Structure of these Fountains, he would never have written, that the Clay in
these Wells was 24 Feet deep, and the marshy Ground as thick: For there are
three Beds of Clay, two of 11 Foot apiece, and one less, with their Beds of
marshy Ground between of two Foot a piece. Therefore this Conjecture for the
Truth of the Universal Deluge, taken from the thickness of the Clay, is of no
weight.

I am persuaded therefore, that after the Universal Deluge, whose Vestigies are
perhaps deeper, these Beds of Clay were produced by three particular Floods,
yet great and most ancient; so that from one Flood to another much time
interceded, in which the stagnation of the Water, and the Ground putrefying
together with the leaves and roots of Reeds, gave Original to these intermedial
marshy Beds.

I can easily believe, that this Bulk of Clay was made of the Earth drawn down
from the Mountains, by the hasty Descent of the Waters into these Valleys;
seeing for gathering of Clay for the Potters, it is usual with us to convey the
Water into Pits made by art, out of the Rivers Scultenna and Gabellus, by
which means the Water being exhaled by the Heat of the Summer, there settles
much Clay in them, which the Potters afterward use for making their Vessels.
And Pliny testifies, That the Potters Art excelled in this City of old, because
of the Excellency of the Clay, and its toughness, saying, That Modena was
famous in Italy for Potters Work; when at that time, as he says, Luxury had
come to that height, that Potters Work cost more than Porcelline.

And we have reason to think, that this diversity of Beds, which is seen in
great Plains, has been made by several inundations and accumulations of the
Ground: But from whence that diversity of Beds comes, which is also found in
the Mountains, is not so easy to determine. Agricola says, there were sixteen
Beds of different Colors in the Mines of the Mountain Melibochus, and of
different heights; but if one could dig deeper, doubtless a great many others
would appear. If we would stick to the Opinion of our Faloppius, 'twill not be
a hard matter to understand the Generation of these Beds, and their Diversity
in the Mountains ^ for he thinks, that the Mountains were made by a dry
Exhalation shut up in the Bowels of the Earth, which he gathers from their
Pyramidical Figure; yea, he thinks they are nourished by such an Exhalation,
and grow by peacemeal; from whence it comes to pass, that, as in Sublimation of
Antimony, Flowers of different sorts are gathered according to the diversity of
the Pots, so he thinks the same to happen in the Caverns of the Mountains,
according to the different Generation of Metals and Fossils. But when in the
Creation, Mountains were built by the great Artificer, it is fit to own they
were made in their whole Perfection (as being the first Former of all things)
and with so many Beds for various uses.

Bartholine, in the Discourse before cited, shows ingeniously the use which
these Beds give, especially those of Clay, for the generation of Fountains,
whether they be made of Rains, as the temporary ones; or of Seawater, as the
perpetual or regular ones: For these Beds are of special use for the Collection
of Waters into one Receptacle, and likewise for their running a long way,
otherwise they should be lost; neither would there be any Reason, why they
should break forth in one place more than another; which use, without doubt,
these Beds of Clay perform in these Fountains; for while these Waters run
through the sandy Plain, it is reasonable to think, that there is another Bed of
Clay lying under; so that being shut up above and below, they follow their
course as it were through a Pipe, except when they break out into the Air, a way
being opened to them by these Wells.

Therefore supposing the hidden Expansion of these Waters over the Sandy and
Gravelly Plain, it is no wonder if a Noise be perceived in the bottom of these
Wells, while the Water runs through the Gravel, (which Gravel it is more
probable to be there made of the Sand, than to fall from the Mountains, (seeing
a great part of it is so soft, that by the only rubbing of your Fingers it is
broke) and if the Water be raised in all the Wells to the same height, seeing
there is the same Cause which drives it on high, to wit, the pressure of the
Water descending from an higher place, and from the same Receptacle. And
lastly, If they be equally pure and wholesome, seeing they are of the same
Disposition. For the same Reason the same Waters are the more lively, the more
is drawn from them, and their slowness is corrected when it happens; because by
the Sand thrown up, and sinking to the bottom, the hole made with the Auger is
sometimes stopped; a sure Proof that these Waters run through a sandy Plain, but
not at all through an immense wide Space; which may be further known by the
depression and failing of the Ground, that is observed sometimes to happen when
too much Water and Sand has run out.

CHAP. VII.
The Proportious inquired into, that the Elevation of Water in a straight Pipe,
inserted into a Horizontal one, has to the height of its Cistern.
THE Nature of Fluid Bodies is so abstruse and intricate, that it could never
be enough explained by the most solid Wits. Among the Ancients Archimedes has
left us a few Theorems, but of great moment, in a Book which he has written, De
Insidentibus Humido, Of things that Float; which Book, that I may use Tully's
own words of Crantor's Books, In Lucul.
Is not great, but golden. Among the Moderns, the Honorable Mr. Boil,
Galilaeus, Sterinus, Borellus; and lastly, D. Guilielminus, a Noble
Mathematician of Bononia, have chiefly cultivated this most noble part of
Philosophy; who though they all, by many Observations and Hydrostatical
Experiments have dived far into the wonderful Properties of Fluids, yet have
left room for a further Enquiry: For if in any case Seneca's words are of
value, it is in this the greatest and most intricate of all, in which even when
much is done, the Age following will find something more to do.

Seeing then, according to our Hypothesis, the Waters of this hidden Source are
movable and running, and withal ascend on high; because, as was said before,
the Passage by which they go out, and fall into a Gulf, is straightened; and
seeing the Ascent into these Wells is constant and perpetual, nor can be done
without some proportion to the height of their Cistern; because this Cistern is
supposed by us to be in the Foot of the nearest Apennine Mountains, and higher
by far than the Elevation of these Waters from the bottom of the Wells to the
top; therefore I thought it would not be unprosftable nor unpleasant, if I
endeavored to shadow out, if not exactly to describe, such a Proportion.
Suppose then there be a Vessel ABC full of Water, to which a Pipe DE is fastened
in a Horizontal Line, and whose Orifice is half shut, so that the water does
not flow with a full Stream: Let there be likewise in the middle of the Pipe D
F another glass Pipe HI inserted perpendicularly; therefore granting a free
Passage to the water, I say, that the water will be lifted in the middle Pipe
HI to such a height, that if the height of the water contained in the Vessel be
of eight parts, the elevation of the water in the straight Pipe HI shall be of
six parts; and such a Proportion will answer to any Division of the Mouth of
the Pipe D F.

For if the Orifice of the Pipe D F be wholly shut, so that no water runs down,
none is ignorant that the water in the Pipe HI of its own nature must place its
self in the same Horizontal Line with the water contained in the Vessel, to
which effect two things doubtless concur with equal force, to wit, the pressure
of the water contained in the Vessel, and the resistance of the Obstacle that
wholly obstructs the Hole in the Pipe, which stop is eqvivalent to a Power
pressing with equal force against the water stagnating in the Vessel; if then
the elevation of the water in such a case is a produce arising from two Causes
equally working, to wit, the pressure of the water, and the resistance of the
stop, it will follow, that when the Orifice of the same Pipe D F shall only be
stopped in part, the ascent of the water in the intermedial Pipe H I, whatever it
be, will be a Product of the same Pressure, as in the first Case, and the
virtual Pressure of the Stop, but working unequally; from hence it comes to
pass, that when the Pressure of the superincumbent water in the Vessel that
presses it to flow out, is in the same degree and energy as before; and on the
other hand, the force of the Stop is removed, the water cannot be lifted up so
high in the Pipe erected perpendicularly, as to reach the height of the water
contained in the Vessel, but must of necessity be under it; so that if the
height of the water were in supposition eight Foot, and operated with such a
Pressure as were equal to that height, but the Stop should not act but half, i.
e. as four; these two working together, and making the ascent of the water,
there cannot but happen an Effect, which is between these two Agents, as 6 is
between 8 and 4, i. e. in an Arithmetical Proportion; and therefore in the
supposed Case the Water will be only raised in the straight Pipe H I to 6
parts, which Elevation is half the Aggregate of the height of the water
contained in the Vessel, and the power of the Stop.

This was my Reasoning before I tried whether the thing agreed to it; which I
did, by inserting a wooden and square Pipe into the side of the Vessel, as in
Fig. 3. and fitting a glass Pipe divided into 8 parts, and erected
perpendicularly to the same Pipe; then putting a stop to the Pipe, which might
only obstruct the half of it, I let the water run out, and observed that the
water did rise in the glass Pipe in the same proportion, to wit, as 6 to 8: Yet
I must confess, that the ascent of the water did not so exactly answer to the
greater or lesser Obstacles put to the hole of the Pipe, because perhaps of the
difficulty of fitting diverse Doors to the Orifice, and because of the
Undulation of the water produced in the Glass Pipe from the Impetus, where it is
observed to go out. Having therefore communicated these my Observations to the
most famous Bocchabadatus, Mathematician to the Great Duke, and my intimate
Friend from our Childhood, (for I always thought it the part of an ingenuous
Man, that I may use Pliny's words, to confess by whom I have profited) he
prompted me with a Method by which I might obtain my Desire. When therefore he
thought that the diversity of Stops might be supplied, if to the hole of the
Pipe, from whence the water should come out, another straight Pipe of the same
bigness were set, but with a proportion to the height of the Cistern. I made
Trial, and the thing succeeded according to my desire.

So in Fig. 4. supposing the Altitude of the Water in the Vessel to be of 8
parts, and the Pipe MN to be only of 4 parts, by which means it is equivalent to
an Obstacle that takes up half the breadth of the Aperture, letting the water
run out, and the Vessel always remaining full, the water in the Pipe HG
appeared suspended in E, to wit, in the height of 6 parts, which is half the
Sum of 8 and 4, the height of the Water and the resistance of the Obex. In like
manner in Fig. 5. when the Pipe is of the height of 6 parts, the water in the
Glass Pipe E F was seen to rise to S, to wit, to 7 parts The same was observed
(as in Fig. 6.) when the Pipe E H pouring forth the water, was of ^ parts, i.
e. equivalent to an Obstacle stopping the fourth part of the Orifice; for in
the Glass Pipe the water stood in T, i. e. in part 5. and that as exactly as
Physical Experiments will admit, as every one may easily try. I do not doubt
but the same will happen in any other case; therefore Reason and Experience do
sufficiently prove, that the Water is raised in a middle Arithmetical
Proportion between the force of the Obstacle, and the height of the water in
the Cistern.

While on this occasion I diverted my self in making various Hydrostatical
Experiments in the Dog Days, I happened to make a very curious Observation, to
wit. That though the height of the water be the same in the Vessel, and the
same Horizontal Pipe be inserted into it; yet in the perpendicular Pipes,
according to the difference of their Situation, there is a notable difference
of the altitude of the water in one and the other, as in Fig. 7. Let the Vessel
A B C D be full of Water, the Pipe D H be inserted into it, and shut in the
Extremity, and let F G H I be the Glass Pipes erected perpendicularly, but M
the Pipe pouring out water. Therefore in the Pipe F G, according to what was
said before, the water will rise to O, i. e. to parts 5. for the height of the
Pipe M pouring out the water is supposed 2. and the height of the water
contained in the Vessel is as 8. But if the Pipe F G be transferred to H I (the
Orifice where it was fastened being stopped) the water will be raised higher, i.
e. to N, to almost 7 degrees; which would likewise happen, if at the same time
two Glass Pipes F G H I stood upright, and the Pipe M should pour out water,
the Vessel being always full; for this different height of waters is perceived
well enough in every case. One may try the same, not only when the Pipe that
poured out the water is longer or shorter, but also when many Pipes of
different lengths, and with proportion to the height of the water contained in
the Vessel, send forth water at the same time, and many Glass Pipes are
interjected, seeing many cases may be feigned according to every ones Fancy. But
seeing there is no small Undulation in the Glass Pipes, because the water
running out at M, falls back upon its self; this Inconveniency will in some
measure be shunned, if the Pipe F H be something bended, that so both the Glass
Pipes, and the Pipes sending forth the water be inclined to one side; for in
this case there will happen less Undulation, and the different heights of the
water may be more easily viewed.

The Reason of this Phenomenon I judge to be, that the Impetus of the Water
running from the Cistern out at M, withdraws some of the water from the Pipe F
G, so that it cannot rise so high; and the same Impetus coming to H I, finding
now no Vent, makes it rise higher, even to N.

This new Observation I communicated to the same Boccabadatus, who, as he did
not a little wonder at the novelty of the thing, so being a most ingenious and
exact Searcher into natural things, he did not cease to enquire into the Cause
of it; yea, afterward he told me he had the Demonstration of it, which he said
he would insert into his Work which he is to publish, about Mechanic Force. I
thought fit to propose this Phenomenon to the Lovers of Hydrostaticks,
thinking it worthy of the consideration of the more acute Wits, to the end it
may be discovered from whence this Diversity of Pressures proceeds.

CHAP. VIII.
About the Goodness and Excellency of the Wells of Modena.
THerefore having sailed over these Subterraneous Waters, according to the best
of my Understanding, as far as I could in a dark Navigation, in which neither
the Stars nor the Needle did guide me, it remains that I furl my Sails, and
hasten to the Land.
Georg. 4.

But that I may not pass over with a dry Foot the nature of these Fountains, so
far as they are useful to Men; and lest, as the Custom is of those that are
thirsty, I drink quietly. I shall touch only at some things relating to this
Subject, though it seem to be beyond my purpose. It Is an old Dispute, what in
the Class of Simple Waters is most wholesome? seeing some prefer Rain-waters,
others prefer Fountain-waters; in some places River-waters are most preferred,
in others Well-waters. Hippocrates seemed to prefer Rain-waters to all others*
for these he called the sweetest* the thinnest, and the clearest of all; seeing
what is thinnest and lightest of the water is exalted and drawn up by the Sun:
Yet it is certain Hippocrates spoke of Rain waters in the Summertime, which
they call Horaiae, i. e. Early, seeing among waters that want Art, he commends
these, which in the Summer time* fall down from the Sky when it thunders; but
these that fall in Storms he pronounces bad. Celsus, Galen, Avicenna, Paulus,
and others, following Hippocrates, judge the same.

On the other hand, Pliny does greatly discommend Rain-waters; yea, he is so
angry, that he thinks the O pinion which commends them, to endanger Men's
Lives; neither does he think it an Argument of Levity that they have been
raised to Heaven, seeing Stones also have been raised to Heaven; and further,
Waters, when they fall from the Clouds, may be infected by the Exhalations of
the Earth, so that Fountain Water to him seems preferable to them, when Plenty
of them may be had.

But if the thing be duly considered, there will be no place left to dispute;
for all Rain-waters, as also Fountain-waters being not of the same Goodness,
seeing every Country has not the same Atmosphere, nor the same Ground through
which the water passes, seeing also; according to Theophrastus, such as the
Earth is, such is the Water) it often happens, as Co^taeus adverts, that in
some places for the Purity of the Air, the Rain-waters are better, but in other
places the Fountain or River-waters are the best; as the water of the River
Nile, whose much wished for Inundation keeps all Egypt every Year solicitous.
But it is no wonder that the water of the Nile excels in Goodness all others,
seeing running a long way over a Country burnt with the heat of the Sun, it is
concocted, and is tossed by sudden Falls from the highest Mountains, and
attenuated. Hence Athenaeus testifies, That when Philadelphus King of Egypt
betrothed his Daughter Berenice to Antiochus King of Assyria, he willed her to
take with her the Water of the Nile.

Yet when other things do not agree, it seems the Fountain-waters ought to be
preferred to Rain-waters, and all others; for Rain-waters are drawn from all
sorts of Filth, Dung and Dead Bodies themselves; and though Hippocrates judged
them best, yet he adds, That they have need of being boiled and strained.
Wherefore it is not without Reason, that some do disprove making of Syrup of
Poppeys with Rainwater; and they think that Hippocrates spoke according to
Reason, and not Experience. So among the Moderns, the most experienced Etmuller
says, That Rainwater kept always something Earthy behind it, though distilled
a hundred times.

But so will any Water do as well as Rain water.

But Well-waters, seeing they have no Motion but when they are stirred, and in
the bottom have much Slime, and Rain-waters being gathered of Snow and Rains,
and running over diverse kinds o^ Earths, and are therefore by Hippocrates
called disagreeing, cannot have that Purity and Simplicity which the
Fountain-waters have, which are concocted by the Heat pent up in the Bowels of
the Earth, and are strained through the same Earth.

Therefore our most pure Fountain-waters, as they have the first place in the
Rank of plain waters, so they yield to none of the most famous Fountains of our
Times; for as much as the Marks, by which the most sincere Waters, and fittest
for Humane Use, are commended, do appear in these in a most eminent manner. The
chief Quality that is wanted in water, and which contains the rest, by way of
Excellency, is, that it partake most of the nature of the Air. So Pliny has
written, That wholesome water ought to be most like to the Air. On which Account
Cassiodorus commended the Virgin Water, so famous then at Rome, that running
most purely it resambled the Air. For water ought to be pure, like the Air,
light and clear, free of smell and taste, thin, and susceptible of Heat and
Cold. But the waters of these Fountains are such; for they are clear like the
Air, free of smell and taste, do most quickly receive any other quality, and
being weighed are lighter than any others.

Though Physicians do not seem to value much the Argument taken from the
Lightness; and the Divine Master calls these light, 5 Aph. 26.
which are soon hot and soon cold. And Pliny writes, Lib. 31. N. 11. c. 3.
That it is in vain to examine by the Balance the goodness of the Waters; seeing
it seldom happens that one is lighter than the other; which Brasavolus tried in
several kinds of Waters, before Hercules the Second Duke of Ferrara: Yet seeing
there are not wanting more subtle ways of knowing even the least difference of
weight in waters, according to the Doctrine of Archimedes, Levity is not
altogether to be neglected, for Levity signifies the absence of the Terrestrial
parts, One may rather say Saline.
and is a sure Proof of greater simplicity. Truly it is without doubt, that if
there were two Vessels of the same capacity, and full of the same water, and in
one of these, diverse kinds of Salts were dissolved in a certain quantity,
though the water did not grow in bulk, yet the one will be of greater weight
than the other, and will be filled with strange qualities; wherefore Gravity
and* Levity are not to be slighted. I will not deny, that some waters naturally
light, are worse than others that are heavier, because of the evil qualities of
the Soil through which they pass. Athenaeus says, That the waters of Amphiaraus
and E^treria being compared together, do not differ in weight, yet the one is
wholesome and the other not. So Tit^aresius, a River of which Homer speaks,
running into Penaeus, is not mixed with it, but swims over it like Oil: Yet
Pliny says, his waters are deadly. And he says, That Penaeus refuses to suffer
his silver-colour'd waters to be mixed with the others deadly waters. If we
infuse a whole Glass of Antimony in water, otherwise light, no weight will be
added to it to judge of; but none is ignorant what Disorders it raises in the
Body.

And it is necessary to confess these things to be true of the lightness of the
water considered alone, but if with other marks of goodness there be lightness
joined, it will be no small accession to its goodness. In Thal.
Herodotus describes a Fountain of Aethiopia, the water of which he says was of
such lightness, that nothing could swim in it, no, not a Stick, nor what was
lighter than a Stick; and such as used those waters were called Macrobii, i. e.
Long-lived. Gelen himself commends the lightness of the water for a probable
conjecture of its goodness. De Bonit. aq. c. 1.
But if the lightness be alone, says he, 'twill not be a sufficient mark of
good water: which one may also say of all the other Signs, seeing none of it
self, and separately is a sufficient Mark of its goodness.

But a surer Mark of the goodness of water is, if it be not heavy in the
Bowels; for this is truly the lightest, and this kind of lightness is more to
be esteemed than that which may be tried with the Scale. For we must not
presently, because it is (...) i. e. Deprived of all quality, so as to be pure,
clear, void of smell and taste, give Sentence, and pronounce it innocent; but
we must bring another Proof, viz. How they affect the Bowels; for it may be
that it has all external Marks of Goodness, yet has a more secret Noxiousness,
which cannot be found out by the external Sense. This therefore will be the
true and safer judgment of waters, which is brought from Experience it self:
And truly that water is to be thought light by the Effect, which makes not the
Bowels feel any weight in passing; for which kind of lightness the waters of
Modena are very commendable, as not weighting the Stomach when one drinks a
full Draught of them, but easily pass through the whole Body, and are voided by
Sweat and Urine.

But above all these, Hippocrates chiefly commends these Fountains, whose
waters come forth of deep Springs, which are cold in Summer, and warm in
Winter; but all these things are observed in these Fountains, seeing they rise
68 Foot high; and in Summer are very cold, but in Winter are warm, yea, exhale
some small Vapors. Neither must we refer the Heat which is found in these
waters in the Wintertime to metallic Exhalations, or a mixture of Salts with
an acid Mineral, seeing that is perceived only in the Wintertime by an
Antiperistasis.

All know that there are as many differences of Waters as of Places; for
Fountain and Well-waters do easily drink up the different qualities of the
Ground, through which they pass, which are innumerable; yet those waters are
thought more wholesome, that run through thick Sand and Gravel, because they
carry nothing from such a matter upward, which cannot be said of that which
runs through Clay and soft Sand. But the waters of these Fountains flow a long
way through Sand, which is called Male, a Proof of which is a great abundance
of Dross, Sand, and Gravel, which these Fountains use to throw up at their
first coming forth.

Moreover, these waters, according to my Observation, and of many others,
continue without Corruption for a long time. For it is found by Experiment in
long Navigations, that the water of Neuceria did stink, but ours continued
pure. I am not ignorant, it is a Question among Physicians no less curious than
worthy to be known, Whether the sudden Corruption of the water be a mark of its
Goodness or Badness? Perhaps Hippocrates himself gave cause of doubting, who,
after he had commended Rain water, says, They soon putrify, except they be
boiled and strained again. Galen, Paulus, Avicenna, and some of the Ancients;
amongst the Moderns, Ioubertus, Salius, Augenius, Bruvierinus, and many others,
take the waters readiness to putrify for a sign of goodness, providing other
Notes agree. For the chief Property of water is, say they, that they be quickly
altered by any external Cause; and from thence they think its inclinableness to
Putrefaction to arise: But these which continue long free of Corruption, say
they, partake of an aluminous nature: Such are the waters of Tyber, which are
kept in Earthen Vessels for Months and Years, under Ground, without Corruption.
On the other hand, there are some who think an inclinableness to Putrefaction
among the faults of water; among whom is Costaeus, who says, That it is a mark
of the best water, that they do not so easily corrupt: And is deservedly
opposed to Avicenna, who thought that Rain-waters were soon corrupted, because
they were thinner: For rather from thinness of the Substance one might argue,
that their Substances are less subject to Corruption, as is known of distilled
waters, and Spirits of Wine, which truly is thinner than Wine, and not only
does not putrify it self, but also preserves other Bodies free from Corruption.

Seeing then Experience it self makes it plain, that those which are most
simple do less putrify, but those which have a greater Heterogenity, because
of the Disagreement of the Internal Parts, and a continual Fermentation, are
more easily corrupted. Therefore I am easily induced to believe, that the
Curruption of the water is rather to be attributed to its Pravity, than
Goodness. But the Reason why the Rain waters sooner putrify, may be this, that
when by the Heat of the Sun the water is raised from the Earth, all sorts of
Filth are raised with it, and a great quantity of Volatile Salts is mixed with
it: which made Becher say, That all Rain-waters being putrified and distilled,
did give an ardent Spirit.

But if promptitude to Putrefaction were a Sign of Goodness, why may we not say
the same of Eatables, which naturally do soon putrify; such as are Fleshes,
Fishes, VVorts, early Ripe Fruits, and the like, viz. That these Aliments are
better than those which do not so soon putrify, seeing they are sooner altered
by the concocting Faculty. Weaker Foods have a shorter Life. Hippocrates, as
Valesius interprets, says, they make Men's Lives shorter; and such as cat these
Meats are infirm and weak, and cannot live so long. So Bread of Wheat well
fermented, and well baked, gives a most excellent Nourishment, and long Life,
to sound Bodies; and Bread of all Food does least putrefie. Upon which account
it is, that Levinus Lemnius commends it. For (says he) Bread long kept does
indeed grow moldy, and grows dry, but does not putrefie. Therefore it is not a
little to the Praise of our Fountains, that they do not corrupt; so that having
other Marks of Goodness, they are to be reckoned the best of Waters.

It Is an old Commendation of Waters, if Pulse be quickly boiled in them, as
Pliny, Athenaeus, Vitruvius, Galeus, Paulus; and among the Modern Physicians,
Langius, Costaeus, Bruvierinus, and others, do testify. But it is known, that
this also is common to unwholsom Waters; for the difficulty of boiling some
Pulse is not always by the Fault of the Waters, but very often of the Grains
themselves, as they have grown in this or the other Ground, as Theophrastus
testifies, when he said, That there are many places which always bring forth
Pulse that are easily boiled, others there are which bring forth Grains hard to
be boiled Yea, Plutarch says, That of two Furrows joined together, one brings
forth a hard Crop, the other not. The Women themselves know that well enough,
who if they have Pulse that are not easily boiled, use to macerate them a Night
in water with a Sack full of Ashes, by which means the close Texture of the
Grain is opened by the force of the Salt in the Ashes. And I think none will
look upon the water, so made lixivial, as simple; or will commend it for daily
drinking in whole Bodies. Yet I cannot deny, that salt and crude waters, very
far distant from the best, may be for some sickly Natures; or in a neutral
state of Health, instead of Medicine, which Hippocrates has taught expressly in
these words: But whatever are salt and crude, are not fit for all to drink of;
yet there are some Natures to whom such Waters are convenient to be drunk.

Whatever were hard to be boiled, the Greek called Ateramnia, transferring
likewise the same word to a stubborn and inflexible Mind. So Grains hard to be
boiled were called (...), such as are those which Theophrastus says, grow in a
thick tough Earth, and as it were clayie; as at Philippi, when the Pulse which
Egypt bears, both by reason of the nitrous Soil, and the Heat, are easily
boiled. Likewise water, in which Grains were hardly boiled, was called (...),
which word Hippocrates used to signify the crudity of water in many occasions,
of which Erotianus has in his Onomasticon made a Collection. Therefore, as the
Difficulty of the Pulses being boiled is not always the Fault of the waters, so
their being easily boiled is not a Mark of their Goodness; which sometimes is
proper to the Seeds, sometimes to the Waters; yea, more effectual in some
waters that are not of the best; seeing in nitrous and lixivious water Pulse,
Roots, and Worts are sooner boiled. Upon this account in Rain-waters, as being
full of Saline Particles, all kind of Grains are sooner boiled than in
Fountain Water, which is more pure and defecated. Upon this account Horatius
Augenius, preferring Rainwater to others for making of Ptisan, when he had
taken notice that Barley did sooner boil in this, than in Spring Water, of his
own accord confesses, That the Rain-VVaters are not sincere; which made him go
into this Opinion as a Paradox, That the purer the water is, and less mixed, the
less it is fit for the use of Life. But in our Fountain-waters, Pulse of all
sorts is easily enough boiled, and any other kind of Aliments, which, as I dare
not discommend in them, so I think is no way to be taken for a Mark of the best.

But certainly that is a greater Criterion for judging of the Goodness of plain
Waters, which, as Vitruvius says, is taken from the Habit of Men's Bodies that
live about those waters; to wit, if they be robust, clear Complexions, sound,
and not blear-eyed. Now it is known enough, that both Citizens, and such as live
in the Suburbs here, are of a good Habit of Body, and subject to none of these
Distempers; and the good Health which those of Modena enjoy beyond other Towns
on this side the Po, is not so much to be ascribed to the wholsomness of the
Air, as to the goodness of the Waters; as in Egypt, where their long Life,
according to Alpinus, is attributed to the water of the Nile. Seeing therefore
in the most strict Censure, the waters of these Fountains are not only
innocent, but wholesome, truly this City has nothing in which it may envy any
other as to this point; yea, seeing its waters are carried to the neighboring
places in the Summertime, the Nucerian water is now out of use, to the great
benefit of the sick. So in the Summertime they run to these Fountains in all
kinds of Fevers, (for the use of water, that I may not say the abuse, is grown
so frequent, that it seems the only Febrifuge) and chiefly to the Fountain
which is called Abyssus, as to the Well of Esculapius, of which we spoke
before. Wherefore I need not fear to make use of what Claudian says of Aponus,
That they are at least amongst our Countrey-folks. -- Commune Medentum
Auxilium, praesens numen inempta salus.
Physicians common Aid, a present Help,
A Powerful Deity, and an unpurchas'd Health.


And so much may suffice concerning the Nature and Properties of the Wells of
Modena; and if I have said something like probable, it is well; but if not, then
both for the Dignity and the Difficulty of the matter, Volutatum est dolium in
Cranio.

FINIS.

