THE MASS a MOCK ROMES Sacrifice an Abomination

frontispiece

The ROMISH Mass Book FAITHFULLY Translated into English WITH NOTES and
OBSERVATIONS THEREUPON; Plainly Demonstrating the Idolatry and Blasphemy
thereof CONTAINING I. The Cautelae, or Caveats of the Mass. II. The Canon of
the Mass. III. The History of the Mass, showing when, how, and by whom it was
Patched together.


WITH UNANSWERABLE ARGUMENTS Proving It No Service of God.

Published at this Juncture to Inform Men's Judgments, and put a stop to the
Designs of Those that Endeavor to Introduce Popery amongst us.

LONDON* Printed by George Larkin, for Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the
Poultrey. 1683.

Reverendo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, D. HENRICO Londinensi Episcopo,
Sercnissimae Regiae Majestati a Secretioribus Consiliis, etc.
QU^^tum sit discrimen inter Sapientiam Divinam in Sacro -- Sanctis Scripturis
Reconditam, et hoc Missale Romanum (nunc in Vernaculum Sermonem, ad verbum,
Conversum,) non latet te, Doctissime Praesul. De priori, Celeberrimus
Augustinus, In quem Spiritus Dei, suas Dotes largius Effudit; postquam ejus
Interiora Penetrasset, haec olim dixerat: Vbi eos (nempe sacrae Paginae
Scriptores) Intelligo, non solum nihil eis Sapientius, verum etiam nihil
Eloquentius videri potest, lib. 4. de Doctr. Christ. De posteriori vero, quid
Sentiendum sit, apud ipsum imperitum Vulgus, Res ipsa jam loquatur. Nudum in
Conspectu omnium, Exponitur istud Mysterium Iniquitatis, and jam Impostura
remota, Si Populus vult decipi, decipiatur.

Ego, qui nihil aliud praeterquam patriae Salutem, adversus hujus Pestis
Progressum, quaero; hanc opellam Nomini tuo dedicare sum ausus. Papicolarum
Invidiae, atque Odii Exitialis, non sum Ignarus; quin, summus tamen, (...) me,
aeque ac Conamina mea, (quamvis exigua) in suam Clientelam, and Patrocinium
habeat, non vereor.

Adversus nostrae Religionis Infestissimos Hosts, tempestive militas, (
Antistes Clarissime,) tam vividis Scriptis, tam viva voce. Non REGIAM
MAJESTATEM, non Augustissimum Angliae SENATUM, Non Vniversum populum latet,
quot, and quibus Pontificiorum latebris, Circumvallamur. Quas Strages, quot
Atrocissimas Insidias, quot Conjurationes (...) Satellites Instruxerunt, and
indies Instruunt, ut ex hujus Monarchiae Naufragio, Gazas, sibi iterum, sine
Mensura, Compararent,

Horret Animus Commemorare tot Martyrum Infandas Clades sub Antichristi Imperio
perpetratas! Proh! -- Quot Obsidionibus minantur oves, [ Lupi voraces sub
Pellibus Agninis] TIBI IPSI non parceret Papistica Rabies!

Quam Barbaris Cruciatibus Afflixerunt Antecessores tuos! CRANMERUM, RIDLEIUM,
LATIMERUM, etc. (Clarissimos Martyrs nunquam sine laud Commemorandos.) Quis
eorum (aeque ac Caeterorum) memoriam oblivisci poterit? nisi stupor Catholicus
totum Orbem occupaverit, omniaque Historiographorum Monumenta Delere valuerit
Index alter Expurgatorius.

URBIS hujus Celeberrimae Vastationem quis non defleat? -- O! quam horribili
Incendio Cremabatur haec Illustrissima Monarcharum seeds; ornamentum atque
praesidium Regni, Matter Artium atque Disciplinarum; Mercatorum, and Reliquae
Plebis, Emporium Opulentissimum! -- Quot Papivomas Flammas, In Caelum quasi
Impetum facientes, Adspexerunt Angligenae? -- Non solum Civitatibus, verum
etiam Omnibus Christianismi Fautoribus, haec Pontifica Conflagratio Minabatur
Interitum!

Vestrae Dominationi notissimum est, quod statim post Exhibitum Messiam,
Circiter Annum Christi Sexagessimum tertium, Haec nostra Brittannia lucem verbi
Divini Accepit. Hanc Spiritualem (...) Rex LUCIUS postea excoluit. Tandem vero,
(...) tanquam Aper in vinea Domini, Corruptelas, Tetrasque Idololatrias,
disseminaverat. Rursus tamen, (licet parum feliciter Successerit, propter
hominum Peccata) quidam vera fide Praestantes emicuerunt, qui in praealtis
Tenaebris, quosdam Errores taxarunt, and verum Domini Cultum, ab Interitu,
Vindicare Conati sunt.

Neminem sanae mentis latet, quam long lateque grassatur haec Diabolica
Conjuratio. Paucos ignorare Existimo, quo Belligerandi and Imperandi Studio,
(ad Veritatis Perniciem,) Calidissimae Jesuitarum Cohortes Ardent. Contendere
igitur omni Studio totisque Viribus necesse est, ut Homines, ab hujusmodi
Praestigiatoribus Obcaecatos, Refulgentibus Verbi Divini Radiis, Illuminentur.
In hoc Opus (ut Christianum Episcopum decet) Summa cum laud Incumbis; ea ergo
de Causa, Tibi, Dignitate ac Nobilitate Clarissimo Domino, hanc (...) offero.
Humiliter Orans, ut Sacro Sanctissimus humanae Saluti^^ Largitor,
(Venerandissimus Jesus,) te diu servet Incolumem, Universamque Ecclesiam
Spiritu suo sancto Gubernet, usque ad Consummationem Seculi, Amen.

Sic Supplex precatur R. V. Humilimus Servus, (...)

The Epistle to the Reader.
THis great Body Politic (of our English Monarchy) being justly incensed
against Popery, has often expressed its solemn abhorrence and detestation of it
by its grand and August Representative the Parliament, as being a Sect of
dangerous and Accursed Principles. And who cannot but see, unless they are
bewitched by the Sorceries of the Whore of Babylon, that the whole Mass of their
Worship is a mere medley of Blasphemy, Nonsense, and Irreligion?

To disabuse the Common People, and such as understand not Latin, you have
here a Faithful Translation of it into the best English such barbarous stuff
will bear. Mr. Coverdale Bishop of Exeter, and from him Mr. Fox our famous
Martyrologist, Published the Canon in English in his Book of Martyrs, and Mr.
Stocker near an hundred years ago Published that and the Cautelae of the Mass
(a barbarous word) which I had a sight of, after my Translation was finished,
both which are out of Press, and therefore I judged it a necessary piece of
service to the Public, to expose it; it being so Foppish, that there needs
little more Confutation of it then to make it English. And that is the reason
the* Priests keep it in Latin. You know that real Beauty scorns the bedawbings
of a Pencil, and Deformity will be always maskt, to avoid the Derision and
Contempt of its Spectators. Therefore this spiritual Farce is acted in the old
Romish Masquerade.

This is that Mass for opposing which, our Reverend Archbishops, Bishops,
Ministers, and Christan Brethren, have been burnt, Massacred, and by
Innumerable Torments otherwise destroyed. This is that Mass which you must go
to, or be BVRNT, if Popery should grow rampant here, (which God in mercy
prevent) This is that Mass that has laid a stumbling block in the way of Jews,
Turks, and Heathens, and hindered their Conversion. How men's Purses and Estates
were empploy'd by these State-Leeches, was well observed by the Reverend
Grostead Bishop of Lincoln, who computed Anno 1253. (Act. and Mon. vol. 1. p.
296.) That the Revenues of Foreigners and Clarks placed here by the Pope,
amounted to 70000 Marks a year, whereas the Revenues of the Crown came not to
30000; a prodigious Sum in those times; 420 years ago.

That Excellent History of the Magdeburgenses tells you, that in the second
Century this whisking Lie of Transubstantiation was unknown to the Church of
that Age -- Cent. 2. cap. 4 p. 48. Edit. Basil. 1559. Ignotum fuit Ecclesiae
hujus Seculi Commentum de Transubstantione. -- Neither is there one word of
their (Theatrica circumgestatione) playhouse like carrying about the
Bran-Idol: nor a syllable of any opus operatum of the Mass.

They come yet nearer, and tell you positively, Missae nec vocabulum quidem
apud hujus seculi scriptorem Invenias Cent 4. cap. 6. p. 430. Not one word of
the Mass can you find among the Writers of this Age. But it appears, say they,
that this monstrous and horrible Plague, of the pains of Purgatory, and the
Merchandise of Masses crept first into the Church in this Age; that is, in the
sixth Century, Cap. 10. Quando tam tetra and horrenda illa pestis de Purgatorii
Poenis, and Missarum Mercatura, primitius in Ecclesiam Dei Invecta sit -- Yea
they tell us that in the seventh Century, full seven hundred years after
Christ, (Tempore illo nondum missas habuerunt in Anglia sed tota fuit
solicitudo Doctor unserviendo Deo) that is, yet they had no Masses in England,
but the whole care of the Doctors was to serve God -- With much more to that
effect -- So that you may see this Mass was brought in about the very time that
the Man of Sin mounted the Ecclesiastical Throne; and as it was born with him,
so no doubt but in Gods due time it will perish with him; which ought to be the
Prayer of every Christian, as it of

Yours in all Christian Services J. D.

THE ROMISH MASS Faithfully Translated into English: WITH Notes and
Observations Thereupon; Plainly demonstrating the Idolatry and Blasphemy
thereof.
The ( Cautelae, or) Caveats for Mass-Priests, Translated word for word out of
the Romish Missale.
Instructions to be observed by the Priest that is to say Mass.
CHAP. I.
THe first Caution is, That the Priest who is to celebrate Mass ought well to
prepare his own Conscience by pure (1) Confession: Let him earnestly desire the
Sacrament, and fully purpose (2) to make it.

He is to get (3) without Book a little Note of the manner of doing his duty.
Let his (4) Gestures be very composed and devout; for whereas every one is
obliged to love God with all his Heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his
Strength, he is not approved to love God, who shall appear at the Table of the
Altar, where the (5) King of Kings, and Lord of all, is handled; and taken, if
he be Irreligious, Undevout, Impudent, Distracted, a Vagabond, or an Idle
Person.

Let every man therefore consider, that he sits at a great Table, let him
consider how he ought to be prepared, let him be Wary and Circumspect.

Let him stand (6) upright not leaning on the Altar, let him join his Elbows to
his Sides: Let him lift up his hands moderately so that the tops of his Fingers
may be seen even with his (7) Shoulders. Let him fit his Understanding to the
words and signs (viz. Crosses) for great things lie hid in the signs, greater
in the words, but the greatest of all in the Intention.

Let him join three Fingers with which let him make the Crosses; let him fold
the other two in his hand.

Let him make Crosses (8) directly, not ob^^quely, and high enough, left he
overthrow the Chalice, let him not make Circles for Crosses. But when he must
bow, let him bow with his whole Body bent, not obliquely, but directly, before
the Altar.

Notes.
(1) This Confession is an Apish Imitation of what the Apostle Commands 1. Cor.
11. 28. viz. Let a man Examine himself, not confess to a Priest in his Ear, and
receive his unsanctifyed Absolution.

(2) The Papists hold that without this purpose whatsoever the Priest does, is
merely null and invalid; And therefore all that worship the Wafer he holds,
commit downright IDOLATRY; for by their own Doctrine if the Priest has not a
right intention, it is no God. Now, no man living can assure himself that the
Priest has a real purpose in what he does, because no man knows the heart, and
consequently can have no assured Faith, for true Faith and Doubt at the same
time, are inconsistent.

(3) That is like a Stage Player, have his Part by heart, that he may the
better act it: O mimick Religiou.

(4) That is, (monkey-like) he must put a good face upon it, and so he had need;
( mark Sirs) he is reputed the devoutest, that is most dexterous at their Apish
and Bobtayl'd Grimaces.

(5) A mighty breaden King indeed! that must be lodged in the Priests Guts, or
at the mercy of Rats, Mice and other Vermin.

(6) Observe your postures, stand clear there, let us see the Juggling Pageant.

(7) This is fine worship in Dumb Show; Religious Mummery!

(8) Have a care of Saltires or Saint Andrews Croses, and Mathematical Circles
there, they would spoil all the Sport

CHAP. II.
THe Second Caution is, that he must not only think, or suppose, but certainly
know, that he has the requisite Materials, that is, Wheaten Bread, and Wine
with a little water. And thus he shall know that he has both Wine and Water;
Let him order the Clark to taste both the Wine and the Water, (1) for the
Priest himself ought not to taste them.

* Let him pour a drop into his hand, chafe it with his Finger, and smell to
it, and so he shall be sure. Let him not trust to the Wine Crewet, nor to the
color, because they often deceive a man. Let him take heed that the Chalice be
not broken (or cracked) let him also take heed to the Wine, for if it be (2)
corrupt he may in no wise Celebrate -- If it be sower, let him [ dissimulet]
Dissemble. If too waterish, let him forbear, unless he knows that there is more
Wine than Water.

And in every Case, if there happens a Doubt by reason of sowerness, mixture,
or Limpidity [ Limpiditatem] (viz. transparency or clearnness) whether it may
be made we advise him to forbear, because in this Sacrament nothing must be
done doubtfully, wherein these words certainly must be said, ( viz.) For this
is my Body and this is the Cup of my Blood.

Likewise let him choose the evenist and roundest hosts, and pour in (3) a
competent portion of Wine; For this Sacrament ought to serve the Senses of
Seeing, Touching and Tasting, that they may be refreshed by the (4) outward
show, and the understanding nourished by the thing contained therein.

Let Water also be poured in a very small quantity, and let it have the relish
of Wine, for there is no danger by putting in never so little Water but by
putting in too much (5)

The Water is put in only for a signification, and one drop signifies as much
as a Thousand. Let the Priest therefore take heed that he pour it in not too
fast, for fear there run in too much.

Notes.
(1) These Mass-mongers (making a Breakfast or the Lords Supper) must Celebrate
it fasting, for the Priest must not taste whether it be Wine or no, but
believes the Clark, yet if he suspects him, here ^ a trick * to bray the Wine
in his Fist, and taste it by the Nose very pretty! The Priest of Payern, it
seems did not mind this Caveat, whose Wine was powdered with Salt and when he
soupt it offt thought himself poisoned, for it seems the Salt was not
transubstantiated,

(2) Such as are verst in the mystery of Tippling, say that good Wine makes good
Blood, and good Blood a good Soul, Ergo he that will be saved must drink well.
So this Bloodmaker must have good Wine, or else he makes but corrupt Blood.

(3) That is, a brimmer, when the Season's hot, and the Priest dry.

(4) Well said for once, if the outward signs serve the Senses, and the Soul is
nourished by the thing signified, then here is no Corporal nor Material Body
and Blood, but a Sacramental Eating, for the Soul and Mind have no Bodily Mouth.

(5) Ay then the Wine is spoiled, and can never make Blood, much less good
Blood.

CHAP. III.
THe third Caveat is, that he must read the Canon more (1) Leisurely then the
rest, and especially from that place -- Who the day before he suffered took*
etc. For then taking breath, he ought to be attentive and Recollect himself
wholly. (2) If he could not do it before, minding every word he pronounces.

And whilst he shall say, (3) Take ye, and eat ye all of this, he is to take
breath, (4) and then with one breath let him speak these words, Hoc est enim
Corpus meum -- For this is my Body. -- So no other thought will disturb him.
And it seems not reasonable to discontinue so short, so high, so effectual a
Form, whose entire virtue depends upon the last word, to wit (5) MY, which is
spoken in the (6) person of Christ, therefore there ought no stop (or point) to
be made between these words, considering that there is no reason to lead any
man so to do, as to point it thus for, This, is, my, Body, but that the whole
sentence be pronounced entire. Likewise in consecrating the Blood the same Form
is to be observed.

In like manner when the Priest pronounces the words of Consecration in every
matter, let him always intend to make that which Christ Instituted, and the
Church also does.

Observations.
(1) This word Translated leasurely, in the Latin is Morosius, that is, more
surly or morose; pronouncing his words like a crabbed Fellow, that is hard to be
pleased. (2) Viz. From the thoughts of his Belly and comfortable Importance,
for if his Thoughts should straggle that way, his Consecration's naught, and
the Worshippers of the Cake a^e Idolaters. (3) This is a mere mockery when the
Priest Communicates alone, to say Take ye, eat ye, etc. When he will not let them
have one bit. (4) If he be founderd or broken winded, or Patient to a
Mountebank, as they often are. (5) In English not MY, but BODY is the last
word; now if the whole virtue of the Consecration and Transubstantiation be in
the last word, he should say this SHALL be my Body, not this IS my Body, since
it cannot be the Body till the last word is pronounced. (6) A Good Salv^, for
then the Priest must else eat himself, because the Bread would then be
Converted to his Body and not into Christ's.

CHAP. IV.
THe Fourth is, that if he has many Hosts to Consecrate, he must lift up one of
them, viz. That which he has pitched upon for (1) himself when he began the
Mass, and he must let it lie amongst the rest, provided he directs his
intention ^o them all, both in Crossing and saying, (2) This is my Body, and
must think upon as many as he lifts up, or has before him.

We Advise also, that the Priest get the Canon by heart, for so he may say it
more Devoutly, yet let the Book be always before him, because if he should
chance to miss, he may have recourse to it.

Observations.
(1) Here to be sure the Priest chooses the largest Cake to m^ke a lustier God
for himself (which is only when some of the Parish Communicates with him,) and
then eats him, (washing it down with his Blood) but not a drop for the people.
His God is a large one, and Capers about as the spiritual Magician Charms,
whilst the other little Diminutives lie sneaking till the grand VVafer makes
its Exit into the Priests unsanctified Guts. But O what a Comedy is it to see,
how many Freaks, Gambals, and Antic Tricks our God-maker plays, what Tossings,
Cringings, postures, Adorations, before the poor God is devoured; This is a
mere Comi-Tragedy.

(2) Here he makes many Gods in a lump, and therefore should rather say, These
are my Bodies. As for the Blood, he may indeed say it, for he turns no Wine
into Blood save for his own God; so that the rest have either no Blood, or else
the Blood is made at the same time with their Bodies, if so, what needs the
Priest make a Distinct Blood for the Body he eats, for without Blood the Body
is a mere Carcass* and therefore the rest* only eat a Dead Body -- or if the
Blood be in it, they are worse than Canibals to eat their supposed Living God;
since it is more Cruel and Barbarous to eat that which has life in it, then
that which is Dead.

CHAP. V.
THe fifth is, that he must so gently handle the Chalice, that by no surprise
of a sudden cough it should rush against any thing; but let him take it
gingerly, so as that he may have no Impediment.

But when he shall take many Hosts, as when the host is to be (1) Renewed, let
him first take that which he has consecrated, and the blood likewise, and then
those that Remain* Yet let him take his own before any of the other, because he
believes and is (2) Assured of his own; of the others he believes, but is not
certain -- Finally let the (3) washings be.

Observations.
(1) This Renewing of the Host (or Breaden God) is when it grows moldy, or
rotten (there is a God indeed!) for that often happens through the neglect of
his Canonical Guard, or when the Priest reels into a Ditch from the Tavern, and
the God in the Pix-box catches cold.

(2) Assured of his own, that is, for ought he knows some unlucky Wag or other
might play Tricks, and steal away the Gods of others, but he has his in safe
Custody, therefore assured of it. O Horrible! The Uncircumscriptable God
supposed to be Imprisoned in the Priests filthy Pocket!

(3) These Washings I take to be the last finger-licking of the Priest, when he
has eaten his God, and washed his flesh down with his blood, rinsing the
Chalice, his Teeth and Fingers, because neither flesh nor blood should Remain.

CHAP. VI.
The Commemorations to be made in the Canon of the Mass, and for whom.

THe Sixth is, that he concern not himself with too many Names in the C^^^n or
Memento, and that not always, but as often as he thinks fit, he may do it, and
when he Pleases omit it: Because the Canon by Multitudes of Names is tedious,
and by that Cogitation is Distracted.

Yet it is Reasonable, that he Remember Father, Mother, Brother, and Sister,
and such as he thinks meet in that Season to be Recommended, especially those
for whom he says Mass* Yet let there be no Vocal but a MENTAL Expression.

CHAP. VII.
THe Seventh is, that he must take care when he washes his Mouth or Teeth
(which he may lawfully do) that he swallow not down the (1) taste of water with
his spittle.

And if the Priest should by chance swallow down a drop of water when he
Washes his Mouth, yet in the Opinion of the Doctors he may say Mass, unless he
should do it of set* purpose.

Hereunto agrees Richard in his fourth Distinction. But Thomas says, Unless he
swalloweth it not down in great quantity: with these also (2) Angelus de
Clavasio in his Summary agrees. Let him take heed of spitting after Mass as
much as he can, until he has eaten and drank, and that for Reverence sake, and
also for fear that something sticking in his Teeth or Wind Passage, should that
way be spit out.

Observations.
(1) This is right Straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel, Matt. 23. 24. A
making clean the Outside of a Cup (or Platter) when the inside is full of
Ravening and Wickedness. Luke 11. 39. Mat. 23. 25.

2. This Angelus, Author of the Evangelical Summary, was a Sophistical
School-Doctor, as Richard, Aquinas, and the rest were, who had Leisure, enough
to study these Idle, Superstitious Theories.

CHAP* VIII.
ANd although the Mass is very devoutly to be Celebrated for Contemplations
sake, yet there is a mean to be observed, least the man be noted to be over
tedious, or too short, for hastiness is a sign of Negligence, and Tediousness
is an Occasion of Distraction both to him, and* his Auditors, both these
William of Paris Rebukes in his Book of Divine Rethorick; but he that uses a
M^an, Acts safest; now every Priest ought to* have this Regard, as to say ^very
Mass, with such Affection, as if he had said his first Mass, and as if he
should never say more; for every* such great gift ^^^^t always to be new*

Therefore the Priests must have great care in his Consecration, great
Reverence in his handling, and Devotion in the Receiving it. And in his so
feeling and doing the Sacrament shall be worthily ministered, he shall rightly
perform his Office, and Perils and Offenses shall be avoided.

CHAP. IX.
LIkewise in saying of his Collects, let an (1) odd Number always be* observed,
if it may be conveniently done, except it happens ordinarily that he must do
otherwise. He must say one for the Unity of the Divinity; Three for the Trinity
of Persons; Five, for the Five-fold Passion of Christ, and his Wounds; and
seven for the seven fold Grace of the Holy Spirit.

It is not expedient to exceed the Number of seven, least he forget many. But
such as can do otherwise may do it in their private Masses.

Also in the Masses for the Dead no Prayer is said but of the Dead, save this
Prayer only, O Almighty and Everlasting God, who have power over Quick and
Dead* etc. Because it makes also mention indifferently of the Dead, and that
in the private Mass.

Likewise so often as the Prayer is made to God the Father alone, he must say
at the end of it, Through thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

But if it be made to the Father, and any mention is made therein of the Son,
then he must say at the end, Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son;
and if the Prayer be made only to the Son, then he must say in the end, Who
live and reignest God with the Father and the Holy Spirit, World without end.
Amen.

And if mention be made of the Holy Ghost in any Prayer, then must be said in
the end, In the Unity of the said Holy Spirit, God World without End, Amen.

Notes.
(1) This seems not only to Ape the the Philosophy of Pythagoras, which
consisted in Numbering, but to have also a certain Magical Relish; for your
Co^urers dispose of their Charms and Enchantments by certain Numbers, in which
they say are great Mysteries, and the whole virtue of their Diabolical Art --
Now I profess seriously that I believe this Mass to be a kind of Sorcery, not
only because of these kind of Magical Tricks, Postures, and Observations, but
also (which is to be lamented) because so many millions of people have been
bewitched by it, and so many millions of the true Worshippers of the Living God
destroyed for opposing this vilest of Idols. O the Blindness, O the Blasphemy,
^^ these Detestable Mass Priest^! -- In their Collects they call upon men and
women Saints; neglecting the (only) Adorable God, they call upon the Merit^ of
such as died Traitors, or rather Incarnate Devils Sainted by the Pope, and
forget the Merits and Passion of our Blessed Lord Jesus -- how abominably
Superstitious are their Prayers for the Dead, supposing a Purgatory, and
renouncing the Blood of Christ our only true Purgatory from Sin, etc.

Here begin certain Not able Instructions and Cautions to be observed about the
Defects or mischances which might happen. And of the Accidents that might fall
out in the Mass, and especially about the Consecration of the Host, and first
what is to be done if the Priest happen to be sick.
CHAP. X.
FIrst if the * Priest begins to find himself ill at the Altar after he has
Consecrated, so that he cannot make an end of the work which he has begun,
then if there be any other Priest at hand, and that the sick Priest is able to
show him the place where he left, he that is in health ought to begin there,
and so make an end of it; but if he cannot point him to the place, then let him
begin at such a place as may be guessed he left at. But if there be no Priest
present, let another Priest be looked for, against the next Morrow, and then
let the Clark show him as well as he can where he must begin; But if the Clark
be not able to Certify him, nor none of those that were present, neither can by
any means understand where the Sick Priest dwells, then let him say over
again the Consecration, and make an end devoutly. For Authority says, that
that cannot be said to be twice done, which a man knows not whether it were
done or not -- Non dicitur ^teratum quod nescitur esse Factum.

If the Priest happen to miscarry or die, before he come to the Canon, it shall
not be needful for any other to make an end of the Mass* Yet nevertheless, if
any is willing ^o Celebrate, he must-begin at the beginning of the Mass, and
devoutly finish it all.

Now if he miscarry in the Canon, and yet shall have made some Signs and
Crosses before the Transubstantiation and Consecration of the Sacrament: Then
some other Priest ought to begin again, at the place where the other left, and
only supply that which remains.

And when the Priest shall happen to miscarry whilst h^ is a Consecrating,
having already in part pronounced some words, and not fully finished: Some
other Priest, in the opinion of Pope Innocent, ought to begin at this place,
Qui pridie, etc. Who the day before he suffered.

Nevertheless if the Priest shall miscarry the (1) Body being once Consecrated
and not the Blood, some other Priest may finish the Consecration of the Blood,
beginning at this place, In like manner, etc.

Notes.
* This gross and brutish Doctrine of Transubstantiation has involved the
Papists in such inextricable Labrynths, such a multitude of ridiculous
absurdities, doubts, and difficulties, that they shall never be able with all
the querks and School-subtilty of their Doctors to avoid the shame and
Confusion of it, as you shall hear.

(1) Here are two workmen (Body and Bloodmakers) as before were two Workmen to
make one Body -- Now the former having not gone through-stitch with his work,
nor made a complete Body, because he pronounced not the last word, therefore
what he did signifies nothing, and another finishes the Job -- Brave Doings!

CHAP. XI.
IF he perceive aster he has Consecrated the Body that there is no Wine in the
Chalice, the Host shall be put up again fair and clean into the Corporas Case,
and when he has made ready the Chalice, let him begin again in this place, In
like manner, etc.

If he perceive before the Consecration of the blood, that there is no water in
the Chalice, he shall immediately put some into it, and make an end. But if he
perceive after he has Consecrated the blood, that there is no water in the
Chalice, yet must he go on, and mingle no water then with the blood, for so the
Sacrament would partly be Corrupted: Nevertheless the Priest ought to be sorry,
and be punished for it.

If after the Consecration of the blood he perceives that there was no* Wine
put into the Chalice, but only (1) Water, he ought to put out that water, and
put in Wine and Water together, always provided that he perceive it, before
such time as he receives the body: And besides he ought to Rehearse the
Consecration of the blood, beginning at this place, In Like Manner, etc.

If he perceive this after he has Rec^ived the Body, he ought afresh to ta^e
(2) another Host to be Consecrated anew with the blood, as the Doctors of
Divinity say, and Reassume the words of Consecration, beginning at this place,
Who the day before, etc. And in the end he must again take the Host that was
last Consecrated, notwithstanding he had Received the Water and also the blood
before.

Yet Pope Innocent says, that if the Priest fears, to (3) offend (or give
Scandal) by Reason of the delay [or Tediousness] these words only are
sufficient by which the Blood is Consecrated to wit* In like Manner, etc. and
so receive the blood.

Likewise if by Negligence, it should happen that after the Canon is read and
the Consecration finished, there be neither Wine nor Water in the Chalice, he
ought immediately to pour in both, and the Priest shall Repeat the Consecration
from that Place of the Canon to wit, In like manner after he had supped, unto
the end. Nevertheless he must not make the two Crosses which are severally made
over the Host.

Now if thou would know what the Priest should do, when as after he has
Received the Body, he has Water in his Mouth, and is certain that it is so
indeed, whether he ought to swallow it down, or spit it out, thou must look for
that in the Summary of (4) Hostiensis, in the title of the Cons^cration of the
Mass.

Howbeit, it is better for him to swallow it down, then to spit it out, lest
happily when he spits out the Water, he cast up some Crum of (5) BREAD withal.

Notes.
Mark (good Reader,) what a deal of Balderdash Foppery, and Confusion's here;
sometimes an Empty Cup is Consecrated; then where is the blood? why the
(breaden, and bloodless) God is laid by, to rest till the Priest new makes him
some -- If he Consecrates without Water, there is no adding of it afterward,
lest the blood should be corrupted (mark that) The blood of Christ is
incorruptible, this is Corruptible; Ergo, it is not the blood of Christ. The
knack is, that if the Water had been mixed with the Wine, before the Wine had
been turned into Blood, it had been, (say they,) Transubstantiated into blood
(with the Wine) if discreetly mingled -- but otherwise it will not Incorporate;
come Riddle me that! Their Schoolmen are sometimes together by the Ears about
these Sacramental Subtilties, and Skirmish stoutly, but the Prevailing party
boldly Allege, that as holy Water makes all the rest of the Water Holy, (Ay a
drop of it forsooth will sanctify the whole Ocean) so the Wine put amongst the
Water turns it into Wine, provided there be more Wine then Water: Look ye now,
there is the Difference! Now here be two* Transubstantiations of the Water, first
into Wine, then into blood, -- * Yea there is a third Metamorphosis of it, when
it is converted to something else* in the Priests belly, and avoided.

(1) If this* should happen, then the Sacramental words are pronounced in vain.
-- Or had their Doctrine been true they tell a swinging LIE* When the Priest
says, This is my (that is Christ's) blood, meaning Material Corporal blood, and
yet there is nothing but mere Water which the Impious Wretch Worships, and
advances, it above his brainless Bald-pate for the People to adore it; If this
ben't point blank IDOLATRY, there is no Idolatry in the World. Now either this
may sometimes happen, or not, if it happens, no man is sure but he commits
Idolatry every time he is at Mass, If it never happens the Caveat is
Superfluous, and his Infallible Popeship is an impertinent fallible Sot.

(2) Here Is another Trick for* you, Gentlemen, the God-maker in this Case, eats
no less then two Gods at a Breakfast, one wet, another Dry; O Monstrous sottish
Popery!

(3) That is in plain Eng^ish, if the People are sensible of the Juggle, that
their God is not well made, and so for fear they should refuse to adore it, the
Priest must by a neat Legerdemain gallop it over in his mind, which will do the
feat cleverly.

(4) This Hostiensi^ writ a vast Volumn of these Fopperies, and treats of this
matter, lib. 4. titul. 15.

(5) Note that BREAD is here still called BREAD after the Consecration and
after the eating of it also, A Heresy, (in the Judgment of Papists) so great,
that whosoever holds it, is first to be given to the Devil, then to the
Tormentors, to by fried in flames, or else by some other Romish Charity
destroyed. Yet if St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 24. Or Christ himself Mat. 26. 26. Mark*
14. 32. Luke^. 22. 19. may be believed, It is called BREAD after Thanksgiving
(or if they will have it Consecration) and in the Distribution of it to the
Disciples, as well as before. Now the Pope (Unawares) here calls it BREAD, yet
you must believe it to be flesh; therefore the Priest must swallow the Water,
lest any God-flesh sticking in his Teeth, or straggling in his Chops, should be
spit out with it.

CHAP. XII.
LIkewise if the Priest after Consecration, remembers that he has been at (1)
Breakfast, or has Committed any Deadly Sin, or is Excommunicated, he must be
Contrite, or at the least (2) Desire the Grace of* Contrition, and then he may
well enough go on, so he purpose to make satisfaction and desire Absolution.

Howbeit, if before the Consecration, he Remembers himself concerning the
things aforesaid, it were safer* for him to leave the Mass begun, and get
absolution; unless by so doing some scandal may arise.

Notes.
(1) By a Canon at Salegaustadein in the time of Henry 8th. Emperor, and Pope
Benedict 8. No Priest* was to say Mass the day following, if he has drunk after
Cock-crowing, unless in Case of necessity. And if it be dangerous to swallow a
drop of water when he washes his Mouth (which they fiercely dispute) much more
danger there is of a lusty Mornings Draught -- Now how contrary is this to the
Lords Supper or Communion? Which was administered by our Lord Jesus after they
had supped.

(2) Note how little Repentance will serve this Theophagus (God-eater) of a
Priest, and

(3) How tender they are in concealing the Sacramental Cheat, it being safer to
neglect Confession and Absolution, then discover it.

CHAP. XIII.
ALso If a fly, Spider, or any such thing, fall into the Chalice before
Consecration, or if it be perceived that any Body has poisoned it, that Wine
must be poured out, and when the Chalice is washed clean, there must be other
Wine mixed with Water, put in to be Consecrated.

But if any of these things happen after the Consecration, then shall he (1)
slily take the Fly, Spider, or any other such thing, and diligently wash it
between his Fingers, over some other Chalice in Diverse Waters, and so burn the
Vermin, and put the Water that washed it with Ashes into the (2) Pix, or if it
can be done without Abomination and Horror, let the Priest take it.

But if it may probably be feared that the Nature of the* Wine is infected with
Poison, or that the Priest dares not receive it for fear of Vomitting it up, or
over much horror, let it then be burnt, as before, for the Poison by no means
must be taken, but the blood wherein the Poison ^s, must be kept in a clean
Vessel with the Relics. And lest the Sacrament should ^e imperfect, he must
again in due order make ready the Chalice, and Rehearse the Consecration of the
blood, beginning at this place, In like manner, etc. And note this, that
according to the Doctors, no* Abominable thing ought to be received by Occasion
of this Sacrament.

Notes.
What a deal of misfortunes this Round-Robbin of a God is subject too!
Certainly if it had been a God, no corruption could touch it, therefore here is
a notable confutation of the Popish Transubstantiation, it being an
unanswerable Truth, that whatsoever is capable to be infected with poison or
annoyed with vermin, cannot be the Body and Blood of Christ, which is now
Glorified and Incorruptible; But this Popish Sacrament (as their own words
expressly declare in this place) may be so infected and annoyed -- therefore it
is not the Body and Blood of Christ. Which plain Argument I defy all the
Jesuits in Europe to answer.

All that are acquainted with History must need^ know how frequently the
Devilish Priests have poisoned their Host, and destroyed their Communicants,
thereby making that which Christ ordai^ed to be a Sacrament of Life to the
faithful Receiver* ^ Fatal, invennom'd murdering Dose. As it was to Pop^
Victor the Third, who was so poisoned, etc. Bu^ how long, O Lord! how long will thou saffer th^^ Monstrous Abomination to infect the World?

(1) Here you have the Priest turned Spider-Catcher, and Fly-washer -- very
good -- but pray what w^^ it these vermin drunk, till they were drowned ^gain?
Was it Wine? Then the Consecration s^^nify'd nothing: Was it blood? if so,
Spiders, Flies, etc. may drink the sacred Blood of Jesus -- O horrible
Blasphemy!

(2) This Pix is a kind of a shrine wherein they put all the sanctified Trash,
as Relics and other such things; here these holy Spiders are reposited --
Well I Will say no more, but, Like Relic, like Saint* like Sacrament, etc.

CHAP. XIV.
IF the Priest forgets to say some of those things he ought to have said, he
ought not to be troubled in mind for it. For he that speaks much, does not
always remember, what he says; yea although he certainly knows that he has
left out somewhat, yet let him go on, and make no Rehearsal thereof, considering
that there are no such things necessarily required in the Sacrament as are
Secrets or some other words of the Canon, nevertheless if he manifestly
perceive, that he has left out somewhat that of necessity is to be used in the
Sacrament, (as the form of the words of Consecration) he ought to Rehearse over
again * all the words of the Consecration upon that matter; for otherwise it
should be NO CONSECRATION, which he needed not do, if many other things had
been omitted. This Conjunction ( Enim) for, or the rest of the words which go
before or follow after the Form, are of not of its substance. But if the Priest
should stand in Doubt whether he had left out some word appertaining to the
substance in form or not, he ought by no means to keep the form, but may
without any rash assertion amend all the order and form concerning his own
matter, with this intention, that if he had once Consecrated, he would by no
means Consecrate again; But if he had not so Consecrated, that then he would
Consecrate both Body and Blood.

Note.
* These Spiritual Conjurers make a kind of Magical Charm of their Sacramental
words; for if the Priest mistakes one word or syllable, all is stark naught, and
ineffectual -- For all the world like the ^lack-Art-men, who in their
Incantations must not miss a syllable of their form of Devilism, if they do,
the Enchantment signifies no more than this Consecration. We find Christ and
his Apostles at their holy supper did not strictly tie themselves, yet all
agreeing in substance to one Form. But these Priests never follow any form
mentioned in Scripture, but impudently use a Form of their own Invention.

CHAP. XV.
IF any Priest at any time of the Consecration, be distracted of his actual
Iatent and Devotion, yet nevertheless the Consecrateth, considering that the
habitual and vertual Intent remains still in him. For the Chief Priest Christ
Jesus supplyeth his defect. But if through over great distraction he lose both
the habitual and actual Intent (which seldom or never come to pass) it seems he
ought to reassume the words of Consecration with the Actual Intent: And yet in
such sort, as that he would not Consecrate, if he had already Consecrated.

Note.
Mark still what weight is put upon the Priests intent; the whole validity of
the figment of Transubstantiation depends upon it -- Therefore (as we noted
already) there is no avoiding the Idolatry which the people must commit if they
worship a Cake for a God, their own Doctrine being this, that without a right
Intent the Consecration's of no effect. Now I would seriously appeal to any
moderate Papist, (if there be any such) what Devotion, or Pious Intent can that
Priest have that goes from a Whore or a Drunken Debauch to make his God (as
many do, if not most of them) O! that the World should be so besotted as to
believe that such pitiful sinful VVretches shall do more than the Almighty God
himself does! He made the Creatures out of nothing by his word; but these
Nonsensical, most horrid, and most monstrous Blasphemers make their Creator of
a Creature by their words, yea many thousands in one day, and many Millions in
one Age. Oh! the amazing patience of Heaven, that will endure such affronts of
Hell which the very Earth has greatest Reason to tremble at the hearing of!

CHAP. XVI
ITem, if the Consecrated Host fall from the Priests hands into the (1) Chalice
either by reason of Cold or some other Cause, before he has divided the Host,
or after, he shall in no wise take it out, nor begin again any of the
Consecration, nor yet alter any thing about the Celebration of the Sacrament:
But proceed with his Crossings and the rest of his business, as if he had had
it between his hands. But if the Eucharist falls to the Ground, then let the
Earth whereon it fell be scraped up and burnt to Ashes, and the Ashes be
bestowed (or kept) near the Altar.

Notes.
(1) Here you have the poor Bran-Idol in danger of Drowning in his own Blood,
yet the Priest must not once dare to give him a lift, till he has said all his
Tricks over him, and then soups off Flesh, Blood, and Bones at one go-down --
This God i^ in as unlucky a Plunge^ as the Flies and Spider^ lately mentioned,
and if he been't drowned, he is a^ least well sous'd and sok't -- yet it is
pretty sport to see how the Priests Fingers frisk and Caper without their God,
whilst he poor thing stirs not a bit, but looks to be swallowed Dead or alive
every Minute.

(2) Mark that the Earth is not fit to bear this Idol, and therefore because it
had the honor to touch it, it is scraped into Relics -- O horrible Blasphemy!

CHAP. XVII
ITem, If through neglect any of the Blood drop down upon the Table, that
sticks fast to the ground, let the Priest lick up the Blood with his Tongue,
and let the place where it fell be scraped, and the scraping burnt, and the
Ashes kept about the Altar with the Relics. And according to the Canons let
the Priest do Penance forty days, or otherwise let him make due satisfaction,
at the discretion of a wise Confessor.

But if the Chalice drop down upon the Altar, let him suck up the drop and do
Penance three days, but if the drop fall upon the Table cloth, and run through
unto the second Cloth, let him do Penance four days; If unto the third Cloth,
let him do Penance nine days, if unto the fourth Cloth, let him do Penance
twenty days, and let the Priest or the Deacons wash the Clothes, which the Drop
touched, in three several waters over the Chalice, and let the washings be laid
* up and kept with the rest of the Relics.

Note.
* Here again we have new Relics; but in my epinion, if the Priest had been
made to Drink these washings, it had been a more cleanly Draught, then the
washings of the Flies, Spiders, and other Vermin, whereof a dranght was before
made, if the Patient would have soupt it off.

CHAP. XVIII.
ITem if any man through chance (or surfeit) vomit up the * Eucharist, the same
vomit shall be burnt to Ashes, and the Ashes thereof to be bestowed and kept
about the Altar.

And if any Clark, Monk, Friar, Priest, or Deacon do it, let him do Penance
forty days; a Bishop seventy days, and a Layman thirty. But if any man cast it
up by reason of sickness, let him do Penance five days, or else let him as
aforesaid make due satisfaction at the discretion of his Confessor.

Note.
* The Eucharist is taken for the Priests God -- But the word Eucharistia,
signifies giving of Thanks, Gratiarum Actio -- or bona gratia, good grace, Ephesians.
5. 4. And since it would be too gross to say to vomit up God, or Gods Body, or
the Host, they say the E^charist; that is in plain English, they vomit up
Thanksgiving, and inshrine the stinking vomit as a d^^estable Relic.

CHAP. IX.
ANd whatsoever Priest shall not safely keep the Sacrament from being EATEN up,
either by Mice, or any other Vermin shall do Penance forty days. But if any
lose it, or if any one piece thereof fall to the ground, and the same not
possibly to be found again, let him do Penance thirty days. And it is also
thought good that that Priest through whose negligence the Consecrated Hosts
shall putrify, is worthy the like Penance! and such a Penitent ought to fast
and abstain from the Communion and saying of Mass, during all those days.

Nevertheless in weighing the Circumstances of the offense and person, the
aforesaid Penance ought according to the will of the Discreet Confessor, to be
either augmented or diminished.

Nevertheless this is to be holden for a sure Rule, that wheresoever all the
whole Species of the Sacrament are to be found, they are reverently to be
reverenced, but if it cannot be done without Peril, then they are to be
reserved for Relics.

Note.
Here they take the name Sacrament, as they did before the name Eucharist --
for it would be too gross to say that the Body of God should be eaten with
Mice, etc. Surely it cannot be said of this God as it is said of Jesus, Psalm.
16. 10. Thou will not suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption, Act. 2. 31. and
13. 35.

CHAP. XX.
ITem, If the Host or but a piece thereof be found under the (1) Patten or
Corporas Cloth, and be doubted whether the same be Consecrated or not, he
ought reverently to receive it, after he has taken the Blood, as thou shall
find more at large set out in the Title of the Celebration of the Mass.

Item, if the Lords Body given to (2) a sick man or woman be by him or her cast
up through Infirmity, or by reason of any other Cause: Yet let it be received
again as carefully and as speedily as may be. And if there can be found none
that has so good a Stomach as to receive that which the sick body has cast
up, then let it be burnt and the Ashes kept in a Shrine.

Note.
(1) The Cover of the Chalice is called Paten, and the Corporas Cloth is so
called, because the Body of their God rests upon it.

(2) I find a Story Recorded that in the year 526. In the Jacobin Convent, in
Auserre, an old Friar of that place having been almost rotten with the Pox, and
had not said Mass a long time, resolves to Feast himself with his God on Corpus
Christi Day, but not able to digest it, thinking to return to his Chamber, he
disgorges that, with other filthy stuff just before the Chapter Door -- This
sets all the Convent in an uproar, and the Prior being absent, they consult a
while, and at last set up a Tabernacle over it, as they do when they sing for
the Dead, with four wax Tapers, one at each corner -- then the Novices sung all
day this versicle, Tantum ergo Sacramentum veneremur cern^i, etc. they sang
also the Antiphone of the same day, viz, O sacrum Convivium; etc. that is, O
Sacred Banquet, yet none of them had the Stomach to taste it, so that they
could never have more truly said, Domine non sum Dignus ut intres sub Tectum
meum, Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my Roof, -- viz. to
be swallowed by me.

At last they agree to shovel the holy vomit together, and reverently gather it
up, and that the ground should be carefully pared and all carried into the
Church -- then comes the Superior in his holy Vestments who with the whole
Convent went into the Church in solemn Procession, two Novices marching before
the Shrine, with Candlesticks, and Tapers. Well the ground is pared, and the
holy vomit gathered up with anointed Fingers -- some set up their howling
Notes, and some shed their Crocodile Tears at so doleful a Spectacle, to the
great confusion of their Solemn Feast -- Now they consult what was* best to be
done with it, some of the oldest Doctors advised it should be burnt and the
Ashes kept in a Shrine* which was immediately done -- And now Gentlemen there is
your blessed Relic. The two Novices mentioned* were amaz^d at this abominable
Passage, and upon deep scrutiny resolved (God in mercy so ordering it,) to
forsake that filthy Profession, and therefore left the Convent and became
worthy Professors of the Gospel. From whom this Passage was received, and
Published by Mr. Stocker in English, near one hundred years ago.

CHAP. XXI.
THE like also of the * Invetered Eucharist. [that is, rotten with Age] set
down by the Council of Orleans chap. 5. Every Sacrifice that is spoiled by
sordid oldness is to be burnt, and the Ashes thereof to be di^posed of near the
Altar.

Note
* Here Is a rotten God still! surely this is not that living Bread that came
down from Heaven.

CHAP. XXII.
ITem, if the Body of Christ being (1) consumed either by Mice or Spiders,
comes to nothing, or be overmuch bitten, if the Worm lie whole and ^^und in
it, then let it be burnt but if the remnant that is s^ bitten, may be taken
without loathing, it i^ a great deal better that it be received.

Likewise, if any man incontinently after the receiving there^f, cast it up
again (al^eit this Food of the Soul passes away into the mind, and not into
the Belly) yet for the Reverence that is to be had to the Sacrament, if there be
found never so little a piece ^f the Eucharist, let it be reverently received
(2) again, and the vomiting burnt, and the Powder thereof put amongst the
Relics.

Note.
(1) O detestable, O horrible Blasphemy! Now it belches f^rth without a blush
-- O you villainous Wretches, what Lords Body do you mean? Now your own Mouths
confound you, and it is your own Mass Book will bear Record that your God is a
corrupt, ro^ten filthy Idol -- Nor shall you escape that divine Nemesis that
flaming vengeance reserved for you by that Jesus you thus Mock and Blaspheme,
for your more then Barbarous Murder of his Dear Members, because they would
not worship your rotten Worm-Eaten Wafer.

(2) Like the Dog that turns to his vomit; it is pity they should ever eat
better meat.

CHAP. XXIII.
ITem, as concerning the matter of the Blood, take heeed it be not sharp, or
else so small Wine, as that it has no color of Wine, neither let it be redish
water, stained with a Cloth that has been Dyed in red wine, let it not be
vinegar nor wine utterly corrupt. Let it not be Claret Wine [ Claretum] nor
Wine made of Mulberies nor Pomegranates, because they keep not the true color
of Wine.

Whosoever Consecrateth knowingly, and not compelled, with wine that is in the
way of corruption [ in via corruptionis] or tending that way grievously
sins, although he Consecrated: Because it keeps not the color of Wine.

Item, there must be great care taken that but a little water be put into it,
for if there should be so much put in, as to cause the Wine to loo^e its
color, the Consecration were of NONE * effect.

Note.
* They say that there are many kinds of Pears wherewith a man may make Wine
to say Mass withal for want of better stuff; and why not as well Mullerries,
Pomegranates, etc. Now if these blookheaded Priests had contented themselves
with Christ's ^ay, they had not needed to keep such a sputter and puzzle about
the mixture of water with the wine, for there is no such thing in Christ's
Institution. Besides a man had need be a Prophet, to know when there is but
just water enough, else he commits Idolatry; because say they, if there be too
much, the whole Consecration is ineffectual.

CHAP. XXIV.
IF any part of the (1) Wine be spilt before the Transubstantiation let him
change the (3) veil [palla] without any words, and Celebrating Prosecute his
Office.

If all be spilt, let the Clothes be changed, and let him minister it again,
and begin from this oblation therefore, yet always premising a Confession.

If any part of the (2) Blood be spilt after Transubstantiation, yet let not
the Priest cease to do his Office.

But if it be all spilt, so that there remain no jot thereof (which is very
hard to do) let him lay it up, on the Altar, and minister the Bread again, and
the* Wine and Water also, and begin again from this oblation therefore, etc.
Always provided that his Confiteor, (that is, Confession) be first said: And
let the Minister or sick Body receive the first host, or some other that i^
ready for that purpose.

If the Blood (4) freez in the Chalice (in frosty ^eather) the Priest must
breathe over it a good while, till it be thavved, or with great reverence
thavv it, with quick Charcoal, or if it cannot so be thawed, let him swallow it
down whole (5)

Notes.
(1) Before Transubstantiation, they call it Wine, Wine; but after, (2) Blood,
Blood; for then say they) it is no more Wine.

(3) This is that that covers the Chalice; which must be removed by slight of
hand, for fear of Offense forsooth.

(4) Sure this Blood must be very cold, when separated from the Body, for Blood
never freezeth in a man's Body unless the Body be stark Dead.

(5) This is no Drinking, but Eating of Wine, (or rather Blood) the Priest must
have a notable wide Throat if he escapes choking -- Poor Anacreon was choked
with a Grape-stone, and one of the Popes with a Fly -- and Fabius the Praetor
with a hair in his Milk, but our Priest can gulp down a lump of bloody Ice.
Presto be gone.

CHAP. XXV.
ITem, if there be any other thing requisite to this matter, let them be sought
for in the Breviary and Lecture of Hosteinsis, in the Title of the Celebration
of the Mass, or rather in the Summaries of the New Doctors of the Civil and
Canon Laws, and of the Divines.

Note.
Reader, here is the Conclusion of the Cautelae or Caveats of the Mass: such a
Medley of ridiculous Foppery and Superstition, yea point black Idolatry, that I
profess I could have hardly believed that any men of sense could have heaped
together such a parcel of monstrous absurdities, had not I seen them in their
own Books, which are here carefully translated, word for word* Yet by this
Conclusion, it seems there are Cart loads of them, and therefore, who so
pleases may rake that prodigi^us kennel. Here is stinking stuff enough to
nauseate any true Christian and so we leave them.

The Mass of the Body of Jesus Christ.
The Preparation, and Requisites of the Priest that is to say Mass -- And first
of his Confession and Absolution.
CHAP. I.
NOw to your Work Priest, make Room there! Well, when they are to play their
Part, and remedy the mischances that might happen in the inte^lude -- the
Priest prepares himself by saying hi^ Confiteor, by the appointment of Pope
Innocent the third, then he must be Combed, Trimmed, and must wash his hands --
and so put on his holy Garments-Look ye sirs! here is the first Scene.

The Preparation to the Mass.

Here is to be noted that he which will make Confession of his Sins, must first
say unto the Priest,

Bless me O Father. (^)

The Priest.

The Lord be i^ thy Heart and in thy Lips, for the Confessing of all thy Sins,
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. So be it.

Them let him make Confession of his (2) Sins, and when he has so do^^, let
the Priest say,

The God Almighty have mercy upon thee, etc. Indulgence and Absolution, etc.

Let thy Sins be forgiven thee the through MERIT of our Lord Jesus Christ the
SUFFRAGES of our Holy Mother the Church, and the GOOD DEEDS which thou shall do
hereafter by the Grace of God.

Then let him enjoin him his (3) Penance saying,

And for an Especial Penance, thou shall say this, and this, or do this and
this.

Then let him absolve him, saying,

Our Lord Jesus Christ the high Bishop, of his most Pious Mercy absolve and
forgive thee; And I by the (4) Authority granted to me, do first absolve thee
from the sentence of the less Excommunication if thou have need thereof. And
besides I absolve thee from ALL thy Sins, in the name of the Father, and of the
Holy Ghost, Amen.

Notes.
(1) First note that the Priest Blasphemes God and Christ at first dash, by
applying himself for a Blessing to his ( per antiphrasin) Holy Father, here is
like to be Holy Service indeed! mark also that in the Absolution wha^ stuff is
joined with the Merits of Jesus the sole and only Mediator, viz. Mother
Church, and his own good works, making them joint Saviors with Christ, that
is, Mother Church one third, viz. out of the store of works of Supererogation,
viz. good works, which they are not commanded to do, which indeed is that very
Ethelothrekeia, will worship, condemned Col. 2. 23. This is done by the Rabble
of Shavelings, Priests, Monks, Friars, etc. Another third is to be fetched out
of the Shop of his own good Deeds, so that one third only is allowed to
Christ, and therefore these Blasphemers make him only a third part Savior.

(2) David prays to be purged from secret Sins, because it is impossible to
know all, but the Priest it seems can do more than David who said, Psalm. 19.
12. Who can understand his errors, Cleanse thou me from secret faults.

(3) This Penance they enjoin for sa^isfaction, and by THIS, and THIS, is
meant what the Confessor thinks fit to order him, as three or four Pater
Noster^, Ave Marys, or some such dreadful punishment, and when he has fumbled
them over, he is like ^ur late Treason-plotters, AS INNOCENT AS THE CHILD
UNBORN -- Is not this fine satisfaction? Certainly the Merits of Christ are
Excommunicated, by these fellows: Yet the Scripture tells us, that by the
Travel of his Soul, God saw and was satisfied, that he made an end of sin and
Transgression, and by one sacrifice perfected for ever them that were
sanctified, made Peace by the Blood of his Cross, on Earth, and lives in Heaven
to keep it, and obtained Eternal Redemption for his People* Believers are
Pardoned and Justified by him, etc. Mourning for Sin, Prayer for Pardon against
the power thereof, and Mortification of it, are for quite other things then
satisfaction for it. But what ever the Scripture says, must it seems truckle to
the Infallible Dictates of the Romish Chair.

'Twas very pretty, when a Popish Archbishop of Canterbury enjoined ten of his
Tennants to do Penance because they carried litter for his Horses very
clownishly, a dreadful sin! 'Twas thus ( de Cariando Litteram, of carrying
Litter, monstrous Latin, in the very Language of the Beast) the Sunday
following they were to go bare headed and bare footed leasurely before the
Procession, carrying every man hi^ Sack full of Straw and Hay upon his
Shoulder, the mouth thereof so open that the lookers on may see it -- Good
sport was it not! More of these Pennances you^ ^^ay see in that excellent Book
Entitled, The Man of Sin, Printed for Mr. Boulter in Cornhil 1677. p. 110.
etc. To which I refer you, heartily wishing every Family in England had one of
them.

(4) The Priest speaks* like a Prince, he has absolute Authority to absolve for
sooth, as if it could not be* done by Christ, without him, O* Blasphemous
Absolution!

Before we proceed it may not be amiss to give a brief account of the Priests
Massing Habit, which differs from a Bishops when his Lordship gives himself the
trouble of saying Mass. The Bishop puts on nine several Vestments and a Mere
Priest but six.

The Priest must be shod, though he has vowed to go bare footed, for, say
they, he is like a Warrier that fights with the Devil, in Defense of
Christians; Ergo he must be Armed to Duel that Dreadful Enemy. Therefore he
puts on his Shoes first, which signify (in their sense) the Humility of Christ.

Then the Bishop attires his head with an Horned Mitre, whereas the Priest
wears only a Coiff and Kerchief (as they call it) this Mitre is a kind of
Spiritual H^lmet to keep his Lordships Patesafe and sound from Satan's Attaque;
The Priests Coif denotes the Robe or Veil that Christ's Face was covered with,
when the Soldier smote him, Matthew. 27. Mark 15. Luke 23. Crying, Who smote
thee?

The Alb, is a kind of shirt of Mail, in their sense representing the Gown
which Herod gave to Christ, in mockery. The Girdle with which he binds this
Smock of the Whore of Babylon, signifies the Bow, with which these Archers kill
Devils in this Holy War. The little Cord wherewith the Stole is tied, denotes
the Quiver wherein the Arrows are put. The Stole is the Breast Plate, which
goes about the Neck* and Crosses the Priests Belly like a Saint Andrew's Cross,
signifying the Cord with which Christ was bound when they scourged him.

The Manipule (that is the Child's swaddling Band) is put about his Arms as a
Bracelet, and is instead of a Mace or Courtleax, denoting with all the Cord
with which Christ's Hands were bound.

The Chasuble is a loose Garment with a hole in the middle, through which the
Priest like a Monkey puts his head, and so one part hangs before, the other
behind, in which undermost part is always a Cross; this signifies the Garment
without Sean wherewith in mockery they attired Christ.

They have abundance of other Fooleries, and some mystical signification
(ridiculous enough to (...) sure) is attributed to each of them -- These m(...)
suffice to show what difference there is between these Sacrament-makers, and
Christ's Institution, (...) which no such Habiliments were used; but Christ
without any super addition of Pontifical Robes, wash his Disciples Feet, O
unspeakable Humility! But these Fellows array themselves with a mock pageantry
of Habit, and happy is he that kisses then Tails. Besides they have a kind of a
Consecratione (call it Conjuring if you will) for all these Garments to keep
all saucy Devils away, that dare to interrupt the sacred Comedy.

Every piece of the Priests spiritual Armor is attended with a Prayer, which he
must whisper to himself forsooth, denoting the Magical Spell, for which it was
ordained, which take from their own Book as follows.

Here follow the words which the Priest must say, when he Apparelleth himself
to say Mass, first, when he has Crossed himself, and taken his Amict, let him
say,
Lord put the Helmet of Salvation upon my head that I may vanquish and overcome
all the Deceits of the Devil, in the Name of the Father, of the Son, etc.

In girding himself with the strings of the Amict.

Lord make me clean both in Soul and Body, to the end I may worthily perform
thy holy Work through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In putting on of his Alb let him say,

Lord put on me the Vestment of Salvation, and the Robe of Righteousness; or,
Environ me evermore with the Robe of Gladness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

When he puts on his Girdle let him say,

Lord Gird the Reins of my Heart and Body with the Girdle of Faith, and quench
in me all humors of Lechery, and let the love of Chastity remain in me,
through Jesus Christ, etc.

In taking the Manipule let him say,

O Almighty God, I beseech thee, that I may so de serve to bear my Manipule
both going and weepig with patience, and putting it off with Joy, that I may
with these have part through Jesus Christ, etc.

When he puts on his Stole let him say,

Environ my Neck with the Stole, which is the Robe of Righteousness.

When he puts on his Chasuble, let him say,

Thy Yoke and Burden, O Lord, are sweet and light, and therefore make me able
to bear them, that I may obtain Mercy at thy hands, O Savior of the World, who
Live and Reignest one God in perfect Trinity World without End.

Notes.
O the Repeated Blasphemies of these Wretches! what the Apostle ascribes to the
true Spiritual Armor which defends us in and through Christ, from the Assaults
of the Devil, is by this Mass Priest attributed to his Cursed Head-geer, and
the other appurtenances of his more Devilish Mass. But for the exposition of
that passage of Scripture Ephesians. 6. I refer my Reader to Mr. William Gurnal of
Lavenham in Suffolk, who upon that Subject Writ Largely and Learnedly.

CHAP. III.
THe Priest being thus prepared, let him approach the Altar saying the 43.
Psalm, Judge me O God, etc. Unto the end, with Glory be to the Father.

Then must he repeat the Versicle -- Introibc, etc.

And I will go in to the (1) Altar of God, to that God which makes glad my
mouth:

The Verse.

Confess your selves unto the Lord because he is good.

The Answer.

For his Mercy endures for ever.

And I guilty and unworthy Priest confess my self unto Almighty God, (2) and to
the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to all the Saints, and to you my Brethren: Because
that I miserable Sinner, have greatly sinned against the Law of my God, in
Thought, Word, Deed, and by negligence, and through my own fault, my fault, my
most grievous fault; And therefore I BESEECH MARY, the most Blessed Mother of
God, and all the he-and-she-Saints of God ( omnes Sanctos and Sanstas Dei) and
you my Brethren, to pray for me wretched Sinner, unto the Almighty Lord our God
to have mercy upon me

When he has thus made his Confession with ^ profound bending of his Body, let
him so stand still till the rest have Answered.

The Clerks shall answer, Amen, (2) Misereatur tu(...) Omnipotens Deus, etc.
The Almighty God have mercy upon thee, etc.

Notes.
How the places of Scripture here alleged and misapplyed, and God is mocked
and Blasphemed, any body may see that is not wilfully blind.

(1) The Table on which the Supper was Celebrated. and whereon thanks were
given to God, which thanks indeed are Sacrifices of Praise by a Metaphorical or
Allusive Phrase called an Altar by some of the Ancients, but Christians have no
Material Altar, but only this Spiritual Altar, whereon it is not lawful for
them to eat that serve the Tabernacle, viz. the Jews or Heathens, who also had
Altars and Sacrifices for their Idols. So that the Pedigree of this Popish
Altar must needs be derived from the Jews, or Pagan Idolaters, for it has no
Sanction in the Gospel.

It Is worth observing, how these Mass-Mongers Massacre the Psalms: picking ont
here and there some Verses that have no coherence together -- expressly
contradicting the second Council of LAODICEA.

'Twas a pretty mistake of a Priest, who neither understood nor could pronounce
this Introibo, to say constantly and Introibo ad Tartara Dei, that is, I will
go unto the Hell of God -- I am sure if he spoke not Truth, yet he was in the
right way to Hell, when he forsook Christ, and followed such strange and
Devilish Paths, etc. his Posture denotes that he neglects Heaven, for he looks
Downwards very demurely -- The Roman Poet the Heathen could tell him, that God
formed man with an Erected face on purpose that he might behold and adore
Heaven.

Os homini Sublime De^ it Caelumque tueri
Jussit and Erectos, ad Sydera tollere Vultus.
Ovid Metam. lib. 1.
(2) The Blasphemy of the Priests Confession is abominable it is not only to God;
No no, that would not do; it is to all the he and she Saints; sure these
Masculine and Feminine Saints have large Ears, and must be Omniscient if they
hear every Priests Confession, Now the Vassals of the infalloblo Pope, Resolve
this Dialemma, thus:

Eieher your he and she Saints hear your Confessions, Prayers, and
Applications; or they do not: If they do hear them, then they are certainly
Omniscient, that is, they know all things, for it would b^ impossible for them
or any of them, at one and the same time to hear the Prayers of many Thousand^
if not Millions, in several Nations and several Languages, and of many hundreds
if not thousand^ of several kinds of Suits, and answer them all at so vast a
Distance, unless they were Omniscient, and if so, by unavoidable Consequence,
(that being on^ of the Divine Majesty's Incommunicable Attributes) you make
them Absolute Gods, which is Superlative Blasphemy to assert:

But if they do not, nor cannot hear, as aforesaid, then all your Prayers,
Confessions, etc. to them are not only idle, and ridiculous, but most horrid
Blasphemy in the very Abstract; Avoid this, ye Saint-Worshippers, if ye can,
and Vindicate your Mass-Priest, who makes no mention of Christ to be his
Advocate, but the Virgin Mary, and the other Saints of both Sexes, etc. O
horrible!

(2) Here Is another Trick for you, when the Priest Confesses, the Clerk, (as
the Representative of the People) absolves him, (mark that) Ay, and the Priest
to quit scores, absolves them; kaw me, kaw thee; like scabby Colts, they nab
one another, (Reader pray bear with me, it is difficult to be serious at so ridia
past-time) this is the only difference of these Absolutions, the Clerk says in
the Singular, Misereatur tui, and the Priest in the Plural, Misereatur vestri,
etc,

CHAP. IV.
ANd after the standers by have confessed, let the Priest say, Amen. Brethren
and Sisters, that by the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ by the Aid and sign of
the holy Cross, THROUGH THE INTERCESSION OF THE ALWAYS BLESSED AND GLORIOUS
VIRGIN MARY, and by the MERITS of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of St.
Michael the Arch Angel, and of the most Holy Saint Julian, and of all the Holy
men and Women; the God Almighty have mercy upon you, and forgive you all your
Sins; And I do further beseech the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God to bring
you to everlasting Life, Amen. I do also beseech our Good Father, and Merciful
Lord, to pardon and forgive you all your Sins, Amen. And the Grace of the Holy
Ghost the Comforter, enlighten our Minds, Hearts, and Bodies, and cleanse us
from all our Sins and Iniquities, Amen.

Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who has made both Heaven and Earth.
Blessed be the Name of the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore. Most
Holy Mother of God* pray for us, that we may be made worthy the Promises of
Christ, Lord hear my Prayer, and let my cry come unto thee. The Lord be with
you -- Answer, and with your Spirit -- Let us pray.

Let the Priest in bowing himself before the Altar say whisperingly,

Lord take from us all our Iniquities, that our Spirits being Purifyed, we may
deserve to enter into the Holy of Holy ones, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

Then stooping let him secretly say,

We beseech thee O Lord, through the Merits of the Saints, whose Relics we
have here, and through the Merits of the rest of the Saints, to forgive me all
my Sins, Amen.

Which done, let him lift up himself, and laying his hands on the Altar, kiss
it, and if it be a Solemn Mass by reason of the Double Feast, let him take the
Censor (viz. the Frankincense Box) out of the Deacons hand, and perfume the
Altar therewith, and Returning the Censor to the Dea^on, let him kiss the Paten
and say,

We adore thee O Christ, and bless thee, because through thy Holy Cross thou
have Redeemed the World. Thou O Lord which have suffered for us, have mercy
upon us.

The Prayer.

We beseech thee, O Lord, to look upon this Family, for the which our Lord
Jesus Christ Refused not to be betrayed into the hands of the Wicked and abide
the Torment of the Cross, who lives, and Reigns with thee, etc.

Notes.
Here are almost as many Blasphemies as Prayers, all the men and Women Saints,
yea the Cross, being joined with Jesus the Blessed Redeemer, and made joint
Saviors with him, -- In which no certain Number nor Order is observed, only
the Priests invoke such as they have a particular kindness for, viz. their
Choice Patrons.

The Priest must whisper or buzz two Prayers here which is against the Decree
of the Counsel of Basil, which damns those secret Prayers of Massing Priests,
This Mumbling looks like Conjuring for all the World. --

This Sancta Sanctorum, Holy of Holies, is not that which God Ordained by
Moses, Exodus 30. for that is Abolished, Heb. 8. by the coming of the Messiah,
prefigured by it, nor can it be that which Christ went into at his Ascension,
which is in Heaven; Now there being no more but these two, the Sancta
Sanctorum, must be of their own or the Devils making, and may be well called
SATAN'S SANCTUARY.

As for the Relics so often mentioned, the plain Case is this, when
Superstition began to creep into the Church, where good men and Martyrs were
buried, they built Sepulchers, and Feigned, that Remission of Sin, and many
other Heavenly Blessings might be had by visiting them, and making offerings
there, so gulling the simple people of their Money -- But these growing too
numerous, the Priests judged it profitable to make a kind of Monopoly of them,
and therefore procured a Decree at the first Council of Carthage, about the
time of Pope Anastasius, that the Bishops should pull down those scattered
Monuments, resorted to, and build them in more profitable Marketplaces, with a
Prohihition that no Christians should haunt the forsaken places -- And in the
time of Pope Gelasius the First, it was Decreed, that no Altar should be
Consecrated unless it were of Stone, and had some Relics of Saints in it,
which they counterfeited as they pleased.

The unmber of these is infinite, as Saint Popes, Saint Cardinals, Saint
Bishops, Saint Abbots, Saint Priests, Monks, Friars, with a world of he is and
she is besides -- Saint Bell, Saint Image, Saint Vessel, Saint Garment, Saint
Temple, Saint Altar, etc. Of Bells, Stocks, Stones, Rome makes her best
Saints, And with fine Varnish her foul Idols paints:

Fit Saints indeed for such a Church as she!

Mock-Saints and Mock-Religion well agree.

In thirty four Churches at Rome only (and what is that to the total there?)
near 200 years ago were Reckoned up by name 200 Relics, but yet in 13 of
those Churches specified, the Author concludes with besides others, or and
diverse others, or many others, or, others innumerable -- or an infinite Number
-- Ex Libro a Stephano Planco de Patavia Romae Excuso Anno 1489.

Now by Proportion what a numbe^rless Armado of these Relics may be found in
the other Churches at Rome, and the rest of the Popifyed World.

The Monk of Charrovium -- Saint Laterane at Rome, and Hildshein, pretend to
have the foreskin of Christ cut off at his Circumcision; This is a
modest-Multiplication into three, in comparison of the whiskers following; yet
Christ had but one, and ascended with his whole Body into Heaven.

The Chalice which Christ used when he said Mass (forsooth) and the Platter in
which the Paschal Lamb was eaten, are to be seen in several places with these
Papists; sure they had good luck to escape the plunder of Jerusalem by
Vespasian, and the Priests must have notable skill to know them from other
Plate, for I never heard that Christ employed any Herald at Arms to Blazen his
Coat, or ingrave it on his Plate. Besides it must be very durable, to last so
long as 1600 years. Well suppose all these Doubts could be answered, how comes
it to pass that this Chalice is seen at Saint Mary's in the Isle of Lions, and
in the Monastery of Austin-Fryars with the Helvians. And the Platter to be at
Rome, Genoa, and Orleance, at the same time. Here Is an increase of
Multiplications! In like manner they Multiply the Towel wherewith Christ washed
his Disciples Feet, the Pots in which he turned water into Wine to be seen at
five places in three several Nations -- The Cross is multiplied to a whole Ship
load, no Town being so little but has a piece of it -- The number of the Nails
is also increased wonderfully at Millain, Carpentras, Rome, Saint Helens, Saint
Crosses Churches, at Sienna and Venice. One at Colen in Germany, one at Tryers,
at Paris in France; with the Carmelites there another; another at Saint
Denis's, and another at B^urges, another at the Abbey called the Sheeres, and
another a^ Dragminian: more than a Bakers Dozen!

T^^y pretend to have the Garments of the Virgin Mar^, as her Hair, Kerchief,
Combs, even he^ very Shift, Girdle, Shoes, Slippers, and I know not what; her
very Milk beyond the quantity of what a^y Dayry-House can show in a year -- And
all these multiplied, as far as Popish Arithmetic will go.

It would be over tedious to number the rest, respecting Saint John Baptists
Head, his Face, Brains, the tip of his Ear, his Hair, his Arm, etc. to be had
at several places. Yet the whole Head is at Saint Silvester's [at Rome all the
while: What a Cerberus do they make of the holy man? yea more than a Cerberus;
for three times three heads will not do, if this Romish Fantastical Figment were
true.

At Rome they have Paul and Peter's Bodies, both their heads at Saint Lateranes,
and one of Saint Peter's Teeth -- Yet Poictiers has got Peter's Jawbone and his
Beard to boot. Argenton in Berry has got Paul's Shoulder, and in a word, all
Churches Dedicated to them, have one p'ece or other of them -- Amongst them (if
you have* Faith enough to believe them) you may find Saint Peter's Chair, his
Massing Garments, his Altar, the Sword with which he cut off Malchus his Ear,
his Crosier, and sheep Crook, and his Cudgel that he walked with; About which
several places quarrel most fiercely, each challenging his to be the right, and
makes all the rest Impostors. Fine Catholic Doings!

It would require a Volume to particularize all, and what a havoc they make of
the Saints Bodies, who were to be single hearted in their lives, yet these
Wretches will not let 'm be single-Bodyed in their Deaths; but multiply 'em, and
snarl about 'em, as hungry Dogs do, about a parcel of Bones. etc.

If thou have a Curiosity to peruse more, se ee^ ^ook before mentioned, viz.
The Man of Sin, Print^d for Mr. Boulter in Cornhill, 1677. A very ingeni^ous
and Excellent Book, p. 1^2, etc.

CHAP. V.
In the Entrance to the Mass, let the Priest say,

OUr help is in the Name of the Lord, who has made both Heaven and Earth.
Blessed be the Name of the Lord, from henceforth for evermore. In the Name of
the Father of the Son and of the Holy Ghost Amen.

Afterward let him read the Introit of the Mass with his hands asunder, and
lifted up a little.

Here follows the Mass of Corpus Christi, Feast.

The Introit, or Entrance.

(1) He fed them with the finest of the wheat, Alleluja, (that is praised be
God) and filled them with the Honey of the Rock, Alleluja, Alleluja, Alleluja,
Praise God, Praise God, Praise God.

The Psalm.

Rejoice in God our Aid, be glad in the God of Jacob.

The Versicle.

Glory be to the Father, etc. Then let him begin and say again; He fed them,
etc. -- Then he must say, Lord have mercy, three times, Christ have mercy,
three times, and Lord have mercy three times --

Then let him go to the midst of the Altar, and bowing himself a little, and if
it be to be said, let him say,

Gloria in Excelsis Deo, etc. Glory be to God on High, etc.

And here is to be be noted, that at every to Morrow-Mass, (or Morrow-Mass) he
must always say,

Te Deum Laudamus, Te Dominum, etc. We Praise thee O God, we Confess thee O
God, etc.

Unless it be said upon the Vigil (or even) of a Saints day, or else in Lent,
or the Ember-days; ye^ upon Easter and Whitson-eve, there must be said always,
what is set down in the Black Letter.

Glory be to God on high, and in the Earth Peace to men of good will -- [ Et in
terra pax hominibus bona voluntas.] We praise thee, we bless thee, we adore
thee. We give thee thanks for thy great glory, Lord God, Heavenly King, God the
Father Almighty, Lord Jesus Christ, the only Son.

The Holy Ghost the Comforter of the Fatherless.

Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father.

The First Begotten of Mary the Virgin Mother.

Thou which take away the Sins of the World, have mercy upon us. Thou which
take away the Sins of the World, receive our Prayers.

To the Glory of Mary.

Thou which sit at the Right Hand of the Father have mercy upon us, for
thou only art holy.

Sanctifying Mary.

Thou only art the Lord.

Which governest Mary.

Thou only art the most high.

Which Crownest Mary.

Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost, in the Glory of the Father, Amen

Notes.
Now comes the Priest in his Massing-Garb out of the Vestry to Act his part,
which you must know denotes the coming of Christ out of the Virgin's Womb, or a
Bridegroom to his Bride; here is like to be Jolly Work.

(1) He has sed them with the finest of the Wheat] -- Ay, to be sure, the
Priests will not eat brown Georges, when they can get White-bread; they are all
furnished with the best Belly-Stuff; their belly, as well as the Wafer, is a God
to them. This Cake God is a notable Caterer; It furnishes 'em with the best
bits, and most delicate Wines.

The first Council of Africa, about the time o Pope Boniface the first, and the
third Council of Toledo, in the days of Pelagius the second, and the Council of
Basil, did prohibit these kind of Interludes, Spiritual Dances, and other
Antique Freaks upon Festival Days, especially in Churches.

We Will pass by the Mystical sense of their repealed Kyrie Eleisons, and
Christ Eleisons, which are Odd Numbers too, viz. 3. and 9. as Magical
Foolleries, and vain babbling, etc.

Note that the Fragments, which relate to the Holy Ghost, and to the Virgin
Mary, have been added to this hymn by others, and not by the makers of the
rest, however you have them as they are, for we cannot find the Authors of
them. They are only said on the Virgin Mary's days, that is, on the days
Dedicated to her.

CHAP. VI.
When he has done this, he kisseth the Altar in the midst, and afterward
turns himself to the People, saying.

The Lord be with you -- Answer
And with thy Spirit --
Priest -- Let us pray.

O God, who under a Marvelous Sacrament, have left us a Remembrance of thy
Passion, we beseech thee to grant us so to honor the holy Mysteries of thy
Body and Blood, that we may always find the Fruit of thy Redemption in us: who
live and Reignest with God, the Father, in the Unity of the Holy Spirit, God
World without end, Amen.

Here is to be Noted that when either the Collector the Epistle is said, his
hands are not joined together; but the Tops of his Fingers.

Through our Lord.

Here as well in the End of his Prayer, as of the Mass, hi^ ^ands ^^e to be
joined together.

Notes.
This Priest is terribly in Love with the Table, for he kisses it often, a
piece of Complaisance, he is well skilled in, etc. -- his backside is toward
the People, because the Situation of their Churches, are Eastwards, but when he
Complements them, he Vouchsafes to turn about, with his Dominus vobiscum; but
his main Business is to talk with the Altar-trash before him.

Here his Lordship the Bishop, when he says Mass, instead of Dominus Vobiscum,
the Lord be with you, is to say, Pax Domini sit semper Vobis^um, let the Peace
of God be always with you; in spite of the Bracarean Council about the time of
Pope Honorius the first, who Enacted that both Bishop and Priest should salute
the People after one and the same Fashion.

This Oremus of the Priest, which signifies Let us Pray, should denote that the
People which are at Mass should understand what is said, else how can they Pray
with him, when he uses a strange Language? see 1 Cor. 14. 2. to the 28 Verse.

The Epistle in Corpus Christi day, is taken from the 1 Cor. 11. from verse 24.
to 29. which of it self Confutes this Abominable Mass. And if the words are to
be understood without a Trope, then the Cup must needs be the New Testament,
and not blood. See 1 Cor. 11. 25. and the other Evangelical Texts that treat of
the Lords Supper. Note also by the way, that that Piece of the Epistle to the
Corinthians, mentioned just now, is ill Translated in this Mass Book, and worse
applied; For if we compare the Mass with the Lords Supper here described, we
shall find it to have no face nor form of the same; which Paul expressly says,
he received of the Lord, not daring to add or diminish from the Institution;
But alas! what a Mass indeed of Blasphemy and Superstition, is this Popish
Mass! and what a rabble of Nensensical and Wretched Ceremonies, out-doing the
silly Heathens, attend it? In a word, it is no more a kin to the Evangelical
Sacrament, then the Bottomless Pit (from whence it came) is to Heaven.

Then follows their Gradual, Sequence, and Prose, as Foppish, and Ridiculous as
the rest, and therefore Omitted, that we may hasten to the Canon it self, or
very body of their Mass.

CHAP. VII
Afterward let him carry his Mass Book unto the (1) other side and say,

O Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

When he has so done, let him look to the (2) Sacrifice, and lift up the
Patten, upon which the Host must lie, looking into the Chalice, whether there
be Wine and Water in it or no; If there be none, then let him take some,
blessing the Wine and the Water, and putting them out into the Chalice, let him
say,

Out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ issued. Blood, and likewise the Water
of Baptism, for the Remission of Sins, let the Wine and the Water be mingled
together: In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost

After that let him say,

Lord Comman^ to bless, The Lord be in my Heart, and in my Lips, that I may
worthily pronounce the Holy Gospel of Peace, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen.

And then let him make a Sign of the Cross. When the Deacon reads the Gospel,
let him kneel down before the Altar, and desire the Priest to bless him, saying,

(3) Lord command to bless, -- -- Then let the Priest say, The Lord be in thy
Heart, and in thy Lips, that thou may worthily utter his Gospel, in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,

Notes.
(1) What Ridiculous Tricks are these? Now at one end, then at the middle, next
at the end of the Table, passes, and Repasses, short and long turns, as the
nature of the Jig requires. Ye blind Stupid Wretches, where did Christ or his
Ministers command or practice such Diabolical Fopperies? the very Nature of
Gods Worship is so Diametrically Opposite to these Monstrous Fooleries, that it
were folly to confute them, any more, then by mere naming of them.

(2) The Bread and Wine not yet Consecrated are here called a Sacrifice, and I
am willing to believe that these Innocent Creatures have then no harm in them,
but when the Priests unsanctified breath Pollutes them, they become an Idol, if
not a pair of Idols.

(3) Here you have the Priest commanding himself to bless himself, and after
does that which he commands himself. Fine Apish Popish Nonsense!

CHAP. VIII.
IN all Solemn Feasts let the Deacon kneeling before the Altar, desire to have
the Incense blessed, saying,

Bless ye.

Then let the Priest Answer,

The Lord; Be thou blessed by him, in whose honor thou shall be burnt, In the
Name of the Father, etc.

After that the Priest Censeth the Altar, Chalice and Mass-Bo^k, then he gives
it back to the Deacon, who Censeth the Priest himself. And when he has so
done, he goes on to the reading of the Gospel, saying,

The Lord be with you.

Answer

And with thy Spirit.

The Priest

S^quentia Sancti Evangelii, etc. The things which follow are according to the
Gospel of Saint John.

Answer.

Glory be to thee O Lord.

When this is said, every one must make the Sign of the Cross both on his
Forehead, and also upon his Breast* then must the Priest make a sign of the
Cross upon his Book and kiss it. After that he goe^h on, and says,

In those Days Jesus said unto his Disciples, and unto the Multitude of the
Jews, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. Whosoever eats
my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwell^th in me, and I in him. As the Living
Father sent ^he, and I live* by the Father, even so he that eats me, shall
live by the means of me. This is that B^ead which came down from Heaven: Not as
your Fathers eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead, but he that eats this
Bread shall live for ever*

And after he adds,

By these Evangelical sayings, let our Sins be blotted out. Amen. -- These are
holy words, and I believe and confess it.

Notes.
*These ^ensings are said to be invented by Leo the First, but it seems that
unless the Mass be solemn, the Gods made at Petty Masses are not perfumed; so
that you have a Distinction of Masses, Grand-Masses and Petty-Masses, according
to the quality of the Saint, or Magnificence of the Audience -- O Antichrist!
that sit in the Temple of God, Exalting thy self above all that is called
God, that make this Pontificial Gaudery to be the Alpha and Omega of thy
Devilish Religion; that make these Ceremonies of besotted B^ains, to thrust
out the Naked Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel -- The Un^rring Word of God
assures us, that thou shall be tumbled with a v^ngeance from thy lofty Pinnacle
of Pride to the Bottomless Pit -- with all thy Rotten Rags, fit only for so
shameless and overgrown a Hee-Whore as thou art.

Reader, You must note that this Perfuming supposes they stunk before, else it
were needless to sweeten them -- Note also that the Incense it self is not
worth a straw, unless the Spiritual Conjurer blesses it. Mark further what a
ridiculous Prosopopeia is here, the Priest speaks to the Incense -- Ab illo
benedicaris, in cujus honor Cremaberis. In Nomine, etc. That is Be THOU blessed
by him in whose honor thou shall be burnt. In the Name, etc. Now if this Mass
be not of Gods making, (for so all Divine Worship must be) it is certainly of
the Devils making, and the Incense is Consecrated by him, and burnt to his
honor -- There Is Devilish Consecration with a Witness!

This Fragment of the Gospel mentioned, no way favors the Carnal Presence of
these Papists, as is fully proved by our Reverend Protestant Divines by
unanswerable Arguments, to which we refer* You see the words of the Gospel are
made a kind of a Charm of, as if by the bare uttering of them Sins were bl^tted
out -- which is no otherwise done but by the Blood of Christ.

[Then with several Antic Cringes and Postures the Nice^^ Creed is Repeated by
the Priest, which Creed confounds this Mass, if rightly expounded: Take but one
instance instead of many, viz. If the Bodily Presence of Christ in the Wafer be
true, then this Article of his Ascension into Heaven is false, or else the Body
of Jesus Christ, is no true (or real,) but a Fantastical Body. But the Article
by their own grant is true: Ergo, their Transubstantiation, the grand Id ^ and
life of the Mass, is a horrible Figment]

Next follows the Offertory or Oblation, as they call it, full of like. Tricks
and Blasphemies, and then comes the washing of hands, etc. as follows.

CHAP. IX.
Afterward let him go and wash his hands at the right end of the Altar,
saying,

(1) I will wash my hands among the Innocents, unto the end of the Psalm. (
viz. Psalm 25.) with, Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was, etc. Lord have
mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us -- Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc.

After he has washed his hands, let him make a sign of the Cross, standing at
the middle of the* Altar, and say,

In the Name of the Father, etc. Come Holy Ghost replenish the hearts of thy
Faithful, and kindle the fire of thy love in them.

Then let him bow himself down before the Altar, and say,

Let us be received by thee O Lord in the Spirit of Humility and a Contrite
mind, and let our Sacrifice be so made, as that it may at this day be received
by thee, and please, O Lord my God. In the Name of the Father, and Son, etc.
Amen.

Making (2) a Cross upon the A^tar, and kissing it, let him lay his hands a
cross over the Sacrifice, saying,

(3) Come O invisible Sacrificer and Keeper, bless and sanctify thy Sacrifice,
prepared for thy Holy Name, In the Name of the Father, etc.

Making a Cross over the whole Sacrifice, and kissing the Altar -- Then let him
hold his hands together, and turning himself unto the People, say,

Pray* for me Brethren and Sisters, and I for you, that both mine and your
Sacrifice together, may be acceptable unto the Lord our God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Lord hear my Prayer. And let my Cry come unto thee. The Lord
be with you, Ansmer, And with thy Spirit.

Let us pray.

(4) Then turning himself about on the left side, he says the (5) Secret or
Secrets -- The Secrets.

We beseech thee, O Merciful Lord, grant unto thy Church the Gifts of Unity and
Peace, which are spiritually signified under the Gifts offered.

Notes.
(1) This washing of hands may be properly compared to Pilates, for they both
(if Transubstantiation be true) Sacrifice the same Jesus, Flesh, Blood, and
Bones -- If this be washing of hands in Innocence (as the verse in the Psalm is
profanely and Impiously applied) there is no guilt in the World.

Here are plenty of Crosses for you -- But these Cross-makers are not over
forward to bear the Cross of Christ.

(3) It Is worth inquiry who this invisible Sacrificer and Keeper is? For it
cannot be Christ, because it would be absurd to invoke him to sanctify
himself* nor the Holy Spirit, for Christ is as holy as the Holy Ghost.
Therefore it must be some Unclean Spirit which guides the Blasphemous Priest:

(4) To omit the ridiculous Postures reacted by the Priest, his Orate pro me,
Fratres and Sorores -- Pray for me Brethren and Sisters, with a Promise of his
Prayers for them, is doubly foolish, for first the people do not understand a
word of it, and secondly, it is absurd to say Brethren and Sisters, when in
thousands of Masses, there is but one besides the Priest, and yet this Form
must be used.

(5) These secrets are so called because the Priest mumbles them to himself. In
many of them are horrible Blasphemies; this inserted here, is not much amiss,
if it had been applied to a better end -- the term [ signified] used in this
secret, is wholly inconsistent with their Mass, in which they affirm the thing,
not the thing signified, to be exhibited.

CHAP. X.
The Preface and Sanctus.

Here lifting ^p his hands asund^r, he says,

For ever and ever -- Answer -- So be it.

The Priest -- The Lord be with you -- Answer -- And with thy Spirit.

The Priest -- Lift up your hearts -- Answer -- We lift them up to the Lord.

The Priest -- Let us give Thanks unto the Lord our God.

Answer -- It is just and meet so to do.

The Priest.

Verily it is meet, and right, equal and healthful, that we should give Thanks
unto thee, Holy Lord, Father Almighty, everlasting God: Because the New light
of thy brightness has enlightened the understanding of our eyes, through the
Mystical Incarnation of thy word: That whilst we know God visibly, we might by
it be ravished by the love of invisible things. Wherefore with Angels and with
Archa^gels, Thrones and Dominions, and with the whole Troops of the Heavenly
Militia, we sing the Hymn of thy Glory.

Here he must join his hands together.

Saying incessantly -- and somewhat bowing himself over the Altar, say,

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God, of Hosts, Heaven and Earth, are full of the
Majesty of thy Glory, Hosanna in the Highest.

Here he signeth himself with the sign of the Cross, saying,

Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord: Hosanna in Excelsis.

Notes.
You are to understand that the Priest mumbles many Secrets to himself, for
fear he should be heard. and then bauls out to no purpose, per omnia Secula
Seculorum, for ever and ever; that the People, who knew not a word of his
Secret Prayers may say, Amen. This Word is Hebrew, and declares the Consent of
the Hearers, and their concurrent Wish with him that prays, therefore is it a
strange and most gross Absurdity for them, to say Amen, to they know not what;
as if a man should sign and Seal such Writings as he never read, nor ever heard
read; If this be not folly, I know not what is: see 1. Cor. 14. 16. etc.

(2) Here the Priest Salutes the People with his Backside to'em: the rest of
this, which they call the Sanctus, was used (though not in this manner, nor to
this end) in some Ancient Churches, and had it not been misapplied, might pass
without Control, but when attributed to the Idol of the Mass, it is horrible
Blasphemy.

Note, that besides the Barbarous Latin, they intermix many strange words in
their Mass. Here they have Sabbath, and Osanna from the Hebrews, which very few
of the Mass-Priests, can pronounce or understand. Are not these Hodge-podge
Prayers? Now we are ^ome to it.

Afterward Bowing himself profoundly before the Altar with hands Joined
together, he says.

CHAP. XI.
The Canon of the Mass.

WE therefore humbly beseech thee most merciful Father through Jesus Christ
thy Son our Lord.

Here the Priest standing upright must kiss the Altar on the (1) Right hand of
the Sacrifice, saying, That thou accept and bless

Here let the Priest make three Crosses upon the Chalice and the Bread, saying,

(1) These Gifts, these Presents, these Holy and Unspotted Sacrifices.

When the Signs are made upon the Chalice, let him lift up his hands, saying
thus,

Which first of all we offer unto thee for thy holy Catholic Church, that thou
vouchsafe to pacify, keep, unite, and govern it, throughout the whole World,
with thy Servant our Pope N. and our Bishop N. that is his own Bishop only,
[Charity would have prayed for others also] and our King (2) N.

And they are Expressed by name; then let there follow, And all true Believers,
and such as have the Catholic and Apostolic Faith in due Estimation.

Here let him pray for the living;

Remember Lord thy Servants and Handmaids, N. and N.

In the which Prayer, a Rule must be observed, for the Order of Charity; five
times let the Priest pray, First for himself, Secondly, for Father and Mother,
carnal and Spiritual, and for other Parents. Thirdly, for special Friends,
Parishioners and others. Fourthly, for all that stand by. Fifthly, for all
Christian People. And here may the Priest commend all his Friends (3) to God:
But my Council is, That none make overlong tarrying there, partly for
Distraction of mind, partly because of Immissions which may chance through Evil
Angels. And all that stand thereby, round about, whose Faith and Devotion unto
thee is known and manifest, for whom we offer unto thee, or which themselves
offer unto thee, their Sacrifice of Praise, for them and theirs, (4) for the
Redemption of their Souls, for the hope of their Salvation and health; and
render their Vows unto thee, the Eternal Living and true God.

Communicating and Worshipping the Memorial first, of the Glorious and ever
Virgin, Bowing down a little let him say,

(5) Mary the Mother of our God, and Lord Jesus Christ, and also of his Blessed
Apostles and Martyrs. Peter, Paul, Andrew, James, John. Thomas, Phillip,
Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon and Thadd^us, Timis, Cletus, Clemens, Sextus,
Cornelius, Cyprianus, Laurence, Chrysogomus, John and Paul, Cosme and Daman,
and of all thy Saints, by whose merits and Prayers grant thou that in all
things we may be defended with the help of thy Protection, through the same
Christ, our Lord, Amen.

Here let the Priest behold the Host with great Veneration, saying,

Therefore Lord we beseech thee, that thou being pacified, wilt receive this
Oblation of our bounden Service, and of all thy household, and order our days in
thy peace, and command us to be delivered from Eternal Damnation, and* to be
numbered in the Flock of thine Elect, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Here again let him behold the Host saying,

Which Oblation we beseech thee, O Almighty God, in all things to make

Here let him make three Crosses, upon both, when he says*

(8) Blessed, Appointed, Ratifyed, Reasonable, and acceptable, that unto us it
may be

Here let him make a Cross upon the Bread, saying,

The Body

Here, upon the Chalice.

And Blood

Note that the Rubric here says thus* The three former Crosses are commonly
made over the Host and Chalice, the fourth only over the Host, and the fifth
over the Chalice.

Here with hands joined together let him say, Of thy most dearly beloved Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Here let the Priest lift up his hands and join them together, and afterward
wipe his Fingers, and lift up the Host saying,

(7) Who the next day before he suffered, took bread in his Holy and Reverend
Hands, and his Eyes being lift up unto Heaven,

Here let him lift up his Eyes, unto the God Almighty his Father. Here let him
bow down, and afterward Erect himself up a little, saying,

Rendering thanks unto thee, he blessed, he brake.

Here let him touch the Host, saying,

And gave unto his Disciples saying* Take ye, and eat of thi^ ye all, FOR THIS
IS MY BODY.

And these words must be pronounced with one breath, and under one Prolation:
without making of any pawse between: After these words, let him (8) bow himself
to the Host, and afterward lift it up above his forehead that it may be seen of
the People, and let him reverently lay it again before the Chalice, in manner
of a Cross made with the same, and then let him uncover the Chalice, and hold
it between his hands, not putting his Thumb and Forefinger asunder, save only
when he blesses, s^ying thus:

Likewise after they had supped, he taking this excellent cup into his holy and
reverend hands, rendering thanks also unto thee.

Here let him bow himself, saying:

Bles sed, and gave unto his Disciples, saying, Take and Drink ye all of this.

Here let him lift up the Chalice a little, saying thus:

For this is the Cup of my Blood of the New and Everlasting Testament, the
mystery of Faith, which for you and for many shall be shed to the Remission of
Sins.

Here let him lift the Chalice to his breast, or further then his head, saying,

As often as ye do these things, ye shall do them in Remembrance of me.

Here let him set down the Chalice again, and rub his Fingers over the Chalice:
Then let him lift up his Arms and cover the Chalice; then let him lift up his
Arms Cross-wise, his* Fingers being joined together, until these words, de tuis
Donis; that is to say, of thine own Rewards.

Wherefore O Lord, we also thy Servants, and thy holy people, being mindful as
well of the blessed Passion and Resurection, as of the Glorious Ascension of
the same Christ, thy Son our Lord God, do offer unto thy Excellent Majesty of
thine own Rewards and Gifts.

Here let there be made five Crosses, namely the three first upon the Host and
Cup, saying,

A Pure Host, an Holy Host, an undefiled Host.

The Fourth upon the Bread only, saying,

The Holy Bread of Eternal Life.

The Fifth upon the Cup, saying,

And Cup of Eternal Salvation. Vouchsafe thou also with a merciful and pleasant
Countenance to have respect hereunto, and to (9) accept the same; as thou did
vouchsafe to accept the Gifts of thy Righteous Servant Abel, and the Sacrifice
of our Patriarch Abraham, And the Holy Sacrifice* the Undefiled Host, that the
High-Prist Melchisideck did offer unto* thee:

Here let the Priest with his Body bowed down, and his hands holden a cross
say, Supplices te Rogamus, We humbly beseech thee; until these words, Ex hac
Altaris participatione, of this partaking of the Altar.

And then let him stand up, blessing the Altar on the right side of the
Sacrifice, and let him make a sign of the Cross upon the Host and in his own
face when he says O^ni Benedictione Caelesti, With all Heavenly Benediction.

We humbly beseech thee O Almighty God command thou these to be carried by the
(10) hands of thy Holy Angel unto the High Altar in the Presence of thy Divine
Majesty that as many of us as

Here Erecting up himself, let him kiss the Altar on the right side of the
Sacrifice, saying, Of this Participation of the Altar shall receive thy Sons
Holy

Here let him make a sign of the Cross upon the Host saying, Body

Then upon the Cup; saying,

And Blood, may be replenished.

Then let him make a sign in his own Face, saying, With all Heavenly
Benediction and Grace through the same Christ* our* Lord Amen.

Here let him pray for the Dead.

Remember Lord also the Souls of thy Servants and Handmaidens N. and N. which
are gone before us with the mark of Faith, and rest in the sleep of Peace. We
beseech thee O Lord that unto them, and unto all such as rest in Christ, thou will grant a place of refreshing of Light and of Peace, through the same Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Here let him soundly thump his Breast, saying. Nobis quoque peccatoribus etc.

Unto us Sinners also thy Servants hoping of the multitude of thy Mercies,
vouchsafe to give some Portion and Fellowship with thy Holy Apostles and
Martyrs, with John, Stephen, Matthias, Barnabas, Ignatius, Alexander,
Marcellinus, Peter, Felicitas, Perpetua, Agatha, Lucia, Agnes, Cecilia,
Anastasia, and with all thy Saints, within whose Fellowship, we beseech thee
admit us, not weighing our merit, but granting us forgiveness through Christ
our Lord.

(13) Here is not said Amen.

By whom, O Lord, all these good things thou do ever Create.

Here let him make a sign over the Chalice three times saying,

Thou sanctifiest, Thou quicknest, Thou blessest and give unto us.

(14) Here let him uncover the Chalice and make a sign of the Cross with the
Host five times first, beyond the Chalice on every side.

Secondly even with the Chalice. Thirdly within the Chal^c^* Fourthly like as
at the first. Fifthly before the Chalice.
Through him, and with him, and in him is unto thee God Father Almighty, in the
Unity of the Holy Ghost, all Honor and Glory:

Here let the Priest cover the Chalice, and hold his hands still upon the Altar
till the Pater Noster be spoken, saying thus:

World without end, Amen. Let us pray.

Being advertised by wholesome Precepts, and, taught by Gods Institution, we
are bold to say,

Here let the Deacon take up the Patten and hold it uncovered on the right side
of the Priest, his Arms being stretched out on high until* da Propitius; Here
let the Priest lift up his hands saying, Pater Noster, etc. The Quire must say,
Sed Libera nos, etc.

Deliver us we beseech thee, O Lord, from all Evil past, present, and to come,
and that by the Intercession of the Blessed Glorious, and ever Virgin Mary the
Mother of God, and thy Blessed Apostles P^ter and Paul, and Andrew, with all
Saints.

Here let the Deacon commit the Patten to the Priest kissing his hand, and let
the Priest kiss the Patten, afterward let him it to his ()15) left Eye and
then to his right, after that let him make a Cross with the Patten above upon
his head, and so lay it down again into his place, saying,

Give peace, graciously in our days, that we being helped through the succor
os thy Mercy, may both be always free from Sin, and safe from all trouble.

Here let him uncover the Chalice, and take the Body, doing (16) Reverence,
shifting it over in the hollow Room of the Chalice, holding it between his
Thumbs, and Fore-fingers, and let him break it into three Parts; The first
breaking while there is said,

Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son.

The Second breaking.

Who with thee in the Unity of the Holy Ghost lives and R^^^neth God.

Here let him hold two pieces in his left hand, and the third piece in the
Right hand upon the brink of the Chalice, saying this with open voice, World
without end.

Let the Quire Answer, Amen.

Here let him make three* Crosses, witbin the Chalice, with the third part of
the Host, saying,

The peace of the Lord be always with you.

Let the Quire Answer,

And with thy Spirit.

To say AGNUS DEI, let the Deacon and Subdeacon approach near unto the Priest
being both ^n the right hand, the Deacon nearer, the Subdeacon further off,
and let them say privately,

(17) O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, have mercy upon us.

O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, have mercy upon us: O
Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, grant us peace.

In the Mass for the Dead, it is said thus:

O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, give them rest.

With this addition in the third Repitition, Everlasting.

Here making a Cross, let him put down the said third part of the Host into the
Sacrament of the Blood saying;

This Holy mingling together of the Body, and Blood of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ,
be unto me, and all that receive it, Salvation of Mind and Body, an wholesome
Preparation both to deserve and receive Eternal Life, through the same Christ
our Lo^d.

Before the Pax be given let the Priest say,

O, Lord, Holy Father, Almighty Eternal God, grant me so worthily to take this
hol^* Body and Blood of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, that by this I may merit
to receive forgiveness of all my Sins, and be Replenished with thy holy Spirit,
and to have thy peace, for thou art God alone, neither is there any other
without thee, whose Glorious Kingdom and Empire endures continually World
without End, Amen.

Here let the Priest kiss the Corporas on* the rightside, and the Brink of the
Chalice* and afterward^ let him say to the Deacon, Peace be unto thee, and to
the Church of God.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

On the right hand of the Priest let the Deacon receive the Pax of him, and
reach it to the Subdeacon, Then to the Step of the Quire, let the Deacon
himself bear the Pax unto the Rectors of the Quire, and let them bring it to
the Qiure either of them to his own* side, beginning at the Eldest, But in
Feasts and Ferial days when the Quire is not Governed, the Pax is born from the
Deacon to the Quire by two of the lowest of the second Form like as before.

After the Pax given, let the Priest say the Prayers following, privately
before he communicate, holding the Host with b^th his hands: O God Father thou
Fountain and Original of all Goodness, who being moved with mercy, have willed
thine only begotten Son for our sake to descend into the lower parts of the
whole World, and to be incarnate, whom I unworthily hold in my hands:

Here let the Priest bow himself to the Host saying,

I worship thee, I glorify thee, I praise thee, with whole intention of mind,
and heart, And I beseech thee that thou fail not us, thy Servants but forgive
our Sins so as with pure Heart and chaste Body we may be able to serve thee,
the only living and true * God through the same Christ our Lord Amen:

[* Note that the Priest speaks all this to the Host* O horrible Blasphemy!]

O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God* who according to the Will of
the Father, the Holy Ghost working withal, have quickened the world through thy
Death, deliver me I beseech thee through this thy holy Body, and through thy
Blood from all my Iniquities, and from all Evils. And make me always obey thy
Commandments, and never suffer me to be separated from thee for Evermore, thou
Savior of the World who with God the Father, and the same Holy Ghost Lives
and Reigns God World without End, Amen*

O Lord Jesus Christ let not the Sacrament of thy Body and Blood which I
receive (though unworthily) be to my (18) Judgment and Damnation, but through
thy goodness let it profit to the Salvation of my Body and Soul Amen.

To the Body let him say with Humiliation, before he receive, Hail for evermore
thou most holy Flesh of Christ, unto me before all things and above all things,
the highest sweetness. The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ be unto me Sinner the
way and life in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
Amen.

Here le^ him take the Blood, a cross being first made, with the same Body
before his mouth, saying,

Hail for evermore thou Heavenly Drink, unto me before all things and above all
things the highest sweetness. The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
profit me Sinner for a remedy Everlasting unto Life Eternal, Amen. In the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Amen.

Here let him take the Blood, which when it is received let him bow himself
down, and say,

The Prayer.

IRender Thanks to thee O Lord Heavenly Father, Almighty Eternal God, which
have refreshed me out of the most holy Body and Blood of thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ. And I beseech thee that this Sacrament of our Salvation, which I
unworthy Sinner have received, come not to my Judgment, nor Condemnation after
my merits, but to the profit of my Body, and to the Salvation of my Soul into
Life Everlasting Amen.

Which Prayer being said, let the Priest go to the right side of the Altar with
the Chalice between his hands, his Fingers being yet joined together as before:
And let the Subdeacon approach near, and pour out Wine and Water into the
Chalice, and let the P^iest rince his hands least any parcels [A dangerous
marter, Sirs! Magno Conatu Magnas Nugas agunt*] of the Body or Blood be left
behind him in his Fingers, or in the Chalice. But when any Priest must
Celebrate twice in one day, then at the first Mass, ^e must not-receive any
Ablution, but put it in the Sacristi, or in a clean Vessel till the ^end of the
other Mass, and then let both the Absolutions be received: After the first
Absolution is said this Prnyer.

That we have received with mouth O Lord, let us take with a pure mind, and out
of a (19) Temporal Gift, let it be to, us a remedy Everlasting.

Here let him wash his Fingers in the hollow Room of the Chalice, with Wine
being powered in by the Subdeacon, which when it is drunk up, let the Prayer
follow:

Lord let this Communion purge us from Sin, and make us to be Partakers of the
Heavenly remedy.

After the receiving of the Absolutions, let the Priest lay the Chalice upon
the Patten, that if ought (...) behind it may drop. And afterward bowing (...)
let him say,

Let us worship the sign of the Cross, whereby we have received the Sacrament
of Salvation.

Afterward let him wash his hand in the mean Season let the Deacon fold up the
^ poras: When his hands are washen and the Priest returns to the right end of
the Altar, let the Deacon reach the Chalice to the Priests mouth, that if ought
of that which was powered in, do remain behind, he may receive it.

After that let him say the Communion with his Ministers. Then making a Sign of
the Cross in his own face, let the Priest turn himself to the people, and with
his Arms s^mewhat lifted up, and his hands joined together, let him say,
Dominus vobiscum, The Lord be with you, and turning him again to the Altar let
him say, Oremus, Let us pray:

Then let him say the Post Common, according to the number and order of the
before said Prayers: Before the Epistle, when the last Post Common is ended, and
the Priest has made a sign of the Cross in his Forehead, let him turn him
again to the people, and say, Dominus vobiscum, Then let the Deacon say,
Benedicamus Domino. At another time is said, (20) Ita missa est: as often as it a
missa est is said, it is always said in turning to the people, and when
Benedicamus Domino, or Reqniescant in Pace must be said, let it be said in
turning to the Altar: When these things are spoken, let the Priest with his
body bowed down, and his hands joined together in the midst before the Altar,
say with a still voice this prayer;

O Holy Trinity, let the Office of my Bond Service please thee, and grant, that
this Sacrifice which I unworthily have offered in the Eyes of thy Majesty, may
be acceptable unto thee, and that unto me and all them for whom I have offered,
it may avail to obtain Remission, thou being merciful who live and Reigns
God, etc.

Which Prayer being ended, let the Priest stand upright, Crossing himself in
his face saying, In nomine Paetris, etc. And so when obeisance is made, after
the same order wherein they came before to the Altar at the beginning to the
Mass, so having on their Apparel with the Censer-bearer and other Ministers,
let them go their way again.

The End of the Canon.
Notes upon the Canon.
AS often as the words Bless and Blessing are mentioned in the Mass, there must
be always Crosses made, as if that Magical Trick had d^^oted Blessing.

(1) Heo dona, haec munera, hec Sacrificia illibata] (...) Popish Rabbis make
a dreadful work about (...) Exposition of these words, because they are in
(...) Plural Number forsooth, when yet there is but o^^ Sacrifice as they
themselves stiffly assert. Here Is a Crabbed Riddle that requires a Spiritual
Oedipus to unfold it -- Aquinas and Bellarmine are Simpleto^^ here What a
pudder do the Schoolmen make ^bo^^ ^his, yet they cannot reconcile it to sense
-- Well let it be so -- That is, neither more nor less than filly Popish
Nonsense.

In the Autient Church the Rich made Contributions for their poor fellow
Members, which because offered to God, were called Sacrifices, Heb. 13. 16. So
Thanksgiving is called a Sacrifice, ver. 15. And the word Eucharist signifies
no more. Yet you see this M^^ Sacrifice is but a Wafer and some Wine and Water,
which the greedy Priest Sacrifices into his (...) Belly; let the Poor starve if
they will, here is no Spiritual nor Corporal Relief for them, I assure ye.

Ay, but (say they) these Crosses signifies Judas his Treason: Yes, yes, what
then? Why then the murdering Priest is the worst Judas of the two; he only
Betrayed his Master, but this bloody Wretch eats him alive! worse by half then
Crucifying.

They expound Illibata for Incorruptible; but if it be so, what need have they
to make such provision for its preservation, as in the third Council of Arles
chap. 3. Yea, burn it to Ashes when putrified, as you have it point black from
themselves; see the Caveats of the Mass, etc. The word properly signifies a
thing whole and sound, but this Wafer-God is broken into three parts by the
God-eater, and then bitten to pieces and swallowed down in Fragments. O cursed
Illabata Sacrificia.

(2) These Letters N. N. denote that the Priest must name those he prays for,
expressing their Respective Titles, as his Imperial Majesty, His Majesty, his
Highness, his Grace, his Lordship, Worship. Squire so and so -- I had almost
forgot his Holin^s^. well let him bring up the Rear for once.

(3) The^e's a charitable Priest for ye, not a bit of a Prayer for Enemies --
Here Is a Prayer for the Living: Why so? Because they are in more danger than
the Dead, who are Roasted in Purgatory, and may for a little in significant
thing called Money be Conjured out at pleasnre. But methinks these cruel
Priests are very hard hearted to let the poor souls fry in such terrible
Flames, when the little Hocus of a Mass (a quarter of an hours work) might
Release them.

In the Prayer for the Quick you have ( Famularumque] That is, She Servants,
or the Priests Bedfellow; the very thought of her is enough to spoil all, for
if his fancy runs a gadding that way, there is no God made, and the people Commit
Idolatry.

(4) Pro Redemptione animarum suarum] here is a Sacrifice for the souls of all
that are present, let the Gospel say* what it will, no matter. What a
Mass-Saviour instead of Christ! Oh horrible Blasphemy!

(5) Besides this Muster-roll of Saints, every Monk* Friar, or Massing-man may
put in who he pleases, Saints past, present, or to come; known, or unknown*
Very pretty! here is a kind of a straggling Saint one Chrysogone (some Mass-Books
have it Grysogone) a stranger to many if not All the Popish Calendars. But why
must such an Armado Rival the Lord of Glory? What? Robb Christ of his hono^r?
Blasphemy, Blasphemy!

You have here a very strange kind of expression [ ^^^^tricis ^^^i and Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, that (...) Shee-B^g^^ter of God and our Lord Jesus Christ]
T^^ same Genetrix (in this sense) is a very Barbar^^^ word* it was formed
(only) by the Poets in their idle Rhapsodies, when they want another word* the
best English of this word is BEGETTRESS; and here you have the Virgin Mary
represented as the B^gettress (I am sure it is as good an English word as
Genetrix is Latin) not only of Christ, but also o^ God the Father -- What Is
God the Father born of the Virgin Mary too! This is wonderful!

Though Christ be really God, yet for distinction'^ sake, that most sacred Term
is usually referred to the Father, and the Name of our Lord to Jesus Christ*
neither can we properly say that Jesus was begotten, but born of her. Here you
may see a Specimen of Popish Infallibility, as I may say ex abundanti.

(6) It is certain that none of these Crosses were ^ver made by Christ, for
there is no mention made of them at the Institution of his Supper, neither was
the Cross upon which he suffered then set up. The Inventor of this Juggle, is
Recorded by Breno to be Pope Gregory the 7th. (with whom also agrees Cochleus)
this Gregory was a mere Conjurer; a notable Ceremony-maker!

(7) Reader pray compare these massing-words of Consecration with the
Evangelical and Apostolical Records, and note how they differ.

(8) The Priest here worships a God of his own making, then advances it over
his bald Pate, ^ringing most reverently (and happy is he that can lift up the
Tail of his Mock seamless garment) Now you have signal given (at the Elevation
of the Wafer God) by a tingling of Bells, and then the people must say,
Adoramus te Christ, etc. We adore thee, O Christ! etc. O abominable Blasphemy
-- What a VVafer Christ! -- It Is observable that no Mass is said without wax
Tapers, or Candles* Though the Sun shines never so clear, yet this Worship i^
mere spiritual darkness -- Nor must the people see the grand VVafer before the
Priest makes a God of it: they have a trick for that -- Thus (forsooth)
Idolatry is prevented, say they.

The people also must adore the Chalice here with an Ave vere sanguis Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, etc. Hail thou truly Blood* of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
Here Is Flesh and Blood distinctly worshipped, and therefore they are distinct
Gods, or none at all.

(9) If the Consecrated VVafer be really converted to a very Christ as Popery
teaches, then the Priest here praying for the Son of God that the Father would
accept of him, speaks Blasphemy, as supposing Christ to have need of the
Priests Intercession.

(10) Here is a piece of Blasphemy as wicked as the other; the Angels must be
at the Priests beck, for what? Why no less then to carry Christ to heaven*
which supposes him absent from thence, and unable to get there unless
introduced by those Evangelical Masters of the Ceremonies of the Popes feigning.

(11) The Memento or Prayer for the Dead is a notable gainful thing for these
Priests that are hired to pray poor Souls out of Purgatory. -- O this knack
brings in more Cash in a year then some Kings Revenues amount to. -- Yet it is
certain, that it is a mere Cheat, the very Prayer speaks as much* -- For what
should [ praecedere in Signo Pacis, and Dormire in Somno Pacis, To go before in
the Sig^* of peace, and to sleep in the sleep of peace] signify* but the actual
enjoyment of Heavenly Glory? I^ so, what necessity is there for the Priests
prayers for them? No need at all I assure ye, but the Feat however robs the
poor Layty, and fills the greedy Priests pocket. Blessed are the Dead which Die
in the Lord, for from thenceforth they rest from their Labor, says the
Scripture; but says the Pope, Blessed are the Dead that are prayed for by my
Jou^neymen Priests; come open your purses, ye niggardly Wretches, or you are
all damned, your Father is broyling upon Live Coals, and will not you give a few
Crowns to Release him? Such, and such, and such* Relations of yours* are in a
horrible pickle, and can you be so hard hearted as not to let a little Mammon
out of your Chest bail 'em out -- O Money! blessed money! these Priests make a
little God A'mighty of thee, he that has thee* may def^e* the Devil and
Purgatory too.

I wonder in my heart whereabouts this Purgatory is, or how this spiritual
Mount Aetna can be supplied with fuel for so many 100 years, and what Devils
are Fire-makers there, and who pays 'em their Sallaries? I tell ye friends,
it is hot Service; And yet these worse Devils wont give the other poor Moyling
Devils their due. They never send them one penny.

(12) Here Is a good round Jury of Sainrs culld out, and why I pray? what is that
to you? because it is my pleasure to name 'em, quoth the Pope -- There Is reason
enough,

(13) Here is not said Amen] why so? Because it is a kind of a Graceless and
hopeless prayer, for the Priest despaires of coming into such a Society -- This
is a Balaams Prayer with a witness, he desired to die the Death of the
Righteous; both are heard alike. O But say they, the Angels Answer, and say
Amen here -- Ay, ay, they are turned Mass-Clarks! brave Preferment!

(14) When the Cat has got a silly Mouse at his Mercy, how he plays with it,
tosses it, boxes it to this side and that, etc. yet at last greedily swallows
it; so this Antic Priest plays with his God, and when he has Acted over all
his Cat-like tricks, devours him skin and all. Exit Priests-God.

(15) Sure this Priests Eyes are not fellows, for he cannot see the Sawcer with
both together. And why the left Eye must have the Prerogative of the first
glance, I cannot yet understand.

(16) O Hypocritical Reverence! true Pilate like! Here Is an adoring Cringe
prologuing the Tragedy. And then the dismembered Body of their (fancyed) Christ
is swallowed done; O more then brutish Villainy! But of this elsewhere. Yet I
pray how can it be posible for this Priest to have any solid Meditation of the
Passion of Christ, when his main business is to make so many Monkey Faces,
Apish postures, and other profane as well as ridiculous Ceremonies?

(17) The Cake is here called the Lamb of God which takes away* the Sins of
the World; Ay and three times too, because he is dull of hearing. Alas poor
Lamb! thou art in the Wolves Clutches, ready tohi*^ sacrificed into his
Unmerciful Paunch.

(18) This is a very Impious Prayer, as supposing the receiving of Christ's Body
may damn him -- Thi^ Priests God is a damnable God; but the true Christian
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is a Comemoration of the Death and Passion of
the Lord of life for our Redemption -- And if any profane or Unbelieving
Person approaches and partakes of this Supper, he discerns not the Lords Body;
that is, h^ wants the Eye of Faith, which only can see into the e^d and use of
the Ordinance, and Consequently is damned for unbelief and Hypocrisy. But it is
certain that such a Person never eats any body of Christ at all* because he
wants a Spiritual Mouth, nor can he do it any more then a man* can eat bread
that wants a Corporal Mouth.

(19) De munere Temporali, of a Temporal Gift* this Expression comes out
unawares; for it is certain that for all these Hocus-pocusses, here is nothing
still but a wafer and a little wine and water, which can no more feed the Soul,
then mere wind can feed a Cormorant of a Priest.

(20) I^e missa est] that is get ye gone, be packing I say; the Mass is done --
it is Massed enough of Conscience, the Job's done, and so are our Observations,
though here is Theme enough for a volumn* but for brevity we omit the rest of
the blasphemon^ Stuff.

FINIS.
IT remains now, tha^ we give you a H^storical Account how every part and
parcel of this Mass cam^ to be patcht together* which I have faithfully
extracted* from the Acts and Monuments of Reveren^ Mr. Fox, page 1274. Edit.
1610. as follows.

Books lately Printed for and sold by Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey.
THe complete Works of that Reverend and Learned Divine Mr. Jacob Ambrose.

Bentevolio and Urania in six Books, written by the Learned Nathaniel Ingelo D.
D, The fourth Edition with large Amendments, wherein all the obscure words
throughout the Book are Interprete^* in the Margin, which makes this much more
delightful to read then the former* Additions.

Mr. James Janeways Legacy to his friends, containing twenty seven famous
instances of Gods Providence, in and about Sea-dangers and Deliverances, with
the Names of several that were Eyewitnesses to many of them.

An Historical Account of the Heroic Life, and Magnanimous Actions of the most
Illustrious Protestant Prince James Duke of Monmouth, containing an Account of
his birth, Education, Places and Titles, with his Great and Martial
Achievements in Flanders and Seotland, his Disgrac^ and Departure both from
Court and Kingdom, with the most Material Passages that has occurred since his
Return.

Catastrophe Mundi* or Merlin Revived; in a Discourse of Proph^cies and
Predictions, and their Remarkable Accomplishments, with Mr. Lillies
Hieroglyphics exactly cut, and Notes and Observations thereupon, as also a
Collection of all the Ancient Reputed Prophecies that are extant Touching the
Grand Revolutions like to happen in these latter Ages:

*Historical Memoirs of the Life and Death of that wise and valiant Prince
Rupert, Prince Palatine o^ the Rhine Duke of Cumberland, etc. containing (...)
brief but Impartial Account of his Grreat and Martial Atcheivements, during the
time of the Civil Wars, together with his several Engagements in the Wars,
between his Majesty and States General, of the united Princes.

Fifteen real Comforts of Matrimony, in answer to the late fifteen
Sham-comforts, together with Satirical Reflections on the Whoring and
Debauchery of this present Age. Written by a Person of Quality of the Female
Sex.

The Voyages of the ever Renowned Sir Francis Dr^^e, into the West Indies, viz.
His great Adventures for Gold and Silver, with the Gaining thereof and an
Account, of his surprising of Nombe de Dios. A large ^ Account of that voyage
wherein he Encompassed the World, his Voyage made with Francis Knollis and
others; their taking the Towns of St. Jago Sancto Domingo, Carthagina and St.
Austine. His last Voyage in which he dyed being Accompanied with several
Vallient Commanders, and the manner of his Burial. To which is added an Account
of his Vallarous Exploits of the Spanish Invasion.

The Confession of Faith, and the larger and shorter Catechism, first agreed
upon by the Assemby of Divines at Westminster, and now approved by the General
Assembly of the Church at Scotland, to be a part of Uniformity in Religion,

Psalmorum Davidis Paraphrasis Poetica Georgii Buchmian, Stotia Argumentis. ac
Melodiis Explicata atque Illustrata.

FINIS.
The History of the Mass.
The Introite.
CElestinus Pope gave the first Introite, as Platina and Sigebertus writ^.

The Psalm Judica me Deus etc.
The Priest prepares himself to his Mass, first with the Psalm Judica me Deus,
and discern causam meam etc. which was ordained by the said Celestinus.

And where they ascr^be to Sa^nt Ambrose the two Prayers which he used in the
preparation to the Mass, and be added to the Books of Ambrose, Erasmus judges
the same to be none of his, and that rightly, as it seems; for therein are
contained Errors not els^ to be found in the Books of Ambrose, both in giving
^doration to the bread of the Sacrament, and making invocation to the Saints,
namely to blessed Mary as in the second Prayer where he says, ut efficax haec
mea sit depr^catio, beatae Mariae Virgin^ suffragia peto* etc. that is, And
that this my Prayer may be of Efficacy. I desire the suffr^ge and intercession
of blessed Mary the Virgin etc. whereby it may appear that learned Ambrose was
not the Author of such an Error.

Chrysostom in the XI homily upon the Gospel of Matthew says, that in his time
(and before hi^ time) the use was to sing whole Psalms till they were entered and
assembled together, and so belike Celestinu^ borrowed this custom of the
Greeks, and brought it into the Latin Church as R^pertus w^ite^h.

Gregory the Great as some w^it^, called a Synod at Rome about the Year of our
Lord 594 in which Synod he appointed that the In^^oit of the Mass should be
taken out of some Psalm.

The Confiteor.
The Confiter Pope Damasus brought into the Mass as it is written, albeit
peradventure not this Popish Confiteor which in the later Church has been
used, stuffed full of Idolatry and Invocation of Saints, against the word of God.

The Kyrie Eleyson.
The Kyrie Eleyson which is 9 times to be repeated in such a Tongue as few
Priests either understood or do rightly pronounce. Gregory did institute about
600 years after Christ taking it out of the Greek Church and yet transposing it
otherwise then there it was used. For among the Greeks this Kyrie Eleyson which
they called their Litany, was sung of all the People, the which Gregory
ordained to be sung only of the Quire, adding thereto also Christ's Eleyson,
which the Grecians used not as Gregory himself writing to the Bishop of
Syracuso does testify.

Gloria in Excelsis.
Next follows Gloria in Excelsis etc. which words were sung of the Angels at
the Birth of our Savior, albeit these words also were corrupted, as many other
things were in the Church, for where the words of the Angels Hymn were
hominibus bo^^ voluntas, that is to men good will, the Mass said hominibus bona
voluntatis, that is to men of good will etc. This Hymn was brought into the
Mass by Pope Symmachus and not by Tolesphorus, as some mistakenly write saying,
that he ordained three Masses on Christmas Day, for in his time there was no
Mass in the World Anno 140. The said Hymn was augmented by Hilarious
Pistariensis with those words that follow, Laudamus te etc. singing it first in
his own Church, which was Anno 340. And afterward brought into other Churches
by Pope Symmachus Anno 510.

Dominus vobiscum with the Answer Oremus, and the Collects.
Dominus vobiscum with the Answer of the People, although we have no certain
Author named by whom it came, yet this is certain that it was deduced out of
the Greek Church, into the Latin, as may appear by the Lyturgie attributed to
Chrysostom and Basilius (but it is a doubt whether that Liturgy be rightly
ascribed unto them) also by Origin and other ancient writers, by whom it may
seem that the Lyturgie or Mass (as they call it) did first begin with Dominus
vobiscum, and then Sursum corda. After that, Gratias agamus Domino deo nostro,
and so following upon the same vere dignum and Augustum est, etc. To the which
beginning of the Canon other additions after were put into by others, as ye
shall hear (by the Lords grate) more hereafter at large.

Hugo des Victore writes that this Prayer was taken out of the ancient
Salutation of Rooz saluting his Harve^ Folks, and out of the Book of Chronicles
where the Prophet saluteth Azan the King with his Company about him saying
Dominus vobiscum; Honorius writes thus, Presbiter cum salutatione ve^eris
testamenti, and Episcopus cum salutatione novi Testamenti salu^at Populum,
quiae dignius est novum ^uam ve^us testamentum. That is the Priest salu^eth the
People with the words of the old Iestament Dominus vobiscum, so the Bishop
uses the words of the New Testament saying Pax vobiscum etc. Concerning the
Collects: Walafridus Strabo writes that as they be diverse and uncertain, if
they were made of diverse and sundry Authors as every of them thought it fit.
Hugo des Victore affirms that chiefly they were made by Gelersius and
Gregorius. Why they were called Collects, W. Durandus and Micrologus show the
cause, for that in the City of Rome, they said them over the People collected
together in their station day, therefore they were called Collectae.

The Gradual with Alleluya tracti and sequencies.
The Responsary which is called the Gradual (being wont to be sung at the steps
going up) with Alleluya, Honorius says, that Ambrose made them, but Pope
Gregory ordained them to be received.

Upon festival days, the sequencies which were wont to be sung, were chiefly
composed by an Abbot called Nokkerus des gallo, and by Pope Nicholas commanded
to be sung in the Mass.

The Gradual, the people were wont to sing when the Bishop was about to go up
to the Pulpit, or some higher standing, where the word of God might be the
better and more sensibly heard at his mouth, Reading the Epistle and the Gospel.

The Epistle and the Gospel.
The Reading of the Epistle and the Gospel although it was not used in the
Apostles times, yet it seems to be of ancient continuence as Hugo says,
Primus temporibus ab Epistola Pauli missa incipiebatur, postquam sequebatur
Evangelium sicut nunc i. e. In former time the Mass begun first with the
Epistle of Saint Paul, after which Epistle then followed the Gospel as also now
etc.

Walafridus Strabo says it is uncertain who first ordered and disposed them to
be.

Some attribute them to Hierome, some to Damasus some to Telesphorus aforesaid,
this is certain that Pope Anastasius ordained to stand up at the hearing of the
Gospel read about the Year of our Savior 406.

Petrus Cirvelus writes thus, legimus and circa annos Christianae salutis 500
fere, jam institutas Epistolas in officio missali etc. about 500 years since
almost the Epistle says he, was first brought into the Mass.

Honorius lib. 1. Epistolam and Evangelium, Alexander Papa legi, ad missam
constituit Hieronimus autem presbiter lixionarium and Evangeliarum ut hodie
habet Ecclesia collegit; sed Damasus papa, ut nunc moris est, legi censuit.
Alexander, says he, appolutthe Epistle and Gospel to be read at Mass.

The Translation and the Disposition of them in that order as they stand,
Hierome, the Priest collected, but Damasus appointed them to be read in the
Church so as the use is now.

Betwixt Epistle and the Gospel the old Canons of the Spaniards did forbid any
Hymn or Canticle to be sung in the Order of the Mass, which now by the Romish
order is broken.

The Creed.
The Creed was made by the Synod of Constantinople, but by Damasus the Pope
ordained to be sung at the Mass, and where some affirm, that it was brought in
by Pope Marcus about the Year of our Lord 340, to reconcile these two together,
peradventure thus it may be taken, that the one brought in the Creed or Symbol
of the Nicene Council, the other appointed the Creed of Constantinople as is
said.

The Offertory.
After this oblations were wont to be offered of the People to the Priest, and
the Offerto^y to be sung of the Quire.

Of these oblations speaks Irenaeus, pro diversis Sacrificiorum ritibus,
simplex oblatio panis and V^ni fid^tibus sufficiat etc. Instead of the sundry
rights of Sacrifices, let the simple oblation of bread and wine ^nffice the
faithful.

Item Walafrid, omnis populus intrans Ecclesiam debet sacrifica^e sicut docet
ordo institutionis Ecclesiasticae, that is every Person entering in the Church
must do Sacrifice as the order of Ecclesiastical institution does ^each, what
order this was it is declared, in ordine Romano by these words, Populus dat
oblationes suas, id est panem and vinum primo masculi, d^inde feminae,
novissime vero Sacerdo^es and Diaconi afferunt, sed solum panem and hoc ante
altar i. e. The People give every one his oblation that is bread and wine,
first the Men, then the Women, after them, Priests and Deacons offer but bread
only etc.

Likewise Bu^ardus testifies the same in Synodo Ma^iscon, decretum est ut in
omnibus Dominicis dicbus aliisque festivitatibus oblatio ab omnibus qui ad
Missam convenerint utriusque sexas offeratur in Ecclesia singulas oblationes
offerentes, finita Missa oblationes a Presbitero accipiant i. e. In the Synod
of Matiscon it was ordained that every Sunday and Festival day, oblation was
made of all the People which came to the Mass or Liturgy both Men and Women in
the Church, every Person bringing and off^ring his own oblation, the Liturgy
being done, they receive the oblations of the Priest etc.

Thus you may see what were their oblations and sacrifice in the ancient Time
in their Liturgy, whereof now remains nothing but the Name only with a Song.

This offertory some ascribe to Eutichianus about the Year of our Lord 280, but
thereof no certain Evidence appears.

Orate pro me fratres etc.
Nauclerus writes that Pope Leo brought in that which is said in the Mass,
Orate pro me fratres and s^rores etc.

The Preface of the Canon.
The preface of the Canon from vere dignum and justum est etc. to per Christum
Dom^num nostrum is given to Gelasius, Sursum corda seems to be borrowed out
of the old manner of the Greek Church, S. Cyprian also makes mention of the
same And S. Austin de vera Religione cap 3.

And therefore Thomas Waldensis judges that this part of the preface cannot be
attributed to G^lasius.

After Christum dominum nostrum in the old Li^urgie then followed Qui pridie
quam pateretur as Renanus supposes, But then came Pope Gelasius the first
about the year of our Lord 497. who inserted that which follows Te jugiter
Clementissime etc.

Whereby it is to be noted, that Polidorus Virgilius (which ascribes qui
pridie to Pope Alexander) de invent lib 5. cap. 10. is deceived.

The like is also to be said of Panormitanus who Refers the same Clause Qui
pridie etc. to the Apostles lib. de celebratione Missae.

Furthermore note (good Reader) how this does agree with the long Canon of
Saint Ambrose, lib. 4. de Sacramentis cap. 5. dicit Sacerdos fac nobis ^anc
oblationem ad scriptam rationalem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis
sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Qui pridie quam pataretur in sanctis
manibus suis, accepit panem, res pexit ad Coelum ad te sancte pat^r omnipotens
and Eternae Deus gratias agens been dixit, fregit etc. If it be true that
either Pannormitanus says; or that Gelasius, made Qui pridi^ etc, how can this
Canon then be fathered upon S. Ambrose; And by the same reason also his whole
book Entitled de sacramentis may be suspected as of diverse learned men it is.

Then came Pope Sixtus ten Years after him which brought into the Canon
sanctus, sanctus, thrice to be sung out of the Book of Esaias, and to annex it
together, joined also that which goes before, per quem Majestatem tuam etc.

He that writes the Liturgy of Basilius ascribes it to his Name, whether he
does it truly or no, I will not here contend. This is to be noted that seeing
in the said Liturgy of Basilius, the same particle, sanctus, sanctus, sanctus
Dominus Deus Sabbath: pleni sunt Cali and Terra gloria tua Osanna in exc^^sis,
is sung, therefore it must needs follow that either Leo which was about the
Year of our Lord 460 borrowed this out of Basi^ius Liturgy, or else the same is
falsely attributed to Basilius.

After this follows sanctum sacrificium immaculatam ^est an till you come to
placatus accipias which Leo the first did make and institute.

The word, in the Communion, hoc quotioscunque seceritis in mei memoriam
faci^tis etc. were put in by Pope Alexander i e. As Humbertus writes under
Alexander Martyr and Papa 5. ab Apost Pet^o passionem Domini inserens Canoni
Missae ait, hoc quotiescunque feceritis etc.

Pope Gregory the third, about the Year of our Lord 732. Put to his piece Et
little quorum memoria etc

This Gregory the third called a Council at Rome, wherein he decreed that
Images, should not only be had in Temples, but also worshipped and that all
gainsayers should be counted as Heretics.

Innocentius the third of that Name affirms Pope Gelasius which was about
490. Years after Christ to have made a great piece of that Canon, as he himself
did something therein about the Year of our Lord 1215.

Panormitanus affirms that Gregory did add to the Canon this clause, Diesque
nostros in pace disponas.

Briefly Gregorius in Registro says that one Scholasticus made the most part
of the Canon, finding also fault with the same, that in composing the Canon he
would put in his own Prayers and leave ou^ the Lords Prayer, etc. Where is to
be noted for the reconsiling of these writers together, of whom some Impute the
Canon to Gelasius, some again to Scholasticus: In my conjecture it may be said,
that both these be one, and so the matter is reconciled the reason that moves
me is this, for so I find, in vetusto quodam libro de officio missae after
these words Gelasius Papaex Scholas^ico effectus in ordine 48. fecit-tractatus
and hymnos etc.

The Elevation and Adoration.
The Elevation and Adoration of the Sacram^nt we cannot find to come in by any
other then by Honorius the third, about the Year of our Lord 1222 which
ordained that the People then should kneel down and worship the Sacrament.

The Pater Noster.
Johannes Diaconus writing of Gregory says Orationem Dominicam mox post
Canonem super hostiam censuit recitari, i. e. That Gregory caused the Lords
prayer to be Recited immediately after the Canon upon the host. etc.

Although the Apostles never used the Lord prayer at the Supper of the Lord,
as is said before, yet Gregory ^elike placed it so in that (...) after the
Canon, and brought it in with those wo^^

precepth salutarib^^, etc. Gregorius in Rege Domi^^ ^^atio spud gracos ab omni
populo apud nos vero, sole sacerdote cantatur i. e. The Lords Prayer says
amongst the Grecians was wont to be sung general of all the People, with us it
is sung only of the P. lest,

Agnus.
The Agnus Pope Sergius about the Year of (...) Lord 700 brought into the Mass
as witnesses E^posit, R. ord propter officium confractionis Dominici cor^^ris
constitutum est a papa sergio, and Agnus des ^^cantetur etc.

The Pax.
Innocentius ordained the Pax to be given to the People. Pacis ait, osculum
dandum post confect a ^^steria and constet populum ad omnia qua in misteri
aguntur prebuisse consensum etc.

Peter Martyr in his Comentaries in Jud. sait that it was brought in by Pope
Leo the Second as it is said, yet he supposes the same, not to (...) so,
saying, that this was an ancient custom in the Apostles time for Christians to
salute one another with the Kiss of peace etc.

To this of Peter Martyr, agrees also Gabr^ Biel writing in these words,
porrexit in primiti^^ Ecclesia Sacerdos osculum pacis ministro, c^texis i^
parti^nd^m ut per hoc significaret etc. That is, (...) the primitive Church the
Priest gave a Kiss of Pea^^ to the Minister, to be given by him to the People*

The Distribution and Communion.
After this follows the Communion, wherein o^ ^opish Mais and Ministers
thereof do much alter a degenerate from ancient antiquity two manner of ways.

First in that they make no Communion thereof receiving only to themselves,
contrary both to their own words, where they say, after their receiving,
sacramenta quae Sumpsimus etc. and also to the ancient examples and decrees of
the Apostles and others. And where it is decreed in the Epistle of Anacletus;
Peracta autem Consecratione omnes communicant qui noluerint Eclesiastic^s
carere liminibus. Sic enim, and Apostoli statuerunt, and S. Romana tenet
ecclesia etc. i. e. The consecration being done let all communicate together,
unless they will be thrust out of the Church doors, etc.

Here note by the way, Reader how Gracianus, the writer of the Popes decrees is
overseen, which in his Book de consecrat did. 2 referieth this Saying of
Anacletus to Pope Calixtus, and likewise also Cocleus writing against Musculus,
follows Gratianus in the same Error.

Likewise in the Canons of the Apostles (if the Canons were theirs) we read
(...) etc. That is, all the faithful that resort to the Church, and tarry not
out the End of the Service, and receive not the holy Communion, be such as
bringing in disorder to the Church ought to be dissevered etc. And again, si
quis Episcopus, Presbiter, aut Diaconus, aut quicunque ex sacerdotali
consortio, oblatione fa^^a, non communi caverins, causam dicito etc.

For how can that be called a Communion which is not Common but private to one
as Microlog^^ writ^^h Nec enim proprie, communio dici potes^, nisi plures de
codem sacrificio participent etc. It cannot be called a Communion Except mo^e
then one do participate of one sacrifice etc. And Durandu^ In primitiva
Ecclesia omnes qui celebratione Missaru^ interer^nt singulis diebus communicare
soleban^, co quod Apostoli omnes de calice biberunt etc. that is in the
primative time, all that were present at the ministration were wont everyday to
Communicate, because that the Apostles did altogether drink of the Cup. etc.

Secondly they alter and degenerate therein from ancient antiquity in that when
they Communicate also with the people, yet they deprive them of the holy Cup,
which deprivation was not in the Church before the Council of Constance about
the Year of our Lord 1414. for before it was so authentickly received that it
was counted a Sacrilege to receive the one without the other, as appears by
the words of Pope Grlasius, Comperimus quod quidam sumpta tantum mode corporis
sacri portione etc. The whole in English is this. We understand that there be
some which receiving the one part only of the holy Body, abstain from the Cup
of the sacred Blood, who because they be taught so do (by what supersticion I
cannot tell) either let them receive the Sacrament whole together, or let them
abstain from the whole Sacrament altogether, because the division of that one
and whole Sacrament cannot be without great Sacrilege etc.

Hitherto also pertains the Testimony of Saint Austin in these words, Et ibi
vos estis in mensa and in calice nobiscum vos estis, simul enim boc sumimus,
simulbibimus, quia simul vioimus etc. i. e. There b^ you at the Table and at
the Cup, there also b^ you with us for together we receive, and together we
drink, because we live together.

As also out of the Book of Gregory it is manise^^ that not on'y the people
received them in both linds, but also the words were prescribed to the Minister
what he should say in giving the Cup. Item sacerdos Calicem dando dicat;
sanguis domini nostri Jes Christi custodiate advitam aternam i. e. let the Pry
say in giving the Cup the blood of our Lord Jesus (...) ^hee ^^ everlasting
life Amen.

Further in rendering the cause why it should so be done Thomas Aquinas writes,
Nam hoc valet ad representandum Passionem Chrsti in qua seorsim suit sanguis a
Corpore seperatus etc. secundo hoc est conveniens usui hujus sacramenti ut
seorsim exhibeatur corpus Christi fidelibus in cibum, and sanguis in potum i.
e. for that serves to represent the passion of Christ wherein his blood was
parted severally from the body etc.

Secondly for that it is convenient to the use of the Sacrament that the body
should severally be given to the faithful for meat and the blood for drink.

And therefore served the office of the Deacons as we read, Ut oblata a populo
super altar consecranda disponant, and perfect is misteriis calicem sacro
sancti sanguinis domini fidelibus prop^nent i. e. say the offerings of the
People upon the alter to be hallowed, and when the mysteries be consecrated, to
distribute the Cup of the sacred blood of the Lord to the faithful etc.

But among all other testimonies to prove that the Sacrament ought to be common
to all people in both kinds there is none more evident then that place of
Hierome Caeterum dominica, cana omnibu^ debet esse communis quia ille omnibus
discipul is suis qui aderunt aequaliter tradidit Sacramenta i. e. the supper of
the Lord ought to be indifferently common to all his Disciples there present
etc.

And there have ye heard the Canon described which otherwise is called Secretum
i. e. the secret of the Mass, being so termed because the Priest was wont to
read it in secret or in silence, the reason thereof Pope Innocentius the third,
declares in his third Book, for that the holy words (faith he) of the Canon
should not grow in contempt with the People by the daily use and hearing
thereof, and he brings in an Example concerning the same of certain Shepherds
which in the fields using the same words of the Canon upon their Bread and
Wine, the matter was turned says he, into Fiesh and Blood, and they plagued
therefore from Heaven, but with such Popish tales the Church has been long
replenished, as we have touched already.

The Postcommon.
After the Canon and Communion then follows the postcommon with the Collects
which the Mass Book requires always to be used in an odd Number, sometime
teaching to use but one, as in the Sundays Leot, and sometime three as in
certain Massesfrom Low Sunday till the Assention, but never to pass the Number
of Seven.

Ita Missa est.
Last of all comes Ita Missa est whereby the Minister dismisseth or sends
away all the Congregation there present to their Business, for as you heard
before it was decreed in ancient time, that it was not lawful to depart from
the Congregation in the time of holy Ministration, before the End of the whole
Communion, and therefore all things being accomplished, the Priest turning to
the Assembly pronounces Ite Missa est.

Where note that upon Sundays and Festival days on'y, when Gloria in Exc^lsis
was sung Ita Missa est was wont to be said, ^on the Work days, bened^eamu^
Domino, sometime, Requi^scant in pace.

Now conc^^ning such Trink^^s as were to the aforesaid Mass appertaining or
circumstant first the Li^^^n Albe^ and copporasses were brought in by Pope
Martus A^^o 340, if that be true which is thought of some: whore note again
that in the time of this Pope it was nothing offensive for every ^on^^^ Prles^
^^ have his own proper Wise. In the (...) also of this Marc^o was ^^ncilium
Elibur^^^^m which condomn all ^ind^ of Images and ^^^^^res ^^ Temples,

Contrary to the which Council, Pope Gregory the third about the Year of our
Lord 732. Calling a Council at Rome did not only establish the Images before
condemned, but condemned the gainsayers for Heretics as is aforesaid.

By Sixtus the second it was ordained that no Liturgy should be done, save
only upon Alters hallowed, about the Year of our Lord 260. as some suppose, but
as I see no firm probation upon the same so have I probable conjecture the same
not to be true.

Some there be that shame not to say that S. Clement brought in the Alb and
vestments to the Popish Mass.

Item, that the Sacrament of the blood of the Lord should be consecrated in
Chalices of glass and not of wood, as it was in former time, they say it was
the ordinance of Pope Severinus.

After this came in golden Chalices and a true Proverb withal, that once they
had wooden Chalices and Golden Proists, now they have Golden Chalices and
wooden Priests.

Sebirianus ordained the Ringing of bells and burning of Lamps in Churches.

Vitalianu^ the playing on the Organs Damasus by the instinct of Hierome
appointed Gloria Patri Glory be to the Father after the Psalms.

Pelagius divised the Memento for the dead.

Leo brought in the Inc^nce.

Eutichianu^ as others say brought in the Offertory which was then after a
manner far otherwise then it is or has been used now a great while.

For what time as many of the Heathen being greatly accustomed to bring
offerings were converted unto Christ, and could not be well brought from their
old long use of offerings, the Pope thought to bear somewhat with the weak and
permitted them to being meats into the congregation of the Church, that when
the Bishop had blessed them, they that brought them might distribute them to
the poor, or take them to their own use. But afterward did Pope Gregory improve
this sentence Non apparebis in cons^^^^u D^^ tui vacuus etc. Thou shall not
appear in the Sight of thy God empty etc. That as he will^d the People to say
their Offerings upon the Al^^^, so they did and have not yet forgotten to do so
still.

Soule-Masses and M^sses applied for the dead, came in partly by Gregory,
partly by Pelagius, which brought in the Memento as is said.

Where note (good reader,) and mark how these two stand together, that which
our Savior says in hi^ Gospel hoc facite in mei commemorati^nem, Do this in
remembrance of me, And that which they say, In quorum memoria corpus Christi
sumitur etc. i. e. In whose commemoration the Body of Chrst is taken etc.
Christ would it to be done in his Remembrance, and the Pope says do it in
Remembrance of the D^^d etc. what can be more contrary?

Ian^^^^tius the third ordained that the Sacrament should be reserved in the
Church, the same also brought in Aricular Confession as a Law about the Year of
our Lord 1215. He did also constitute that no Arch Bishop should enjoy the
Pall, unless he were of his own Religion, and therefore no great Marvel if
there be such Unity in Pop^ry.

Vigilins orda^n^d that the Priest should say Mass having his face toward the
East.

P^^tine writes how the first Latin mass was sung in the fixed Council of
Constantinople which was about the Year of our Lord 680, so that the said Mass
was there and then first allowed and not before. And yet they (I mean the Greek
Church) should have known as soon the Mass, if it had proceeded from James or
Basillus as the Latin Church ^^^ know it.

The opinion that the Mass, helps Souls in pur^^^ory was constrmed by Pope
J^^nn^s the 19. by (...) of a dream, wherein he dreamt tha^ he heard and saw
the voices of Devils, lamenting and bewailing, that Souls there delivered from
them by the sayings of Massos and diriges, and therefore he did approve and
Ratify the feast of All Souls, brought in by Odilo, moreover he had joined
also to the same the the feast of Alhallowes about the Year of our Lord 1003.

Concerning lent fast some think that Telesphorus about the Year of our Lord,
140. was the author thereof, But that paradventure may be as true, as that
which they also attribute to him that he ordained three Masses of one Priest to
be said on Christmas Day, or if he did ordain that Fast, yet he did ordain it
but freely to be kept, for so I find a mong the decrees that Lent was commanded
first to be fasted but only of the Clergy or Churchmen.

Pope Leo Commanded the Sacrament to be censed that is perfumed with Incense,
Pope Boiniface set in his foot for covering of the Altars,

In St. Cyprians time it seems that water was mingled with the Wine, whereof
we read mention in his second Book of Epistles, which mixture is referred to
Alexander the first in the order of the Roman Canon.

As concerning the breaking of the body in three parts we read also mention to
be made in the same book of order, but no certain author thereof to be named,
the words of the book be these; Tripliciter inquit corpus domini intelligitur,
unum quod resurrexit a mortuls quod significat particula in sanguinem missa,
aliud quod ad huc vivit in terra significatum partuit particulam a Sacerdote
consumptam, tertium quod jam requiescit in Christo quod etiam a tertia
particula in altari reservata apt figuratur etc. i. e. Three ways is the Body
of the Lord understood, one which rose again from the Dead, being signified by
that part which is let fall to the Blood in the Chalice, the other is that
which yet is living in the Earth, which the part of the Priest eaten does
signify, the third is that now rests in Christ which also is figured by that
Particle that is reserved upon the Altar.

Dedication of Churches came in by Felix the third, and that the Churches might
not be hallowed but by a Bishop Anno 492.

The Canticle Gloria laus etc. In the procession before the Mass on Palm Sunday
was instituted by The edulphus Bishop of Aurelia, as Sigebertus writes about
the Year of our Lord 483.

Giving of holy bread came in by this Occasion as it is to be gathered partly
out of Honorius, partly out of Durandus and others, the manner was in ancient
time, that the Ministers were wont to receive certain Meats of every House or
Family, wherewith a great Loaf was made called Panis Dominicus, able to serve
in the Communion, and to be distributed unto the People which then was wont
every day to be present and received, especially they that offered the Meat,
for whom it was wont therefore to be said in the Canon, omnium circumstantium
qui tibi h^^ sacrificium laudis efferunt etc. But afterward the Number of the
People increasing, and piety decreasing as Durandus writes, it was then
ordained to communicate but only upon Sundays.

At length followed the third Constitution, that thrice a Year, at least at
Easter every Man should communicate it being thus provided, that instead of the
daily Communion before used the Pax did serve, and instead of receiving upon
the Sunday bread was hallowed, and every Sunday given and distributed unto the
people which also was called ^^logi^, the constitution whereof seems to
proceed from Pope Pius, for so we read in the Decree^ of the said Pope Pius, Ut
de oblationibus qu^ off(...) (...) a Populo and consecrationibus supersunt, vel
(...) (...) deferunt ^ideles ad Ecclesiam, vel certe de s(...) (...) p^r^^s
(...) habeat in (...) indito and convenienti, and post missarum solennia qui
communicare non fuerint parati Eulogias omni Die Dominica, and in di^bus
festis, exinde accipiant, That is that the Minister shall take of the oblations
offered of the People, remaining of the Consecration, or else of the bread
which the Faithful bring unto the Church or use to make of their own Bread; and
cut it conveniently in portions in a clean and a convenient Vessel, so that
after the solemnity of the Ministration being done they that were not prepared
and ready to communicate, may receive every Sunday or Festival day Eulogies or
Benedictions with the same. haec illo.

As concerning Holy water which they used to sprinkle at the Church door upon
them that entered in, I will nor say that it sprung from the Idolatrous use of
the Gentiles.

This I say as I find in Historia Zozomeni, erat autem Romany vetusta
consuetudo ut quem limen Templi transeundum esset sacerdos secundum morem
ethnicum madidos quosdam Olivae remusculos manu tennens ingredientes aspergebat
etc. i. e. It was an old custum among the Romans that at the entering in at the
Church door, the Priest after the usual manner of the Ethnicks, having in his
hand moist branches of Olive did sprinkle with the same such as entered in etc.

To the which custom this our manner of giving of Holy water is so like that it
seems to proceed out of the same.

In the Book of the Popes Decrees, and in the distinctions of Gratianus there
is a certain Decree gathered upon Alexander the first about the Year of our
Lord 121, which Decree may well seem to be a bastard Decree, neither agreeing
to such a father, nor such a time, concerning the Conjuring of holy water, the
words of the decree be these, A^uam sale conspersam in Populis been dicimus ut
ca (...) aspersi sanctificentur and purificentur quod omnibus sacerdotibus
faciendum esse mandamus: Na(...) si cinis vitul^ aspersus Populum
sanctificabat, atq(...) mundabat, multo magis aqua sale aspersa, divinisq(...)
pracibus sacratd, Populum sanctificat atque mund(...) Et si sale asperso per
Heliseum prophetam sterilit(...) aqua sanata est, quinto magis divinis precibus
sacra tus sal sterilitatem rorum aufert humanarum, and col(...) quinatos
sanctificat and purgat, and caetera bona multiplicat, and infidias Diaboli
avertit, et a phantasmat(...) versutis homines defendit. That is, we bless
water sprinkled with Salt among the People, that all such as be sprinkled with
the same, may be sanctifye and purified, which thing we charge and command all
Priests to do, for if the Ashes of the Heifer the old Law being sprinkled among
the People did sanctity and cleanse them, much more water sprinkled with Salt
and hallowed with godly Prayers, santifieth and cleanses the People, and if
the Helisens and the Prophet by the sprinkling of Salt did heal and help the
barrenness of the water, how much more does the Salt being hallowed by god
Prayers, take away the barrenness of human thin(...) and sanctify and purge
them that be defiled, a(...) multiplieth other things that be good. and tu(...)
away the Snares of the Devil, and defends Men from the deceptions of phantasy
etc.

Thus you have heard the Author and Father holy water which some also ascribe
to Pope Six(...) which succeeded Alexander, but as the Papists do (...) agree
in the first Author or institutor of this hallow of Elements, so I think the
same, untruly to be scribed to either, but leaving the probation of the further
leisure, let us now hear in our own to(...) their own words which they use in
this their C(...)juration.

The form and words used of the Priest in Conju(...) Salt.

I Conjure thee thou creature of Salt by th(...) ^ving God, by the true God, by
the holy God etc.

That thou may be made a Conjured Salt, to the Salvation of them that
believe, and that unto all such as receive thee, thou may be health of Soul
and body, and that from out of the place wherein thou shall be sprinkled may
fly away and depart all phantasy wickedness, or craftiness of the Divils
subtilty and every foul Spirit etc.

The form of Cunjuring Water*
I Conjure thee thou creature of Water in the name of God the father almighty,
and in the name of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord and in the virtue of the Holy
Ghost that thou become a Cunjured Water to expel all power of the Enemy etc.

Who sees not in these words Blasphemy intolerable? how that which is only
due to the Blood of Christ and promised only to Faith in him, the same is
transferred to Earthly and insensible creatures, to be salvation both to body
and Spirit, inwardly to give Remission of Sins, to give health and remedies
against evils and Devils against all fantasies wickedness and all foul
Spirits, and to expel the power of the Enemy etc. If this be true, whereto
serves the Blood of Christ and the virtue of Christian Faith.

Therefore Judge thy self (good Reader) whether thou think this trumpery
rightly to be fathered upon those ancient Fathers before named? or else whether
it may seem more like truth that John Sleydan writes, whose words in his
second Book de Monarchiis are these. Norum decreta sunt in libris inserta
conciliorum, sed ex his pleraque tam sunt lericula, tam nugatoria tam aliena
prorsus sacris literis ut credible fit ab aliis longo post tempore fuisse
conficta etc.

That is the decrees of these foresaid Bishop and Marters be inserted in the
Book of Councels, but of these decrees many whereof be so Childish, so
trifling, and so far disagreeing from the holy (...) it is very like that the
same were fained and counter^elted of others long after their time etc. Thus
much ^aith S^eydon with more words in that place* unto whose Testimony i^ I
might be so bold also to add my conjecture, I would suppose the Conjuration of
this same Water and Salt to spring out of the same Fountain, from whence
proceeded the conjuring of Flowers and Branches, because I see the order and
manner of them both to be so like and uniform as may appear.

The manner of hallowing Flowers and Branches.
I conjure thee thou creature of Flowers and Branches in the Name of God the
Father Almighty, and in the Name of Jesus Christ his Son our Lord and in the
Virtue of the Holy ghost, therefore be thou rooted out and displanted from this
Creature of Flower and Branches, all thou strength of the Adversary, all thou
Host of the Devil, and all the Power of the Enemy, even every assault of the
Devils etc.

And thus much concerning the Antiquity of holy Bread and holy water, which is
left Before the Christian Reader, that he may judge whether they be of God or
the Father of Lies etc.

Furthermore as touching the Reserving of Relics and the Memorial of Saints,
brought into the Mass, Gregory the third is the Author thereof, who also added
to the Canon thereof this clause, Qu^rum solemnitatis hodie in conspectu Divine
Majestatis tu^ celebrantur etc.

Finally, it were too long to recite every thing in order divised and brought
in particularly to the Mass and to the Church, for after that man's brain was
once set on devising, it never could make an end of ^^aping Rite upon Rite and
Ceremony upon Ceremony, till all Religion was turned to Superstition, ^^^^^fore
comes Oil and Creem brought in by ^ope Silvester not wont to be hallowed but
by a ^ishop.

That the Corporas should not be of Silk, but only Fine Linen Cloth. That the
Psalms should be (...) on Sides, the one fide of the Quire Singing (...) verse,
the other another, with Gloria Patri etc.

That Baptism should be Ministered at no other time the Year but only at Easter
and Whi^sontide (save ^^ly to Infants, and such as were in extreme infirmi^^)
and that it should be required 40 Days before, so ^^termined by Pope Sixtus,
and therefore was it, at Fonts were hallowed only at these two seasons, (...)
which hallowing they keep still, but the ordinance ^^ey have Rejected.

Item that Bells also were Christened, Item no Priest ^ould wear a Beard, or
have long Hair, so appointed Pope Martin the first, Item that Auricular
confession ^ould be made* that the Book of Decrees and de^^tals should be
stablished, and transubstantiation ^^firmed, in which three arts, Pope
Innocentius the (...), was the chief doer, about the Year of our ^^rd, 1215.

Arguments against the Popish Mass and Transubstantiation.
To omit the Janglings of Critical Schoolmen about the Derivation of the word
Missa, (Mass), I^ which the Papists themselves cannot agree the mo^^ probable
opinion is, that Missa is taken pro licenti^ dimittendi populum, that is the
dismission or sendin^ away the people by their Ite Missa est at the Conclusion
of the Mass. Or say others, it takes denomination of that which the Greeks call
(...) the dimission of the people, alluding to the story of the Hebrews,
licensed of Pharaoh to Depart out of Captivity after eating of the Pasch^ lamb,
as an old Popish Book de Sacramentis sace^ do^alibus has it etc. Let it be what
it will, you man note by the way that this word Missa, was never used by the
Greeks: Yet such Latin Interpreters a^ have in old times Translated the Ancient
Gree^ Books, as Eusebius, The Tripartite History and others, have made bold to
render those term (...), and (...) that is, to call the Congregation, to
convene Assemblies, etc. By the Terms of Missas sacere, Celebrar^ etc. that is
to make or Celebrate Masses: So that yo^ may conjecture that the word was not
of old time attributed to the action of Consecration, but (...) Christian
Assemblies gathered together. Well, (...) best it is a barbarous Latin word of
an uncertain original, and so let the Name pass, Now to the thing.

As the Unbelief of the Jews, when our Lord Jesus ^^^urned on Earth, was a kind
of Miracle, considering those ^tupendious, sense-convincing M^racles wrought
for their Conversion; so, the fre^^^ and dotage of Our Mass-adorers is to be
ad^^red at, who prostrate their Reason, Conscience, and Religion, in
maintaining such a medley of superstition, Blasphemy and Nonsense, especially
in these times of Gospel Sunshine, wherein it has been baffled by unanswerable
Arguments, and made appear (as really it is, the very Invention of the Devil,
and his vicar the Romish Antichrist. To encounter therefore this Contagion, we
will give you an Abstract of some Arguments that have been, or may be used, to
overthrow it.

The holy Supper instituted by our Lord Jesus is a pledge of his Love, and a
Memorial of his Passion. A Sacrament that nourishes, seeds, and refreshes the
believing Soul. But these idolatrous Papists turn it into a Soul-killing
poison, quite changing the Nature of it, of which take these brief Instances.

1. There must be W^ter mixed with the Wine, which B^llarmine says, lib. 4. cap.
10. De Euchar* cannot be omitted without grievous Sin, verifying the saying of
the Prophet thy Wine is mixed with Water. Yet not one Drop of Water is mentioned
by any of the Evangelists or Apostles when they treat of the Supper. I read
that Pope Hon^rius the 3. suspended a poor Priest for ever ab o^^icio and
beneficio, from office and benefice, for sacrificing without Water*

2. They are by no means to use any other but unleavened Bread. Bellarmine
ibid. cap. 7. a silly superstitious Vanity like the former; for Christ and the
Apostles laid no such restraint, but used the Bread that was commonly used
where they were. The Greek Church contends for leavened Bread only, the Latins
for unleavened. This was one of the Crimes of the Priest last mentioned.

3. Their Bread must be a little Wafer Cake -- This is notorious to all the
World -- But if a Man may be so bold to ask them, in what part of the World
such water Crustlings are used for Bread? without doubt it is in Vtopia, that
is, nowhere, where Natives (No people) make it their daily Food. But the
Mystery is, it gives a lift toward Transubstantiation, for if it be No bread,
it may with ease be somewhat else; and what that should be, you shall hear anon.

4. One of these Wafers only is to be broken into three parts, and all that
too, for the Priest alone to devour. The Communicants have it whole, (but a
less Wafer, such as Letters are sealed withal) so that there is no breaking of
Bread for them ^ Quite contrary to Christ who first did break the Bread, and
then being broken gave the same Bread to his Disciples; note, that the Priests
morsel must be broken over the Chalice, least any Crum should be lost. So the
People must have theirs whole, to avoid the like Danger forsooth; as Durandus
and Salmeron tells us.

5. The consecration lies percisely in these words: This is my Body, this is my
Blood, says Bellarmine de Eucar. lib. 4. cap. 13. he ought not to have left
out [ enim, for] though the Gospel does; since his Missal has it, and himself
used it but at the end of the Chapter before quoted. His Modesty in this place
is singular, the Scripture says that every creature of God is sanctified by the
word and Prayer; and our Lord first takes Bread; next Blesses it; then breaks
it; after gives it to his Disciples, biding them, take, eat; and lastly says,
This is my Body: without any [ for] of theirs. And can the Consecration lie in
the last words only? It cannot be common, but consecrated or blessed Bread,
that is Christ's Body. And this Bread was Blessed or consecrated before Christ
says thereof, This is my Body.

6. The consecrations must be uttered by the Priest secretly that no body else
may hear it. And why must he so mutter? Because forsooth, (1) Hannahs voice was
not heard, only her lips moved, and she (they say) was a tiype of the Church.
And the Lord said to Moses, Wherefore try'st thou to me? when he said nothing.
And the Prophet said, speak in your Hearts, and in your Chambers. (2) Else the
Priest might mar his own intention, and then all the Freak of
transubstantiation vanishes. (3) His voice perhaps might fail by speaking loud
(4) the holy words might grow vile (or despicable) as of old time when they
were spoken loud, some shepherd learning them, put Bread up on a stone, and by
speaking those word turned it into flesh: But (says the whiske^ they were
smitten with Fire from Heaven for their pains, some other Raving (not
reasonings) they have which I omit see Duran^ Rational. lib. 4. de secret.

7. They have Private Masses (that is Sacraments) wherein the Priest alone
Communicates. This alone Communion is such a piece of Nonsense and impious
Contradiction, that it might astonish any man to hear those Rabbys, (as men of
reason) ^ impudently assert it. What can be more contrary to the Command of
Christ to (...) Disciples present, take, Eat, Drink, yet the Ravenous Priest
swallows all himself, and bids the people seed with their Eyes; it is pity but he
were so fed. Institution is the sol^ foundation whereon Sacraments stand. And
all Examples in Scripture are again these Papists; nor will any Antiquity
she^ter them* see Dr. Caves Primitive Christianity, An Excellent Book.

8. Lay men must not taste at all of the Cu^ but Christ and his Apostles were of
another mind; Drink ye all of this, was current then, but now it will not pass.
No, No though the Conventicle of Trent sect. 21. Cap. 3. Confessed the
Institution to be otherwise. Their Doctrine is that whole Christ is either
kind, in defiance of Christ who said, the Bread was his Body, and the Wine his
Blood. If the people have a whole Christ under one kind, then the Priests have
two Christ's under both, that's certain, either two, or none. That Popish Hector
Bellarmine gives you reasons forsooth (lib. 4. de *Euchar. cap. 24. ad finem)
why they thus rob the Laity. Because it would be impossible in large Parishes
for one Priest to give the Cup to all (Ah, ah, he is too large) And then, some
drops may fall and be split and the Wine by carrying about, one way or other
may be made unfit to Drink. Again, many cannot abide Wine. (O rare!) some
Countries want it.

Ergo, the Laity must not have the Cup Well concluded great Bellarmine! Brave
Logic.

Now let us consider this Mass, and examine whether it be of God or no, In order
to which take a few general Reasons of that blessed servant and Martyr of
Jesus, John Gradford, thus briefly reduced into Syllogisms. From Fox Act. and
Mon. 1. That thing is not perpetual nor stands not alone which admits of
succession of others to do the same thing that was done before.

But the Mass Priest [pretend to] succeed after Christ, doing the same
sacrifice which he did before.

Ergo, the Mass Priests make Christ's Priesthood not to be perpetual.

2. All Priests be after the order of Aaron, or after the order of
Melchisedech, or after the order of the Apostles, or after that spiritual sort
whereof it is written, ye are a spiritual Priesthood etc.

But the Mass Priests are neither of the order of Aaron ( for that were to
establish what Christ abolished) neither after the order of Melchisedech ( for
that is peculiar only to Christ) neither after the order of the Apostles for
they were Ministers and Preachers, never had the title of Priests. Neither
after the general sort of the spiritual Priesthood ( for every Christian is a
spiritual Priest, offering up spiritual not bodily sacrifice as Prayer
thanksgiveing etc.)

Ergo, the Mass Priests, are no Priests, ( unl^ss after the order of Baals
Priests)

Concerning the sacrifice of Christ he reasons in like manner, this reduced
into Argument.

To Reiterate a thing once done, for the a^taining or accomplishing of the end
wherefore it was begun, declares the imperfect^on of the same thing before the
Mass-Priests do reiterate the sacrifice of Christ once done for the end
wherefore it was begun (that is for propitiation and remission from punishment
and guilt, for the living and Dead.)

Ergo Mass Priest make the sacrifice of Christ to be Imperfect, and so are
injurious to the sacrifice of Christ.

To confirm this, mark the Rubric following written before the Mass of the
five Wounds in the Mass -- Book.
Boniface Bishop of Rome lay sick and was like to die, to whom our Lord sent
the Archangel Raphael with the office of the Mass of the five Wounds, saying
Rise and write this office, and say it five times, and thou shall be restored
to thy health immediately: And what Priest soever shall say this office for
himself or for any (1) other that is sick five times, the Person for whom it is
said, shall obtain health and grace, and in the World to come, if he continue,
(2) LIFE everlasting and 3. whatsoever tribulation a man shall be in this life,
if, he procure this office to be said five times for him, of a Priest, withont
doubt he shall be delivered. And if it be said for the SOUL of the Dead, anon
as it shall be said and ended five times, his Soul shall be rid from pains.
This hearing the Bishop, he did erect himself up in his Bed, Conjuring the
Angel by the Name of Almighty God, to tell him what he was; and wherefore he
came, and that he should depart without doing him harm who answered that he was
Raphael the Archangel sent unto him of God: And that all the premises were
undoubtedly true, Then the said Boniface confirmed the said office of the five
Wounds, by the Apostolic Authority.

Reader if I should go about to convince any body, that this Rubric which
these Blushless Blasphemers shame not to print in their Mass Book, is horribly
wicked, it would be a kind of an Impeachment of your Understanding. Now either
the Apparition is ture, or false. If true, it must be from God, or the Devil,
It cannot be from God, for it is diametrically opposite to his word: For health,
Grace, and Salvation are to be had only by and through the Lord Jesus our
Redeemer. Therefore of necessity it must be from the Devil. But if there was no
such Apparition; then the Pope is a devilish liar; fine Infallibility! is it
not.

1. Note here that there is no need of Docters, or Apothecharies etc. For this
Catholic Physitiah has got you a Panpharmacon to cure all diseases; What
unmerciful wretches are they to suffer so many of their pocky Brethren to
languish under the te^ious and Chargeable Cures they are purgatory'd with, when
so easy a remedy is at every Priests disposal,

2. Here Is Jesus Christ himself made a mere Cipher; here is the Eternal wisdom
Blasphemously arraigned of downright folly and Cruelty. For, if Everlasting
life might be had at so easy a rate, there was no need that the Eternal Son of
God should be exposed to those torments, and ineffable Agonies which he suffered
in bearing the whole weight of Gods wrath for our Sins. O the Astonishing
Impudence of this Rubric.

3. Nay this is not all neither, 'twill deliver out of all sorts of trouble;
will it so? Yes, it is undoubtedly, true says the Heavenly Ambassador (I should
say Satan's Envoy Extraordinary) Well; but how comes it to pass that the late
Jesuits and their Brethren Martyred for Treason, (If I may use a Catachresis)
made no use of this glorious receipt to save their Necks. If they tried it, the
Devil fail'd'um. If not, they were all so many ( felo's dese) self murderers,
when they might escape if they would. I would advise the Priests in Newgate etc.
to get themselves out by this trick, as also their friends in the Tower. I
profess I can hardly forbear laughing when I consider what fools our students
are, as well as the vertuosoes and Philosopher-stone-men together with the
whole body of learned Physicians, who spend so much time and expense in
arriving to their Skill. Yea the whole World is mad, that does not lay aside
these and other useless sciences, and set up a parcel of 5 wound Mass Priests,
who will do the Job presently, be it what it will.

In whatsoever Tribulation] this is a Comprehensive word art thou going to be
hanged? Employ a Priest betimes in the Morning, and heel fumble over five Mases
before thou getst to high Holborn -- there is one Tribulation gone. Art thou
over Head and Ears in Debt, and surrounded with a stone Doublet; peh, it is
nothing, the same Charms will set open the Prison doors for you. Art thou at
Sea Menaced every moment with the Devouring Billows, whilst the enraged
Elements tumultuously encounter to destroy thee, the Skys rattling, the Wind
roaring, and the swelling Waves mounting like so many Isles of Tenariff fear
not; set the Catholic Chaplain to work, and whip, you have all the Ocean as
smooth as a Fish pond, before you have surl'd your Sails. An Infinite Number of
these benefits may be thought on. And the Nation may save a world of Money in
an Age, which i^ given to maintain Our Ministers for Preaching the Gospel of
Salvation. If these five Masses can save us, the Gentry may save the Charges of
breeding up their Sons at University's and Inns of Court, because this Mass
Priest can prevent and remedy all vexations of Lawsuits, so that in a word
Divinity, Law, and Physic, are all rendered Superfluous, if this Mass can
supply their places. Risum teneatis amici! But to our Argument.

4. Whatsoever causes or occasions a man to rest in a mere external serving of
God, which should be inward and Spiritual, that hinders the service of God.

But the Mass occasions a man to rest in such external service [viz. hearing,
seeing, and saying of Mass, which are but the object of sense, yet (say they)
meretorious ex opere operato, etiam sine bono Motu intentionis, viz, from the
work done, even without the good motion of the Intention]

Erog, the Mass hinders the true service of God.

1. The Papists affirm that the Bread after these 5 words of Consecration [ hoc
est enim Corpus meum] are whispe^ed by the Priest over it, it ceases to be
Bread, and at the utterance of the last syllable ( um) [mark that, not before]
it becomes the real and substantial Body of Christ, Flesh Blood and Bones,
without any hope or Allegorical Meaning; even as he conversed with Mortals upon
Earth. This is their great D^^na of a Doctrine.

Well, what then? Then of necessity, if this Doctrine be true, the real Body of
Christ is a Dead * substance wholly void of life and sense, for the Consecrated
water stirs not, but as the Priest moves it: But the real Body of Christ is a
living substance, and is, and must be eternally such Romans 6. 9. -- Christ being
raised from the Dead, dies no more, Death has no more dominion over him, Rev.
1. 18. I am he that lives and was Dead: and Behold I am a live for evermore
Luke 20. 35. 36. Ergo this wafer cannot be the real and material Body of
Christ, the one being a living, the other a Dead Substance.

If the Consecrated wafer be the real Body of Christ, then it is possible that
Christ may have a 100000 Bodies at one, and the same time. For one Pr^est at one
Consecration may make as many as the Table will hold, perhaps some hundred
Body's at a Clap, with the mere Charm of hoc est enim Corpus Meum, to be sure
he makes enough for all the Communicants, which may be Mil^ions at one Instant,
at least the same Morning, in Europe etc. This is quite contrary to the Text 1
Cor. 1. 13. Is Christ Divided? etc. that is he is not Divided as by the Context
appears. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. one Body -- one Spirit^ one hope -- one Lord -- one
Faith-one (...).

Now if every one of these consecrated, Wafers be a real and substantial
Christ; it must of necessity follow that we have so many Christ's, yea
Christ-Mediators, (for that it must or no Christ) as there are consecrated
Wafers which the Scriptures in express terms gain says 1 Cor. 8. 6. -- to us
there is but one God -- and one Lord Jesus Christ etc. 1 Timothy 2. 5. there is
one God, and one Mediator, (not many) between God and Men, the Man (not Men)
Christ Jesus.

The Papists say that Christ's Flesh, Blood, and Bones, ay, and his Soul and
Divinity too, that is whole Christ, is here sacrificed in their wafer by a
Knack they call Concomitancy: A very little room a mere little Ease! Now if
there be as many - real Christ's or Christ's Bodies, as there are consecrated
Wafers, they make the Lord Jesus to have only a fantastical Body, that is
indeed, none at all contrary to what he himself demonstrated to his Disciples
Luke 24. 39. Behold my Hands and my Feet, handle me (or feel me) and see etc,
proving the reality of his Body by sight-and touch, so John 14. 19. the World
seek me no more (viz. till his second coming) I go unto the Father (viz. in
bodily presence ver. 28.) I leave the World etc. but the Papists can bring him
back with a Charm of five Words. The Angel thought it was a good Argument to
prove Christ was not on Earth or in the Sepulcher, because he was risen; but
these Logicians will have him risen and here too, strange S^phistry!

If this Transubstan^iation be true, th^n Christ's Body may be eaten by Rats,
Mice, and other Vermin, (as in the Caveats of the Mass) contrary to Act. 2*
27. where it is said neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see Corruption.

This consecrated Bread or Wafer has not the real Nature and property of flesh
or a human Body, as Animal Spirits, no taste nor feeling like Flesh, no
complexion of flesh, so as to convince the senses of sight, taste and to^uching
therefore no real Body of Christ. And if we must believe a thing so contra^y to
sense, and that our senses are deceived* the greatest Evidence of Christianity
it self is but a fantastical Dec^ptio visus, or a trick of Leg^rd^main; for to
what end served those amazing Miracles done by the Almighty power, in the
Infancy of Christianity, but to convince the unbelieving World? and if sense
must be mistrusted or plainly contradicted as in this Case of
Transubstantiation; might not the incredulous Jews and Gentiles plead for their
unbelief? and say, these are but mere Phantasms and Juggles* we will not believe
our very eyes, no nor any (...) sense, for they may be all deluded: Nay (...)
^on't believe any thing written in the Bible, for our Eyes may deceive us etc.
See what a Gap these God* makers open to let in Infidelity and point blank
Atheism!

If our senses err we are sure of nothing under the Sun; no, not that we see
this, or that, or to'ther thing, and if the sense of universal Mankind cannot
be deceived in so notorious a thing as this is, it is certain that the Priests
consecrated wafer, is no more than a mere wafer still, without the least
alteration or change to be perceived by the Eyes or Spectacles in the World.

If it should be true that this wafer is really turned into Christ's material
Body, what Cannibals can be more inhuman than the Papists? what? make a
Breakfast of their God? O horrible! this is a thousand times worse than to be
crucified by the Jews. They murdered the Lord of life, ONCE, and then they let
him alone, but these vile, Roman God-eaters, will never let him be quiet, they
daily in thousands of places scranch his very bones betwixt their Teeth, and
give him an unmerciful swallow; modesty forbids me to mention what treatment
the wafer God has afterward to the end of the Chapter. These fresh Crucifiers
of Christ are hopeless Reprobates Heb. 6. 6, 8. etc.

Further this Bread never came down from Heaven; no Sirs. I can tell you its
p^digree* it is first sown in the ground, then mowed o^ reaped next brought
unto the barn and soundly thresh'd ground in the Mill, sifted, kneaded, baked,
and Godded by the Priest Prestol etc. But other parts of the same corn serve
for* other uses; see Isaiah 44. 15. 16.

This Brea^d cannot give eternal life to the Receiver, because it self is not
external, for ni^ dat quod in se non habet nothing can give that which it has
not in it self; a most infallible Maxim. If it should, then the effect must
infinitely tanscend the cause, the grossest of absurdities.

Pray consider what monstrous conclusions may be drawn from this real presence*
for if it be true, then;

1. That the Body of Christ is a dead substance, as we mentioned, contrary to
Luke 20. 35. 36. Romans 6. 9. Rev. 1. 18.

2. That Christ may have a 100000 Bodies at one time.

3. That there are so many Lords Christ's and Christ's Mediators, against 1 Cor.
1. 13. Ephesians* 4. 4. 1* Cor. 8. 5, 6. 1 T^m* 2. 5.

4. That the Body of Christ is corruptible against Act* 2. 2^.

5. That it is flesh, yet has neither the Nature, property, complexion, or
dimension of flesh.

6* That it may be swallowed down alive (...) pretend to worship him Heb. 6* 6.
(...)

7. That it is the Bread of Heaven, when nothing can be more false, as before.

8. That it can save the Receiver, when it has no such Virtue existing in it.

It is neither like Man, Woman, nor Child, nor has it any dimensions like them.
It has no parts, powers or operations of a human Body; no distinct Members. It
moves not, neither does it grow, it can neither hear nor see, etc. No passions,
for Christ upon the Cross was sensible and cried, my God, my God etc. But this
God speaks never a word when he is in the Devourers hands, a pitiful God
indeed, that cannot rescue him self from the Merciless God -- Eater.

Christ's real Body rose again after he was Crucified, but this knows no
Resurrection any more then Common Excrements. That went to Heaven after it was
sacrificed, but this into the Draught. You may with as much reason say that all
the Saints of God are material Bread, because it is said 1 Cor. 10. 17. we being
many are ONE Bread, and one B^dy, and that the Israelites of old were
Individual Vine-trees, because they were called a Vineyard Isa. 5. 7. as well
as call this Bread the real Body of Christ. For Indeed they are all Metaphors.

If the consecrated Bread be the real Body of Christ, then no Man needs fear
the danger of eating unworthily, unless he be stark blind, for they may easily
see the wafer (and so in the Popish sense discern the Lords Body) the
qualification required 1 Cor. 11. 29 But men of good sight, yea if they had
Eagles ey's may be damned for all that, the discerning here being purely
spiritual 1 Cor. 11. 27.

Either this Popish Sacrament is a living or a dead Body, if living, they that
bite it, and eat it, are mere Murderers, yea worse, for they eat it raw: no
Ceremony of boiling or roasting, though they often roast the l^ving Members of
Christ, the Martyrs of his eternal truth. If it be a dead Body, how can it give
life? it is no more then an insipie Carcass, that can give no good relish or
nourishment.

Besides if the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be true, Christ was his own
Executioner, and did eat himself, before Judas betrayed him, or the Jews did
murder him. But it is certain he did not so, therefore that Doctrine is
abominably false.

Moreover this Doctrine makes him suffer Millions of times since his
Crucifixion contrary to Heb. 7. 27. For this (viz the Sacrifice) he (that is
Christ) did ONCE, when he offered up himself. So Heb. 9. 28. and 10. 10. 1.
Pet. 3. 18 Heb, 9 24, 25, 26. (mark,) it is but ONCE, ONCE, ONCE, etc. Sure no
Man would endure to be eaten alive at this rate, ^^d do you think the Lord of
life would be (...) often Priest-bitten? no, no, by one offering he has
completed the work Heb. 10. 14. And he has all Power in Heaven and Earth, by
which Kings reign, and Princes decree. Justice, Matthew. 28. Prove. 8.

If this Popish Doctrine be true, then these Papists that buy and sell it are
mere Jews and Judasses, the one sold, the others bought him to destroy him, so
these sell him that they may devour him.

You cannot be a true Believer in the Romish sense unless you will be a mere
Sot, sense as well as reason must be denied, for that there is nothing say
they, but the poor species or accidents remaining. And so those accidents must
subsist without a Subject; contrary to the very Nature of them, whose being is
to be something. As, to instruct the plainest Christian, you have whiteness,
roundness, thinness, and the like before your Eyes; but it is the whiteness,
roundness, thinness of nothing. So gratefulness of smell to the Nose, and
pleasantness of taste to the Mouth: But gratefulness and pleasantness of
nothing still. For Christ's Body is not (they confess) white, round, and thin,
nor his Blood grateful and pleasant. And Bread and Wine, there is none at all;
you hear, and must believe, there is an end on it this is Bedlam Doctrine with a
Witness.

It Is a strange Parodox to me that Christ should eat his own body and drink his
own blood, yet they affirm it, why so? why then (say I) the Body and Blood of
Christ was in his own mouth and stomach, and yet sitting at the table with his
Disciples at the same time. It was broken and whole; eaten and uneaten, and all
at once. Nay his blood was shed, and in the Cup, and thence drank by himself,
yet not one Drop missing out of any Vain of his Body; Ay, and to confound us,
the Eater was the thing Eaten and the thing Eaten was the Eater to. For with
his Body did he Eat, and this his Body that he Eat, so his Disciples did Eat
him as Crucified and dead; his Body broken and blood ^^^d; but he was still
alive, untouched, and before their faces; these are monstrous Goblins. The
Scripture assures us it is true BREAD and WINE, that we receive in the Sacrament;
Matthew. 26. 26. Mark. 14. 22. Luke. 22. 19. And the Apostle calls it bread, no
less then three times after the Consecration, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 28. And calls the
Cup the Communion of Christ's Blood; and Bread, the Communion of his Body Chap.
18. V. 16. etc. Certainly the most Idolatrous among the Heathens may learn
Idolatry from these Nicknamed Christians. the Ancient Romans used to make their
Gods of wise, or at least Valient Men; the Greeks chose reasonable Creatures
for the object of their adoration. The Egyptians more brutish then the (...),
would yet have a living Creature for their chief Diety. But papists take a
senseless lifeless thing. O, more then Heathen Idolatry, O fulsom (Nicknam'd)
Eucharist away with thee.

Reader if thou do but impartially consider these. Arguments and brief
Reasonings* I am satisfied you will judge this Mass to be no Institution of
Christ's, but rather a most abominable rabble of Blashphemys patcht together by
the Antichristian synagogue of Rome in opposition to the worship of the
Everliving Jesus; and a thing quite different from the sacred supper of the
Lord.

By this Mass arises false hope, and a false remedy is promised to wicked
lives; for such if they hear Mass in the Morning think all is well, and bolster
themselves up in security, giving the reins to all kind of sensuality and the
Debaucheryes that are Alamode: For who would deny himself of his beloved
pleasure, (though never so contrary to true piety) that believes alittle
Mercenary Priest, A mass, or some Holy water can expiate his sin? O says one, I
am now purged from all iniquity, and am a good Catholic, Innocent as the Child
unborn. Ay, Cries another, I thank God I saw my Maker to day, I am well enough,
so takes his Evening wallow in wickedness, and next Morning a Mass, makes him a
Saint again. Certainly that can be none of Gods way that incourages men to
vice, as this (...) which besides its Numberless abominati^ (...)d in a
language unknown to the People and therefore (had it been never so good.) no
way edyfying as the Apostle says in one of his Epistles to the Corinthians,
mentioned before Objection, me thinks these words at every plain, This is my
body, what will you make Christ a Liar? the Catholic Church of Rome take them
literally, and you ought to believe it.

Answer, the Scripture is not always to be taken a^ the lerter foundeth, but
the intent and purpose of the holy Spirit the Dictator of it, is to be minded:
For ^^ you will always follow the bare words, you will quickly shake down the
greatest part of Christianity. What Is plainer then thy, my Father is greater
then I John 14. 28. whence sprung the Arrian Heresy, yet Christ says John 10.
30. I and my Father are one, whence some denied the distinction of Persons in
the Trinity. It is said Acts 4 32. that the multitude of believers had one
heart and one soul, yet every one of them had a heart and soul peculiar to
himself. He said that the Man and Wife are one Flesh, yet each has a distinct
Body. Judah said of his Brother Joseph, he is our Flesh Gen 37. 27. yet he has
not their real Flesh, it is said of Melchise^^^h that he had neither Father nor
Mother, yet he had both. Christ is called a Rock, a Door, a Lamb a Vine, etc.
yet he was not really and materially such, the Cup is called the New Testament,
yet call it a Metonimy, so that you may see by these and many other Instances
of (...) like Nature, how frequently such figurative and ^^opical Speeches are
used in Scripture, as may be seen (...) large in a late Book entitled
Tropologia and (...) sacra etc. And why must this only Text be so (...)
confined to a mere literal interpretation, (...) the sense and reason in the
World?

(...)culous to say that a thing is done in (...) it self, this Sacrament is
used in (...) therefore not Christ himself.

(...) both Visible and Invisible, but the Sacrament is visible, and the*Body
of Christ invisible, therefore they are not one, the Body of Christ is food,
not for the Body, but for the Soul, and therefore it must be received by faith
only, which is the Souls mouth Hence Augustine says in Johan. tract. 15. Quid
paras ventrem and dentem? Creed and manducasti Why make thou ready thy Tooth
and thy Belly? Believe and thou have eaten. Here Is a Sylogism for you in Datisi.
Of whatsoever sort the Mouth is of, such is its food; But the Mouth of the
Spirit is spiritual, not bodily. Ergo, it receives Christ's Body spiritually,
not bodily,

Spiritual hunger must be spiritually satisfied the most delicate and palate
pleasing dishes cannot content the longings of the fasting Soul, it is only
spiritual Food lie feeds on.

In my Judgment the very Mice are wiser then these Dating Priests, for if the
wafer were not real bread, (for all the Priests conjuring) they would never
steal it away and eat it. But if it be a God, then the Church Rats are well
fed, when they are banqueted with Gods Flesh.

Under the Law, No man was to eat or drink Blood, yea the prohibition is
repeated in the Acts of the Apostles, but these blood thirstly Priests gulge of
their Gods Blood unmercifully; yea in the very time of their lent, even on
Good Friday they eat Flesh and drink blood when the poor Laymen must not eat
an Egg or a Mess of Milk, under pain of Church curses, if not Damnation. If
this Bread could be metamorphos'd into Christ, real Christ, St. Paul needed not
to have wished to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, when he might be every
day with him at the Altar. But alas! that Blessed man knew better things The
Scripture and all the ancient Fathers tells us that Christ is ascended into
Heaven, and is there to remain at the Right hand of the Father; how can it be
true then that every Mass Priest can conjure him down to be eaten at pleasure?
Ay, ^^d make a horrible Multiplication of him, I could (...) (...) though from
Antiquity if it were need^ (...) how can the Sacrament be called a break(...)
(...) if there be no Bread remaining unriddle (...) God makers. I have read
that Henry the (...) Emperor was poisoned in the Host, and victor (...) in the
Chalice; what, a poisoned God! (...)!

(...) Sacrament could speak, (and doubtless (...) it were alive,) it would cry
out O! I am bitter (...) swallowed, I perish, I mould, I am kept in a Box
f(...) of Rats, if you leave me out all Night I shall be d(...) before Morning,
If the Mouse gets me, I am gon^ ^ Bread, I am no God, don't believe the
wretches mu^ murder murder! etc. I will conclude my Argument (...)st this
Upstart transubstantiation (which wi(...) up from the bottomless Pit in the
time of Pop^ (...) at the ^* at the Latarant Council in Rome about (...)rs
ago) with these pithy Sentences of a few (...) Fathers.

(...) in his homily on Levit. says si secundum litera^ naris etc. that is, if
ye follow that which is written after (...)ener (unless ye shall eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man (...) shall be no life in you) that letter kills. So
Chrysosto^ (...) Hom 46. Caro non prodest etc. The flesh profite^ that is to
say, my words must be taken and expounde^ (...) by Spirit for he that hears
after the flesh gainet^ (...). Now what is it to understand Carnally? to take
(...) simply as they be spoken, and not to consider any fur^ (...) meaning
therein, for things must not be judged (...) seen, but all Mysteries must be
seen with inwar(...) that is to say spiritually. Teitullian Contra Marc(...)
says Christus accepit panem and Corpus suum fe(...) est Corpus meum, dicendo;
id est figura Corpor(...) that is, Christ took Bread and made it his Body
say(...) Body, that is to say, the figure of my Body (...) Augustine, Irenaus
etc. say with one voic^


