SELECT OBSERVATIONS Of the Incomparable Sir Walter Raleigh, Relating to Trade,
Commerce, and Coin. As it was Presented to KING JAMES.

Wherein is Proved; That Our Money, our Sea and Land Commodities, serve to
Enrich and Strengthen other Countries against Our OWN.

With other Matters of the highest Moment for the Public Welfare.

LONDON; Printed for J. S. and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near
Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick Lane, MDCXCVI.

Preface to the Reader.
THE Worth and Excellency of these Learned Observations, are such, that it is
wished they were treasured up in the Breast and Memory of our Grave Senators,
being a Subject worthy of their profound Consideration, and a Jewel of far
greater Value in the English Crown, than the whole Produce of the Indies. The
Name of the Author stamps it Standard Proof against all the efforts and false
allays of Counterfeits, who slily, under the Masque of Public Service, have
insinuated their gilded Notions, and Essayed to make their Sophistical
Positions, pass for Current Reason. It Is for this cause that now this
Incomparable Author interposes, whom the World knows to have been free from
Partiality and Self-interest; and that what he then advised, was from unfeigned
Sincerity of Heart, and the great love he bore to his King and Country, and
grounded on the unerring Rules of Experience; the Truth and Excellency of whose
Judgment, is further confirmed by demonstration of almost a hundred Years
additional Experience; and the Non-Observance of these golden Rules, have only
made us so wise as to know the Nation to be in so much more a worse Condition
than it was in his time.

I write not this from a Belief, that any thing I do, will or can add an Attom
to the Universally Celebrated Memory and Honor of this Admirable Person, (no,
I have not that Vanity) no more than I believe the greatest Mome can detract
from the Truth and Authority of his Positions. I have presumed to add some
things, grounded on the same Hypothesis, relating to our present Circumstances,
wherein, if I have Erred, I submit to the censure of better Judgments.

J. S.

May it Please Your MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
ACcording to my Duty, I am emboldened to put your Majesty in mind, that about
Fifteen Years past, I presented you a Book of such Extraordinary Importance,
for the Honor and Profit of your Majesty and Posterity; and doubting that it
has been laid aside and not considered of, I am Encouraged (under your
Majesty's Pardon) to present unto you one more, consisting of Five
Propositions: Neither are they grounded upon vain or idle Grounds, but upon the
Fruition of those wonderful Blessings wherewith God has endued Your Majesty's
Sea and Land, by which means, you may not only enrich and fill your Coffers,
but also increase such Might and Strength (as shall appear, if it may stand
with your Majesty's good liking to put the same in Execution in the true and
right Form:) So that there is no doubt but it will make you in short time a
Prince of such Power, and so Great, as shall make all the Princes your
Neighbors, as well glad of your Friendship, as fearful to Offend you. That
this is so, I humbly desire that Your Majesty will vouchsafe to peruse this
Advertisement with that Care and Judgment which God has given you.

Most humbly praying your Majesty, that whereas I presented these Five
Propositions together, as in their own Natures, jointly depending one of
another, and so linked together, as the Destruction of any one will be an
apparent Maim and disabling to the rest; That Your Majesty would be pleased
that they may not be separated, but all handled together jointly and severally
by Commissioners, with as much speed and secrecy as can be, and made fit to be
reported to Your Majesty, whereby I may be the better able to perform to Your
Majesty that which I have promised and will perform upon my Life, if I be not
prevented by some that may seek to hinder the Honor and Profit of Your
Majesty, for their own private Ends.

The true Ground, Course and Form herein mentioned, shall make appear how other
Countries make themselves Powerful and Rich in all kinds, by Merchandise,
Manufactory, and fullness of Trade, having no Commodities in their own Country
growing to do it withal. And herein likewise shall appear how easy it is to
draw the Wealth and Strength of other Countries to your Kingdom, and what
Royal, Rich, and plentiful Means God has given this Land to do it (which
cannot be denied) for support of Traffic and Continual Employment of your
People, for Replenishing of your Majesty's Coffers: And if I were not fully
assured to Improve your Native Commodities, with other Traffic, Three Millions
of Pounds more Yearly than now they are, and to bring not only to your
Majesty's Coffers within the space of two or three Years, near Two Millions of
Pounds, but to increase your Revenues many Thousands Yearly, and to please and
greatly profit your People, I would not have undertaken so great a Work; All
which will grow by Advancement of all kind of Merchandising to the uttermost,
thereby to bring Manufactory into the Kingdom, and to set on Work all sorts of
People in the Realm, as other Nations do, which raise their Greatness by
abundance of Your Native Commodities, whilst we are Parling and Disputing
whether it be good for us, or not.

May it Please Your most Excellent Majesty.
I Have diligently, in my Travels observed how the Countries herein mentioned
do grow Potent, with abundance of all things to serve themselves and other
Nations, where nothing grows, and that their never dried Fountains of Wealth,
by which they raise their State to such an admirable Height, as that they are
at this day even the Wonder of the World, proceeds from your Majesty's Seas
and Lands.

I thus moved, began to dive into the depth of their Policies, and
circumventing Practices, whereby they drain, and still covet to Exhaust the
Wealth and Coin of this Kingdom, and so with our own Commodities to weaken us,
and finally beat us quite out of Trading in other Countries; I found that they
more fully obtained these their purposes by their convenient Privileges, and
settled Constitutions, than England with all the Laws and super-abundance of
homebred Commodities, which God has vouchsafed your Sea and Land: And these,
and others mentioned in this Book, are the urgent Causes that provoke me in my
Love and bounden Duty to your Majesty and my Country, to address my former Book
to your Princely Hands and Consideration.

By which Privileges they draw multitudes of Merchants to Trade with them, and
many other Nations to Inhabit amongst them, which makes them populous, and
there they make Storehouses of all Foreign Commodities, wherewith upon every
Occasion of Scarcity and Dearth, they are able to furnish Foreign Countries
with plenty of those Commodities, which before in time of plenty they Engrossed
and brought home from the same places, which does greatly augment Power and
Treasure to their State, besides the Common Good in setting their Poor, and
People on Work.

To which Privileges, they add sinallness of Custom, and liberty of Trade,
which makes them flourish and their Country so plentiful of all kind of Coin
and Commodities, where little or nothing grows, and their Merchants so
flourish, that when a loss comes they scarce feel it.

To bring this to pass they have many advantages of us, the one is by their
fashioned Ships called Boyers, Hoy-barks, Hoys, and others that are made to
hold great bulk of Merchandise, and to sail with a few Men for profit; for
Example, though an English Ship of 200 Tuns, and a Holland Ship, or any other of
the States of the same burden be at Dantzick, or any other place beyond the
Seas, or in England, they do serve the Merchant better cheap by one hundred
pounds in his Freight, than we can, by reason he has but nine or ten Mariners,
and we near thirty; thus he saves twenty Men's Meat and Wages in a Voyage, and
so in all other Ships according to their Burden; by which means they are
Freighted wheresoever they come, to great profit, whilst our Ships lie still
and decay, or go to New Castle for Coals.

Of this their smallness of Custom inwards and outward, we have daily
experience: For if two English Ships, or two of any other Nation be at
Bordeaux, both laden with Winc, of 300 Tuns apiece, the one bound for Holland,
or any other of the States, the other for England, the Merchant shall pay about
900 l. Custom here, and other Duties, when the other in Holland, or any other
of the States, shall be Cleared for less than 50 l. and so in all other Wares
and Merchandises accordingly, which draws all Nations to Traffic with them:
And although it seems but small Duties which they receive, yet the multitudes of
all kind of Commodities that is brought in by themselves and others, and
carried out by themselves and others, is so great, that they receive more
Custom and Duties to the State, by the greatness of their Commerce in one Year,
than England does in two Years; for the one hundredth part of Commodities are
not spent in Holland, but vented into other Countries, which makes all the
Country Merchants, to buy and sell and increase Ships and Mariners to transport
them.

My Travels and Meaning is not to diminish (neither has been) Your Majesty's
Revenues, but exceedingly to increase them, as shall appear, and yet please the
People, as in other Parts they do.

Notwithstanding their Excizes bring them in great Revenues, yet whosoever will
adventure to Bordeaux, but for six Tun of Wine, shall be free of Excize in his
own House all the Year long; and this is done on purpose to animate and
increase Merchants in their Country.

And if it hap pen that a Trade be stopped by any Foreign Nation, which they
heretofore usually had, or hear of any good Trading, which they never had, they
will hinder others, and seek either by Favor, Money, or Force, to open the Gap
of Traffic for Advancement of Trade amongst themselves, and Employment of
their People.

And when there is a New Course or Trade erected, they give free Custom inwards
and outward, for the better Maintenance of Navigation, and Encouragement of
the People to that Business.

Thus They and Others glean the Wealth and Strength from us to themselves; and
these Reasons following procure them this Advantage of us.

1. The Merchant-Staplers, which make all things in abundance, by reason of
their Storehouses continually replenished with all kinds of Commodities.

2. The Liberty of free Traffic for Strangers to Buy and Sell in Holland, and
other Countries and States, as if they were Freeborn, makes great Intercourse.

3. The small Duties levied upon Merchants, draw all Nations to trade with them.

4. Their fashioned Ships continually freighted before ours, by reason of their
few Mariners, and great Bulk, serving the Merchant cheap.

5. Their Encouragement to further all manner of Trading.

6. Their wonderful Employment of their Busses for Fishing, and the great
Returns they make.

7. Their giving free Custom inwards and outward, for any new erected Trade,
by means whereof they have already engrossed almost the sole Trade of Europe
into their hands, and have daily since this Worthy Author made these
Observations, made further Encroachments, to the great enriching of their State.

Furthermore all Nations may buy and sell freely in France, and there is free
Custom outward twice or thrice in a Year, at which time our Merchants
themselves do make their great Sales of English Commodities, and do buy and
led their great bulk of French Commodities to serve for the whole Year; and in
Rochel in France, and in Britany, free Custom all the Year long, except some
small Toll, which makes great Traffic, and makes them Flourish.

In Denmark to encourage and enrich the Merchants, and to increase Shipping and
Mariners, grant free Custom all the Year long for their own Merchants, except
one Month between Bartholomew-Tide and Michaelmass.

The Haunce Towns have advantage of us, as Holland, and other States have, and
in most things imitate them, which makes them exceeding Rich and Plentiful of
all kind of Commodities and Coin, and so strong in Shipping and Mariners, that
some of their Towns have near one Thousand Sail of Ships.

The Merchandises of France, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Turkey, East and West
Indies, England and Ireland, are transported most by the Hollanders and other
States into the East and North-East Kingdoms of Pomerania, Spruceland, Poland,
Denmark, Norway, Sweedland, Leifland, and most places of Germany, Russia, etc.
And the Merchandises brought from these Kingdoms and Provinces, being wonderful
many, are likewise by the Hollanders and the other States most Transported into
the Southern and Western Dominions, as France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, England,
Ireland, etc. and yet the Situation of England lies far better for a
Storehouse to serve the South-East and North-East Kingdoms, than theirs does,
and has far better Means to do it, if we will apply our selves to it.

No sooner a Dearth of Fish, Wine, or Corn here, and other Merchandise, but
forthwith the Embdeners, Hamburgers, and Hollanders, out of their Stores and
Magazines, lade one or two hundred Ships, or more, dispersing themselves round
about this Kingdom, and carry away great store of Coin and valuable Wealth, as
is our Lead and Tin, etc. for little Commodity in those Times of Dearth, by
which means they drain our Kingdom of their Riches, cut down and under-sell our
Merchants, and decay our Navigation; but not with Commodities of their Native
Growth, but the Merchandises of other Countries and Kingdoms.

Therefore it is far more easy for Your Majesty's Kingdom to serve our selves
and others, to Encourage our Merchants in their profitable Trading, increase
our Shipping and Mariners, and strengthen Your Kingdom, and not only keep our
Money in our own Realm, which other Nations still rob us of, but bring in
theirs, who carry ours away, and make the Bank of Coin and Magazines of all
Stores to serve other Nations as well and far better cheap than they.

Amsterdam is never without Seven Hundred Thousand Quarters of Corn, besides
the Plenty they daily vent, and little or none of this grows in their own
Country: A Dearth in England, France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, and other Places,
is truly observed to enrich Holland Seven Years after, and likewise the petty
States.

For Example, the last Dearth six Years past, the Hamburgers, Embdeners, and
Hollanders, out of their Store Houses furnished this Kingdom; and from
Southampton, Exeter, and Bristol, in a Year and half they carried away near Two
Hundred Thousand Pounds from these Parts only; Then what great quantity of Coin
was Transported round about Your Kingdom from every Port-Town, and Your City of
London, and other Cities, cannot be esteemed so little as two Millions, to the
great Detriment of Your Kingdom, and Impoverishment of Your People, discredit
to the Company of Merchants, and great Dishonor and Shame of the Nation, that
a State that has little or no Corn in it of their own Country Growth, should
serve this Famous and Plentiful Kingdom, which God has so blessed and enabled
for the Support of it self and others.

They have a continual Trade into this Kingdom, with five or six hundred Ships
yearly (but now augmented to a far greater Number) with Merchandises of other
Countries and Kingdoms, and store them up in their Magazines till the prices
rise to their Minds, and we Trade not with fifty Ships into their Country in a
Year, (and not much increased at this time) and the same Number are about this
Kingdom every Easterly Wind, for the most part, to lade Coals and other
Merchandise. Unless there be a Scarcity, or Dearth, or high Prices, all
Merchants do forbear that Place where great Impositions are laid upon the
Merchandise, and those Places are slenderly shipped, ill served, and at dear
Rates, and oftentimes in Scarcity, and want Employment for the People; and
those petty States finding truly by Experience, that small Duties imposed upon
Merchandise draw all Traffic unto them, and free Liberty for Strangers to buy
and sell does make continual Mart; therefore what Excises or Impositions are
laid upon the Common People, yet they still easily uphold and maintain the
Merchants by all possible means, of purpose to draw the Wealth and Strength of
Christendom to themselves; whereby it appears, though the Duties be but
small, yet the Customs for Exportation and Importation do so abound, that they
greatly increase their Revenues, and make Profit, Plenty and Employment of all
sorts by Sea and Land, to serve themselves and other Nations, to the Admiration
of the whole World: And likewise the great Commerce which grows by the same
means, enableth the Common People patiently to bear their Burden laid on them,
who by their constant Employ and Commerce, grow Rich even in a time War of, by
their convenient and encouraging Privileges, and commodious Constitutions.

There was an Intercourse of Traffic to Genoa, and there was the Flower of
Commerce, as appears by their ancient Records, and their sumptuous Buildings,
for all Nations Traded with Merchandise to them, and there was the Storehouse
of all Italy and other places; but after they had set a great Custom of 16 per
Cent. all Nations left Trading with them, which made them give themselves
wholly to Usury; and at this day we have not three Ships go thither in a Year;
but on the contrary, the Duke of Florence built Legorn, and set small Customs
upon the Merchandise, and gave them great and pleasing Privileges, which has
made a rich and strong City, with a flourishing State.

Furthermore, there are some Particulars needful to be considered, that the
greatest Fishing the World has produced, is on the Coast of England, Scotland
and Ireland; Nevertheless the great Fishery is in the Low Countries, and other
petty States, wherewith they serve themselves and all Christendom, as shall
appear.

In four Towns in the East Kingdoms within the Sound, viz. Quinbrough, Elbing,
Stetten, and Dantzick, there are carried and Vented in a Year, between Thirty
or Forty Thousand Last of Herrings fold but at fifteen or sixteen Pounds the
Last, is about six hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds, and we none. Besides,
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Leifland, Rye, Nevil, the Narve, and other Port Towns
within the Sound, there is carried and vented above Ten thousand Last of
Herrings, sold at fifteen or sixteen Pounds the Last, is a Hundred and sixty
Thousand Pound more Yearly: In such request are our Herrings there, that they
are often Sold for 20, 24, 30, and 36 Pounds the last, and we send not one
Barrel into all those East Countries.

The Hollanders send into Russia near fifteen hundred Lasts of Herrings, Sold
at about 30 Shillings the Barrel, amounts to Twenty seven Thousand Pounds,
and we but about Twenty or Thirty Lasts.

To Stroad, Hambrough, Breamen, and Embden, upon the River Elbe, VVeaser, and
Embs, are carried and vented of Fish and Herrings, about six Thousand Lasts,
Sold at about fifteen or sixteen Pounds the Last, or more, is a Hundred
Thousand Pounds, and we none at all. Cleaveland, Gulickland, up the River Rhine
to Collen, Frankfort, on the Maine, and so over all Germany, is carried and
vended Fish and Herrings near Twenty two Thousand Lasts, Sold at 20 Pounds the
Last, is Four Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds, and we none.

Up the River Maze to Liege, Mastricht, Vendlow, Zutphen, Davanter, Campen,
Swoole, and all over Liefland is carried and vented Seven Thousand Lasts of
Herrings, Sold at Twenty Pound the Last, is a Hundred and Forty Thousand
Pounds; and we none.

To Gilderland, Artois, Hanault, Brabant, Flanders, up the River of Antwerp,
all over the Arch Dukes Countries, are carried and vended between Eight or Nine
Thousand Lasts, Sold at eighteen Pounds the Last, is a Hundred and Sixty
Thousand Pounds; and we not a half Penny worth.

The Hollanders and others carried of all sorts of Herrings to Roan only in one
Year, besides all other parts of France, Fifty Thousand Lasts of Herrings, Sold
at 20 Pounds the Lasts, is one Million of Pounds; and we not one Hundred Last
thither: They are sold often there for 24 and 30 Pound the Last.

Between Christmas and Lent, the Duties for Fish and Herrings came to Fifteen
Thousand Crowns at Roan, only that Year the late Queen deceased: Sir Thomas
Parrie was then Agent there, and S. Savors his Man knows it to be true, who
handled the business for pulling down the Impositions. Then what great Sums of
Money came the Duties to of all his Port Towns, to the great enriching the
French Kings Coffers, and to the great enrichment of many other Kings and
States throughout Christendom, and the great quantities vended in the
Streights, besides what is spent in the Low Countries, amounting to many a
Hundred Thousand Pounds Yearly, ought not to be forgot, and the Stream to be
turned to the Good of this Kingdom, to whose Seacoasts God only has sent and
given these great Blessings, and multitude of Riches for us to take, however it
has thus long been neglected to the great Damage and dishonor of this
Kingdom, that any Nation should yearly carry away out of this Realm great
Masses of Money, for Fish taken in our own Seas, and Sold again by them to us,
which must needs be a great loss and hinderance to this Nation. From the Port
Town of any Kingdom in Christendom, the Bridgemaster or the Whafsinger for
Twenty Shillings a Year will deliver a true Note of the Number of Lasts of
Herrings brought to their Wharfs by us, and the Prices they are Sold at; but
the Number brought to Danzick, Collen, Rotterdam, and Enchusen, etc. is so
great, as it will cost more than three, four, or five Pounds for a true Note.

The abundance of Corn grows in the East Kingdoms, but the great Storehouses
for Grain to serve all Christendom, and the Heathen Countries in time of
Dearth, is in the Low Countries, wherewith upon every occasion of Scarcity and
Dearth they do enrich themselves seven Years after, employ their People, and
get great Freights for their Ships in other Countries, whilst we have none in
that Course.

The mighty Vineyards and store of Salt is in France and Spain, but the great
Vintage and Staple of Salt is in the Low Countries, and they send yearly near
One Thousand Sail of Ships with Salt and Wine only into the East Kingdoms,
yearly besides other places, and we not one in that Course or Trade.

The exceeding Groves of Wood are in the East Kingdoms, but the huge Piles of
Wainscot, Clapbord, Fir-deal, Masts, and Timber is in the Low Countries, where
none grow, wherewith they serve themselves, and other parts, and this Kingdom
with those Commodities. They have five or six hundred great long Ships
continually using that Trade, and we but a few. The Wool, Cloth, Lead, Tin, and
diverse other Commodities are in England, but by means of our Wool and Cloth
going out ruff, undrest, and undy'd; there is an exceeding Manufactory and
Drapery in the Low Countries, wherewith they serve themselves and other
Nations, and advance greatly the Employment of their People at home, and
Traffic abroad, and put down ours in foreign Parts, where our Merchants Trade
unto, with our own Commodities.

We send into the East Kingdoms yearly but one hundred Ships, and our Trade
chiefly depends upon three Towns, viz. Elbing, Kingsborough and Dantzick, for
making our Sails, and buying their Commodities, sent into this Realm at dear
Rates, which this Kingdom bears the burden of. Our Trading to these parts, and
some others, is much improved since, but still may bear nigh the same
Proportion.

The Low Countries send into the East Kingdoms yearly about 3000 Ships, trading
into every City and Port-Town, taking the Advantage, and venting their
Commodities to exceeding profit, and buying and lading their Ships with plenty
of those Commodities, which they have from every of those Towns 20 per Cent.
better cheap than we, by reason of the difference of Coin; and their Fish
yields ready Money, which greatly advances their Traffic, and decays ours.

They send into France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, from the East Kingdoms that
passes through the Sound, and through Your Narrow Seas, yearly of the East
Country Commodities, about 2000 Ships, and we none in that Course.

They Trade into all Cities and Port-Towns in France, and we chiefly but to
five or six.

They Traffic into every City and Port now round about this Land, with five or
six Hundred Ships yearly, and we chiefly but to three Towns in their Country,
and but with Forty Ships.

Notwithstanding the Low Countries have as many Ships and Vessels as Eleven
Kingdoms of Christendom have, let England be one, and Build every Year near
1000 Ships, and not a Timber Tree growing in their own Country, and that all
their homebred Commodities that grow in their Land in a Year, (less than one
Hundred good Ships are able to carry them away at one time,) yet they handle
the matter so well for setting them all on Work, and that their Traffic with
the Hanse-Towns exceeds in Shipping all Christendom.

We have all things of our own in Superabundance to increase Traffic, and
Timber to build Ships, and Commodities of our own to lade about 1000 Ships and
Vessels at one time, (besides the great Fishing) and as fast as they have made
their Voyages might relade again, and so Year after Year, and all the Year long
to continue; and yet our Ships and Mariners decline, and Traffic and Merchants
daily decay.

The main Bulk and Mass of Herrings, from whence they raise so many Millions
yearly that enrich other Kingdoms, Kings and States Coffers, and likewise their
own People, proceeds from Your Majesty's Seas and Lands, and the return of
the Commodities and Coin they bring home in Exchange of Fish, and other
Commodities, are so great, as would require a large discourse apart; all the
amends they make us is, they beat us out of Trade in all parts with our own
Commodities.

For instance, we had a great Trade in Russia Seventy Years, and about 14 Years
past we sent Store of goodly Ships to Trade in those Parts, and three Years
past we sent out but Four, and this last Year two on three: But on the contrary
the Hollanders about twenty Years since Traded thither with two Ships only, yet
now they are increased to about Thirty or Forty (and at this time to many more)
and one of their Ships is as big as two of ours, and at the same time (in their
Troubles there) that we decreased in Trade they greatly increased, (the same
may now fitly be applied to the present Circumstances that the War has not
improverisht them, but their Trade greatly increased thereby, and the great
advantage they have of us in the East India Trade, and others, is obvious) but
the chiefest Commodities they carry with them to Russia, is English Cloth,
Heilings taken in our Seas, English Lead, and Pewter made of our Tin, besides
other Commodities; all which we may do better and cheaper than they, if we knew
the value of our own Commodities, and would apply our selves to do it. And
although it be a cheap Country, and the Trade very gainful, yet we have almost
brought it to Naught, by disorderly Trading, joint Stocks (now called
Stock-jobbing) and the Merchants banding themselves one against an other.

So likewise we used to have eight or nine great Ships to go continually a
Fishing to Ward house, and this Year but one, and so pro rata they out do us in
all kind of Fishing and Merchandising in all Countries, by reason they spare no
Cost, nor deny any Privileges that may Encourage the advancement of Trade and
Manufactory.

Now if it please, and with Your Majesty's good liking stand,
To take notice of these things, which I have Conceived to be fit for Your
Majesty's consideration, which in all humbleness (as duty binds me) I do
tender unto Your Majesty for the unfeigned Zeal I bare to the advancement of
Your Honor and Profit, and the general good of Your Subjects; it being
apparent that no three Kingdoms in Christendom can compare with Your Majesty's
for Support of Traffic, and the continual employment of Your People within
themselves, having so many great means both by Sea and Land to enrich Your
Coffers, multiply Your Naval strength, enlarge Your Traffic, make Your
Kingdoms powerful, and Your People Rich; yet through Idleness they are Poor,
wanting employment, many of your Land and Coast Towns much ruinated, and your
Kingdom in great need of Coin, your Shipping, Traffic and Mariners decay,
whilst Your Majesty's neighboring Princes, without these means, abound in
Wealth, enlarge their Towns, increase their Shipping, Traffic, and Mariners,
abound in Coin, and find out such employment for their People, that they are
all advantageous to their Common Wealth, and this only by ordarining Commodious
Constitutions in Merchandising, and fullness of Trade in Manufactory, and the
Effectual keeping their Coin at home.

God has Blessed Your Majesty with incomparable Blenefits.
As with Copper, Lead, Iron, Tin, Alum, Copperas, Saffron, Fells, and diverse
other Native Commodities, to the Number of about one Hundred, and other
Manufactories vendible to the number of about one Thousand, besides Corn,
whereof great quantity of Beer is made, and most transported by Strangers, as
also Wool, whereof much is Shipped forth unwrought, and Cloth and Stuffs
transported undrest and undied, which does employ and maintain near Fifty
Thousand People in Foreign Parts; Your Majesty's People wanting the Employment
in England, many of them being enforced to live in great want, and seek it
beyond Seas.

Coals which do employ Hundreds of Strangers Ships yearly to transport them out
of this Kingdom, which we only ought to do whilst we do not Employ Twenty Ships
in in that Course. Iron Ordinance, which is a Jewel of great value, far more
than it is accounted, by reason that no other Country could ever attain unto
it, although they have assayed with great charge.

Your Majesty has Timber of your own for building of Ships, and Commodities
plenty of your own growth, and Manufactories to lade them, which Commodities
other Nations want, nor cannot well be without, and yet Your Majesty's People
decline in Shipping, Mariners, Traffic, etc.

These Inconveniences happen by three Causes especially, viz.
1. The unprofitable course and Method of Merchandising.

2. The want of complete and full Manufactory of our home bred Commodities.

3. And chiefly the undervaluing of our Coins, contrary to the Rules of other
Nations.

For instance.
The Merchant Adventurers by overtrading upon Credit, or with Money taken upon
Exchange, whereby they lose usually Ten or Twelve, and sometimes Fifteen or
Sixteen per Cent. are enforced to make Sale of their Cloths at under rates, to
keep their Credit, whereby Cloths being the Jewel of the Land, are undervalued,
and the Merchant in short time eaten out.

The Merchants of Ipsovich, whose Trade for Elbing is chiefly for fine Cloths,
and some few sorting Cloths, all died and dressed within our Land, do for the
most part, buy their fine Cloths upon Time, and by reason they go so much upon
Credit, they are enforced (not being able to Stand upon their Markets) to sell,
giving fifteen or eighteen Months time of payment for their Cloths, and having
Sold them, they then presently sell their Bills, so taken for Cloth, allowing
after the Rate of fourteen or fifteen, and sometimes twenty per Cent, which
Money they employ forthwith in Wares at excessive prices, and lose as much more
that way, by that time their Wares be Sold at home. Thus by overrunning
themselves upon Credit, they disenable themselves and others, inhanceing the
price of Foreign Commodities, and pulling down the Rates of our own.

The West Country Merchants that Trade with Cloths into France, or Spain, do
usually employ their Servants, (young men of small experience) who the by
cunning Combining of French and Spanish Merchants, are so entrapped, that when
all Customs and Charges be accounted for, their Masters shall hardly receive
their Principal Moneys. As for Returns one of France, their Silver and Gold is
so highly valued that our Merchants cannot bring it home, but to great loss;
therefore the French Merchants set higher rates upon their Commodities, which
we must either buy dear, or let our Money lie dead there a long time, until we
may conveniently employ the same.

The Northern Merchants of York, Hull, and Newcastle, trade only in White
Kersies and colored Dozens, and every Merchant, be his Adventure neverso
great, does for the most part send over an unexperienced, Youth, unfit for
Merchandising, which brings to the Stranger great advantages, but to his
Master and Commonwealth great loss and hindrance; for they before their Goods
be landed, go to the Stranger, and buy such quantities of Iron, Flax, Corn, and
other Commodities, as they are bound to lade their Ships withal, which Ships
they engage themselves to re-lade within three Weeks or a Month, and do give
the price the Merchant-Stranger asks, because he gives them Credit, and lets
them Ship away their Iron, Flax, and other Commodities, before they have sold
their Kersies, and other Commodities, by which means extraordinary dear
Commodities are returned into this Realm, and the Servant also enforced to sell
his Cloths under rate, and often times to loss, to keep his Credit, and to make
Payment for the Goods before shipped home, having some twenty days or a Months
respit to sell the Cloths, and to give the Merchant Satisfaction for his Iron,
Flax, and other Wares; by which Extremities our homebred Commodities are
abased.

Touching Manufactory.
There have been about 80000 undrest and undied Cloths yearly transported.

It is therefore evident, that the Kingdom has been yearly deprived of 400000
Pound within this five and fifty Years, which is near twenty Millions, that
would have been gained by the Labors of poor Workmen in that time, with the
Merchants gains for bringing in of Dying Stuffs, and return of Cloths dressed and
died, with other Benefits to the Kingdom, besides the exceeding increase of
Traffic, Ships, and Mariners.

There would have been gained in that time about three Millions, by increase of
Custom upon Commodities returned for Cloths dressed and died, and for dying
Stuffs, which would have more plentifully been brought in and used for the same.

There has been also transported in that time yearly by Bays, Northern and
Devonshire Kersies white, about fifty thousand Cloths, counting three Kersies
to a Cloth, whereby has been lost about five Millions by those sorts of Cloths
in that time, which would have come to poor Workmen for their Labor, with the
Customs for Dying Materials, and the Merchants profit for bringing them in,
with returns of other Commodities and Fraighting of Ships.

Bays are transported white into Amsterdam, and being there dressed and died, are
shipe into Spain, Portugal, and other Kingdoms, where they are sold in the name
of Flemish Bays, setting their own Town Seal upon them, so that we lose the
very name of our homebred Commodities, and other Countries get the Reputation
and Profit thereof: Most deplorable it is that this Kingdom should be deprived
of so many Millions abovementioned, and that our Native Commodities of Cloth,
ordained of God for the natural profit and good of your Subjects, being so
Royal and Rich in it self, should be driven to so small advantage of Reputation
and Profit to Your Majesty and People, and so much improved, and intercepted by
Strangers, considering that God has enabled, and given Your Majesty, power to
advance Dressing and Dying, and Transporting of all your Cloths, within a Year
or two; I speak it knowingly, to show it may be done laudably, lawfully, and
approved to be honorable, feasible, and profitable.

All the Companies of your Land transport their Cloths dressed and died, to the
good of Your Kingdom, except the Merchant-Adventurers, whereby the Eastland and
Turkey Merchants, with other Companies, do increase Your Majesty's Customs by
bringing in, and spending Dying Stuffs, and setting your People on work, by
Dressing before they transport them; and they might increase far more Custom to
Your Majesty, and make much more profit to themselves, and this Nation, and set
many thousands of poor People more on work for dressing and dying, and likewise
employ more Ships and Mariners for bringing in Dying Stuffs, were it not for
the Merchant-Adventurers, who transport their Cloths white, rough, undrest and
undied, into the Low Countries, where they sell them to the Stranger, who
afterward dress, die, and stretch them to such unreasonable lengths, contrary
to our Law, that they prevent and forestall our Markets, and cross the just
Prohibitions of our State and Realm, by their Agents and Factors lying in
diverse places with our own Cloths, to the great decay of this Kingdom in
general, and discredit of our Cloths in particular.

If the Account were truly known, it would be found that they make clear
profit, only by Cloth transported rough, undrest and undied, 60000 l. a Year:
But it is most apparent Your Majesty in your Customs, your Merchants in their
Sales and Prices your Subjects in their Labors, for want of not Dressing and
Dying, your Ships and Mariners in not bringing in of Dying Stuffs, and spending
of Allom, are hindered yearly near a Million of Pounds, so that Trade is driven
in to the great damage andhindrance of Your Majesty and People, by permitting
your Native Commodities to pass rough, undrest, and undied, by the
Merchant-Adventurer.

Touching Fishing.
The great Sea business of Fishing does Employ near 20000 Ships, and Vessels,
and 400000 People are employed yearly upon your Coast of England Scotland, and
Ireland, with 60 Ships of War, which may prove dangerous.

The Hollanders only have about 3000 Ships to Fish withal, and 50000 People
are employed yearly by them upon Your Majesty's Coasts of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

These Three Thousand Fishing Ships and Vessels of the Hollanders, do employ
near 9000 other Ships and Vessels, and 150000 Persons more by Sea and Land, to
make provision to cure and transport the Fish they take, and return
Commodities, whereby they are enabled, and do build yearly 1000 Ships and
Vessels, having not one Timber Tree growing in their own Country, nor home bred
Commodities to lade 100 Ships, and yet they have 20000 Ships and Vessels, and
all employed.

King Henry the 7th desirous to make his Kingdoms powerful and Rich, by
increase of Ships and Mariners, and employment of his, People, sent unto his
Sea Coast Towns, moving them to set up the great and Rich Fishing, with promise
to give them needful Privileges, and to furnish them with Loans of Money, if
need were, to encourage them, yet his People were slack. Now since I have
traced this business, and made my endeavors known unto Your Majesty, your
Noble Men, able Merchants, and others, (who having set down under their hands
for more assurance) promised to disburst large Sums of Money, for the building
up of this great and Rich large Sea City, which will increase more Strength to
your Land, give more comfort, and do more good to all your Cities and Towns,
than all the Companies of your Kingdom, having fit and needful Privileges, for
the upholding and strengthening of so weighty and needful a business.

For example, 20 Busses built and put into a Sea Coast Town where there was not
one Ship before; there must be to carry, recarry, transport, and make provision
for one Buss, three Ships; likewise every Ship setting on work 30 several
Trades and Occupations, and 8000 Persons by Sea and Land, insomuch as 300
Persons are not able to make one Fleet of Nets in four Months for one Buss,
which is no small employment, with increase of a Thousand Mariners, and a Fleet
of 80 Sail of Ships to belong to one Town, where none were before, to take the
Wealth out of the Sea, to enrich and Strengthen the Land, and this only by
raising of 20 Busses.

Then what good one Thousand, or two Thousand will do, I leave to Your
Majesty's consideration.

It is worthy to be Noted, how necessary Fishermen are to the Common Wealth,
and how needful to be advanced and cherished, viz.

1. For taking Gods blessing out of the Sea to enrich the Realm, which
otherwise we lose.

2. For setting the People on Work.

3. For making plenty and cheapness in the Kingdom.

4. For the increase of Shipping, to make the Land formidable against its
Enemies.

5. For a continual Nursery for Breeding and the Increasing of Seamen.

6. For making Employment for all sorts of People, as Blind, Lame, and others
by Sea and Land, from Ten or Twelve Years and upwards.

7. For enriching Your Majesty's Coffers, for Merchandise returned from other
Countries for Fish and Herrings.

8. For the increase and enabling of Merchants, which now droop and Decay, to
the great loss of the Nation.

Touching the Coin.
For the most part, all Monarchies and free States, both Heathen and Christian,
as Turkey, Barbary, France, Poland, and many others, do hold for a Rule of
never failing profit, to keep their Coin at higher rates within their own
Territories, than it is in other Kingdoms.

And for these causes,

1. To preserve the Coin within their own Territories.

2. To bring unto themselves the Coin of Foriegn Princes.

3. To enforce Merchant strangers to take their Commodities at high Rates, for
want of which this Kingdom bears the Burden.

For Instance.
The King of Barbary perceiving the Trade of Christian Merchants to increase in
his Kingdom, and that the Returns out of his Kingdom were most in Gold, whereby
it was much enhanced, raised his Ducket (being then Current for three Ounces)
to four, five, and six Ounces; nevertheless it was no more worth in England,
being so raised, than when it went for three Ounces.

This Ducket current for three Ounces in Barbary, was then worth in England 7
Shillings and 6 pence, and no more, being raised to 6 Ounces, since which time
(adding to it a small piece of Gold) he has raised it to 8, and lastly to 10
Ounces, yet at this day it is worth but 10 s. and one penny, notwithstanding
Your Majesty's late raising of Your Gold.

Having thus raised his Gold, he then devised to have plenty of Silver brought
into his Kingdom, and by the same policy raised the Royal of 8, being but two
Ounces, to 3 s. and 3 d. half penny, which caused great plenty of Silver to be
brought in, and continue in his Kingdom. And it were to be wished that we might
follow the good Example of this advantageous Policy in this Juncture, when by
the same Method we have brought great plenty of Gold into the Kingdom, and if
we pursue it, (by advancing the value of our Silver) may not only keep what we
already have, but also cause great plenty to be brought in and kept here, when
we have it.

France.
The English Jacobus goes for 1 l. 3 s. in Merchandising.

The English Crown for 7 s. and 6 d.

Also the King has raised his Silver four Sols in the Crown.

North Holland.
The Double Jacobus goes for 1 l. 3 s. Sterling.

The English Shilling is there 11 Stivers, which is two Shillings over in the
Pound.

Poland.
The K. of Poland raised the Hungarian Ducket from 56 to 77 Polonish Groshes,
and the Rix-dollar from 36 to 47 and Groshes, the Rix-dollar worth in Poland
47, and groshes, is by account in Poland 10 s. and 4 d. and in England is worth
but 7 s. and 10 d. The Jacobus of England here Current (at that time) for 1 l.
2 s. in Poland 1 l. 4 s. at the rate of 7 s. 10 d. for the Hungarian Ducket.

Some additional Remarks and Observations Relating to Coin and Trade.
1. That Nation can only be in a prosperous Estate, that has a proportionable
quantity of Silver or Gold to balance the Strength and Trade of its
neighboring Nations.

2. That whilst the Current Cash of this Kingdom can be converted into Bullion,
and so made a trading Commodity (as has been practiced this hundred Years)
'twill either be conveyed to the best Market, or wrought in to Plate at home,
notwithstanding the utmost rigor and vigilance, to the great and daily
Consumption of the Coin, and Detriment of the Nation.

That it is evident, notwithstanding those great Sums coined in the two last
Reigns, 'twas no sooner made than converted into a trading Commodity (some
inconsiderable Sums excepted, that hapt not into Hucksters hands) and if from
the like Causes the same scarcity of Milled Money should happen at any time
hereafter (which God forbid) tho morally it is not impossible for the reason
above alleged, and as a part bears to the whole (that without raising the
value of our Coin) the Nation may totally be drained of it, and may possibly be
then at too great a distance to be had for calling for; and were there no more
Silver now in the Nation, than the standard Money that has past the trading
hands of Merchants and Goldsmiths, the Nation were in a deplorable and
irreparable Condition.

3. That what Custom makes the Medium, Measure or Reward of Labor, Industry,
and Commerce, is universally called Money, and ought not to be convertible to a
trading Commodity to the Public Damage and diminution of the Species, be it
what it will: For the stamp of Authority on a Brass Farthing for its currency,
for 12 d. would with Submission, better accommodate and suit the convenience of
our Domestic Commerce, than the Paucity of our glorious Silver Species, as our
present Circumstances demonstrate.

That it is a Truth beyond Contradiction, that the goodness and excellency of
the Spanish Coin (tho dispersed through all parts of the Trading World) has not
been a means to enrich that Kingdom, nor the little esteemed value of the
current Cash of the Hollanders, a means to Impoverish them.

That raising the value of our Coin, is the only certain means to keep it in
the Nation, to make us a rich and thriving State, to recover our lost Trade,
and the best Bulwark and Defense against all the Attacks of our Enemies.

That diminishing the quantity, or raising the value of our Standard Coin is
equivalent; but at this Juncture it is humbly thought more advantageous tolessen
the Weight, by reason the Nation would be at less Expense to make it good, as
also being more commodious for Commerce and Tale, when even parts of a Pound as
before, than when Fractional, as must be if the value of the ancient Standard
Weight be advanced.

That raising the value of our Coin, will be a dishonor to the Nation, seems
an empty Notion, if Profit be joined with it.

That our Silver Coin ought to bear a higher Value at home, than elsewhere, as
well to bring it home, as we have already done the Gold, and to keep it here,
as also encourage the bringing in of Bullion, which is now much wanted.

That contrary to the Policy of Nations, our standard Coin is of greater value
in all places than at home ( Spain only excepted) for which reason we bring
Spanish Money hither, and for the same Reason our Money is transported to other
places, to the great Impoverishment of the Nation.

That Gold and Silver is the commanding Species, and if we Export more than we
Import, the Nation is so much a loser; and tho as a Gentleman observes, if we
yearly send out Commodities to the value of 400000 Ounces of Silver more than
the Commodities we bring home from abroad cost us there, is 100000 l. every
year clear gain, which must come home in Money or Bullion, and be a real
increase of our Wealth, and will stay here as he is pleased to think.

This over balance of Trade, so much talked Fallacy, and may be a great loss
to the Nation; for Example, if 400000 Ounces of Silver or Commodities be
exported, and the worth of 800000 Ounces of unprofitable Commodities imported,
viz. as French and Port Wines, Silks and Linen, wrought, and many other things
that are all expended and comsum'd here at home, the Nation is so far from
gaining 100000 l. that it is 200000 l. the worse, viz. 100000 l. sent out of the
Nation, and the 100000 l. which is the over balance, is gained from the
Public Treasure and Stock of the Kingdom into private hands, which will again
be sent abroad to the same loss: Now the true cause why the Hollanders have
acquired such great Riches by Trade, is (as the Excellent Sir Walter observes)
an over balance of Trade truly stated, that is; they Import of Commodities 100
times the quantity of what themselves expend, and the rest is again transported
to diverse Countries, and brings them in Gold and Silver, to their great and
real Profit, whereas we scarcely Export the hundredth part of what is Imported,
and if we should send all the Silver in the Nation abroad, and have treble the
value returned in unnecessary Commodities, which we spend and consume at home,
pray what would the Nation get by this over balance of Trade, being deprived
of all its Silver?

The same Gentleman observes, that if a Million of Bullion, was yearly imported
from Spain, it would not increase our Wealth; this seems a Paradox, for there
is not a Necessity that it should again be exported, nor that our Money should
be of more intrinsic Value, or less price than the rest of our Neighbors, and
consequently we may keep it at home as well as they do, and need not send out a
100000 l. of our own Money with it, as he is pleased to say we must. The same
Author further Remarks, that the true liberty the Hollanders have of Exporting
their Money, does not empoverish them; but on the contrary they are Rich, and
the severe Penalties the Spaniard imposes on those that Export their Coin, does
not prevent their great want of Money. This I take to be a convincing Argument
of the Necessity of raising our Coin; for the great Allay and Exteinsick Value
of the Dutch Coin, as effectually secures it from Exporting, as the Clipping of
our Coin has kept it at home, and the Goodness of he Spanish Money transports
it to all parts of the World, which demonstrates the invalidity of any Law that
can be made to the contrary, to the great Diminution of their Money, and
Impoverishment of their People.

He farther adds, that raising the denomination, or value of our Coin, will not
bring one Grain of Silver the more into England. This is denying it is day when
the Sun shines (and begging the Gentleman's Pardon) he might with as much truth
have said, and as easily been believed, that the advance of Guineas has not
brought one Guinea more into the Kingdom than was here four years ago.

The further Objections against raising the value of our Coin, it is humbly
thought will also prove a Fallacy, and by this Dilemma we will attempt to
unLOCK the Mystery. The ancient Standard of our Coin has been advantage or
disadvantage to the Kingdom.

If an advantage, why should we alter it?

If a disadvantage, why should it not be altered?

That the Standard of our Coin has been advantageous to the Public, will be a
Task too difficult for themost cunning Sophisterto prove.

The contrary is in great part already demonstrated, but for further
Confirmation, it is observable, that according to Mr. Lowndes's Account from the
Mint, there was coined from the 1st of Q. Eliz. to the beginning of K Chapter IIs.
Reign, more than 15 Millions of Pounds Sterling, and in the two last Reigns,
and since, we'll suppose 7 Millions, that is 22 Millions of Silver Coin in
Specie, besides great quantities of Bullion that has been imported and
exported. Now the question is what is become of all this Treasure.

It Is true, that some part of it is made into Plate; and it had been well in
the present Circumstances we are in, if it had all been so, and there is
thought to be in the Kingdom 5 Millions lest of Coin good and bad, of the 22
Millions, the rest is gone by the over Balance of an unprofitable Trade, for
1000 l. sent to Bordeaux advances at first hand more than 25 per Cent. and
though a double value of Wine return, yet we are so much the Poorer for it, if
expended here, and 1000 such Merchants would rob the public stock of 100000 l.
yearly; and tho they pay great Sums for Customs, it is not with the Money they
bring in, and more laudable and profitable ways for the public good; and his
Majesty's increase of Customs might be introduced, and all the profit we can
expect by this French Commodity for 100000 l. yearly Exported is, that possibly
at last, we may find a way to make Saltpeter of it.

A Catalogue of the Names of most Foreign Coins with their Value here as
Bullion, and their particular Allay; wherein it plainly appears how much better
our standard Coin is, than the Coin of all Europe, Spain only Excepted.
Value here.

Oun. dw. Oun. dw. s. d. Flanders or Spanish Duckatoon, is Better 0 04 5 06
Mexico Real, is Standard, 0 00 4 04 Sevil Real, is better, 0 01 4 04 Holland
Dollar, is worse, 0 08 4 04 Lion Dollar, is worse, 2 03 3 04 Rix-dol. of the
Emp. is worse, 0 07 4 05 Old Cardecu is worse, 0 01 1 06 French Lew. or Crow.
is worse, 0 00 4 04 Doub. Milrez of Portu. is worse, 0 01 3 09 Sing. Milrez of
Portu. is worse, 0 01 1 09 S. Mark of Venice, is worse, 0 01 2 06 Doub. D.
Stivers Skill. and Gilders. is worse, 4 06 0 00 Crols Dollar is worse, 0 12 4 02
Zealanu Dollar, is worse, 2 00 2 03 Old Philip Dollar, is worse, 1 00 5 00
Ferdinan. Dollar, 1623, is worse, 0 12 4 03 Pr. of Oran. Dol. 1624, is worse, 0
10 4 03 Leopoldus Dol. 1624, is worse, 0 09 4 03 Rodolph. Dol. 1607, is worss,
0 10 4 04 Maximilian Dol. 1616, is worse, 0 04 4 04 Danish Dollar, 1620, is
worse, 0 13 2 11 Portugal Teston, is worse, 0 01 1 02 Quar. of a new Fr. Lew.
is worse, 0 00 1 01

The Allay of our standard is 11 oun. 2 with. Silver, 18 d with. of Allay, that is
in an oun. 1 d.. Note the Ounce is 5 s. and penny weight is 3 pence.

The Use that may be made of this Catalogue of Coins, is first, that no Coin
but Spanish can be brought hither to advantage, nor can any other Money be made
Bullion, and brought hither, but with great loss; and for this reason they keep
it at home.

That tho all the above Foreign Coins have a greater Allay, and so much worse
than ours, yet their Extrinsick value is raised above ours, and the Spanish
Money, for a Spanish Duckatoon, whose Intrinsic value, is nigh double a Dutch
Duckatoon, yet goes for no more there than 63 Stivers, as their own does; and
it is worth Remarking, that an English Crown, whose intrinsic value is 6d.
better than a French Crown, and in Holland current for 55 Stivers, when the Fr.
Crown is current at 67 Stivers, and yet have but few of them neither, the
Reason is plain, the advance the Fr. have made on their Crown of 72, 73, 74,
Sols and more now, and since all Princes have a Prerogative of raising their
Coin when it suits with their Interest, and we find it practically done by all
the rest of the Thriving World, without those Chimerical Whimsies, and
Inconveniences, our Dreamers would bewitch the World to believe, for they value
the English and Spanish Coin at no greater price, because they can have it so,
and they give so much more for the French because they cannot have it without.

By this Table may be found how much of any of these Species our Standard Coin
will make, and thereby find the advantage all Countries will have by melting
our Money down: And can it reasonably be thought, that what is carried out will
ever return, when in some places, 100 l. of our Standard Coin will make nigh
200 l. current of the Country, and in other places some what less; for don't we
melt down the Sp. Money here, to make our own, to far less advantage. And if we
send over Silver with privilege to Coin their Species; it is so much loss to the
Nation and never can return, but raising the value of our Coin, not
withstanding great Sums sent out of the Country, will as effectually return
again, as all the Dutch Money did, that was brought over hither.

Nor will there be any loss by Foreign Exchange, when our Commodities are
valued accordingly, and at worst cannot stand in Competition with the
Inconveniences the Nation has labored under for many Years, when the greatest
part of our Trade was carried on by Money generally so abased, that 10 s. would
scarcely weigh a Crown piece, according to the Value it is now proposed to be
made at. And then no such great damage and wrong, or inconveniency was talked
of, nor so much as thought on to have been done to the Landlords in their
Rents, etc. as some endeavor now to insinuate, will be the Issue of making the
Coin so much better than it was at that time.

That this Kingdom can never be drained or exhausted of the Riches of its
native Produce, and Excellency of its Manufactories, nor prejudiced by any
other means, but under valuting our Coin and Commodities, by which we are
outdone and under-rated in all Markets; tho we have a continual spring of
natural Product, as Lead, Tin, Allom, Wool, etc. and other Materials for
Manufactory, yet by reason of the scarcity of Gold and Silver Species amongst
us, our People have been unemploy'd and empoverish'd, and our Manufactory
greatly decayed, and attempted to be carried into other Countries, to almost
the ruin of our Nation, had not God Almighty put this Opportunity into our
hands, for regaining our lost Trade, Gold and Silver; the plenty whereof
amongst our selves would greatly increase, Manufactory to the great
Encouragement of Trade and People in general.

Though raising the value of Coin to so high a pitch as is hoped ours may be,
might prejudice a Nation that have little or no Natural product', and
Manufactory, but their Commodities fetched from other Countries, and
consequently might be drained of all they have, by those that have most Money,
and so ruined, not being able to Supply themselves again with the same
quantities, for what the other was sold for, nor having native product or
Manufactory to set themselves on Work; but that is not our case.

Experience demonstrates that notwithstanding the good intention of all our
Laws, yet many of them have failed in answering the ends proposed, particularly
the late Act, to prevent Melting down and Exportation of Coin, where Oath and
Penalty was imposed, and yet no Person was accused thereon, though many Thousands
Pounds are supposed to have been Exported since that Act. Wherefore it is
evident that all Laws and Penalties tho of Life and Goods to prevent
Exportation of Coin or Bullion, would be invalid and of no effect, if the Coin
can be made Bullion, and will yield a better price abroad than at home.

That those Trades only deserve Encouragement that bring in Gold and Silver,
and such profitable Commodities, that by Manufactory and Exporting may bring it
in; and those justly Merit discouragement that bring in unprofitable
Commodities, as Wines, Silk, etc. which are Expended and Consumed here without
profit, and this to be done by laying great Impositions on them brought hither,
and Effectually made to sell them at under Rates.

That the French have done the Confederates more mischief by the Silver and
Gold they have exhausted from this Kingdom, for 35 years last past, than with
his Armies and Fleets; and the same Methods he has taken to keep his Coin,
possibly might prove as prejudicial to him if executed by us, as the loss of a
Land Battle, for he that is strongest in Purse, is strongest in Power, and has
the longest Sword, and may give Laws to his Enemies: And it is observable, that
before our Milled Money was made, there was great scarcity of Silver in France,
haing little trade with Spain, and their usual Payments were then in a worse
Species. And yet to the great loss and dishonor of the Kingdom, that Trade is
still continued, and will be whilst the Backdoor of Portugal is open; and
there is now as great plenty of Fr. Wines sold, as when we had open trade with
France, notwithstanding the Act of Prohibition, to the great prejudice of his
Majesty's Customs, and the Nation in general, and this under the name of Port,
tho I have heard it disputed whether the whole Produce of Oporto can furnish a
dozen of our best Taverns with what they expend under that Name.

That contrary to the Policy of Nations, we raise the value of our own Product,
and Manufactory amongst our selves, which ought only to be advanced when
Exported by the Imposition of Public Authority; by this means the rise of
Guineas would be no loss if we now keep them here, by selling little more
abroad of any Commodity, than when they went for 1 l. 1 s. 6 d.

That the Burden of this War would not be grievous to the Nation, were but the
prices of our native and necessary Commodities regulated, having little need of
Foreign Assistance; but by the Covetous and Arbitrary sway of great Traders,
and without just Cause the Poor are pincht, and over-rated in their Bread,
Cloths, Coals, Soap, Candles, and in short, in all things, as if we had nothing
of our own growth, but all were brought from the Indies: Nor is it a small
Inconveniency they suffer by Abuse in exchange for Farthings.

That what Impositions are laid on Sugars, Salt, Coals, Spirits, Tobacco,
East India Goods, Vinegars, etc. whatsoever imported, we our selves only pay
for it, whereas if our Impositions were levied on our Native Product and
Manufactory Exported, others would bear a part and must pay for it.

That the French Refugees may be servicable to the Government, by forming them
into Colonies in Ireland, where is want of People, and Store of waste Ground to
plant Mul-berries and make a Silk-work there, and to be dyed and Manufactured
here.

NOW to turn the Stream and Riches raised by Your Majesty's native Commodities,
into the Natural Channel, from whence it has been a long time Diverted,

May it Please Your Majesty to consider these Points following.

1. Whether it be not fit that a State Merchant be Settled within your
Dominions, which may both dispose more profitably of the Riches thereof, and
encounter Policies of Merchant Strangers, who now go beyond us in all kind of
profitable Merchandising?

2. Whether it be not necessary that your Native Commodities should receive
their full Manufactory by your Subjects within your Dominions?

3. Whether it be not sit that Coals should yield Your Majesty's and Subjects a
better Value, by permitting them to pass out of the Land, and that they be in
your Subjects Shipping only Transported?

4. Whether it be not sit Your Majesty presently raise your Coin to as high
rates as it is in any parts beyond Seas?

5. Whether it be not necessary that the great Sea business of Fishing be
forthwith set forward?

If it please your Majesty to approve of these Con siderations, and accordingly
to put them in a right course of Execution, I assure my self (by Gods help) in
a short time your Majesty's Customs, and the Continual comings into your
Coffers, will be exceedingly increased, your Ships and Mariners trebled, your
Land and wast Towns (which are now run out of Gates) better replenished, and
your People employed, to the great enriching and Honor of your Kingdom, with
the applause, and to the Comfort of all your Loyal Subjects.

May it please your Majesty.
I have rather undergone the pains to look into their Policies, because I have
heard them prosess they hoped to get the whole Trade and Shipping of
Christendom into their own hands, as well as for trasportation, as otherwise
for the Command and Mastery of the Seas, to which end I find that they do daily
increase their Traffic, augmenting their Shipping, multiplying their Mariners,
Strength and Wealth in all kinds, whereat I have grieved the more, when I
consider how God has endued this Kingdom above any three Kingdoms in
Christendom, with diverse Varieties of home bred Commodities, which others have
not, and cannot want, and induced us with sundry other means to continue and
maintain Trade and Merchandising, and Fishing beyond them all, whereby we might
prevent the Deceivers, ingross the Commodities of the Ingrossers, enrich our
selves, and increase our Navigation, Shipping and Mariners, so as it would make
all other Nations Vail the Bonet to England, if we would not be still wanting
to our selves in employment of our own People; Which People being divided into
three parts, two of them are mere Spenders and Constiniers of a Commonwealth;
therefore I aim at these Points following. To allure and encourage the People
for their private gain, to be all workers and encreasers of a Commonwealth, to
enrich and fill your Majesty's Coffers by a continual coming in and make your
People Wealthy, by means of their great end profitable Trading and Employment.

To vent our homebred Commodities to far more reputation, and much more profit
to the King the Merchant, and the Kingdom.

To return the Merchandises of other Countries at far cheaper rates than now
they are; to the great good of the Realm in general.

To make the Land powerful by increasin of Ships and Mariners.

To make your Peoples takings in general to be much more every day than now
they are, which by Gods help, will grow continually more and more by the great
concourse and Commerce that will come by settled Constitutions and convenient
privileges, as in other Ports they do by this their great freedom of Trade.

All this and much more is done in other Countries, where nothing grows, so
that of nothing they make great things.

Then how much more mighty things might we make, where so great abundance and
variety of homebred Commodities, and rich Materials grow, for your People to
work upon, and other plentiful means to do withal, which other Nations neither
have, nor cannot want, but of necessity must be furnished from hence.

And now whereas our Merchandising is wild, utterly Confused, and out of frame,
as at large appears, a State Merchant will roundly and effectually bring all
the premises to pass, fill your Havens with Ships, those Ships with Mariners,
your Kingdom full of Merchants, their Houses full of outlandish Commodities,
and your Coffers full of Coin, as in other parts they do, and your People shall
have just cause to hold in happy memory, that your Majesty was the beginner of
so profitable, praise worthy, and renowned a work, being the true Philosophers
Stone to make your Majesty a rich and potent King, and your Subjects a happy
People, only by settling of a State Merchant, whereby your People may have
fullness of Trade and Manufactory, and yet hold both Honorable and profitable
Government, without breaking Companies.

And for that in settling of so weighty a business, many things of great
Consequence must necessarily fall into Consideration, I humbly Pray that Your
Majesty may be pleased (for the bringing of this great service to light) to
give me leave to Nominate the Commissioners, and Your Majesty give them power
to call before them such Men as they shall think fit to Confer with upon Oath,
or otherwise as occasion shall offer; that the said Commissioners with all
speed for the better advancement of this Honorable and profitable work, may
prepare, and report the same to Your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most Loyal and true Hearted Subject, W. R.

FINIS.

