THE Royal Remembrancer, OR, A Healing Letter, WITH, ARGUMENTS and REASONS, to
the Presbyterians and Nonconformists; Seasonably Offered, From diverse learned
and Conforming Persons, to the view of Mr Calamy, Mr. Ienkins, and others.

London, Printed for Josias Allen 1663.

A Declaration, and Proposals to the Presbyterians, and Independents, etc.
SINCE man became a Traitor to his Creator; he has not feared to Rebel against
his King, his Titular God: Shimei cursed David. Good Princes do too too often
meet with Railing, and Blaspheming Subjects; whereas they ought not to conspire
against, or with violence resist, a wicked King, their lawful Sovereign.
Flattering Absalom, that unnatural Son, that smooth faced Traitor, had his wise
Achitophel, as the Devils Oracle, to be his companion in his Treacherous
Design; And, was not that Famous Counselor, and notable Politician, rarely
well qualified for a Judge, or for a President? How cunningly did the Grand
Rebel Absalom, by his false pretention unto Justice unjustly steal away the
hearts of his Fathers Subjects? How wisely did he apply himself unto the
People? How did he catch them with a Bait most proper, suitable and convenient?
thus sighting out an Interjection of dissembling affection (except unto
Ambition) Oh that I were made Judge in the Land! that every Man, which has any
Snit, or Cause, might come unto me, and I will do him Justice: complaining of
the present Government, saying, That there was no man deputed of the King to
hear men's Controversies; addressing himself with most familiar language unto
the People; and expressing toward them much Condescension, great Affability,
and extraordinary Courtesies. When any man that had a Controversy, came unto
the King for Judgment then, Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what City
art thou? And when any man came nigh unto him to do him obeisance, he put forth
his hand, and took him, and kissed him: he also who had so well studied the
humor of the People, was not Ignorant concerning their Princes inclination;
and therefore endeavors to frame and fashion himself unto the devout mind of
his good old Father; abusing his Innocence, and Credulity with a specious
pretense o^ Piety, and Devotion; saying unto the King, I pray Thee let me go,
and pay my Vow, which I have Vowed unto the Lord in Hebron; for thy Servant
vowed a Vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the Lord shall bring
me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord; and the King said unto
him Go in peace: After the common guize of dissembling Rebels, in this very
Treason there was a profession of Equity, and Piety; Justice, and Devotion; and
mention made of a Religious Vow, as there has been of an holy Covenant. It was
therefore no wonder that we read of 200 men, who being called, went with
Absalom in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing. May we, because of so
glorious a profession, joined with such a practice, wisely conclude that
Abs^lom and his adherents were most just and Devout, then pious King David? Who
as we read in 1 Chronicles. 18. 14. reigned over all Israel, and executed Judgment,
and Justice among all his People. Adoni^ah treading in the same presumptuous
steps, plays the Traitor also; strengthening his Rebellion with the confederacy
of Abiathar, and Ioab; the one a pious Priest, the other a valiant and politic
Commander, a famous General.

Many more Testimonies, in the Holy Bible, may be ppoduced of Faction,
Treachery, Treason and Rebellion: Historyes both Sacred and Profane, afford us
many Relations of this Nature; wherein has been recorded not only the
perverseness, and perjury of Infidels, but also of Christians, yea of good and
believing Christians (of all Ranks and degrees) unto Lawful Authority; And this
indeed is the drift I aim at, that it may not seem wonderful unto us, to see
men otherwise very Good, Religious, and Conscientious engaged in Faction, and
infected with Schism; the one pernicious to Civil Societies, the other to
Ecclesiastical; and indeed, what the one is to the State, the other is to the
Church: Among these very Corinthians, whom St. Paul affirmed to be Saints,
santified in Christ Jesus, to have received the Grace of God, to have been
enriched by God in all knowledge, to have been called unto the fellowship of
Jesus Christ our Lord, among those (I say) were found Schisms, Strifes,
Envyings, Divisions, and Factions: while one boasted to be of Paul, another of
Apollo, another of Cephas, and another of Christ as if Christ had been divided:
And although I do not peremptorily charge that great Apostle St. Peter as a
Schismatic, yet may I as a Temporizer, one who through fear, and cowardice,
did separate himself for a time from Communion with the Gentiles, because of
the circumsed Jews; twice through fear did St. Peter offend; with him at this
time did Barnabas, and diverse Jews also dissemble, so as to withdraw from
converse with the Gentiles, upon which they were justly taxed by St. Paul for
not walking uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel: And did not their
Separation upon this account almost amount unto a Schism? And now I will not
wonder at the Temporizing, or Time-serving; yea, or at the Schism of a
Presbyterian Moderator: Little reason has he to wrangle at that Translation, Be
fervent in Spirit, applying your selves unto the Time; I only affirm, that
Good and religious men have sometimes been Rebels, and Schismatics, through
the darkness and ignorance of their Understanding; and through the obstinacy
and perverseness of their own Wills. This Consideration calls for deep
Humiliation, and serious Repentance from those amongst us, who have made great
profession of Religion; and, yet contrary to the Command of Christ, requiring
subjection to Lawful Authority, have Rebelled against their Sovereign; and
being too too forgetful of our Churches Peace, Happiness, and Welfare, have
separated, rent, and divided themselves from her Communion; and have bereaved
her of many of her dear Children by their most uncharitable practices; these
are they, who have preferred their private Opinions, wild Fancies, and strange
Enthusiasms, before the Sound, Orthodox, and Established Doctrine of the Church
of England.

I profess Ingenously, That I have much Charity for many who have been
accounted Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and Quakers; and therefore
I heartily desire them to beware of Spiritual pride: Consider seriously, how
great a blow, how great a fall, Religion has received by your Pride,
Hypocrisy, and Ambition: Remember how sad a woe Christ has pronounced against
those, through whom offenses come.

Consider, That you of all Parties, that ever were in the World, have most of
all arrogated unto your selves the names of Holy, Godly, and Religious men: Let
nor the Truth and Ways of God be any longer blasphemed, or evil spoken of for
your sakes; but now give glory unto God* and satisfaction to the Church; return
unto her Communion, and despise her not: be less Censorious, and more
Charitable toward others, who are sinners, Knowing that you are also in the
Body: be not high-minded therefore but fear. God Almighty so defend me by his
Grace as that I may not so sin, as to rejoice that you have thus sinned; or to
insult over you, that you are, or may be miserable, because you have thus
sinned. In Ecclesiastical Matters (seeing Gods Word commands not expressly any
one certain Form of Church Discipline, to be imposed upon the Churches of
Christ,) he expects your submission unto the Episcopal Discipline as his
established Form of Church Government, most agreeable to the Word of God, or at
least, not repupnant unto it; and most commonly, and generally, practiced by
the most pure, Primitive and Apostolical Churches of Christ; and lastly, as
most agreeable, suitable, and convenient for, and unto the Temper and
Constitution of this English Nation: And for the Ceremonies, which if I may so
say) are Pendent upon, and appertaining unto that Form, as they are Cirstances
of it, and themselves of an indifferent and Adiaphorus nature; yet belonging to
Order Decency, and Convenience, they be wisely prudently, and justly, enjoined
by the King, whose Power is exercised about indifferent things. I will herein
so freely declare my judgment, as to assert, that though I approve not of a
Church gorgeously decked and trimmed with Superstitious Ceremonies; yet am I
not so mad so rude, and so slovenly, as, with many of our Non-conformists, to
desire to honor, or embrace, a Church in this World naked of all outward
Beauty, Splendour, Ornaments, or Comeliness whatsoever. It must be granted, that
visible and external things are many times serviceable, and profitable, for the
attainment of things invisible, and internal: The serious observation of the
making that Transient and AErial Cross on the forehead of the Child without
any Superstition, may many times become unto us an occasion of true devotion
outlasting the aforesaid Action. Our AErial Cross cannot be a Relic, and
Monument of Idolatry, because the word Monument is deduced from Remaining;
neither our particular transient Crosses ever worshipped by Papists; our Cross
is not of the same kind with the Popish, deferring therefrom in operations;
their Cross is said to drive away Devils, and to consecrate things unto God
which things we ascribe not unto our Cross: Now the diversity of Opperations
does sufficiently distinguish between things Artificial, or the kinds of things
Artificial, of which number is the Cross: The Cross is a sign, yet not
Sacramental, but humane; and voluntary; not of our Covenant with God, but of
our Profession toward Men: it does Historically, not Sacramentally, describe
unto us Christ's Death: Therefore it is a Slander that we add it to Baptism, as
Sacramental, or Essential; this out of diverse good Instances I have chosen out,
for the sense of seeing. Now for the Sense of hearing, I shall speak a little
concerning Church-Musick; which ( as I have read) has been partly erected,
partly allowed of, by Athanasius in the East, Ambrose in the West and Augustine
in the South: As God loves a cheerful Giver, so he loves a cheerful
Worshipper; Music is Requisite, that Devotion may be refreshed by delectation;
there is a Natural Sympathy between Man's soul and Melody: Of what excellent use
are our Bars herein for the furtherance of our Piety! As long indeed as we are
in this World we shall stand in need of diverse external helps for our Devotion;
we shall need the Pedagogie of Forms, and Manduction of Ceremonies. I shall not
now descend down unto other particulars; but shall define the Reader to
consider, that I only endeavor to vindicate the established, and well known
Ceremonies of the Church of England; not any which have been introduced merely
by the bold Innovation of presumptuous Intruders.

In a word, sundry Memorable and most Excellent Testimonies, might be produced,
in order to the vindication of the Church of England, yet causelessly many of
the Non-conformists, grieved at our established Ceremonies, and did mourn
because of our Liturgy; when others of them did ( as causelessly) mock at them,
and deride them. Oh! that these ungodly mockers would at length arise up out of
the seat of the Scornful, and meekly sit down in the School of Repentance.
These men who were so curious, nice, and narrow-throated, that they could not
swallow down the Commands of their lawful Superiors; when time was, did both
Feast and Fast, and take Oaths too, as fast as Usurpers did command; and
indeed then, what did they leave undone, when commanded by that unlawful power?
yet then they pretended unto as good Consciences* and as great Sanctimony, as
evey men could lay claim unto. But their Hypocrisy being so amply discovered,
in a notable and ingenious Discourse, in Folio, (Entitled, A Proposal humbly
offered, for the farming of Liberty of Conscience) It will not be here
Requisite to declare their Game any further; I rather desire their Conversion
and that every Soul would be subject to the Higher Powers; for we ought not
only to pay Tribute to our King, ( as our King) but we are also all of us, in
our several Stations, places, and capacities; bound by the Law of God, of
Nature, and of Nations, to the uttermost of our powers, to defend and protect
his Royal Person, and to maintain his Dignity, and Supremacy, against all
opposers whatsoever. And very careful ought all his Majesty's Subjects to be,
to endeavor after, and to keep the peace of the Kingdom, and the Unity of the
Church.

Thus of old, writ Dyonisius, (the good Bishop of Alexandria) to Novatus, an
Enemy to the Truth; Thou should have suffered any thing, Rather then to Rend
asunder the Church of God. So says a late friend to the Non-conformists; Cast
off that Babe (meaning the Covenant) whose production, wrought such a wilful
and hardened obstinacy, against the famous Liturgy of our English Church that it
made them not only to dispense with their Covenant with God, but also to break
Covenant with their lawful Sovereign; earnestly desiring them to come in, and
embrace the Discipline of their Mother Church; and no longer to remain amongst
such, whose Doctrines and Principles were chiefly grounded upon Pernicious
Errors.

FINIS.

