THE STATUTES OF THE COLLEGE OF Physicians LONDON: Worthy to be perused by all
Men, But more Especially PHYSICIANS, LAWYERS, APOTHECARIES, SURGEONS, AND All
such that either do, or shall Study, Profess, or Practice PHYSIC.

ANNO DOMINI 1693.

To the PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.
MOST Renowned Assembly, whose Vigilance and Care for the Public Good, all
Ages have sufficiently experienced, and in whose Determination the People of
England, calmly, contentedly, and conscienciously acquiesce; tho the
corruptions and perversions of ill men have frequently subverted your most
Generous Designs for the Public Good, to their own base and private Interests;
among the number of which, it were heartily to be wished that the most Noble
and Necessary Art of Physic were not pro^^ituted and perverted (by men
strictly sworn to the contrary) to the avarice, pride, and oppression of a few,
who not content privately to enslave and abuse men, by exacting Fourscore or a
Hundred Pounds, for an Admission, without any Examination; but openly enact
Bylaws, contrary to Act of Parliament and the Cammon Good of Mankind,
precluding (without any respect of their Due and Legal Qualifications, and
Abilities) particular men from being serviceable to the Public; as will
plainly appear to those who shall attentively examine the following Case, and
Statutes. The prudent and seasonable redress of which Enormities, most Worthy
Patriots, when time and opportunity shall present, is humbly submitted to your
Determination and Judgment.

The Base, Dishonorable, and Illegal Dealing of the College of Physicians,
London, with a Doctor in Physic, admitted to that Degree in one of our own
Universities;
WHo in July, August, and September, in the year 1683, presented himself to the
President and Censors, to be examined; Doctor Thonas Coxe President, Samuel
Collins, Senior Register, Walter Charleton, Thomas Allen, Nathaniel Hodges,
Edward Hulst, Censors: and was by them examined ( Chap. 15. page 112.) three
several times in Latin, according to the Form of the Statutes ( Chap. 16. page
119, 120, 123.) in that Case provided; and was approved ( Chap. 15. page 111.)
and had leave given by the President and Censors, after Examination ( Chap. 16.
page 124.) to visit the Fellows, and did accordingly visit all the Fellows, in
order to be admitted Licentiate ( Chap. 11. page 79, 80.) and at the same time
was requested and desired by them, in the behalf of the whole College; and
withal complemented, how extremely he should oblidge and highly honor that
Society, if he would be pleased to suspend his Admission of Licentiate (and
which they confessed they could not deny) till such time as he had quitted his
Employment in Pharmacy, and completed his Degree (being then Batchelour in
Physic) of Doctor in the University; and that then, without any farther
trouble of visiting the Fellows, or other Examinations, and for the very same
Fees, by virtue of those Examinations standing registered in their Books (if
they escape the fate of being cut out, as some other things have been) he might
be admitted Candidate, the more honorable station in their Society, and which
he better deserved, and they did then propose to him Doctor Lister's Case, as a
President for the same thing: On these Considerations he submitted to and
gratified their Request.

Four years now elapsed, and by their advice, having regularly completed his
Degree of Doctor in Physic ( July 6. 1687.) performing all Exercises required
by the Statutes of the University of Cambridge (and as 14, 15 of Hen. 8.
accomplishing all things for his Form, without any grace) as his Diploma to
them shown, and the Register in that University will sufficiently testify; he
applied himself to the then President of the College in the year 1687, for his
Admission (as formerly directed and promised, by the President and Censors, in
the behalf of the whole College in the year 1683.) from whom he had a
courteous reception, and acknowledgement that it was all the Reason and Justice
in the World that he should have his Admission, besides, says he, we cannot
deny it him; ( Chap. 15. p. 119. l. 8.) and then advised him to wait till next
College day, and there give his attendance; which he accordingly did, and was
then deferred to another opportunity, by reason the College was then engaged
in private business ( viz. Making New Statutes ( N. 8, 16.) of Exclusion) and
no public business would at that time be entered on; he attended again and
again, and was still deferred: During these delays the private business is
effected, and the New Statutes of Exclusion are made and promulgated in the
Theater, September 28. 1687.

After these New Statutes were made, he was advised to wait on the President
and Censors on a private College day, to demand his Admission, and did
accordingly; and had for answer from them their New Statutes, which Mr.
Register would needs read: To which he answered, These Statutes cannot relate
to my Case, being made above four years since the desires, requests, and
directions of this Board, in behalf of the whole College, were made to me to
suspend my Admission till I had completed my Degree of Doctor; besides, I have
lately attended several times on the College for my Admission in July, August,
September 1687. since I was Doctor in Physic, and before these Statutes were
made or promulgated.

However, so it was, that unless he would abjure the Company of Apothecaries
(as well as he had, by their advice and directions, quitted his employment in
Pharmacy in the year 1684.) and bring it attested under the hand, or by the
person of a Public Notary, that he had relinquished and abjured that Society,
he should not be admitted.

And now, for the further illustration of their Honor, Justice, and Credit, in
this Case, I will give you an Advertisement published by the College of
Physicians London, in the Gazette; as also what they have annexed to his most
Sacred Majesty's Letters, and published by the consent of the whole College in
1688.

Gazette N. 2325. Thursday 1 March 1687. WHereas there are in and about this
City several Persons practicing Physic, who have not yet been examined and
licensed by the President and Censors of the College of Physicians, these are
to require all such persons forthwith to repair to the said President and
Censors, for their Examination and License to practice, that they may hereby
prevent their being prosecuted according to the Laws and his Majesty's special
Command.



'A short Account of the Institution and Nature of the College of Physicians
London.
Published 1688.
THe College of Physicians in London, being constituted of men of generous and
liberal Education, and instituted for public benefit, out of which no person
of sufficient Capacity and Learning can be excluded, consists of a President,
Fellows, Candidates, Honorary Fellows, and Licentiates.

1. Fellows are Doctors of Physic chosen out of the Candidates, who have been
always limited to a certain number (formerly Forty) and are now confined to the
number of Fourscore, by his present Majesty's gracious Charter.

2. Candidates must be Doctors in Physic, admitted to that Degree in one of
our own Universities, must not be Foreigners, and ought to have practiced
Physic four years before they are admitted into that Order.

3. Honorary Fellows are such Doctors in Physic, as by reason of their being
Foreigners, or having taken their Degree in some University beyond the Seas,
are not incorporated into either of ours; or for some other reason (having not
been Candidates) are not of the number of those who have Votes in the Affairs
of the College.

The Reader will find no such Rank or Degree instituted either in the Old or
New Statutes, but was at first honestly and justly dispensed with about the
year 1660, for those who through the iniquity of the times, were forced from the
Universities, and so could not orderly take their Degrees at home; but were
compelled to take them abroad in Foreign Universities, and were therefore
numbered among the Honoraries ( Chap. 12. p. 91, 92.) viz. the Kings, Queens,
and Princes Physicians; that so they might be restored to their Seniority and
Standing: but have since been continued and perverted to the detriment of our
Universities, and the scandal of the College, by admitting all foreign
Degrees, or any else (without Examination for money, 80 or 100 l.) into an
Order, which the Statutes have not ordained.

4. Licentiates, are such other persons skilled in Physic, who by reason of
their being Foreigners, or their not being admitted Doctors in one of our
Universities, or for their not being eminently learned, or by reason of their
too great youth, or such like causes, are not capable to be elected into the
number of the Candidates, yet may notwithstanding be serviceable to the Public
in taking care of the health of the Kings Subjects, at least in some particular
Diseases.

The Act of Parliament makes no such Distinctions, save the Eight Elects, but
that all shall be one Body and Fellowship; as in Anno 14, 15. Hen. 8. Cap. 5
says, Have incorporate and made of Us, and of our Company aforesaid, one Body
and perpetual Comminalty or Fellowship of the Faculty of Physic, and to have
perpetual Succession and Common Seal: And further Quod nemo in dicta Civitate,
aut per septem milliaria in circuitn ejusdem, exerceat dictam Facultatem, nisi
ad hoc per dictum Praesidentem and Communitatem, seu Successores eorum, qui pro
tempore fuerint, admissus sit per ejusdem Praesidentis and Collegii Literas
Sigillo suo Communi Sigillatas.

Now, of all these several Ranks and Degrees of Practisers in Physic, none of
them is confined to any certain number, but the Fellows and Candidates; (but
not according to the Act of Parliament) so that the rest being wholly
unlimited, no person can be excluded out of the College, or debarred from
Practice, but such as are so wholly illiterate and unskilful, that they dare
not adventure to submit themselves to the Examination and Judgment of the
President and Censors of the College, either as to the goodness of their
Medicines, or their own skill in all or any part of Physic, though the
President and Censors be men strictly sworn to do Justice to all persons who
shall present themselves or their Medicines to their Scrutiny and Examination.

From hence it menisestly follows that the College of Physicians is very far
from being a Monopoly, since it cannot reject any of the King's Subjects who
are duly qualified for the Exercise of all, or any part of Physic.

From all these published Advertisements and following Statutes, it manifestly
follows that Doctor I.Bgr. is and has been legally and duly a Member of the
College of Physicians London for these Ten years last past, although his Name
be not printed in their New Catalogue of 1693. (which Catalogue, if examined by
the Registers of our Universities, you will find many of those Doctors Names
either there not registered, or many that have been imposed on the Universities;
which will be well worth publishing in their next Impression for the public
good and information;) Or the College guilty of publishing to the World most
notorious falsehoods: and to use their own words, is very far from being any
other then a perfect Monopoly ( Page 119. exacting large Subscriptions of our
University men, besides their pretended Fees, and admitting any for Fourscore
or a Hundred Pounds, without Examination first had Page 116. l. 1.) and
Confederacy, to support Ignorance ( Page 83. l. 16, 20. P. 148. l. 7. P. 151.
l. 18. P. 159. l. 1. P. 160. l. 17. New Stat. N. 2, 10. and exclude regularly
commenced Doctors in our own Universities; and the King's Native Subjects, duly
qualified for the Exercise of all and every part of Physic.

STATUTA COLLEGII MEDICORUM LONDINENSIVM.
QUum Regis Serenissimi HENRICI VIII. Privata gratia, and Publicis Parliamenti
Decretis sancitum sit, ut Collegium Medicorum Londinensium in decus Regni, and
salutem Reipublicae stabiliatur, Privilegiis muniatur, Possessionibus
locupletetur, Electoribus insigniatur, Praeside, and Censoribus gubernetur,
Statutis dirigatur illaque de novo condendi facultate donetur; Consiliariis
adjuvetur, and Literis perpetuetur; Consultissimum etiam Nobis visum est ut
praescribamus: Primo qui sint futuri Electores; quodque eorum sit Officium, Tum
quis sit futurus Praeses; quomodo, and a quibus eligendus; qua Lege
obstringendus; quodnam ejus Officium, and potestas: denique quis locus, atque
dignitas: Deinde, quinam sint futuri Consiliarii, quid illis fide data sit
praestand um quodque eorum sit Officium, Locus, and Potestas: Qui Censores
Literarum, Morum, itemque Medicamentorum sint constituendi; quoque Officio, ex
Juramento, illis sit fungendum. Quodnam sit Officium Thesaurarii, Regestarii,
and Bedelli. Postremo, quid reliquos deceat in sui honorem and Collegii decus,
and qua sponsione teneantur. Si quae Statuta condenda, si quae abroganda
fuerint, quo id facere opporteat modo. Quae sit Commitiorum, examinationum,
atque admissionum forma. Quae sit Offensae habenda ratio: cum aliis, quae
universim ad omnes Collegii personas and negotia ex aequo spectant. Enim vero
nihil durabile est, quod Ratione, Modo, atque Ordine careat.

CAP. I. De Electoribus Creandis.
STatuimus igitur and Ordinamus ut e Numero Sociorum Octo tantum Electores
creentur, qui gravitate, literis, moribus, and aetate caeteris praefulgeant,
Doctoratusque gradu insigniantur, and natione sint Angli, quorum Officium erit
ex Authoritate Collegii postridie Divi Michaelis (si commodefieri potest, at
vero si ob gravia quaedam impedimenta id non licebit; tunc alio die ad eam rem
magis idoneo modo sit intra septimanam a tempore Praestituto) in celebribus
Comitiis Praesidem e numero Electorum eligere: si anni superioris Praeses
defuncto annuo Officio superfuerit, sin autem defecerit ille quam primum id
commode fieri poterit alium surrogare, ad plurimum intra dies 20 post quam is
defecerit. Deficere autem Praesidem vel Electorem intelligimus, si vel mortuus
fuerit, vel e Collegio sit expulsus, vel cum pannis, ut aiunt, a Civitate
discesserit, and per annum integrum absuerit, nisi sit in Ministerio Principis.

Si Electorum unus aut plures ita defecerint Electione nova sufficiatur alius
aut plures in ejus aut eorum locum ex caeteris Sociis qui ejusdem Nationis,
Gradus, Morum, Doctrinae, atque Ordinis erunt, intra dies 30 aut saltem 40; sed
ita ut illis Comitiis soli Electores intersint, quo liberior fiat Electio, and
morum, ingenii, gravitatis ac Doctrinae justior examinatio, quas omnes Virtules
in Electore vel maxim requirunt Statuta Regni.

Qui eligendus est, prius examinabitur ab Electoribus prout cautum est per
Statuta Regni, tum eligatur omnium little consensu; si fieri poterit sin minus
per majorem partem, at si paria fuerint Suffragia per seniorem partem.

Si autem propter Pestis saevitiam vel aliam ob causam Electores abfuerint ab
Urbe, ita ut certus dies statui nequeat, tunc licebit Praesidi quo tempore and
loco commode poterit Electores convocare.

Si quis ex numero Electorum Civitatem reliquirit and cum familia sua in alio
aliquo loco ultra septem ab Urbe Milliaria per annum integrum commoratus
fuerit, is (nisi sit Medicus Regius aut aliter Principis Ministerio detentus)
inter Electores locum amittet, aliusque per Praesidem and Electores
surrogabitur: Volumus tamen ut suum in Collegio locum and dignitatem retineat,
si interea temporis Praesidem de Absentiae suae causa certiorem fecerit.

Dabit sidem se nemini daturum consensum aut suffragium ut Praeses aut Elector
creetur nisi secundum formam Statuti and nisi ejus gravitatem, eruditionem,
mores integros, aetatem decentem, sincerum animum in Collegium and Rempublicam
and alacritatem ad obeunda Officia cognitam and perspectam habuerit.

CAP. II. De Praside and ejus Officio.
QUi Praeses futurus est in annum designetur, sitque e numero Electorum, and
quem caeteri Electores praesentes, aut omnes aut plurimi pro temporis rei and
personae ratione idoneum judicaverint idque eo anni tempore fiat, quo jam ante
Constitutum est, cum de Electoribus ageremus postridie nempe Divi Michaelis si
commode fieri potest, etc. ut supra in Capite de Electoribus creandis.

Cautum and Statutum est si paria fuerint Suffragia, ea pars vineat in qua
plures ex senioribus fuerint, quod si hi quoque pares suerint ea praevalebit in
quam vetus Praeses aut eo mortuo vel absente Praeses natus inclinaverit,
Praesidem natum vocamus qui senior ex Electoribus fuerit, qui etsi Praesidis
nomen gerat nullam tamen potestatem habeat condendi aut mutandi Statuta,
administrandi vero, fungendive Praesidis munere caeteris in rebus ad Collegii
negotia pertinentibus, sit ei plena potestas secundum verum sensum Statutorum.

Si Elector aliquis, Praesidis munns ei delatum recusaverit, mulctabitur 40
solidis nisi fuerit Medicus Regius.

Sponsio sive Fides a Praeside data.
DAblt fidem fe pro viribus conaturum, ut honor Collegii conservetur, Statuta
ejusdem sine fraud observentur, omniaque acturum in salutem Rei Publicae, and
Honestam Collegii utilitatem.

Fidem a Praeside novo postulabit superioris anni Praeses si adfuerit, aut
Consiliariorum alter, Senior potissimum si adfuerit, aut his absentibus Senior
ex Electoribus praesentibus.

Qui fidem postulabit is porrigat Virtutis Insignia Pulvinar nempe honoris,
Librum, and Caduceum dicatque, Damus tibi Praesidis Authoritatem tradimusque
Pulvinar Honoris, Librum Scientiae and Caduceum Gubernationis and Prudentiae ut
intelligat excellentia tua caeterique Collegae omnes Scientia and Prudentia
Collegium nostrum firmiter stabiliri quamobrem ne id memoria tua excidat in
solemnioribus Conventibus Officiis funebribus aliisque temporibus and locis
opportunis curabis gestari ante te per Bedellum, Librum and Caduceum in
Scientiae and Prudentiae Signum ut quod virtus postulat id usus confirmet.

Ratio Deponendi Officium.
DEfuncto Praesidendi Officio, munus depositurus Praeses finita quam velit
praefatione dicat. Depono Praesidendi authoritatem inque tuas manus alterius;
viz. Consiliariorum Senioris potissimum aut his absentibus Senioris Electoris
praesentis omnium nomine restituo, ut integrum sit quibus eligendi potestas est
quem velint eligere and substituere; reddo tibi igitur pulvinar honoris, Librum
Scientiae and Caduceum prudentis regiminis, praecorque Collegio and vobis
omnibus omnia fausta.

Quo facto cui deligata potestas est proponat eligendum quem ad id Officium
maxim idoneum fore judicaverint. Eligatur autem eo modo quo sub initium hujus
Capitis ordinatum est, and eum qui pro Statutorum ratione Electus est clare and
nominatim pronuntiet electum in Praesidem jubeatque ut omnes eum pro Praeside
habeant, denique fidem ab eo postulabit eadem formula qua supra dictum est.

Praesidis Officium esto ut Comitia indicat, qua autem ratione postea dicetur
cum de Comitiis statuimus, tum ut causas Comitiorum proponet, singulorum
sententias excipiat, pro majori part discernat, factiones and partium studia
excludat.

Electores, Consiliarios, literarum, morum, and medicamentorum Censores, cum
caeteris, quorum ea res intererit eligat.

In Collegis eligendis, aliorum Suffragia primum accipiat, dein suum ferat, and
pro majori part descernat.

Lites inter Collegas dirimat sed id communi consilio and sententia Electorum
and Censorum seorsim adhibitorum; eoque modo, quo postea in Capite de
Consiliariis dicetur before.

Curet praeterea, ut Sigillum commune in Arca tuto custodiatur: Omnia ipse
obsignabit, in quae reliqui Socii pro Officio and Statuto consenserint.

Si qui Libri Collegio donentur, curabit, ut reponentur, in Bibliotheca, and
exacto anno eorum ratio reddatur novo Praesidi, ostendanturque ei nominatim ex
Indice.

Si quis sit reditus, sive fructus annuus ex fundis Collegii, si quid donetur
Collegio, si quid aliis nominibus accedat, procuret ut in Communi Arca
conservetur cujus ipse clavem unam, Consiliariorum singuli itidem unam habeant.

Rationem etiam acceptorum and expensorum anni superioris exigat a Thesaurario,
caeterisque Officiariis Collegii, in praesentia reliquorum Electorum tunc
temporis in Urbe presentium, quos omnes admoneri volumus, ut putandis
rationibus praesto sint, si modo commode poterint; Imprimis autem videat, ut
Statuta diligenter observentur, and in Collegio legantur, vel ab ipso, vel a
Registario, vel ab alio aliquo prout illi videbitur, eo nimirum modo, quo
postea in Statutis provisum and constitutum est.

CAP. III. De Pro-Praeside.
LIcebit Praesidi, vel Ministerio Pincipis, vel magnatis alicujus cura detento,
vel multitudine aliorum negotiorum oppresso, Pro-Praesidem eligere, and sibi
substituere; is vero Praeses natus sit, si commode per aetatem, negotia, aut
valetudinem fieri potest; sin minus ex Electoribus aliquis, qui gravitate,
recto judicio, experientia, diligentia, and agendi alacritate polleat, pro
Praesidis voluntate and arbitrio.

Hujus Officjum erit, supplere locum Praesidis absentis in omnibus Collegii
negotiis gerendis, and administrandis, quae commode per Praesidem obiri
nequeant.

Sit ei Locus, and Dignitas pro gradu and senioritate, nisi cum Praeses
abfuerit; tum enim Praesidis locum occupabit, sed in Collegio tantum, loco
nimirum Comitiorum ordinario; abesse autem Praesidem intelligimus, non modo si
extra Urbem, and Suburbia fuerit, sed etiam, si morbo aliquo, aut gravioribus
negotiis in Urbe detentus adesse nequeat. Sed in his casibus, volumus, ut
absentiam suam, vel per literas propria manu subscriptas, vel per Collegii
Bedellum notum faciat.

Duret Officium pro negotio. Dabit fidem si Electores aequum judicaverint, se
pro virili curaturum negotia Collegii sibi commissa, and sedulo acturum omnia
in honorem and utilitatem Collegii, nihilque facturum, nisi judicio and
consilio Praesidis, aut consiliariorum, eorumque Sociorum, quorum per Statuta
intererit.

CAP. IV. De Consiliariis.
POstridie Divi Michaelis si commode fieri potest, etc. ut supra in Capite de
Electoribus creandis, in Comitiis ordinariis, statim a Praesidis Electione
iidem Electores ex suo ordine duos qui ad Officium hoc idonei fuerint in
Consiliarios eligant, assentientibus, vel omnibus vel majori Electorum
Presentium numero; si paria fuerint suffragia, ea pars prevalebit, in qua
plures fuerint ex Senioribus; si hi quoque numero pares fuerint, tum ea, in
quam Praeses propenderit.

Dabunt fidem se probe, and aeque, ut viros bonos decet, se posito omni
affectu, officio suo functuros.

Horum officium esto, Praesidi semper in Comitiis majoribus adesse; eundem
opera, and consilio ubi opus fuerit, juvare, nunquam abesse, nisi gravis aliqua
causa cogat; and ne tunc temporis locus vacet, qui abfuerit substituet loco suo
alium Electorem, donec redierit cum consensu tamen Praesidis, aut eo absente,
Pro-Praesidis.

Si quae lis aut controversia de re ambigua, aut genuina interpretatione
alicujus Statuti, aut hujusmodi aliquod dissidium, inter Collegas oriatur,
totum id negotium volumus quiet placideque componi per Praesidem,
Consiliarios, Censores, aut per majorem eorum partem.

Similiter, si inter Praesidem, and Collegas, controversia aliqua orta fuerit,
rem totam decerni volumus per Consiliarios, and Censores, vel per majorem
illorum partem. At si ne sic quidem componi potest, tunc volumus illis arbitris
praedictis, reliquos etiam Electores adjungi; ut horum omnium, vel majoris
partis suffragiis, tota illa controversia dirimatur.

Atque hanc regulam observari volumus, in omnibus Collegarum rixationibus
decenter compescendis. Hac nempe ratione futurum speramus (quod maxim optandum
est) ut rixosa jurgia, ac contentiones evitentur: and fraternus amor, cum
suavianimorum and voluntatum consensu quotidie coaalescat, ac in perpetuum
confirmetut.

Si Consiliariorum alter aut moriatur, aut aliter defecerit antequam annum
expleverit, alius intra dies quindecim surrogetur.

Nemo recuset Officium Consiliarii sub poena quadraginta solidorum, nisi sit
Medicus Regius.

Quoties little consilium Praeses rogaverit, paratos se praestent; sin minus
solvant singuli tres solidos and quatuor denarios, nisi urgens aliqua causa
impedierit de qua, cum proxime redierint, Praesidem certiorem sacient.

CAP. V. De Censoribus.
POst Electum Praesidem, and Consiliarios, mox in iisdem Comitiis, statuimus
and ordinamus ut singulis annis quatuor Viri docti and graves eligantur: sive
ii Electores fuerint, sive Socii: Quos Censores Collegii Londinensis, sive
Gubernatores nominari volumus.

Horum Electio sit per Suffragia Praesidis and totius Societatis aut majoris
partis occulte accepta.

Horum Officium esto, de omnibus Medicinam exercentibus cognoscere, sive
nostrates fuerint, sive advenae; per Urbem Suburbia, and intra septem milliaria
in ambitu eorundem. Eos examinare, corrigere, gubernare, and lite (si opus sit)
una cum Praeside and Thesaurario, persequi: eorum medendi rations inquirere,
medicamenta judicio perstringere, Pharmacopolarum Officinas scrutari, de
Pharmacis judicare, vitiosa comburere, aut alio pacto destruere: si
Pharmacopolae obstiterint, ad Praesidem and Collegium rem refer: omniaque
haec in salutem Reipublicae and Collegii honorem agere.

Censorum Juramentum.
JUrabunt coram Praeside, Se neminem in Collegium admittendum decreturos, nisi
quem omni seposito aflectu, judicaverint and literis and moribus idoneum: Nec
prece, nec pretio, vel gratia, aut quemquam hominem, aut quidquam
Medicamentorum approbaturos; inque caeteris suo Officio probe functuros: sicut
eos Deus adjuvet, and sancta Dei Evangelia.

Nullus Socius recuset Officium Censoris, sub poena quadraginta solidorum, nisi
sit Medicus Regius.

CAP. VI. De Comitiorum ratione atque tempore and de Caduceatore sive Bedello.
TRiduo antequam futura sunt Conmitia solennia, aut pridie ejus diei, si res
urgeat; auctoritate Praesidis monendi sunt omnes Collegae per Bedellum, aut
Praesidis ministrum, ut intersint Comitiis futuris die, hora, and loco
praescriptis.

Quo ubi ventum est, sedeant singuli eo ordine quo postea dicetur. Comitia
vocamus, conventus; sive ut Rex Henricus in suo Diplomate nominat,
congregationes Collegarum; and ea Comitia solennia, sive majora legitima
judicamus, quibus ut intersint, omnes Collegae, in Urbe per Bedellum
admonentur: and in quibus duodecim Socii, ad minimum, adsunt praeter Praesidem.
Modus autem admonitionis talis esto, Dominus Praeses orat Excellentiam vestram
(Doctor eximie) ut Comitiis intersis, mense, die hora and loco a Praeside
praescriptis. Subscribat dein ad hunc modum A. V. B. i. e. authoritate vestra
Bedellus.

Sit Bedellus vir probus, detque fidem, se fideliter and sedulo inserviturum
Praesidi and Collegio, in omnibus Collegii negotiis, sine fuco aut fraud.
Promittat insuper, se nec pretio, nec prece, nec gratia, secreta Collegii
cuiquam vulgaturum.

Hujus Officium esto, Schedulas admonitionis scribere; Collegas omnes ad
Comitia accerscere in eorum adventum omnia parare, munda, politaque conservare,
a Comitiis non abesse: res in Collegii usum a Praeside acceptas fideliter
far, and refer; quoscunque sive Medicos; sive Empiricos, and Impostores
indagare, eorumque nomina Praesidi and Censoribus indicare: atque illis,
jubente Praeside aut Censoribus, diem indicere; improba Pharmaca comburere, aut
aliter destruere, Convivils, and Funeribus adesse, Virtutis Insignia gestare,
and caetera peragere, quae ministro ex Officio incumbunt.

Bedello stipendium duodecim librarum a Thesaurario annuatim solvetur.

Volumus etiam, ut a singulis Candidatis and Permissis quatuor solidi quotannis
pro mercede ipsi erogentur; in omnibus praeterea admissionibus, and mulctis
quae viginti solidos excedunt; and Anatomiis, tres solidi and quatuor denarii
illi persolventur.

De Collegis admonendis ad Comitia.
STatuimus, ut Collegae omnes, qui in Urbe, aut Suburbiis fuerint, singulis
Comitiis majoribus, sive ordinariis, sive extraordinariis intersint; nisi grave
aliquod impedimentum obstiterit. Quod ad minores illas Congregationes attinet,
quae singulis mensibus, aliisque temporibus habentur; liberum erit caeteris
Collegis (praeter sex illos, quos postea in Cap. de Temporibus ordinariis
Comitiorum, nominabimus) vel adesse, vel abesse, pro arbitrio; nisi Praesidis
aut Pro-Praesidis monitu adesse jubeantur.

Quod si quis praemonitus per Bedellum ipsum, vel per Schedulam ab eo domi suae
relictam non accesserit; solvet in usus Collegii duos solidos nisi per
valetudinem excusatus fuerit, aut absuerit ab Urbe duobus ad minimum miliaribus.

Qui abfuerit a Comitiis eo die quo Praeses and Censores eligendi sunt, nisi
gravem ob causam a Praeside, aut Pro-Praeside, aut Consiliariis, and Censoribus
approbandam, solvet in usum Collegii tres solidos and quatuor denarios. Imo
solidum solvet, qui ante Auditam tertiam non accesserit.

Quoniam autem complures legitime a Praeside per Bedellum admoniti, Comitiis
praedictis interesse vel negligunt, vel aspernantur; quo fit ut saepe irriti
fiant Conventus; reliquique Socii, Praesidis monitis obtemperantes, frustra
negotia sua privata negligunt; propterea statuimus and ordinamus, ut, si quis
Socius praedicto modo admonitus, ad stata Comitia majora accedere recusaverit,
quaterque hoc pacto continuo deliquerit, nec interea temporis absentiae suae
causam Praesidi aut Pro-Praesidi cum Consiliariis and Censoribus approbandam
reddiderit; alius (quam primum) commodum videbitur Collegio) in ejusdem locum
sufficiatur.

Omnia Statuta in tres parts sive sectiones dividantur; prima pars ea omnia
comprehendet, quae pertin ent ad Electores, ad Praesidem, and Pro-Praesidem, ad
Consiliarios, ad Censores, ad Comitia, aliaque donec ventum sit ad Caput Nonum,
quod tractat de Officio Thesaurarii.

Secunda pars complectetur ea Statuta, quae pertinent ad Thesaurarium, and
Registrarium, ad numerum Sociorum and Candidatorum, ad eorundem Examinationes,
Electiones, and Admissiones ad Permissorum Ordinem, and Officia; and reliqua,
usque ad Caput Vicessimum secundum quod agit de Statutis Poenalibus sive
Moralibus.

Tertia pars continebit Statuta Poenalia sive Moralia, atque secundum hanc
triplicem Statutorum partitionem perlegantur in Comitiis majoribus omnibus
praeterquam die Comitiorum divi Michaelis, quo tempore Electiones Officiariorum
instituuntur.

Lectioni Statutorum intersint Socii, Candidati, and Permissi, quotquot adesse
poterunt.

Atque haec nostra Statuta ad praedictum modum perlegentur, vel ab ipso
Praesideaut Pro-Praeside (si ipsis placuerit) vel a Registrario, si adfuerit.
At si forte Registrarius, sive negotiis districtus, sive morbo detentus, sive
alia aliqua gravi causa impeditus, non adsuerit; tunc pro arbitrio Praesidis,
aut Pro-Praesidis, alius aliquis e Sociis pro illo tempore designetur, qui
illam Statutorum partem perlegat.

Cautum tamen interea volumus, atque provisum; ut, si graviora quaedam negotia
illis Comitiis pertractanda fuerint, Liberum sit Praesidi aut Pro-Praesidi, pro
arbitrio hanc Statutorum lectionem, pro tempore, vel penitus omittere, vel ejus
partem duntaxat aliquam legere, aut legendam praecipere.

CAP. VII. De Temporibus Ordinariis and Extraordinariis Comitiorum and reliquis
ad Comitiorum rationem pertinentibus.
ORdinata sive Stata Comitia ad quatuor anni Tempora aeque distantia
celebrenter.

Prima postridie Divi Michaelis si commode fieri potest, etc. ut supra dictum
est.

Secunda postridie Divi Thomae, si commode, etc.

Tertia postridie Dominicae Palmarum si commode, etc.

Quarta postridie Nativitatis Divi Johannis Baptistae si commode, etc.

Atque haec omnia sunt ordinaria sive stata Comitia, quae etiam solennia and
majora licebit appellare.

Ac praeter stata ista sive ordinaria licebit etiam Praesidi, alia quoque
solennia sive majora Comitia extraordinaria convocare pro necessitate aut
dignitate incidentis rei.

Atque in omnibus istis solennibus Comitiis, volumus ut duodecim ad minimum
Socii adsint praeter Praesidem aut Pro-Praesidem.

At si urgens aliqua necessitas, ut saevitia Pestis, etc. aut grave aliquod
negotium per principis mandatum expediendum inciderit; idque eo forte tempore,
quo tot Socii in Civitate non adfuerint tunc quidem necessitati parendum est,
talique casu res tota relinquenda est Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis prudentiae
and judicio, ut quot fuerint in Urbe, eos omnes per Bedellum admonendos curet,
ut intersint Comitiis atque in istis majoribus Comitiis, volumus ut ordinariae
fiant Electiones and Admissiones novorum Sociorum, Candidatorum, and
Permissorum.

Quod vero ad Sociorum, Candidatorum, and Permissorum, Examinationes attinet
eae recte peragi possunt, sive in majoribus istis Comitiis, sive etiam in aliis
minoribus Conventionibus pro Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis arbitrio.

In omnibus Comitiis, Praeses, aut Pro-Praeses, Conventus causam exponat; quid
singuli ordine dicant expectet, accipiatque Suffragia: nec quisquam discedat
nisi impetrata prius venia, antequam Praeses, aut Pro-Praeses Comitia disertis
hisce verbis dissolverit, Solvimus haec Comitia.

Sunt enim alia Comitia, quae minora dicuntur, qualia singulis Mensibus,
aliisque temporibus, pro ratione rerum and personarum habentur; prout occasio
aliqua subitanea postulaverit.

In his, admittendi in Collegium, examinantur; res item Agyrtarum and
Impostorum omniumque Medicinam male factitantium, a Praeside and Censoribus
executiuntur, ipsique pro merito puniuntur; aliaque id genus negotia tractantur.

In minoribus istis Comitiis non requirimus, ut tot adsint Socii, quot in
majoribus and solennibus requiruntur; suffecerit, si in his Dominus Praeses,
quatuor Censores, and Registrarius adfuerint.

Necesse autem est, ut omnes Censores intersint, secundum Statuta Regni, modo
legitime admoniti fuerint per Bedellum; quare ne reliqui frustra conveniant,
absentem Censorem december solidis mulctandum statuimus; nisi Praesidem antea de
absentiae suae causa certiorem fecerit.

Summa in omnibus Comitiis agendum est modestia summa gravitate, ne qua lis aut
convitium oriatur; turpe certe jurgium in privatis congressibus, sed
turpissimum in publicis: praesertim inter eos, qui ex bonis disciplinis
honestos mores hausisse judicantur.

Proinde nemo proponat aut dicat aliquid public in Collegio, nisi Capite
aperto, veniaque prius a Praeside impetrata: ad quem solum Oration dirigenda est.

Quod si plures simul loqui inceptent, cedat Junior seniori Unusquisque
breviter, and graviter, sine prolixa dicacitate loquatur; and Praesidis monitu
sileat.

Neminique liceat loquentem inturbare, nisi Praesidi aut Pro-Praesidi, aut
praesentium Censorum seniori cujus enim munus esto, quemlibet sui officii
admonere.

Unusquisque autem ad rem propositum semel tantum suoque ordine, sententiam
dicat; nisi iterum impetrata a Praeside venia.

Reliqui Socii attenti sint, nec privatis confabulationibus susurris,
strepituve, loquentem, vel auditores interturbent, and semper ad Praesidis
nutum fiat silentium: qui contra fecerit duobus solidis statim solvendis
plectetur.

In rebus dubiis, and magni momenti, elegantur delegati, pro Praesidis
arbitrio, qui rem undiquaque discutiant, referantque ad Collegium singulis
Comitiis, postquam Praeses Conventus causam exposuerit.

Registrarius quae novissimis acta Comitiis clara voce recenseat (ut expunctis
si quae fuerint emendanda) demum inscribantur Libro Annalium.

Suffragia colligenda nemo proponat, nisi Praeses aut Pro-Praeses.

In omnibus Electionibus tacit and occulte, per pisa aut fabas ferantur
Suffragia, in aliis Collegii negotiis, prout visum fuerit Praesidi aut
Pro-Praesidi.

CAP. VIII. De Statutis Condendis and Abrogandis, and de Mulctis Irrogandis.
STatuta pauca sanciantur, eaque vel Fide data vel Mulcta confirmentur.

Sit Mulcta levis, sed inevitabilis; minima Mulcta sit 12 denariorum.

Ad Statutum aliquod Condendum sufficient Comitia duo, sed ad Abrogandum non
nisi tria.

Statuimus and ordinamus ut omnes Mulctae, quae a Praeside aut Pro-Praeside,
and quatuor Censoribus; vel a majore part Sociorum, quomodocunque infliguntur,
cedant duntaxat in usum Collegii, non autem in ullius privati emolumentum;
exceptis tamen illis pecuniarum solutionibus quae per Statuta Collegii
Officiariis aliter conceduntur. Volumusque ut hae Mulctae illico solvantur, aut
saltem data hypotheca, qualem Praeses expetierit, sibi caveat de praesenti
paecunia.

CAP. IX. De Officio Thesaurarii.
COllegii redditus and Emolumenta quae Annuatim accrescunt Collegio, recipiet,
and in custodia sua tuto conservabit, in usum Collegii.

Collegii Utensilia, aliaque necessaria, quoties opus fuerit, procurabit.

Ejusdemque Bona, Libros, Suppellectilem, caeteraquae Ornamenta ad decus illius
pertinentia, quantum potuerit, tuto and decenter conservabit.

Si quid reparandum fuerit in Collegii Edisiciis, curabit ut id tempestive fiat.

Lites Collegii and Causas Juridicas ipse una cum Praeside and Censoribus
prosequetur.

Collegii Officiariis, sua cuique Salaria sive Stipendia, ex Statutis debita,
quatuor usitatis Anni temporibus persolvet.

Computi rationem bis quotannis Praesidi and Electoribus reddet, modo ad hoc
postulatus and praemonitus fuerit.

Intra mensem post festum Divi Michaelis, perfectum computi rationem, pro
integro elapso anno reddet; eo nempe die, quem Praeses ille assignaverit.

Totamque pecuniae summam quae tunc temporis supererit, caeteraque Collegii
Bona, Suppellectilem, Utensilia, quae in ipsius custodia fuerint, Praesidi and
Electoribus restituet.

Syngrapha Praesidi and Societati obligabitur, eodem die quo admittitur ad
Officium, ut Stipendia Collegii Officiariis debita, intra septimanam, post
plenam computi sui rationem pro illo anno redditam, fideliter solvat.

In reparandis Collegii Aedificiis, rebusque necessariis in usum Collegii
coemendis, non impendet ultra quadraginta solidos, sine Praesidis aut
Pro-Praesidis voluntate, and consensu.

Thesaurario pro Stipendio solventur annuatim ex Collegii redditibus
quadraginta solidi.

Statuimus praeterea and ordinamus, ut a singulis in Collegii Societatem
admissis, itemque a singulis, qui vel in Candidatorum ordinem, vel in
permissorum numerum admittentur, accipiat sex solidos and octo denarios,
tempore admissionis illorum.

Dabit Fidem se perfuncturum Officio suo fideliter secundum Statuta, omniaque
acturum in honorem and utilitatem Collegii; and computi rationem fideliter
redditurum monitu Praesidis.

CAP. X. De Registrario.
OFficium Registrarii hujusmodi esto, singulis Collegii Comitiis, sive
majoribus sive minoribus, legitime and tempestive admonitus per Collegii
Bedellum sive Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis ministrum, ipsemet coram adsit, sub
poena december Solidorum.

Quicquid ibi actum, ratum, and sancitum fuerit, consentientibus Praeside, and
Sociorum praesentium majori part (nisi sit res levioris momenti, and notatu
indigna) id omne fideliter adnotet and initio Comitiorum proxime sequentium
perlegat, ac postea (correctis si quae emendanda fuerint) in Librum Annalium
Collegii referat.

Sin autem per valetudinem, aut graviora negotia impeditus fuerit, quo minus
adesse possit; tunc ei licebit, Socium aliquem pro tempore substituere, qui and
absentia ejus causam Praesidi significet, and locum ipsius diligenter suppleat.

Formulas Literarum ad Collegium vel a Collegio scriptarum; and reliqua omnia
acta, Libro Annalium inserat.

Pro Annuo Stipendio, Registrario quotannis solventur ex Collegii redditibus,
Quadraginti solidi, eidem per aequales parts, quatuor usitatis hujus Regni
terminis, a Thesaurario annumerandi.

A singulis, qui vel ad praxin in Medicina permittuntur, vel in Candidatorum
Ordinem adsciscuntur, vel in Sociorum numerum admittuntur; ipso vel
Permissionis vel Admissionis tempore Registrario solventur Sex Solidi and octo
denarii, and Quinque insuper Solidi pro illorum Nominum inscriptione in Librum
Annalium.

Quotiescunque contigerit, aliquem ex Sententia Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis,
and Censorum, mulctari aliqua pecuniae summa notabili Collegio persolvenda, a
singulis ita punitis, Tres Solidi and quatuor denarii Registrario solventur.

Si quis, aliqua pecuniae summa in usum Collegii solvenda mulctatus, non simul
and semel totum mulctam solverit, sed solutionem imperatam, ad dies aliquot
distulerit, adeoque eam partitim solverit; singulis istis solutionibus sic
divisim factis, Tres Solidi and quatuor denarii Registrario persolventur;
quippe Officium ejus molestum onus judicamus.

Dabit Fidem se Officio suo debite perfuncturum, secundum Statuta, in honorem
and utilitatem Collegii omniaque fideliter Libro Annalium quae fuerint acta,
vel in majoribus, vel minoribus Comitiis sine fraud inscripturum.

CAP. XI. De Candidatis.
STatuimus and ordinamus, Ut numerus Candidatorum non excedat Duodecim:
Volumusque ut nemo admittatur in illorum Ordinem, qui non sit in Medicina
Doctor, and Natione Britannus, and Medicinam exercuerit per quadriennium.

Quod si Doctoratus gradum in extera aliqua Academia adeptus fuerit; Volumus,
Ut antequam admittatur ad examen, Diploma, sive Literas Testimoniales veras and
authenticas illius Academiae proferat, and ostendat Collegio; and praeterea, ab
alterutra nostrarum Academiarum incorporationis suae testimonium habeat, and
adducat.

Volumus praeterea and ordinamus, Ut singuli Candidati and Permissi antequam
admittantur, omnes Collegii Socios bis, gratiae impetrandae ergo conveniant;
nimirum primo ante examinationem ullam, secundo autem finito examinationum
curriculo.

Fides a Candidatis postulata.
DAbis Fidem, te observaturum Statuta Collegii; and pro viribus conaturum, ut
honos ejus sartus tectus conservetur, nec unquam consilium aut familiaritatem
inibis cum aliquo qui studet verbo vel facto Collegii statum labefactare; sed
in omnibus quae ad honorem and utilitatem Collegii spectant, consilio, open, and
auxilio juvabis.

Dabis etiam Fidem, te in omnibus licitis and honestis morigerum futurum Domino
Praesidi aut Pro-Praesidi, and Electoribus, Seniori in Collegio (secundum
Statuta) locum cedes, eundemque honor debito prosequeris.

Accedes ad Collegium, ex mandato Domini Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis, vel
Censorum; quoties fueris per Bedellum admonitus and accersitus.

Intereris fingulis Anatomiis, nisi gravi detinearis impedimento, approbando a
Praeside and Censoribus.

Nec prece, nec pretio, neque ulla alia causa, medicamenta quae abortum
faciunt, vel venena cujusvis generis, in pernitiem, aut malum usum dabis; nec
ea quempiam docebis, quem suspicaris velle illis abuti.

Neminem qui admissus est in Collegium, vel ignorantiae, vel maleficii nomine
accusabis, aut public contumeliis afficies.

Persequeris omnibus modis honestis, indoctos, Empericos, and Impostores,
eorumque nomina ad Praesidem aut Censores referes; nec te Empiricis, aliisque
per Collegium non licentiatis familiarem reddes; neque eorum Conventiones ad
Collegii detrimentum vel infamum ullo modo frequentabis.

Secreta Collegii nemini extra Collegium divulgabis.

Dabis fidem, te neque Literis a Magnatibus, nec pretio, nec ullo alio modo
illicito, Collegii Societatem, ambire; omniaque in art Medica pro viribus
facturum, ad honorem Collegii and Reipublicae utilitatem.

Statuimus and ordinamus, Ut Permissi sive Licentiati, itemque Candidati,
Statuta and Decreta nostra diligenter observent, Praesidi, Electoribus, and
Censoribus morem gerant; Mulctaque, ab iis, ob delicta inflictos prompte,
persolvant.

Praeterea non recusabunt, Medicamenta illa sua, quae Secreta sive Arcana
appellant, solentque in sua praxi usurpare plane and nude exponere, quoties a
Praeside and Censoribus ad id faciendum requiruntur; qui pertinaciter contra
fecerit, pro arbitrio Praesidis and Censorum poenas lucet.

Unusquisque Candidatus solvet tempore admissionis suae quatuor libras in usum
Collegii, and december solidos in proprios usus Praesidis, Thesaurario vero sex
solidos and octo denarios; itemque Registrario, pro debito Salario, sex solidos
and octo denarios, eidemque insuper quinque alios solidos, pro insertione
Nominis in Librum Annalium; praeterea Bedello Collegii tres solidos and quatuor
denarios.

Quoniam multi huc confluunt quotidie ad exercendam praxin, e quorum numero
complures sunt, qui ante debitum tempus ex Academiis suis emigrantes, ad
transmarinas oras volitant, ut in exteris regionibus breviori spatio, and
minori impendio ad Doctoratus gradum perreptent, quam domi in Academiis nostris
assequi poterant.

Idcirco statuimus, Ut quicunque vel in Collegii Societatem, vel in
Candidatorum Ordinem, vel in Permissorum numerum admittetur, si Doctoratus
gradum apud exteros susceperit: Is admissionis tempore, duplo plus solvat
Collegio, Praesidi, Thesaurario, Registrario, aliisque Collegii Officiariis,
quam illi solvere solent, qui in nostris Academiis Doctores creantur. Item,
quicunque Doctor creatus fuerit in nostris Academiis, si tamen testinantius ad
gradum illum subvolando, quam par est tempus illi dignitati debitum
anticipaverit, id est, si Doctor fiat prius, quam vel in artibus integros
septem annos rexerit, vel tam diu Baccalaures in Medicina praeextiterit; is
duplo plus solvet Collegio, Praesidi, caeterisque praedictis Collegii
Officiariis, quam illi solent, qui secundum laudabiles leges and consuetudines
nostrarum Academiarum, tempore praefinito, and maturiori cum judicio, ad
Doctoratus gradum ascenderunt.

Volumus, Ut omnes Candidati, and Permissi, a Bedello admoniti, singulis
nostris Comitiis intersint; ut si quos cognoverint illicite and inscienter
praxin exercentes, eorum nomina Praefidi, and Censoribus significent; tum etiam
ut Statutorum praelectionem audiant.

Solvant etiam, si occasio fuerit, and necessitas Collegii postulet, ut Socii;
modo ad id requirantur.

Exacto anno, Candidati Praesidem ejus rei moneant, rogentque ut in Sociorum
numerum adsciscantur, si modo id commode fieri potest, salvis Collegii Statutis.

CAP. XII. De Sociis.
STatuimus and ordinamus, Ut numerus Sociorum, non excedat triginta; volumusque
ultra hunc certum and determinatum numerum Regis, Reginae, and Principis
Medicos ordinarios tanquam Medicos Honorarios Supernumerari and admitti.

Volumus praeterea, Ut nemo admittatur in Collegii Societatem, qui non prius
fuit per annum integrum de Candidatorum numero, aut public in aliqua
Britanniae Academia Medicinam per triennium perlegerit, aut Doctor Cathedrae,
ut aiunt, in aliqua hujus regni Academia prae-extiterit, aut Regius Medicus
fuerit ordinarius.

Singuli Socii tempore admissionis suae solvent Collegio, Praesidi,
Thesaurario, Registrario, and Bedello, prout de Candidatis antea Statutum est;
omnes item solutiones duplicabunt, conditionibus iis, quae supra dictae sunt.

Statuimus etiam, Ut omnes Socii tempore admissionis, Literas habeant Patentes
Sigillo Collegii munitas; and hac data fide obstringantur.

ADniteris pro viribus, ut Status Collegii perpetuetur, Statuta Collegii
observabis, Parebis Praesidi in iis quae ad honorem and perpetuitatem Collegii
spectant.

Non dabis quae abortum faciant, aut conceptum adimant, vel impediant, nec
venena in malum finem; imo vero ea ne docebis quidem ubi aliqua doli mali
suspitio est.

Neminem decernes in Collegium cooptandum, nisi quem seposito omni affectu,
judicaveris scientia and moribus idoneum.

Leges diligenter intra annum, quinque primos Libros Galeni, de simplici
Medicina, and omnes de usu partium.

Persequeris omnibus modis honestis, indoctos, Empericos and Impostores,
eorumque nomina Praesidi, aut Pro-Praesidi, vel Censoribus deferes.

Dabis etiam fidem te Medicinam exercuisse per quadriennium, aut legisse
public in aliqua Academia.

Item dabis fidem, te Statutum de publica corporis humani diffectione, summa
diligentia, quandocunque a Praeside aut Pro-Praeside, admonitus fueris
observaturum.

Dices denique vere and bona fide, quaenam sit patria tua.

Literae Admissionis.
SCiant omnes, Nos J. C. Medicinae Doctorem and Praesidem Collegii Medicorum
Londinensium, una cum consensu Sociorum ejusdem, authoritate nobis a Domino
Rege and Parliamento concessa, examinasse, approbasse and in Collegium nostrum
co-optasse doctum and probum virum R. M. Cantuariensem in Florentissima
Academia (Cantabrigiensi vel Oxoniensi) Medicinae Doctorem; eique concessisse
Liberam Facultatem and Licentiam exercendi Scientiam and Artem Medicam juxta
formam Statutorum ad hoc Editorum largitosque praeterea usum ac fructum omnium
commoditatum Libertatum, ac Privilegiorum, quae Collegio nostro authoritate
praedicta and jam concessa sunt, and in futurum concedenda.

In cujus rei fidem and testimonium Sigillum nostrum commune praesentibus
apponi fecimus. Datum Londini, in Collegio nostro septimo die Maii Anno Domini
1647.

* Si Collegarum quispiam se Religioni, aut Sacerdotio mancipaverit, postquam
in Collegium co-optatus fuerit ne vocetur ad Collegium, ne videamur ad
Medicinae usum revocare eum, quem Religio and Lex Ecclesiastica a Medicinae
functione ablegavit.

* Neve honestum putemus Clerico, inter caetera, tractare res, morbosque
muliebres.

* Quod si Clericorum aut Religiosorum quispiam, admitti cupit in Collegium,
aut permitti ad praxin, multo minus assumatur, propter easdem causas.

Si Collegarum quispiam se sacerdotio addixerit postquam in Collegium
co-optatus fuerit, nolumus eum denuo vocari ad Collegium.

Quod si quispiam Clericus aut Sacris initiatus, admitti cupit in Collegium,
aut permitti ad praxin multo minus id illi concedetur.

Statuimus and ordinamus, Ut si quis criminis alicujus gravioris ac publici
reus, aut vitio aliquo insigni infamis fuerit, ablegetur a Collegio; ne si
retineremus talem, videremur aut virtutem contemnere, aut eodem morbo laborare;
ne autem talis Collega non existens, admittatur in Collegium, and aliis
Statutis prohibitum est, and his prohibemus.

CAP. XIII. Literae Testimoniales Practicantium per Vniversum Angliae Regnum.
SCiant omnes, Nos A. B. Medecinae Doctorem and Praesidem Collegii Medicorum
Londinensium, una cum consensu E. P. B. H. and R. M. praedicti Collegii
Sociorum and Electorum, Authoritate nobis a Domino Rege and Parliamento
concessa, examinasse and approbasse 17 die Aug. Anno Domini 1667, probum virum
T. W. ex Comitatu B. in Florentissima Academia Oxoniensi vel Cantabrigiensi,
Magistrum Artium and in Civitate Eboracensi been in praxi Medica exercitatum
eumque dignum judicamus, qui admittatur ad praxin Medicinae, juxta formam
Statutorum ad hoc editorum;

in cujus rei testimonium Sigillum nostrum Commune apposuimus, and nomina
adscripsimus. Datum Londini in Collegio nostro die, and mense, etc.
Si quis a Praeside and tribus Electoribus, modo praedicto idoneus ad praxin
judicabitur, is Nomen suum Registrario indicabit ut in Libro Annalium
inscribatur.

CAP. XIV. De Coercendis Empiricis.
CUm magna sit imperitorum turba qui Rempublicam affligunt, nobisque ex
Prescripto Regis and Parliamenti incumbit ut populi saluti and securitati
consulamus; statuimus and ordinamus in commodiorem talium extirpationem, ut
quos indoctos and inhonestos esse reipsa comprobaverimus, non solum mulcta and
carcere puniamus, sed etiam Senatores and Pro-Senatores cujuslibet Urbis,
Provinciae, sive Custodiae, ubi tales Impostores habitant certiores per literas
nostras faciamus, eos indignos Medicorum nomine censendos, proindeque
tractandos ut caeteros Cives.

Forma autem Literarum talis esto sed Lingua vernacula.

Forma Literarum ad Senatores.
VOs certiores facimus egregii viri H. M. vestrae Provinciae, Empiricum in vico
S. Morantem, esse virum indoctum and imperitum Medicinae, nostrique nequaquam
esse Collegii, quamobrem vobis licet pro jure vestro, eum aliosque omnes qui
Literas Testimoniales Sigillo nostro munitas non habent, ad omnibus urbis
vestrae idoneis Officiis fungendum, co-optare and eligere, cogereque caetera
agere and praestare, quae authoritati vestrae imperari conceditur.

Haec in eum finem scripsimus, ne sub Medicinae nomine and praetextu,
Privilegia fallant, insubidi isti plebis Impostores.

Datum e Collegio nostro, etc.
CAP. XV. De Permissis sive Licentiatis ad Praxin.
QUoniam complures, in hac Civitate Medicinam faciunt, quos inidoneos omnino
censemus, ut in numerum Sociorum aut Candidatorum adoptentur, vel quod natione
non sint Britanni, vel Doctoratus gradum non adepti fuerint, vel non satis
docti, aut aetate and gravitate provecti sint, vel alias consimiles ob causas,
and tamen Reipublicae inservire and saluti hominum prodesse possint, saltem in
nonnullis curationibus.

De his ordinamus and statuimus, Ut post examinationes debitas and
approbationem Praesidis and Censorum permittantur ad praxin, quamdiu se been
gesserint.

Volumus ut omnes qui solummodo permittuntur ad praxin, eadem side qua
Candidati obstringantur.

Praeses igitur tempore admissionis his verbis utetur, Ego. J. C. Praeses
Collegii Medicorum Londinensium, authoritate per Leges mihi concessa, permitto
te A. B. ad praxin Medicinae in Civitate Londini, and per septem circum circa
milliaria, quamdiu te been gesseris, Statuta Collegii observaveris, and
folutiones debitas praestiteris, ita facienti precor omnia fausta.

Volumus ut permissi sive Licentiati folutiones omnes usitatas praestent
Collegio, Praesidi Thesaurario, Registrario and Bedello, quas modo Candidatis
praestandas assignavimus.

Volumus praeterea, ut primo Permissionis anno solvant Collegio sex libras,
nisi ob causas a Praeside and Censoribus approbandas mitius cum iis agere
aequum censebitur, solvent utcunque quatuor ad minimum libras; fequentibus
autem annis quam diu permissi fuerint solvent in usum Collegii quadraginta
solidos.

Statuimus and ordinamus, Ut nemo ad praxin Medicinae admittatur intra Urbem,
Suburbia, septem circum circa milliaria, nisi prius ter (totidem diebus ad id
constitutis) examinatus fuerit a Praeside and Censoribus, and ab iisdem
approbatus; and ad Medicinae praxin permissus fuerit.

Quod si quis intra spatium sive ambitum praedictum facultatem Medicinae
exercuerit, nec tamen se examinandum Praesidi and Censoribus ultro obtulerit;
is primo admoneatur per Bedellum idque Praesidis nomine, ut omnino a Medicinae
praxi abstineat, donec Praesidis and Collegii approbationem obtinuerit, utque
stato and praefixo tempore se coram Praeside and Censoribus sistat, eorum
examinationem atque approbationem exspectaturus.

Bedellus autem admonitionis Schedulam vel ipsi, in manus tradat, vel domi
illius relinquet, in haec verba;

NOs Praeses and Censores, Collegii Medicorum Londinensium, te admonitum
volumus ut 10 die Junii coram nobis in propria tua persona compareas, idque
post meridiem inter secundam and tertiam horam ejusdem diei, in Aedibus
Collegii; ibidem responsurus ad ea quae tibi de Art Medicinae ejusdemque praxi
objicientur.

Datum a Collegio 10 die Junii Anno Domiui 1647.
Quod si praedicto modo admonitus, non comparuerit pro Refractario habendum and
fecundum Regni Statuta plectendum censemus.

Cum autem nullo modo (nisi examinatione prius habita) nobis constare possit,
quam sit quilibet idoneus ut secundum Regni Leges ad Medicinae praxin
admittatur.

Statuimus etiam and ordinamus, Ut siquis Medicinam Londini, aut intra limits
praedictos exercens, Praesidis jussu ad examen vocatus, comparuerit quidem, sed
ille tamen Praesidi and Censoribus respondere, and scientiae suae in Medicina
facienda experientiaeque rationem reddere recusaverit, pro ignaro and
refractario habeatar; atque ob praxin ita institutam a Praeside and Censoribus,
secundum Regni Statuta puniatur.

Statuimus etiam and ordinamus, Ut siquis a Praeside and Censoribus examinatus,
eorum judicio non satis peritus aut idoneus censebitur, qui ad Medicinae praxin
admittatur, is statim ab iisdem praxi interdicatur.

Quod si post hujusmodi prohibitionem, Medicinae tamen Facultatem exercuerit
vel cuipiam Medicamentum aliquod intra eandem Civitatem vel circuitum
praedictum exhibuerit, prout Regni Statutis cautum est, puniatur.

Aequum autem censemus, Ut Censores and Socii examinatos omnes, quotquot tam
doctrina quam moribus idoneos repererint, ad Medecinae praxin admittant, ne
Collegium nostrum Monopolii accusetur; modo tamen Statutis Collegii morem
gesserint.

CAP. XVI. Forma Examinationum Sociorum and Candidatorum eorundemque
Admissionis.
ANtequam quispiam vel in Sociorum vel Candidatorum Ordinem admittatur, ter
examinetur in legitimis Comitiis, sive majoribus sive minoribus, pro arbitrio
Praesidis and Censorum, ut antea dictum and ordinatum est in Capite de Comitiis.

Forma autem Examinationis hujusmodi esto,

PRimo, Examinetur in Part Physiologica, ipsisque Medicinae Rudimentis; atque
in hac Examinatione proponantur Quaestiones ex Libris de Elementis, de
Temperamentis, de Usu Partium, de Rebus Anatomicis, de Naturalibus Potentiis
and Facultatibus, and de caeteris Naturalis Medecinae Partibus.

Secundo, Examinetur in Part Pathologica, sive de Causis Morborum,
Differentiis, Symptomatibus, and Signis, quibus utuntur Medici ad Essentiam
Morborum cognoscendam; atque in hac Examinatione proponantur Quaestiones ex
Libris de Art Medicinali, de Locis affectis, de Morborum and Symptomatum
Differentiis, de Febribus, de Pulsibus, de Libris Prognosticorum Hyppocratis,
etc.

Tertio, Examinetur de Usu, Exercitioque Medicinae, sive Medendi Ratione; idque
fiat ex Libris de Sanitate Tuenda, de Methodo Medendi, de Ratione Victus in
Morbis Acutis, de Simplici Medecina, de Crisibus, de Aphorismis Hyppocratis and
id genus aliis quae ad Medendi usum spectant; Ex. gr. Quae Cautio observanda
sit in Purgando? quaenam in Sectione Venae? nempe quo Tempore? quo Morbo? in
qua Persona? quali Medicamine? in qua Vena ista fieri debeant? Similiter quis
sit usus Narcoticorum and Soporiferorum? and quae Cautio in illis Observanda?
Quis sit Locorum internorum positio? Sive situs and quibus Viis pertingant ad
ea Medicamenta? Quis sit Clysterum? quis Vomitionum Usus, periculum, genus, and
mensura?

Omnes has examinationes fieri volumus a Praeside and Censoribus, licebit tamen
cuilibet Socio disputare, pro arbitrio and periculum facere, quantum in re
Medica valeat.

In istis autem Examinationibus cupimus, ut Socii candide se gerant, and suavi
quodam sermonis temperamento utantur; nequaquam morosos, se praebeant, aut
difficiles in disputando.

Si Doctoris gradum in aliqua nostrarum Academiarum susceperit, honoris causa
sedeat decenter examinandus; ne quid indignum pati a nostra Examinationum forma
Matter Academia videatur.

Qui ad hunc modum examinatus fuerit, si se virum doctum praestiterit, moresque
etiam honestos and amabiles habuerit (de quibus insignem curam haberi cupimus)
admittatur per majorem partem Sociorum praesentium; modo non pauciores istis
Comitiis adfuerint, quam duodecim praeter Praesidem and Pro-Praesidem.

Formula Admissionis talis esto.
ADmittendus flexis genibus, manus invicem applicatas humiliter tradat in manus
Praesidis, qui dicat, Ego J. C. Praeses hujus Collegii admitto te A. B. in
Societatem nostri Collegii (vel in Ordinem Candidatorum, vel in numerum
Permissorum) quibus peractis si Socius fuerit, singulis Sociis praesentibus
exhibita manu gratias agat.

Quod si constet eum qui examinandus est, in aliqua e nostris Academiis per
triennium fuisse Publicum Medicinae Praelectorem Regium and Doctorem Cathedrae,
ut aiunt, vel ob singularem scientiae famam ad aulam vocatum, atque Regis aut
Reginae Medicum esse; non erit necesse ut examinetur, sed pro arbitrio
Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis, and majoris partis Sociorum praesentium, potest
admitti absque ulla disputandi Ceremonia.

Quicunque, vel Censor vel Socius, Quaestiones proponit in examinationibus,
detecto sit capite, perinde ac Doctor ille qui istic ut examinetur accessit.

CAP. XVII. De Loco and Dignitate Praesidis and omnium Sociorum.
PRaesidis locus primus esto, ut and dignitas prima, non solum in Collegio, sed
in aliis omnibus locis.

Medicorum Regiorum ordinariorum qui assignatum Stipendium, Literasque Patentes
sub Magno Regni Sigillo habuerint, locos and honos proxime post Praesidem esto.

Unicuique locus esto, pro senioritate, ita ut seniores junioribus, non modo in
Collegio, sed and extra illud ubique praeferantur.

Senioritatem autem vocamus, non quam aetas aut dignitas, aut ubicunque
suscepti gradus tempus fecere, sed quam admissio in Collegium.

CAP. XVIII. De Anatomica Administratione, and De Lectura Chirurgiae.
STatuimus and ordinamus, Ut singuli Socii Admissionis tempore fidem dent, se
Corpus Humanum public Collegii sumptu Anatomice administraturos, eo anno quem
Praeses indixerit, idque vel in Collegio, vel alio loco judicio Praesidis and
Electorum assignando; potissimum fi quis Anatomices peritus iis videbitur.

Quod si quis onus impositum recusaverit, atque ipsemet ad eam rem minus
idoneus illorum judicio habeatur, solvet quatuor libras in usum Collegii; sin
autem munere hoc debito defungi pervicaciter negaverit is pro libito Praesidis
and majoris partis Sociorum praesentium mulctabitur; modo tamen poena haec
Viginti libras non excesserit.

Statuimus etiam and ordinamus, Ut nullus Socius aut alius Collega, alibi quam
in Collegio aut loco a Praeside and Electoribus assignato public Corporis
Humani administrationem suscipiat aut profiteatur, sub poena quatuor librarum,
nisi locus ille ab Urbe septem ad minimum miliaribus abfuerit.

Volumus tamen, Ut integrum sit cuilibet Collegae public Anatomiam exercere in
Aula Chyrurgorum dummodo Communitatis Chyrurgorum Magister, and Domini
Guardiani veniam illi prius impetraverint a Praeside aut Pro-Praeside; quippe
aequum and rationi consentaneum arbitramur, ut qui per Collegam aliquem
prosicunt, ii Collegio ipsi aliquod g^atianmi officium praest^nt.

Statuimus praeterea, Ut omnes Socii and Candidati singulis publicis Anatomicis
dissectionibus in Collegio factis intersint toga and pileo decenter vestiti,
pro honor Collegii and Artis.

Qui contra fecerit, tribus solidis and quatuor denariis plectetur.

Ut Lectura in Chyrurgia, crebiori idoneorum Auditorum turba melius
frequentetur; idcirco volumus and statuimus, ut omnes Candidati, omnes etiam
permissi ad practicandum in hac Civitate Lecturam in Chirurgia diligenter
audire teneantur. Qui secus fecerit, and in hac re negligentius se gesserit, is
toties quoties absens fuerit, pro absentia sua, singulis vicibus solvet
Collegio duodecim denarios; quam pecuniae summam qui in manibus suis
detinuerint and Officiario Collegii ad came rem deputato solvere recusaverit
intra octo dies post finem illius termini, in quo propter absentias suas prius
debebatur, tunc volumus ut illa mulcta duodecim denariorum augeatur ad duos
solidos sexque denarios, toties quoties delictum fuerit.

Volumus insuper, Ut postquam totos quinque Annos hanc Lecturam attentius
audiverint, tunc Liberum sit iis deinceps ut suo utantur, hac in re, arbitrio
non enim a nobis requiritur ut longius illius Lecturae sint Auditores post
quinquennium in eo studio diligenter collocatum.

Concedimus praetereant liberum sit unicuique pro arbitrio ter abesle impune in
unoquoque Termino, and quod mulcta absentium toties quoties cedat in usum
Praelectoris pro tempore existentis, and quod statutum sit, ut debita fiat
istorum omnium persolutio, antequam admitti possit in Collegium: iniquum enim
censemus Praelectorem nostrum frustra Auditores expectando oleum and operam
perdere, praeter honorem Artis and dignitatem Collegii.

CAP. XIX. De Ornatu and Vestitu Medicorum
STatuimus, juxta Hyppocratis consilium, Ut Socii omnes Vestitu decoro
amiciantur, quoties ad Collegium accedunt aut in publicum prodeunt ne Artis
praestantia and dignitas, ob immunditiem, male apud vulgus audiat and
contemptui habeatur.

Quare statuimus and ordinamus, Ut Praeses, Pro-Praeses, Electores, Censores,
reliquique omnes Socii in omnibus Comitiis majoribus Collega^^m Conviviis,
Funeribus, and Ana^o^^^s Administrationibus, Toga re^iqu^que Vestitu decenti
induantur sub poena quinque solidorum Collegio solvendorum quoties deliquerint.

CAP. XX. De Exequiis.
SI ex Collegis quempiam mori contigerit (nisi Peste obierit) unusquisque
Collega per Bedellum legitime praemonitus funus suo Ordine sequi, and Exequiis
reliquisque Divinis Officiis interesse tenebitur, sub poena trium solidorum,
and quatuor denariorum Collegii usibus solvendorum.

Volumus praeterea, in honorem Collegii, ut Praesidi sedile in Templo, tapete
sive auleo, and pulvinari decenti ornetur tantisper dum Funebria Officia
aliaeque Divinae Solennitates celebrantur.

CAP. XXI. De Conviviis.
QUoniam ex honestis Conventibus mutuus amor alitur, atque animi studiosorum
recreantur, Volumus, Ut omnes qui in Collegii Societatem admissi fuerint,
Praesidem and Socios omnes in Urbe praesentes, frugali, honesto, ac sufficienti
Convivio excipiant; idque tempore a Praeside prius indicto.

Indicat autem ipsorum Comitiorum ordinariorum sive majorum die aut quo die
visum fuerit ex quindecem proxime insequentibus Festum Divi Michaelis,
Nativitatis Domini, Paschatis, aut Nativitatis Divi Johannis Baptistae.

Peracto Convivio licebit eodem in loco, exclusis alienis Arbitris, Comitia
celebrare and Collegii negotia tractare, si res id postulaverit, and necessum
Praeses and Consiliarii judicaverint.

Si autem aliquando contigerit, ut is, cujus est Convivium apparare, id commode
praestare nequeat; ac propterea ob justam aliquam and honestam causam, a
Praeside and majori Societatis part approbatam petierit a Societate ut benign
legibus his solvatur, illoque onere liberetur, rem totam Praesidis and
Societatis prudentia moderandam relinquimus.

Quicunque tamen Collega gratiam hanc obtinuerit, ut a Convivio adornando
immunis sit, solvet nihilominus Collegii usibus december aut viginti libras, prout
aequum videbitur Praesidi, and majori parti Sociorum.

CAP. XXII. De Conversatione Morali and Statutis Poenalibus.
SI quae lis aut controversia ex ordine, gravitate, and modestia (quae in
Comitiis observari praescripsimus) parum observatis, oriatur; arbitrio
Praesidis aut Pro-Praesidis, and Censorum, quicunque deliquerit, puniatur.

At si Praeses, contra Statuta quid admiserit, admoneatur quidem per
Consiliarios coram Sociis in Comitiis, non puniatur tamen, nisi ob grave
aliquod crimen (quale est peculatus, sive dissipatio bonorum Collegii and
similia) tale judicatum per majorem partem Sociorum praesentium; inter quos
volumus ut quatuor sint ex Electoribus, qui una cum reliquis super ea re
sententiam ferant.

Tantum tribuimus Praesidis honori and authoritati.

Ne quis revelet aut propalet quidquam alicujus momenti quod in Collegio dictum
sit, sub poena December solidorum.

Nullus Collega alterum vel ignorantiae vel male praxis vel alicujus sceleris,
aut ignominiosi criminis nomine accusabit, vel public contumeliis afficiet.

Si quem contra fecisse Praesidi and Censoribus innotuerit, prima vice solvet
in Collegii usum Quatuor libras.

Secundo duplicabitur Mulcta, quod si tertio quis similiter offenderit,
expelletur e Collegio; nec denuo restituetur, priusquam Collegio December libras
solverit.

Nullus Medicus, qui secundus ad aegrum vocabitur priorem Medicum repelli
faciet, nec quicquam prius innovabit (nisi res urgeat) quam illum convenerit,
and ne quis fraudi locus sit; quicunque ad aegrum accersitur, ab illo vel
astantibus, an quis Medicamentum aliquod praescripserit, percunctabitur: Sub
poena Vigenti Solidorum.

Postea tamen ex aegri sententia, vel solus illi Medebitur, vel cum priori
Medico, aut alio aliquo rem Administrabit.

Dabit tamen operam, quantum poterit, ut priorem secum in Praxi retineat.

Quod si aegroti, vel Amicorum consensu id fieri nequeat priorem tamen, Medicum
nullo modo vituperabit; nec Vultu, Gestu, Suspicioso Silentio, vell ullo alio
modo, illius Acta apud aegrum, vel astantes traducet sed eum laudabit potius;
neque id dolose, Honestatis and Probitatis Nomine, sed (quod ad rem maxim
attinet) periti and Intelligentis Medici: Memor semper, ut alterius famam apud
alios co loco habeat, quo suam mutatis vicibus esse cuperet. Nempe ad Artis,
quam Profitetur, Honorem and Dignitatem.

Consultandi Formula.
SI plures, curationis gratia, Convenerint, de Condition aegri deliberaturi
consultandum est summa modestia, and non nisi seclusis Arbitris alienis, Latin
autem res transigatur; alioquin mulcta esto quinque Solidorum in usum Collegii.

Tunc Primum sedulo inquirendum in Morbi Speciem, Causam, and Symptomata.
Deinde Remedia proponenda, ad Morbum Profligandum, and Symptomata Mitiganda
maxim Convenientia.

Incipiat Junior Medicus, Concludat Senior.

At si Senior aliquis primo accersitus fuerit, enarret ille primum rem totam
reliquis; nempe quid egerit, and quo successu: Dein fiat ut dictum est.

Si saepius ad eundum aegrum visendum convenerint, nemo quidquem praescribat,
imo ne innuat quidem quid agendum sit, coram aegro, vel astantibus; priusquam
conjunctis Consiliis privatim inter ipsos Medicos conclusum fuerit: Ne quis
ambitiose nimium videatur praxin praeoccupare, and reliquis liberam
praescribendi ansam praeripere; nisi subita and urgente aliqua occasion (eaque
approbanda a Praeside and Censoribus) coactus fuerit solus praescribere.

Si Medici in Diversas eant sententias, ita ut in eandem praxin inter se
consentire nequeant, summa tamen prudentia and moderatione sic se gerant, ut
eorum discordia in Artis praejudicium non cedat; nec aliis, si fieri possit,
innotescat.

Si duo tantum Medici fuerint; Junior cedat Seniori; vel tertiam advocent, cui
res referatur: Si plures vincat pars major: Si Dissidentes numero pares fuerint
concludatur cum majori part Seniorum. Sic honori and dignitati Artis
providebitur; quae alioquin per Medicorum discordium facile contemptui
habebitur, qui contra secerit, mulctabitur Quadraginta Solidis.

Ne qua lis aut Controversia inter Medicos, propter Officiosas Visitationes,
Praeoccupationes, and Insinuationes, oriatur.

Statuimus and Ordinamus, ut cum ad Medicum quemlibet alii Medici consultandi
gratia advocati fuerint; ac secundum formulam a nobis praescriptam, de Morbo
and Remediis inter eos convenerit: Senior Medicus, aut alius aliquis, referat
aegro, aut astantibus, quae Approbata and Praescripta communi consensu fuerint,
eorundemque Executionem caeteri Ordinario Medico relinquant; nec denuo
Visitabunt aegrum, nisi a Medico Ordinario, aut ab aegro, ut id faciunt
express rogati fuerint.

Nullus Medicus, sive Socius, sive Candidatus, sive Permissus Consilium ineat
cum Empirico, aut rejecto a Collegio, and a Medicinae praxi prohibito, aut alio
aliquo sine Admissione aut Permissione Medicinam exercente nisi urgente aliqua
Causa, a Praeside aut Pro-Praeside, and Censoribus, aut majori part illorum
approbanda; sub poena Quadraginta Solidorum.

Quilibet Medicus contentus esto honesta, pro condition aegri, and laboris
sui, mercede.

Nemo paciscetur cum aegro, ut alio quovis aegri nomine de praetio sanitatis
restituendae.

Verum si quis aegros susceperit curandos, qui sibi aliter satisfactum non
putabunt nisi pactionem ineant cum Medico: Aut in eos incidat, qui facultatum
suarum, aut honoris nulla habita ratione Parce nimis and illiberaliter agunt
cum Medicis; cum tallibus licebit pacisci. Reservata tamen potestate Domino
Praesidi, and Censoribus, atque in little absentia, quatuor ex Electoribus, pro
ipsorum prudentia corrigere, si quid iniquius pactum sit, and immutare.

Ne quis doceat Populum Medicamenta, aut horum nomina illi indicet; (praesertim
si fuerint Medicamenta Vehementioria, veluti Purgantia, Opiata, vel Narcotica,
abortum facientia, Vomitoria, aut quidquam aliud majoris momenti ac periculi)
ne abusu eorum laedatur Populus: sub poena quadraginta solidorum, quoties
offenderit.

Qui paciscitur cum Pharmacopolis, de aliqua pretii part ex Medicamentis
Praescribendis percipienda; mulctabitur quadraginta solidis quoties ita
deliquerit.

Nullus Socius, Candidatus, aut Permissus, eorum Pharmacopolarum opera utetur;
qui aut ipsi Medicinam exercent, aut iis Medicis crebro inserviunt, qui
Examinati and Approbati non sunt secundum Statuta hujus Regni: Sub poena December
Solidorum quoties offenderit, Collegio solvendorum; modo ea de re a Praeside,
aut Pro-Praeside, and Censoribus praemonitus fuerit.

Nemo mulctam, sibi pro dilicto secundum Statuta inflictam, solvere recufabit;
sub poena violatae Fidei Collegio praestitae.

Quoniam Pharmacopolae, and Chirurgi, praecipue Chyrurgi, saepe ad Medicos
Urinas aegrotantium deferunt, petuntque ut ab Urinarum Inspectione aliquid
aegris suis prescribant; ac deinde, sub hoc Consultationis praetextu, reliquam
Curationis telam ipsimet pro Arbitrio pertexunt; quicquid inde quaestus sive
lucri est id omne sibi arripientes, Medicis vero nihil praeter exilem illam and
jejunam Urinarum spectandarum mercedem afferentes.

Idcirco Statuimus and Ordinamus, Ut nemo, sive Socius, sive Candidatus, sive
Permissus, Consilii quidquam impertiat istiusmodi veteratoriis, Impostoribus
super Urinarum nuda Inspectione, nisi simul ad aegrum vocetur; ut ibidem pro re
nata, idonea Medicamenta, ab honesto aliquo Phamacopola componenda, praescribat.

Volumus praeterea; ut singulis Schaedulis; sive Receptis (ut vocant) diem
Mensis, and nomen Aegri, suumque quisque adscribat.

Ridiculum quidem est and insulsum, ex Urinarum solummodo Inspectione, sive de
Morbi Genere and Natura, sive de Aegrotantis Statu ac Condition, Aruspicum and
conjectorum more, velle quidquem certi, solidique divinare.

Monemus igitur omnes Medicos, ut hac in re Multo cautius in posterum se
gerant, quam antehac a plerisque factitare solitum, and hanc ob causam, omnibus
Medicinam exercentibus interdictum volumus, ne Idiotis istis and Mulierculis
Aegrotantium matulas circumferentibus, aliquod Medicamentum praescribant; nisi
aut ipsum aegrum prius recte noverint, aut saltem ab iis, qui consilium petunt,
de Morbo, ejusque circumstantiis, and plane and plene instructi fuerint.

Quippe hac ratione, and dignitatem Medicinae melius tuebimur, and multo aptius
certiusque Remedia pericilitantibus profutura excogitabimus.

Denique Statuimus and Ordinamus; Ut, quicunque admittuntur in Societatem
Collegii, subscriptis nominibus polliceantur se Statuta omnia praedicta
diligenter observaturos; aut Mulctas, contra facientibus inflictas, non invito
animo persoluturos.

Si ad hanc normam, Collegium prudenti consilio Praesidis, Electorum and
Censorum gubernetur; debito and obedienti caeterorum officio honestetur and
exterminatis indoctis, profligatisque odiosis Impostoribus, scientia decoretur,
certissimum est, and florentissimum futurum hoc nostrum Collegium in perpetuum,
and universae etiam Reipublicae (quantum nostra officia attinet) recte
provideque consultum iri.

Quare per Fidem illam Collegio datam, Socios omnes hortamur, and obtestamur;
ut quoquoversum diligenter prospiciant, and providenter agant; nec quemquam
respectu personarum habito, admittant in Societatem Collegii: sed ad Laudem,
Decus, Honorem and Perpetuitatem Societatis, omnia decernant; quoniam certum
est, Collegium nostrum nulla re firmius stabiliri posse, and continuari, quam
bonis Legibus, Probis, Gubernatorum Moribus, and Collegarum singulari Virtute
atque eruditione.

FINIS.
THE Statutes (or Bylaws) OF THE COLLEGE OF Physicians of London.
WHereas by the Private Grace of Our most Sovereign King HENRY VIII. and by the
Public Decrees of Parliament, It is ordained, That a College of Physicians of
London, be Established for the Honor of the Kingdom and the Health of the
Public, that it be defended with Privileges, enriched with Possessions,
dignified with Electors, governed by a President and Censors, and directed by
Statutes or Bylaws, and endowed with a Power of making them anew; should be
assisted with Consiliarii or Assistants, and perpetuated by Learning, it seemed
also most advisable to Us, That We prescribe first who are to be the Electors,
and what their Office is, also who is to be President, and after what manner,
and of whom he is to be chosen, by what Law obliged, and what his Office and
Power is; and lastly, what his Place and Dignity is; and then who are to be the
Consiliarii or Assistants, and what on their faith given, is to be performed by
them; and what their Office, Place, and Power is; who are to be made Censors or
Governors of Learning, Manners, and also Medicines; and what Office upon Oath
is to be performed by them; what is the Office of a Treasurer, Register, and
Beadle; lastly, what becomes the rest for their own honor, and the glory of
the College, and by what Covenant they are obliged; if any Statutes are to be
made, or if any are to be abrogated, after what manner that ought to be done;
what is the Form of the Comitia, or Meetings, Examinations, and Admissions,
what account to be had of an Offense with others, and what universally of right
belongs to all persons and business of the College; for nothing is durable,
that wants Reason, Form, and Order.

CHAP. I. Of Creating the Electors.
WE Constitute therefore and Ordain, That out of the number of the Fellows,
Eight only Electors be created, who for gravity, learning, manners, and age,
excel the rest; and that they be dignified with the Degree of Doctor, and are
by birth English men, whose Office it shall be, by the Authority of the
College, the day after St. Michael, if conveniently it can be done, but if for
some great impediments, that will not be lawful, then on some other day for
that business more convenient, so that it be within a week from the time
appointed in the greater Comitia or Meetings, to choose a President out of the
number of the Electors, if the President of the foregoing year having performed
his annual Office, be remaining; but if he be wanting, as soon as that can
conveniently be done, to substitute another, at the most within Twenty days
after he has been wanting; but we understand a President or an Elector to be
wanting, if he be either dead, or expelled the College, or departed from the
City with his family, and he be wanting for a whole year, unless he be in the
service of the Prince.

If one or more of the Elect have been so wanting, let one or more by a New
Election be substituted in his or their place, out of the rest of the Fellows,
who shall be of the same Nation, Degree, Manners, Learning, and Rank, within
Thirty, or at most Forty days; but so that at those Comitia or Meetings, only
the Electors be present, to the intent that a more free Election be made, and a
more just examination of manners, wisdom, gravity, and learning, all which
virtues are chiefly required by the Statutes of the Kingdom in an Elector.

He that is to be chosen, shall first be examined by the Electors, as is
provided for by the Statutes of the Kingdom, then let him be chosen by the
consent of them all if it may be, if not by the greatest part; but if their
Votes are even, by the senior part.

And if by reason of the reigning of a Plague, or some other cause, the
Electors are out of Town, so that a certain day cannot be appointed, then it
shall be lawful for the President, at what time and place conveniently may be,
to call the Electors.

If any of the Electors have left the City, and made his abode with his Family
for the space of a whole year, in any place beyond seven miles from the City,
he, unless he be the Kings Physician, or otherwise detained in the service of
the Prince, shall lose his place among the Electors, and another shall be
substituted by the President and Electors; yet we will that he keep his place
and dignity in the College, if in the mean time he shall certify the
President of the cause of his absence.

He shall promise that he will give his Consent or Vote for none to be created
President or Elector, unless according to the form of the Statute, and that he
perfectly know and understand his gravity, learning, honest behavior, decent
age, and sincere affection to the College and the Commonwealth, and readiness
to perform his duty.

CHAP. II. Of the President and his Office.
WHo is to be President shall be appointed for a year, and must be of the
number of Electors, and whom the other Electors present, either all or most,
shall judge fit, in respect of time, business, and person; and it shall be done
at that time of the year which is already appointed, when we treated of the
Electors, to wit, the day after St. Michael, if conveniently it may be done,
etc. as before in the Chapter of Creating the Electors.

It is provided for and determined, if the Suffrages are equal, that party
shall carry it, in which the greater number of the Seniors shall be; but if
these also shall be equal, that shall prevail, to which the Old President, or
he being dead or absent, the born President inclines. We call the born
President, the Senior of the Electors, who though he carry the name of
President, yet has no power to make or change Statutes; but in administering
and performing the Office of a President in other things relating to the
business of the College, let him have a full power according to the true
meaning of the Statutes.

If any Elector refuse the Office of a President conferred on him, he shall be
fined forty shillings, unless he be the Kings Physician.

The Covenant or Faith given by the President.
HE shall promise, That he will to his power endeavor that the honor of the
College be preserved, the Statutes thereof without fraud observed, and that he
will act all things for the health of the Public, and the honest Profit of the
College.

The President of the former year, if he be present, shall demand the Faith
from the New President, or one of the Consiliarii or Assistants, especially the
Senior, if he be present; or these being absent, the Senior of the Electors
then present.

He that shall demand his suretyship, let him hold forth the Ensigns of
Government, The Cushion, to wit, of Honor, the Book and Caduceus or Mace, and
let him say, We give to thee the Authority of a President, and deliver the
Cushion of Honor, the Book of Knowledge, and the Caduceus or Mace of
Government and Prudence, that your Excellency and all the other Colleagues, may
understand our College firmly to be established by Knowledge and Prudence;
wherefore that you may not forget, you shall take care that the Book and Mace,
as a sign of Knowledge and Prudence, be carried by the Beadle before you in all
solemn Meetings, Funeral Ceremonies, and at other times and places convenient,
that what honor requires, that use may confirm.

The Manner of Laying down the Office.
THe Duty of Governing being discharged, let the President laying down his
Office, having finished what Prologue he please, say, I lay down the Authority
of Governing, and in the name of all return it into your hands, some other, to
wit, the Senior of the Consiliarii or Assistants chiefly; or these being
absent, the Senior Elector present; that it may be lawful to whom the power of
Choice belongs, to elect and substitute whom they please: therefore I return to
you the Cushion of Honor, the Book of Knowledge, and the Mace of prudent
Government, and I wish all happiness to the College and you all.

Which done, to whom the power is conferred, let him propose for choice, whom
they judge most fit for that Office, but let him be chose after that manner
which in the beginning of this Chapter is ordained, and let him with a loud
voice, and by name pronounce him, who is chosen according to the Statutes,
elected for President, and command that all esteem him for the President;
lastly he shall demand his Suretyship from him in the same form as is
beforementioned.

Let the Office of the President be to appoint Meetings, but after what manner
shall be spoken by and by, when we determine of the Comitia or Meetings, and
also to propose the cause of Meetings, to receive the opinion of every one, and
to determine for the major part, and to exclude factions and partios.

Let him, with the rest whom that matter shall concern, choose the Electors,
Assistants, and Censors, of learning, manners, and medicines.

In choosing Colleagues let him first receive the Suffrages of others,
afterward give his own, and determine for the greater part.

Let him compose differences between the Colleagues, but that by common advice
and opinion of the Electors and Censors separately made use of, and in that
manner which afterward in the Chapter of the Consiliarii or Assistants shall
be spoken more fully.

Moreover, let him take care that the Common Seal be safely kept in a Chest, he
shall sign all things to which the other Fellows according to their duty and
the Statute have consented.

If any Books are given to the College, he shall take care that they be placed
in the Library, and at the years end, let an Account of them be given to the
New President, and let them be showed to him by name in the Index.

If there be any Revenue or yearly income, by the Lands of the College, if any
thing be given to the College, if any thing come by any other names, let him
take care that it be kept in the Common Chest, whereof let him have one Key,
and likewise each of the Consiliarii or Assistants one.

Let him require an A^compt of the Receipts and Disbursements of the last year,
from the Treasurer and other Officers of the College, in presence of the other
Electors at that time in Town; all whom we would have summoned to be at the
making up the Accounts if conveniently they can; but let him more especially
take care that the Statutes be diligently observed, and read in the College,
either by him or the Register, or some other, as it shall seem good to him; to
wit, in that manner which is afterward provided and appointed in the Statutes.

CHAP. III. Of the Pro-President.
IT shall be lawful for the President being detained in the service of the
Prince, or in the cure of some great Nobleman, or oppressed by the multitude of
other business, to choose and substitute for himself a Pro-President; but let
him be the born President if conveniently by age, business, or health, it may
be: If otherwise, one of the Electors who excels in gravity, sound judgment,
experience, diligence, and cheerfulness of acting; according to the will and
pleasure of the President.

His Office shall be to supply the place of the absent President, in acting and
administering all business of the College which cannot conveniently be
performed by the President.

Let his Place and Dignity be according to his degree and seniority, unless
when the President is wanting; for then he shall possess the place of the
President, but only in the College, to wit, in the ordinary place of meetings.
But we understand the President to be absent, not only if he be without the
City and Suburbs, but also if detained by any disease, or more weighty business
in the City, he cannot be present. But in these cases we will that he make
known his absence either by a Letter writ with his own hand, or by the Beadle
of the College.

His Office shall continue according to the business. He shall give his faith,
if the Electors think it fit, that he according to his ability will take care
of the business of the College committed to him, and will diligently act all
things for the honor and profit of the College, and will act nothing unless
with the judgment and advice of the President or Assistants, and those Fellows
whom by the Statutes it shall concern.

CHAP. IV. Of the Consiliarii or Assistants.
THe day after St. Michael, if conveniently it can be done, etc. as before in
the Chapter of Creating the Electors, in the ordinary Meetings presently after
the Election of a President, let the same Electors choose two for the
Consiliarii or Assistants, out of their own Order, that shall be fit for this
Office, with the assent either of all or the greater number of the Electors
then present; if their suffrages shall be even, that part shall carry it,
wherein there shall be more of the Seniors; if these also shall be equal, then
that to which the President shall incline.

They shall give their faith that they will honestly and justly, as becomes
good men, laying aside all affection, perform their duty.

Their duty is always to attend the President in the greater Comitia or
Meetings, to assist with their labor and counsel, where need shall be; never
to be absent, unless some extrardinary matter compel; and lest at that time the
place should be void, let him that shall be wanting substitute in his place
anoanother Elector, till he shall return; but with the consent of the
President, or he being absent, of the Pro-President.

If any strife or controversy concerning any doubtful matter, or the genuine
interpretation of some Statute, or any discord of this sort arise among the
Colleagues, we will all that matter be quietly and calmly composed by the
President, Assistants, and Censors, or by the greater part of them.

Likewise, if between the President and Colleagues any controversy shall
arise, we will that the whole matter be decided by the Assistants and Censors,
or by the greater part of them; but if it cannot be so composed, then we will
that other Electors be joined also to those forementioned Arbiters, that by
the suffrages of all these, or of the greater part, the whole matter in
controversy may be decided.

And we will that this rule be observed in decently suppressing all wranglings
of the Colleagues, for by this means we hope it will (which especially is to be
wished) that brawling, scoldings, and contentions, be avoided, and brotherly
love with a sweet consent of minds and wills daily grow together, and be
consirmed for ever.

If one of the Assistants either die, or be otherwise wanting, before he has
completed the year, let another within fifteen days be deputed.

Let none refuse the Office of an Assistant under the penalty of Forty
Shillings, unless he be the Kings Physician.

As often as the President shall ask their advice, let them be ready, or else
let them pay each of them Three Shillings and four pence, unless some urgent
matter shall hinder, whereof when they next return, they shall better certify
the President.

CHAP. V. Of the Censors.
AFter the President chosen and the Assistants, presently in the same Meetings
we appoint and ordain, That every year four men, learned and grave, be chosen,
whether they shall be Electors or Fellows, whom we will have named Censors or
Governors of the College of London.

Let their Election be by the Suffrages of the President and whole Society, or
of the greater part secretly received.

Let their Office be to inquire after all persons practicing Physic, whether
they be our Contrymen or Foreigners, through the City and Suburbs, and within
Seven miles in circuit thereof, to examine, correct, and govern them, and if
need be of a Law Suit, together with the President and Treasurer, to persecute,
to inquire their Methods of Cure, to condemn their Medicines, to search the
Apothecaries Shops, to judge of their Medicines, to burn, or any other ways to
destroy the corrupt; and if the Apothecaries withstand or oppose, to refer the
matter to the President and the College, and to perform all these things for
the health of the Public, and the honor of the College.

The Oath of the Censors or Governors.
THey shall swear before the President, That they will decree none to be
admitted into the College, but whom, all affection laid aside, they shall
judge fit, both for learning and manners; neither to approve any man or any
medicine, for hire, entreaty, or favor; and in other things honestly to
perform their Office, as God shall help them and the Holy Gospel.

Let no Fellow refuse the Office of a Censor, under the penalty of Forty
shillings, unless he be the Kings Physician.

CHAP. VI. Of the Manner and Time of the Comitia or Meetings, and of the
Caduceator or Beadle.
THree days before the solemn Meetings are to be, or the day before that day,
if the matter be urgent, by the Authority of the President all the Colleagues
are to be summoned by the Beadle, or the servant of the Presidents, that they
be present at the Meetings, to be such a day, hour, and place prescribed.

Whither, when they are come, let each seat themselves in that order which
shall afterward be spoken; we call Comitia Meetings, or as King Henry in his
Diploma names them Congregations of the Colleagues; and we judge these Meetings
solemn or the greater legitimate, at which all the Colleagues in the City are
admonished by the Beadle to be present, and in which twelve Fellows at the
least are present, beside the President. Let this be the manner of Summons, Mr.
President entreats your Excellency, worthy Doctor, that you be present at a
Meeting held such a Month, day, hour, and place, prescribed by the President.
Lastly, let him subscribe it after this manner, A. V. B. that is, By your
Authority Beadle.

Let the Beadle be an honest man, and let him promise, that he will faithfully
and diligently serve the President and the College in all business belonging
to the College without fraud or guile. Moreover, let him promise that he will
neither for hire, entreaty, or favor, divulge the secrets of the College to
any one.

Let his Office be to write scrowls of admonition to summon all the Colleagues
to the Meetings, to provide and keep all things clean and neat against their
comeing, not to be absent from the Meetings, faithfully to bring and carry
things received from the President for the use of the College; to hunt out
what-some-ever, whether Physicians or Empiricks and Impostors, and to give in
their Names to the President, and at the Presidents or Censors commands, to
give them a Summons; to burn bad Medicines, or otherwise to destroy them, to be
present at Feasts and Funerals, to carry the Ensigns of Honor and perform
other things which lie on a servant as his duty.

Let a salary of Twelve pounds yearly be paid by the Treasurer to the Beadle.

We will also that from every Candidate and Permissive, four shillings yearly
be bestowed on him for a reward; besides in all admissions and fines, which
exceed twenty shillings, and Anatomies, three shillings and four pence be paid
him.

Of Summoning the Colleagues to the Meeting.
WE appoint all the Colleagues, who shall be in the City or Suburbs, to be
present at all greater Meetings, whether ordinary or extraordinary, unless some
great impediment hinder. What relates to those lesser Congregations which are
held every Month, and at other times, it shall be free for the rest of the
Colleagues (except those Six whom afterward we shall name in the Chapter of the
Ordinary times of Meeting) either to be present or absent, according to their
pleasure, unless they are bidden by the Summons of the President or
Pro-President, to be there.

But if any forewarned by the Beadle himself, or by a Note left by him at his
house, shall not come, he shall pay Two shillings for the use of the College,
unless he shall be excused by sickness, or he be Two miles out of Town at the
least.

They who shall be absent from the Meetings on that day when the President and
Censors are to be chosen, unless upon some weighty matter, to be approved by
the President or Pro-President, or Assistants and Censors, shall pay for the
use of the College Three shillings four pence; nay he shall pay One shilling,
who shall not come before the Clock strike Three.

Because very many lawfully summoned from the President by the Beadle, either
neglect or despise to be present at the for aid Meetings, whereby it often
happens that the Conventions are made void, and the other Fellows obeying the
Summons of the President, to no purpose neglect their own private business;
therefore we appoint and ordain, That if any Fellow, summoned after the manner
aforesaid, shall refuse to come to the greater appointed Meetings, and shall
four times continually fail in this manner, and in the mean time shall not give
the reason of his absence, to be approved of by the President or Pro-President,
with the Assistants and Censors, let another Colleague (as soon as it shall seem
good to the College) be put into his place.

Let all the Statutes be divided into three parts or sections, the first part
comprehends all those things which belong to the Electors, to the President,
and Pro-President, to the Consiliarii or Assistants, to the Censors or
Governors, to the Comitia or Meetings, and other things, till you come to the
Ninth Chapter, which treats of the Office of the Treasurer.

The second part comprehends those Statutes which belong to the Treasurer and
Register, to the number of Fellows and Candidates, to their Examinations,
Elections, and Admissions, to the Order of the Permissives, and their Office,
and the other things, even to the Two and twentieth Chapter, which treats of
the Penal or Moral Statutes.

The third part shall contain the Penal or Moral Statutes, and according to
this threefold partition of Statutes, they may be read through in all greater
Meetings, except on the day of the Meetings of St. Michael, at which time the
Election of Officers are appointed.

Let the Fellows, Candidates, and Permissives, be present at the Reading of the
Statutes, as many as can be there.

And these our Statutes shall be read after the aforesaid manner, either by the
President himself, or Pro-President (if they please) or by the Register, if he
be present; but if peradventure, the Register, either obliged by business, or
detained by a Disease, or hindered by some other grievous matter, shall not be
present, then according to the pleasure of the President or Pro-President, some
other of the Fellows shall be appointed for that time; who may read through that
part of the Statutes.

Yet in the mean time we will that it be taken care of and provided for, that
if any more weighty matters are to be transacted in those Meetings, it may be
free for the President or Pro-President, at his pleasure, either wholly to omit
this reading of the Statutes for the time, or to read, or command to be read
only some part.

CHAP. VII. Of the Ordinary and Extraordinary Times of Meetings, and other
Things pertaining to the Reason of the Meetings.
LEt the fixed or settled Meetings be kept at four seasons of the year, equally
distant.

The first the day after St. Michael, if conveniently it may be done, etc. as
is said before.

The second the day after St. Thomas, if conveniently, etc.

The third the day after Palm Sunday, if, etc.

The fourth the day after the Nativity of St. John Baptist, if conveniently,
etc.

And these are all the ordinary or fixed Meetings, which also may be called
solemn or greater.

And beside the fixed or ordinary Meetings, it shall also be lawful for the
President to summon likewise other solemn or greater extraordinary Meetings,
according to the necessity or dignity of the matter happening.

And in all these solemn Meetings we will that twelve Fellows at least be
present, besides the President and Pro-President.

But if some urgent necessity, as the raging of a Pestilence, etc. or some
weighty affair, happen to be dispatched at the command of the Prince; and that
peradventure in such a time, wherein so many Fellows shall not be present in
the City, then indeed you must obey necessity, and in such a case the whole
matter is to be left to the prudence and judgment of the President or
Pro-President, that as many as shall be in the City, he take care that all
those be summoned by the Beadle, to be present at the Meetings; and in those
greater Meetings we will that the ordinary Elections and Admissions of new
Fellows, Candidates, and Permissives, be made.

But for what belongs to the Examinations of Fellows, Candidates, or
Permissives, those may rightly be porformed, either in those greater Meetings,
or also in the other lesser Conventions, according to the pleasure of the
President or Pro-President.

In all Meetings let the President or Pro-President expound the cause of the
Convention, let him observe what each speak in their order, and receive the
Suffrages: neither let any depart unless leave first obtained, before the
President or Pro-President has dissolved the Meetings in these eloquent words,
We discharge these Meetings.

There are also other Meetings, which are called lesser, such as are held every
Month, and at other times, as some sudden occasion shall require; according to
the reason of things and persons.

In these those that are admitted into the College are examined, also the
Affairs of Quacks and Impostors, and of all persons practicing Physic ill, are
discussed by the President and Censors, and they punished according to their
deserts; and other business of that kind are treated of.

In these lesser Meetings, we do not require that so many Fellows be present as
are required in the greater and solemn Meetings; it shall suffice if in these
Mr. President, the four Censors and Register be present.

But it is necessary that all the Censors are present, according to the
Statutes of the Kingdom; provided they be lawfully summoned by the Beadle:
wherefore lest the rest meet in vain, we ordain an absent Censor to be fined
Ten shillings, unless he certify the President beforehand of the cause of his
absence.

Least any controversy or reproach should arise, we must act in all Meetings
with the highest modesty and the greatest gravity; for certainly scolding is
filthy in private, but most filthy in public Meetings, especially among those
who are judged to have acquired honest manners out of good disciplines.

Therefore let none propose or speak any thing publicly in the College,
unless with his hat off, and leave first obtained from the President, to whom
alone his speech is to be directed.

But if many shall begin to speak together, let the Junior give way to the
Senior. Let every one speak shortly and gravely, without prolix babbling; and
at the admonition of the President be silent.

And its lawful for none to disturb him that is speaking, but the President or
Pro-President, or the senior of the Censors then present; whose Office let it
be to admonish every one of their duty.

But let every one speak his judgment to the Matter proposed, once only and in
his order, unless by leave again obtained from the President.

Let the other Fellows be attent, and not disturb him that is speaking, or the
hearers, with their private discourse whisperings or noise; nnd let silence
always be made at the nod of the President: who shall act contrary let him be
punished Two shillings, presently to be paid.

In matters doubtful and of great moment, let the delegates be chose at the
pleasure of the President, who may discuss the matter on every side, and relate
it to the College in each Meeting, after the President has opened the cause
of the Convention.

Let the Register with a loud voice relate what was done in the last Meetings,
that (those things being expunged, if any things are to be mended or corrected)
they may at last be writ in the Book of Annals.

Let none propose to gather the Suffrages, but the President or Pro-President.

In all Elections let the Votes be carried silently and secretly, by pease or
beans, in other business of the College as it seem good to the President or
Pro-President.

CHAP. VIII. Of Making and Abrogating of Statutes, and of Levying of Fines.
LEt few Statutes be established, and those confirmed either by Faith given, or
Fine.

Let the Mulct be small but inevitable, let the least Mulct be a Shilling.

To make any Statute, two Meetings shall suffice, but to abrogate not under
three.

We appoint and ordain that all Fines which after what manner soever are
imposed, by the President or Pro-President and four Censors, or by the greater
part of the Fellows, go only to the use of the College, and not to the profit
of any private person; yet those payments of Money are excepted, which by the
Statutes of the College are otherways granted to the Officers. We will that
these Mulcts be forthwith paid, or at least a deposite given, such as the
President shall desire, to secure the present money.

CHAP. IX. The Office of the Treasurer.
HE shall receive the Revenue and Profits which yearly accrue to the College,
and in his custody safely shall keep for the use of the College.

He shall take care of the Vtensils and other Necessaries of the College, as
often as need shall be.

He shall, as well as he can, safely and decently keep the Goods thereof,
Books, Household Stuff, and other Ornaments appertaining to the glory thereof.

If any thing be to be repaired in the Buildings of the College, he shall take
care that it be seasonably done.

He together with the President and Censors, shall prosecute the Controversies
and Lawsuits of the College.

He shall pay to the Officers of the College every ones Salary or Stipend due
according to the Statutes, at the four usual Seasons of the Year.

He shall give in his Accounts twice every Year to the President and Electors,
if he be required to it and forewarned.

He shall give a perfect Account for the whole Year last past, within a Month
after the Feast of St. Michael; to wit, on that day which the President shall
assign him.

He shall restore to the President and Electors the whole sum of Money which at
that time shall be over remaining, and the other Goods, Household Stuff, and the
Vtensils of the College which have been in his custody.

He shall be bound in a Bond to the President and Society, on the same day that
he is admitted to his Office, that he faithfully pay the Wages due to the
Officers of the College within a Week after the complete making up his Account
for that Year.

In repairing the Buildings of the College, or in buying things necessary for
the use of the College, he shall not lay out above Forty Shillings without the
will and consent of the President or Pro-President.

To the Treasurer for a Salary shall be paid yearly out of the Revenues of the
College the sum of Forty Shillings.

Moreover, We appoint and ordain, That from each person admitted into the
Society of the College, also from every one that shall be admitted into the
Order of the Candidates, or into the number of Permissives, he shall receive
Six Shillings and eight pence at the time of their Admission.

He shall give his Faith, That he will perform his Office faithfully according
to the Statutes, and that he will act all things for the honor and profit of
the College, and that he will faithfully give up his Account at the Summons of
the President.

CHAP. X. Of the Register.
LEt the Office of the Register be after this manner, To be present at all
Meetings of the College, whether greater or lesser, being lawfully and
seasonably admonished by the Beadle of the College, or the servant of the
President or Pro-President, on the penalty of Ten Shillings.

Whatsoever shall be there acted, ratified, and established, by the consent of
the President and the greater part of the Fellows present (unless it be matter
of small moment, and unworthy to be taken notice of) all that he shall
faithfully set down, in the beginning of the next following Meetings let him
read it over, and afterward (it being corrected, if any things are to be
amended) let him enter it into the Register of the College.

But if he shall be hindered by sickness or more weighty business, so that he
cannot be present; then it shall be lawful for him to substitute some other
Fellow for the time, who may signify the cause of his absence to the
President, and diligently supply his place.

The Forms of Letters writ to the College or from the College, and all other
things that are acted, let him enter into the Register Book.

For an Annual Stipend, there shall be yearly paid to the Register Forty
Shillings, to be accounted to him from the Treasurer, out of the Revenue of the
College, by equal parts, at the four usual times of this Kingdom.

From every one who are permitted to practice Physic, or received into the
Order of the Candidates, or admitted into the number of the Fellows, shall be
paid at the very time, either of Permission or Admission, the sum of Six
Shillings and eight pence to the Register, and Five Shillings more for writing
their Names in the Register Book.

As often as it shall happen that any one by the Sentence of the President or
Pro-President and Censors, be fined in any notable sum of money to be paid to
the College, by every one so punished Three Shillings and four pence shall be
paid to the Register.

If any fined in any sum of money to be paid for the use of the College, shall
not together and at once pay the whole fine, but shall put off the payment
appointed for some days, and so shall pay it piecemeal, for each of those
payments so made in parts, Three Shillings and four pence shall be paid to the
Register; for we judge his Office a troublesome burden.

He shall give his Faith that he will duly perform his Office according to the
Statutes for the honor and profit of the College, and all things which have
been acted either in greater or lesser Meetings, without fraud faithfully
insert into the Register Book.

CHAP. XI. Of the Candidates.
WE appoint and ordain, That the number of Candidates do not exceed Twelve; We
will that none be admitted into that Order, who is not a Doctor in Physic, and
by Nation an Englishman, and has practiced Physic for four years.

But if he has attained the Degree of Doctor in any Foreign University, We
will, That before he be admitted to Examination, he bring forth his Diploma or
Letters Testimonial true and authentic of that University, and show them to
the College; and besides that let him have and bring a Testimonial of his
Incorporation from one of our own Universities.

We will moreover and ordain, That each Candidate and Permissive, before they
be admitted, visit all the Fellows of the College twice, to ask leave, to wit,
the first time before any Examination, but the second the course of
Examinations being finished.

The Faith required of the Candidates.
YOu shall give your Faith, That you will observe the Statutes of the College,
and to your power endeavor that the Honor thereof be preserved entire, nor at
any time shall you consult, or entertain familiarity with any one who studies
in word or deed to subvert the State of the College; but in all things which
belong to the honor and profit of the College, you shall promote with your
advice, aid, and assistance.

You shall give your Faith, That you will in all things lawful and honest, be
obedient to Mr. President or Pro-President and Electors, that you will give
place to the Senior in the College (according to the Statutes) and respect him
with due honor.

You shall come to the College at the command of Mr. President or
Pro-President and Censors, as often as you shall be admonished and sent for by
the Beadle.

You shall be present at all Anatomies, unless detained by some great
impediment, to be approved by the President and Censors.

Neither for entreaty, nor rewards, nor on any other cause, shall you give
Medicines which cause Abortion or Miscarriage, nor Poisons of any kind for
destruction, or to an ill use; neither shall you teach them any one, whom you
suspect will abuse them.

You shall by name accuse none who is admitted into the College, of ignorance
or ill practice, or publicly reproach them.

You shall persecute by all honest means the unlearned, Empiricks and
Impostors, and their names you shall give in to the President or Censors;
neither shall you keep company with Empiricks and others not licensed by the
College; neither shall you by any means frequent their Meetings, to the
detriment or infamy of the College.

The secrets of the College you shall divulge to none, that is not of the
College.

You shall give your faith that you will neither by Letters from great Men, nor
by price, nor by any other unlawful means, circumvent the Society of the
College; and that you will to your power do all things in the Art of Physic
for the honor of the College and the Public good.

We appoint and ordain, That the Permissive or Licentiates, and also the
Candidates, diligently observe our Statutes and Decrees, be obedient to the
President, Electors, and Censors, and the Mulcts imposed on them for defaults
they readily pay.

Besides, they shall not refuse plainly and nakedly to reveal those their
Medicines which they call Secrets or Arcana, and are wont to use in their
practice, as often as they are required to do so by the President and Censors;
who shall obstinately act contrary, shall be punished at the pleasure of the
President and Censors.

Every Candidate shall pay at the time of his Admission Four pounds to the use
of the College, and Ten shillings for the proper use of the President; but to
the Treasurer Six shillings and eight pence; also to the Register for his due
Salary Six shillings and eight pence, and to him moreover Five other shillings,
for insertion of his Name into the Book of Annals; and besides to the Beadle of
the College Three shillings and four pence.

Because many flock hither to practice, of the number of which there are very
many, who coming out of their Universities before their due time, fly to places
beyond the Seas, that in foreign Nations by a shorter space and lesser charge,
they may creep to the degree of Doctor, then they could attain at home in our
Universities.

We therefore appoint, That whoever shall be admitted either into the Society
of the College, or into the Order of the Candidates, or into the number of the
Permissive: If he has taken the degree of Doctor abroad, he at the time of his
Admission shall pay double to the College, President, Treasurer, Register, and
other Officers of the College, then those are wont to pay who are created
Doctors in our own Universities. Also whoever is created Doctor in our
Universities, yet if he anticipate, by more hastily acquiring that Degree then
is the fit time due to that dignity; that is, if he made Doctor either before
he has been seven whole years Master in the Arts, or has been so long Bachelor
in Physic, he shall pay double more to the College, President, and to the
other aforesaid Officers of the College, then they are wont who according to
the laudable Laws and Customs of our Universities, at the time prefixed, and
with more mature judgment, ascend to the degree of Doctor.

We will, That all Candidates and Permissives summoned by the Beadle, be
present at every one of our Meetings; that if they know any unlawfully and
ignorantly exercising Practice, they signify their Names to the President and
Censors, and also that they hear the Reading of the Statutes.

Let them likewise pay, if occasion be, or the necessity of the College urges,
as Fellows; so they be required thereto.

The year complete, let the Candidates move and ask the President to be
admitted into the number of the Fellows, if so be it may conveniently be done,
according to the Statutes.

CHAP. XII. Of the Fellows.
WE appoint and ordain, That the number of the Fellows exceed not Thirty, and
we will that above this certain and determinate number the Phisicians in
ordinary to the King, Queen, and Prince, be admitted as Honorary, and to be
reckoned Supernumeraries.

We will moreover, That no body be admitted into the Society of the College,
who have not been first for a whole year of the number of the Candidates, or
publicly read Physic in some University of England, or has been formerly
Doctor of the Chair (as they say) in some University of this Kingdom, or has
been the Kings Phisician in Ordinary.

Every Fellow at the time of his admission shall pay to the College,
President, Treasurer, Register, and Beadle, as is appointed before concerning
the Candidates; but all payments shall be doubled on those conditions which are
above mentioned.

We appoint also, That all Fellows at the time of admission have Letters
Patents, signed with the Seal of the College, and be obliged by this given
faith.

YOu shall endeavor to your power that the State of the College be
perpetuated; the Statutes of the College you shall keep, you shall obey the
President in those things which relate to the honor and perpetuity of the
College.

You shall not give what may cause abortion, or take away or hinder conception,
nor poison to an ill end, nay indeed you shall not so much as teach them, where
there is a suspicion of an ill design.

You shall determine none to be chose into the College, unless whom, laying
aside all affection, you shall judge for knowledge and manners suitable.

You shall read diligently within a year the five first Books of Galen
concerning Simple Medicine, and all the Books of the use of the parts.

You shall persecute by all honest means the unlearned, Empericks, and
Impostors; you shall give in their Names to the President, Pro-President, or
Censors.

You shall also give your faith that you have practiced Physic for four years,
or have read publicly in some University.

Also you shall give your faith, that you will with great diligence observe the
Statute concerning the public dissection of humane bodies, whenever you
shall be summoned by the President or Pro-President.

Lastly, You shall truly and on good faith say, what is your Country.

Letters of Admission.
KNow all men, That we A. B. Doctor of Physic and President of the College of
Phisicians of London, together with the consent of the Fellows thereof, by the
Authority granted to us from our Lord the King and Parliament, have examined,
approved, and into our College chose the learned and honest man C. D. of Kent,
in the most Flourishing University of Oxford or Cambridge, Doctor of Physic,
and thereby have granted the free Faculty and License of exercising the
Knowledge and Art of Physic, according to the Form of the Statutes published
to that purpose; and moreover we have bestowed the use and profit of all
Advantages, Liberties, and Privileges, which by the Authority aforesaid are
already granted to our College, and which for the future may be granted.

For the truth and testimony whereof we have caused our Common Seal to be set
to these presents. Given at London in our College the seventh day of May Anno
Domini 1647.

* If any of the Colleagues has applied himself to Religion or the Priesthood,
after he has been chosen into the College, let him not be called to the
College; that we may not seem to recall him to the Practice of Physic, whom
Religion and the Law Ecclesiastic has abandoned from the Office of a Phisician.

* Neither do we think it honest for a Clergyman or Preacher, among other
things, to meddle with Women's businesses and diseases.

* But if any Clergyman or Preacher, desires to be admitted into the College,
or permitted to Practice, let him not be taken in for the same reasons.

If any one of the Colleagues shall addict himself to the Priesthood, after he
has been admitted into the College, we will not that he be again summoned to
the College.

But if any Clerk, or one entered in Holy Orders, desires to be admitted into
the College, or to be permitted to Practice, much less shall that be granted
him.

We appoint and ordain, That if any one guilty of some more heinous and public
crime, or shall be infamous for some notable vice, he shall be discharged from
the College; lest if we retain such, we should seem either to contemn virtue,
or labor under the same disease; but lest such not being a Colleague, should be
admitted into the College, it is both by other Statutes prohibited, and we
forbid it by these.

CHAP. XIII. Letters Testimonial of those that Practice through the whole
Kingdom of England.
KNow all men, That we A. B Doctor of Physic and President of the College of
Phisicians of London, together with the consent of B. H. and R. M. of the
aforesaid College, Fellows and Electors, by the Authority granted to us from
our Lord the King and Parliament, have examined and approved 17th day of
August, in the year of our Lord 1647, the honest man T. W. of the County of B.
in the most Flourishing University of Oxford or Cambridge, Master of Arts, and
in the City of York well exercised in the Practice of Physic, and we judge him
worthy, who may be admitted to the Practice of Physic according to the form of
the Statutes published to this purpose;

in testimony whereof we have set our Common Seal and subscribed our Names.
Given at London in our College the day and month, etc.
If any one after the aforesaid manner shall be judged qualified for Practice
by the President and three Electors, he shall tell his Name to the Register,
that he may be inserted into the Book of Annals.

CHAP. XIV. Of Suppressing Quacks.
WHereas there is a great number of unskilful persons who annoy the
Commonwealth, and it lies on us, by the Prescript of the King and Parliament,
that we take care of the health and security of the people; we appoint and
ordain for the more commodious extirpation of such, that whom for certain we
shall prove to be unlearned and dishonest, that we punish not only by fine and
imprisonment, but also that we certify by our Letters the Magistrates and
Governors of every City, Province, or Jurisdiction, where such Impostors
dwell, that they are to be reckoned unworthy the name of Phisicians, and
therefore to be treated as other Citizens.

Let this be the Form of the Letters, but in English.

Form of the Letter to the Magistrates.
WOrthy Sirs, We certify you that H. M. of your Province Quick, living in the
Street S. is a man unlearned and unskilful of Physic, and in no wise is of our
College; wherefore you may according to your Law elect and choose him and all
others who have not Letters Testimonial, signed with our Seal, to serve all fit
Offices of your City, and to compel them to act and perform other things, which
its granted to your authority to command.

These we have written, to that end lest those silly Impostors of the
Commonalty, should under the name and pretense of Physic, evade your
Privileges.

Given from our College, etc.

CHAP. XV. Of the Permissives or Licentiates to Practice.
BEcause very many in this City exercise Physic, whom we think altogether
unfit to be admitted into the number of Fellows or Candidates, either because
they are Foreigners, or are not admitted Doctors, or are not sufficiently
learned, or by reason of their too great youth, or such like causes, yet may
notwithstanding, be serviceable to the Public, in taking care of the health of
the Kings subjects, at least in some particular Diseases.

Concerning these we ordain and appoint that after due examinations and the
approbation of the President and Censors, they be permitted to practice so long
as they behave themselves well.

We will that all who are only permitted to practice, be bound with the same
faith wherewith the Candidates are.

Therefore the President at the time of admission shall use these words, I J.
C. President of the College of Phisicians of London, by the authority granted
me by Law, permit thee A. B. to the Practice of Physic in the City of London,
and for seven miles round about, as long as you behave your self well, and
shall observe the Statute of the College, and perform your due payments; and
to you so doing I wish all happiness.

We will that the Permissive or Licentiates make all usual payments to the
College, President, Treasurer, Register and Beadle, which lately we assigned
to be performed by the Candidates.

We will moreover that the first year of Permission they pay to the College
six pounds, unless for reasons to be approved of by the President and Censors,
it shall be thought fit to deal more gently with them; however they shall pay
four pounds at least: but for the following years, as long as they shall be
Permissives, they shall pay to the use of the College forty shillings.

We appoint and ordain, That none be admitted to the Practice of Physic within
the City, Suburbs, and seven miles round about, unless he has been first
examined thrice (on so many days appointed for that purpose) by the President
and Censors, and by them approved and permitted to the Practice of Physic.

But if any within the space, or foresaid circuit, has exercised the Faculty
of Physic, and as yet has not freely offered himself to the President and
Censors, to be examined, let him first be admonished by the Beadle, and that in
the name of the President, that he altogether abstain from the Practice of
Physic, till he has obtained the approbation of the President and College,
and that at a set and prefixed time, he appear before the President and
Censors, to wait their examination and approbation.

And let the Beadle deliver a Summons either to him into his hands, or he shall
leave it at his house, in these words;

WE the President and Gensors of the College of Phisicians of London, summon
you to appear on the 14th day of June before us, in your own proper person, and
that between two or three of the clock in the afternoon of the same day in the
College, there to answer to those things that shall be objected to you
concerning the Art of Physic and the Practice thereof.

Given from our College the 10th day of June Anno Domini 1647.
But if being summoned after the aforesaid manner, he shall not appear, we
judge him to be esteemed for a refractory person, and to be punished according
to the Statutes of the Kingdom.

But seeing by no means (unless by examination first had) it can be manifest to
us, how every one is qualified to be admitted to the Practice of Physic
according to the Laws of the Kingdom.

We moreover appoint and ordain, That if any exercising Physic at London, or
within the aforesaid limits, summoned by the commands of the President to
examination, shall appear truly, but in the mean time shall refuse to answer
the President and Censors, and to give an account of his knowledge and
experience in the Practice of Physic, let him be esteemed for an ignorant and
refractory person; and for Practice so begun, let him be punished by the
President and Censors, according to the Statutes of the Kingdom.

We also appoint and ordain, That if any examined by the President and Censors,
and in their judgments shall be thought not sufficiently skilful or qualified,
to be admitted to the Practice of Physic, let him presently by them be forbid
the Practice.

But if after such Prohibition, he shall notwithstanding exercise the Faculty
of Physic, or give any Medicine to any person within the same City, or the
circumference aforesaid, let him be punished as is provided by the Statutes of
the Kingdom.

But we think it just that the Censors and Fellows should admit to the Practice
of Physic all examined persous, as many as they shall find qualified, as well
for learning as manners; lest our College should be accused of a Monopoly; yet
so that they obey the Statutes of the College.

CHAP. XVI. The Form of the Examinations of the Fellows and Candidates, and of
their Admission.
BEfore any one be admitted either into the Order of the Fellows or Candidates,
let him be examined thrice in lawful Meetings, whether greater or lesser,
according to the pleasure of the President and Censors, as is said and ordained
before in the Chapter of the Comitia or Meetings.

Let the Form of Examination be after this manner,

FIrst, Let him be examined in the Physiologick Part, and the very Rudiments of
Medicine, and in this Examination let Questions be propounded out of Books
concerning Elements, Temperaments, the Use of Parts, Anatomy, Natural Powers
and Faculties, and the other Parts of Natural Medicine.

Secondly, Let him be examined in the Pathologick Part, or concerning the
Causes, Differences, Symptoms, and Signs of Diseases, which Phisicians make use
of to know the Essence of Diseases; and in this Examination let Questions be
proposed out of Books concerning the Art of Physic, of the Places affected, of
the Differences of Diseases, and Symptoms, of Fevers, of the Pulses, of the
Books of the Prognostics of Hypocrates, etc.

Thirdly, Let him be examined concerning the Use and Exercise of Medicine, or
the Reason of Healing; and let that be done out of the Books concerning
Preservation of Health, of the Method of Healing, of the Reason of Diet in
Acute Diseases, of Simple Medicines, of Crises, of the Aphorisms of
Hyppocrates; and other things of that kind, which relate to the Use of Healing;
for Example sake, What Caution is to be observed in Purging? what in
Blood-letting? at what Time? in what Disease? in what Person? with what
Medicine? and in what Vein, those things ought to be done? Likewise, what is
the Use of Narcoticks and Sleeping Medicines? and what Caution is to be
observed in them? what is the Position and Site of the Internal places? and by
what Passages Medicines come to them? What is the Use of Clysters, what of
Vomits, the danger, kind, and measure?

We will that all these Examinations be made by the President and Censors, yet
it shall be lawful for any Fellow to dispute at his pleasure, and make trial
how able the examined is in the Phisical Art.

But in these Examinations, we desire that the Fellows behave themselves
fairly, and use a pleasant temperament of speech; by no means showing
themselves morose or difficult in disputing.

If he has taken the Degree of Doctor in any of our Universities, let him that
is to be examined, for Honors sake be decently seated; lest our Mother
University should seem to suffer some affront from our form of Examinations.

He who bath been examined after this manner, if he show himself a learned man,
and has honest and amiable conversation (of which we desire great care to be
taken) let him be admitted by the greater part of the Fellows present; so there
be not fewer present at those Meetings than twelve, besides the President and
Pro-President.

Let this be the Form of Admission.
HE that is to be admitted, let him on his bended knees humbly deliver his
bands joined together, into the hands of the President, who shall say, I J. C.
President of this College, admit thee A. B. into the Society of our College
(either into the Order of Candidates, or into the number of Permissives) which
being done, if he be a Fellow, he shall with taking by the hand, give thanks to
all the Fellows present.

But if it appear that he who is to be examined, has been for three years
Public Reader of Physic or Regius Professor, and Doctor of the Chair (as they
say) in any of our Universities, or for his singular fame of knowledge, is
called to Court, and is the Kings, Queens, or Princes Phisician, it shall not
be necessary to examine him; but at the pleasure of the President and
Pro-President, and greater part of the Fellows present, he may be admitted
without any Ceremony of Disputing.

Whosoever, either Censor or Fellow, proposes Questions in Examinations, let
him be with his head uncovered, as also that Doctor that comes thither to be
examined.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Place and Dignity of the President and all the Fellows.
LEt the first place be the Presidents, as also the first dignity, not only in
the College, but in all other places.

Let the place and honor, next after the President, be the Kings Phisicians in
ordinary, who receive a set Salary, and have Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of the Kingdom.

Let every ones place be according to his seniority, so that the juniors give
place to the seniors, not only in the College, but also every where out of it.

Now we call seniority, not what age or dignity, or the time of taking a degree
any where, but what admission into the College makes.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Anatomical Administration, and The Chirurgical Lecture.
WE appoint and ordain, That each Fellow at the time of Admission give his
faith, that he will in public Anatomically dissect a Humane Body at the charge
of the College, in that year which the President shall appoint, and that
either in the College, or some other place, to be assigned at the judgment of
the President and Electors; especially if any shall seem to them skilful in
Anatomy.

But if any shall resuse the burden laid on him, and he be estecmed in their
judgment less fit for that business, be shall pay four pounds to the use of
the College: But if he shall obstinately refuse to perform this due Office, he
at the pleasure of the President, and the greater part of the Fellows present,
shall be fined; yet so that this Fine exceed not Twenty pounds.

We also appoint and ordain, That no Fellow or any other Colleague, publicly
profess or undertake the administration of a Humane Body, any where but in the
College, or place assigned by the President and Electors, under the penalty of
Four pounds; unless that place be distant from the City seven miles at least.

Yet we will, That it be free for any of the Colleagues publicly to exercise
Anatomy in Surgeons Hall, provided the Masters and Wardens of the Community
of Surgeons first ask leave for him of the President or Pro-President; for
we judge it just and reasonable, that they who profit by any one of the
Colleagues, should show some duty of respect to the College.

Moreover, we appoint, That all the Fellows and Candidates be present at each
Public Anatomical Dissections made in the College, decently clad with Gown
and ap, for the honor of the College and Profession.

Who shall do otherwise, shall be punished three shillings and four pence.

That the Lecture in Surgery may be the better followed with a fuller
company of proper Auditors; therefore we will and appoint that all Candidates
and all permitted to practice in this City, be obliged diligently to hear the
Chirurgical Lecture; who shall do otherwise, and behave himself more
negligently in this matter, he as often as he shall be absent, for that his
absence, each time, shall pay to the College twelve pence; which sum of money
he that shall keep in his own bands, and shall refuse to pay to the Officer of
the College deputed for that purpose, within eight days after the end of that
term, in which for his absence it was formerly due; then we will that that fine
of twelve pence be increased to two shillings and six pence, so often as it is
defaulted.

We will, moreover, That after they have diligently heard this Lecture for sive
whole years, then it may be free for them to use their own pleasure in this
matter for the future; for it is not required by us that they should be longer
hearers of that Lecture, after five years diligently spent in that Study.

We surther grant, That it may be free for every one at his pleasure, to be
thrice absent in each Term without fine, and that the fine of those who are
absent as often as it shall happen, go to the use of the Reader for the time
being; and that it is established, that a due payment be made of all those,
before they can be admitted into the College: for we judge it unfit, besides
the honor of the Art and the dignity of the College, that our Reader
expecting Auditors, should to no purpose lose his labor and pains.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Ornament and Clothing of Phisicians.
WE appoint according to the advice of Hyppocrates, That all the Fellows be
clothed with a decent Garb, as often as they come to the College, or go forth
in public, lest the excellency and dignity of our Art, by reason of
slovingliness should be reproached and contemned by the Vulgar.

Wherefore we appoint and ordain, That the President and Pro-President,
Electors, Censors, and all other Fellows, in all greater Meetings, Feasts of
the Colleagues, Funerals, and Anatomical Administrations, be clothed with Gown
and other decent apparel, upon penalty of five shillings to be paid to the
College, as often as they shall be delinquent.

CHAP XX. Of Funeral Ceremonies.
IF it happen that any one of the Colleagues die (unless he die of the Plague)
every Colleague lawfully admonished by the Beadle, shall be obliged to be
present at the Funeral, and to follow in his Order, and attend at the other
Funeral Rites and Ceremonies, under penalty of Three shillings and four pence,
to be paid to the use of the College.

Moreover, We will for the honor of the College, that a Seat for the
President in the Church be adorned with Tepestry or Hangings, and a decent
Cushion, for so long time as the Funeral Offices, and other Divine Solemnities
are celebrated.

CHAP. XXI. Of Feastings.
BEcause by honest Meetings mutual love is maintained, and the minds of
studious men recreated, We will that all who have been admitted into the
Society of the College, entertain the President and all the Fellows in Town,
at a frugal, honest, and sufficient Feast, and that at a time first appointed
by the President.

But he appoints it on the day of the ordinary or greater Meetings, or on
what day he thinks fit of the fifteen next following the Feast of St. Michael,
the Nativity of our Savior, Easter, or the Nativity of St. John Baptist.

The Feast over, it shall be lawful in the same place, excluding foreign
Arbiters, to call a Meeting, and treat of the business of the College, if the
matter require it and the President and Counselors shall judge it necessary.

But if at any time it shall happen, that he whose duty it is to provide a
Feast, cannot conveniently perform it, and therefore for some just and honest
cause to be approved by the President and greater part of the Society, he shall
desire of the Society to be kindly released from this Law, and freed from that
charge; we leave the whole matter to be moderated at the discretion of the
President and Society.

Yet whatever Colleague shall obtain this favor, that he be released from
providing a Feast, he shall pay to the use of the College Ten or Twenty
Pounds, according as it shall seem reasonable to the President and greater part
of the Fellows.

CHAP. XXII. Of Moral Conversation and Penal Statutes.
IF any strife or controversy arise from the order, gravity, and modesty
(which we prescribe to be observed in our Meetings) not duly observed; whoever
shall offend, may be punished at the pleasure of the President or Pro-President
and Censors.

But if the President shall commit any thing against the Statutes, let him be
admonished by the Consiliarii or Assistants, before the Fellows in our
Meetings, but not punished, unless for some grievous Crime, such as is robbery
or wasteing the goods of the College, and the like, so adjudged by the greater
part of the Fellows, among whom we will that there be four of the Electors; who
together with the rest shall give their judgment on that matter.

So much we attribute to the Honor and Authority of the President.
Let none reveal or divulge any thing of any moment that is said in the
College, under the penalty of Ten shillings.

No Colleague shall by name accuse another either of ignorance or ill practice,
or any villainy, or ignominious crime, or publicly reproach any of the College.

If it shall appear to the President and Censors that any has acted contrany,
the first time he shall pay to the use of the College Four pounds.

The second the Mulct shall be doubled, but if any shall offend the third time,
he shall be expelled the College, neither shall he be restored again, before
he has paid Ten pounds to the College.

No Phisician who shall be called second to a sick person, shall cause the
former Phisician to be turned away, nor shall he innovate any thing before
(unless the matter be urgent) he shall meet him, and that there be no place for
deceit, whoever is sent for to a Sick Person, he shall ask of him or the
Bystanders, whether any has prescribed a Medicine, under the Penalty of
Twenty Shillings.

Yet afterward at the pleasure of the Sick, be shall alone Cure him, or
Administer the business with the former Physician, or with any other.

Yet he shall do his endeavor, as much as in him lies, that he retain the
former with him in Practice.

But if that cannot be done with the Consent of the Sick Person, or the
Friends, he shall in no manner dispraise the former Physician, neither by
Countenance, Gesture, Suspicious Silence, or by any other means blame his
Actions to the Sick, or Bystanders; but he shall rather praise him, and that
not deccitfully by the Name of Honesty and Goodness, but (what chiesly pertains
to the matter) of a Skilful and Intelligent Physician; always remembering, that
he have the Reputation of another with others, in that esteem, which if the
Case were altered, he would desire his own, to wit, for the Honor and Dignity
of the Art he professes.

The Form of Consultation.
IF any for Cure sake shall meet to deliberate on the Condition of the Sick,
they must consult with the greatest Modesty, and not unless Foreign Arbiters
are secluded: But let the business be transacted in Latin, otherwise let there
be a Fine of five Shillings for the use of the College.

First of all they must diligently inquire into the Species or Kind, Cause and
Symptoms of the Disease, and then Remedies most convenient for the Destruction
of the Disease, and Mitigation of Symptoms, are to be propounded.

Let the Junior Phisician begin, let the Senior conclude.

But if any Senior shall be first sent sor, let him first relate the whole
matter to the rest, to wit, what he has done, and with what success, then let
them act as is Directed.

If they shall often meet to visit the same sick person, let none prescribe any
thing, nay let him not so much as hint what is to be done, before the sick or
bystanders, before with joined counsels in private, it shall be concluded among
the Phisicians themselves; lest any should seem too ambitiously to fore-stall
Practice, and snatch the free opportunity of prescribing from the rest, unless
upon some sudden and urgent occasion (and that to be approved of by the
President and Censors) he shall be compelled to prescribe alone.

If the Phisicians are of disserent opinions, so that they cannot agree among
themselves upon the same Practice, yet let them so manage themselves with the
greatest Prudence and Moderation, that their Discord may not make to the
prejudice of the Art, neither if possible let it be known to others.

If there shall be only two Physicians, let the Junior yield to the Senior, or
let them call a third, to whom the business may be referred; if many, let the
greater part carry it, if the Dissenting Physicians shall be equal in number,
let it be concluded by greater part of the Seniors: so the Honor and Dignity
of the Art will be preserved, which would otherwise by the discord of
Physicians be easily had in Contempt; he that shall Act contrary, shall be
Fined Forty Shillings.

Lest any strife or controversy should arise among Physicians for Officious
visits, fore-stallments and insinuations,

We appoint and ordain, That when other Physicians shall be called to any
Physician to consult, and according to the form prescribed by us; they are
agreed of the Disease and Remedies: Let the Senior, or some other Physician,
relate to the Sick, or Bystanders, what have been approved and prescribed by
Common Consent, the Execution whereof the others shall leave to the Ordinary
Physicians; nor shall they again visit the Sick, unless they be expressly
desired to do so from the Physician in Ordinary, or the Sick Person.

Let no Physician, whether Fellow or Candidate, or Permissive, consult with an
Empirick, or one expelled the College and forbid the Practice of Physic, or
any other Practicing Physic without Admission or Permission, unless upon some
urgent Cause, to be approved of by the President, or Pro-President, and
Censors, or the greatest part of them, under the Penalty of Forty Shillings.

Let every Physician be content with an honest Reward, according to the
Condition of the Sick and his Labor.

Let none make a Bargain with the Sick, or with any other in the name of the
Sick, about the Price of Cure.

But if any undertake Sick Persons to Cure, who will not think themselves
otherwise satisfied, unless they make a Bargain with the Physician, or if he
happen on those, who have no regard of their Estate, or Honor, and act too
sparingly, or illiberally, with Physicians, with such it shall be lawful to
make a Bargain, yet reserving a Power for the President and Censors, and in
their absence, for Four of the Elect, at their prudence to correct and alter,
if any thing be more unjustly covenanted.

Let none teach the People Medicines, or tell their Names to them (especially
if they are Vehement Medicines, as Purgers, Opiats, or Sleeping Medicines, or
which cause Abortion, Vomits, or any other of greater moment or danger) lest by
the abuse of them the People be injured; upon penalty of forty Shillings as
often as they shall offend.

He that bargains with Apothecaries for any part of the Price arising from the
Medicines to be prescribed, shall be fined forty Shillings, as often as he
shall so offend.

Let no Fellow Candidate or Permissive, make use of those Appothecaries, who
either themselves Practice Physic, or frequently serve those Physicians, who
are not Examined and Approved, according to the Statutes of this Kingdom, under
penalty of Ten Shillings, to be paid to the College, as often as he shall
offend, provided he before-warned thereof by the President or Pro-President and
Censors.

None shall refuse to pay a Fine laid on him according to the Statutes, for a
fault, under penalty of violating his Faith given to the College.

Because Aposhecaries and Surgeons, but especially the Surgeons, often
bring the Urine of Sick People to Physicians, and desire that from the
Inspection of the Urine they would prescribe something for their Sick; and
under this pretense of Consultation, manage the whole Course of Cure at their
pleasure, whatever profit or gain there is; appropriating all to themselves,
but bringing to the Phisicians nothing besides that slender and hungry reward
of inspecting the Urine.

Therefore, We Appoint and Ordain, That none, whether Fellow, Candidate, or
Permissive, give any Advice to such like Cheating Knaves and Impostors, upon
the bare Inspection of Urine, unless he shall also be called to the Sick, and
there, according as the matter shall require, prescribe proper Medicines to be
Compounded by some honest Apothecary.

Moreover, We will that to each Scrowl or Receipt (as they call them) every one
write the Day of the Month, Name of the Sick, and his own Name.

It is indeed ridiculous and foolish, only from the Inspection of Urine, after
the manner of Soothsayers and Conjurers, to attempt to Divine any thing Certain
and Solid, either of the Kind or Nature of the Disease, or of the State and
Condition of the Sick.

Therefore, We admonish all Physicians, that for the future, they carry
themselves much more wary in this matter, than heretofore was wont to be done
of many; and for this Reason we forbid all Persons Practicing Physic, that
they do not prescribe any Medicine to those Idiots and Silly Women who carry
the Pispots of Sick Persons about, unless they have first known the Sick
Person; or at least shall be plainly and fully instructed by those who ask
advice concerning the Disease and its circumstances.

For by this means we shall both better defend the dignity of Physic, and also
much more aptly and certainly devise Remedies to profit the Sick.

To conclude, We Appoint and Ordain, That, whosoever is admitted into the
Society of the College, they promise by subscribing their Names, that they
will diligently observe all the aforesaid Statutes, or willingly pay the Fines
inflicted on those that act contrary.

If according to this Model, the College be governed by the prudent counsel of
the President, Electors and Censors, and graced with the exact and obedient
duty of the rest, and adorned with Science, the Illiterate being rooted out,
and the hateful Impostors exterminated, it is most certain that this our
College will be most flourishing for ever, and it will rightly and providently
be consulted for the whole Commonwealth (as much as belongs to our duties.)

Wherefore by the Faith given the College, we exhort and beseech all the
Fellows that they have a diligent prospect every way, and act prudently, and do
not admit any for respect of Persons into the College; but that they determine
all things for the Praise, Glory, Honor, and Perpetuity of the Society;
because it is certain our College can by no means be more firmly established
and continued, then by good Laws, honest Governors, and Manners, and the
singular Virtues and Learning of the Colleagues.

FINIS.
The Statutes that are marked with these Characters * are such that the
College thought good to leave out in their New Model, and these following
ought to be inserted in those Pages that the Numbers refer to.
Page 84. We will appoint, That no Candidate, before he be admitted into the
College and made Fellow, have either the Seal of our College, or Letters
Patents, such as are granted to the Fellows at their Admission.

Page 87. Shall be punished, either by Imprisonment, or Fine, or by both, at
the pleasure of the President, Pro-President and Censors, as often as they
shall offend.

Page 91. That they give their Names to the President and Censors, and to their
power take care, that they bring with them, and have in readiness, all those
Arguments and Testimonies which have any force or weight to accuse them, that
by this means all that race of male Practisers, be either wholly extirpated, or
at least more prudently restrained.

Page 95. You stall not by your self or any other, in Word or Sign, declare the
places of questions in Examinations, you shall be prepared for the Examination
of those who desire to be examined and admitted.

To your Knowledge you shall not speak nor act against the College; the more
choice Medicines you shall not write to an Apothecary, that you may gain his
favor in procuring Patients.

FINIS.
Page 85. Volumus and Statuimus, Ut nullus Candidatus antequam admittatur in
Collegium and fiat Socius habeat aut Collegii nostri Sigillum, aut Literas
Patentes, quales Sociis in admissione conceduntur.

Page 86. Poenas luet, sive per Carcerem, sive per Mulctam, sive per utrumque
pro Praesidis and Pro-Praesidis atque Censorum arbitrio toties quoties
offenderit.

Page 90. Eorum nomina Praesidi and Censoribus significent curentque quantum in
se est, ut omnia illa argumenta and testimonia, quae vim aliquam habent atque
pondus ad eos accusandos, una secum adducant and habeant in promptu, ut hac
ratione, tota illa maleficorum progenies aut penitus extirpetur, aut saltem
paulo providentius coerceatur.

Page 94. Non indicabis verbo aut signo per te, aut alium loca quaestionem in
examinationibus, paratus eris ad examinationem eorum, qui petunt examinari and
admitti.

Sciens non loqueris nec ages contra Collegium, pretiosiora Medicamenta, non
scribes Pharmacopolae, quo favorem ejus in procurandis aegris demerearis.

FINIS.
INDEX.
Chap. 1. OF the Electors. Page 7. Their Office. Ibid. Oath. p. 11. Chap 2. Of
the President. p. 12. His Oath. p. 15. His Office. p. 20. Chap. 3. Of the
Pro-President. p. 24. His Office. p. 27. Chap. 4. Of the Assistants. p. 28.
Their Oath. p. 31. Duty. Ibid. Chap. 5. Of the Censors. p. 35. Their Office.
Ibid. Oath. p. 36. Chap. 6. Of the Meetings and of the Beadle. p. 39. His Oath.
p. 40. His Office. Ibid. Of Summoning the Colleagues to the Meetings. p. 44.
Chap. 7. Of the Ordinary and Extraordinary times of Meetings, etc. p. 52. The
Examinations of Fellows, Candidates, and Permissives. p. 56. Chap. 8. Of Making
and Abrogating Statutes, and Levying Fines. p. 64. Chap. 9. The Office of the
Treasurer. p. 67. His Oath. p. 71. Chap. 10. Of the Register. p. 72. His Oath.
p. 76. Chap. 11. Of the Candidates. p. 79. Their Oath. p. 80. Of Secret
Medicines. p. 85. Of their Payments. p. 87. Chap. 12. Of the Fellows. p. 91.
Their Oath. p. 92. Letters of Admission. p. 96. Chap. 13. Letters Testimenial
of those that Practice through England. p. 103. Chap. 14. Of Suppressing Quacks.
p. 104. The Form of Letters to Magistrates. p. 107. Chap. 15. Of Licentiates.
p. 108. Chap. 16. The Form of the Examinations p. 119. The Form of Admission.
p. 127. Chap. 17. Of the Place and Dignity of the President and Fellows. p.
128. Chap. 18. Of Anatomical Administration, and the Chirurgical Lecture. p.
131. Chap. 19. Of the Ornament and Clothing of Phisicians. p. 139. Chap. 20.
Of Funeral Ceremenies. p. 140. Chap. 21. Of Feastings. p. 143. Chap. 22. Of
Moral Conversation and Penal Statutes. p. 147. The Form of Consultation. p.
152.
FINIS.
INDEX.
Cap. 1. DE Electoribus. Page 6. Officium. Ibid. Fides data. p. 10. Cap. 2. De
Praeside. p. 13. Sponsio seu Fides data. p. 14. Officium. p. 22. Cap. 3. De
Pro-Praeside. p. 25. Officium. p. 26. Cap. 4. De Consiliariis. p. 29. Data
Fides. p. 30. Officium. Ibid. Cap. 5. De Censoribus. p. 34. Officium. Ibid.
Juramentum. p. 37. Cap. 6. De Comitiis and de Bedello. p. 38. Data Fides. p.
41. Officium. Ibid. De Collegis Admonendis ad Comitia. p. 45. Cap. 7. De
Temporibus Ordinariis and Extraordinariis, etc. p. 53. Examinatio Sociorum,
Candidatorum, and Permissorum. p. 57. Cap. 8. De Statutis Condendis and
Abrogandis, and de Mulctis. p. 65. Cap. 9. De Officio Thesaurarn. p. 66. Data
Fides. p. 70. Cap. 10. De Registrario. p. 73. Data Fides. p. 77. Cap. 11. De
Candidatis. p. 78. Data Fides. p. 81. De Arcanis. p. 85. De Solutionibus. p.
86. Cap. 12. De Sociis. p. 90. Data Fides. p. 93. Literae Admissionis. p. 97.
Cap. 13. Literae Testimoniales Practicantium per Regnum. p. 102. Cap. 14. De
Coercendis Empiricis. p. 105. Forma Literarum ad Senatores. p. 106. Cap. 15. De
Permissis. p. 109. Cap. 16. Forma Examinationum. p. 118. Formula Admissionis.
p. 126. Cap. 17. De Loco and Dignitate Praesidis and Sociorum. p. 129. Cap. 18.
De Anatomica Administratione and Lectura Chirurgiae. p. 130. Cap. 19. De Ornatu
and Vestitu Medicorum. p. 138. Cap. 20. De Exequiis. p. 141. Cap. 21. De
Conviviis. p. 142. Cap 22. De Conversatione Morali and Statutis Poenalibus. p.
146. Consultandi Formula. p. 153.
FINIS.
THE NEW STATVTES OF The President of the College, or Commonalty of the
Faculty of PHYSIC of LONDON, Made by the President of the College, or
Commonalty aforesaid, with the consent of the President of the College, or
Commonalty aforesaid, in the year 1687. and that they may remain established,
fixed, and certain, signed with the Common Seal of the same College, or
Commonalty aforesaid, the 28th of September, in the year 1687.
1. THat none, to any but the absent Fellows, reveal or divulge the Secrets of
the College, or any thing of any moment, that is said in the Assemblies,
whether greater or lesser, under the penalty of Forty shillings the first time,
Five pounds the second, and the third Expulsion from the College: We will have
all that esteemed for a secret or matter of moment, whatever shall be
pronounced in the Assemblies or Meetings by the President or the two Senior
Censors present, fit to beconcealed.

2. Let no Phisician, whether Fellow or Candidate, or Licentiate, consult with
an Empirick, or who is rejected by the College, or forbidden the Practice of
Physic, or any other practicing Physic without Admission or Permission, who
is not Phisician to the King or the Royal Family, and to whom a Salary has
been assigned, or who by chance shall come out of the Country, with no design
of staying in the City, under the penalty of Ten pounds.

3. Let no Phisician who shall be called second to a sick person, cause the
former Phisician to be repelled or put by, nor shall he alter any thing, unless
the matter be urgent, before he meet his Colleague; and that there be no place
for deceit, whoever is sent for to a sick person, shall inquire of him or the
bystanders, whether any one has prescribed any Medicine, under the penalty of
Forty shillings the first time, the second Five pounds; but if any shall in
like manner offend the third time, he shall be expelled the College.

4. If to visit the same sick person, two or more Phisicians shall meet
together, let none prescribe any thing, nay let him not so much as hint what is
to be done, in presence of the sick or bystanders, before with joint counsel
in private, it shall he concluded betwixt them; lest he seem too ambitiously to
fore-stall Practice, and snatch the free opportunity of preseribing from all
the rest, unless by some sudden and urgent occasion, and that to be approved by
the President and Censors, he shall be compelled to prescribe alone; under the
penalty of Five pounds, as often as he is delinquent: but if any shall be found
often to offend in this matter or part, let him be removed from the College
with ignominy.

5. Lest any strife or controversy should arise between Phisicians for
officious visitings, forestallments, and insinuations, we appoint and ordain,
that when other Phisicians shall be called to any Phisician to consult, that
the elder Phisician, or same other, relate to the sick, or bystanders, what by
common consent have been approved and prescribed, and let the rest leave the
execution thereof to the ordinary Phisician; nor shall they again visit the
sick, unless expressly desired to do so by the ordinary Phisician, or from the
sick person, on the penalty of Five pounds as often as they shall be found
delinquent.

6. None shall refuse to pay Subscriptions or Payments due, or lastly Fines
inflicted on them for default, according to the Statutes, under penalty of
expulsion from the College.

7. Seeing by the wandering Discourse of men there is a report that some
Phisicians of our Community, after the manner of Empericks, disperse Bills
among the common People, whereby they may hawk out a sordid and mean practice
among the ordinary sort of people, and in the mean time bring no small
dishonor to the faculty of Physic, We Appoint and Ordain, that no Colleague
Print, Divulge, or by any means Publish any Book, Treatise, Table, Paper, or
Pamphlet whatsoever, wherein is contained any thing that relates to the Art of
Physic or Surgery, or the Practice of them, without leave and approbation
of the President and Censors, or the greater part of them, under the penalty of
four pounds the first time, eight pounds the second, but the third Expulsion
from the College.

8. If by chance any Surgeon or Apothecary shall offer himself to the
President and Censors to be examined, that he may be received into the number
of Candidates, or Licentiates; We will that he before Examination, or at least
before Admission, be wholly discharged from all Tie and Obligation, wherewith
he was formerly oblidged to his Community; for we do not think it just or
convenient, to admit any into our Society, who has his Faith oblidged to
another.

9. Because it is found by Experience that the Apothecaries from the Prescripts
of Physicians, attain some pretense or shadow of false Knowledge (every where
boasting themselves to Sick Persons) which they abuse, not without the hazard
of others, to their own profit; We Determine and Ordain, that no Colleague for
the future, either Fellow, Candidate, or Licentiate, add Directions as they
call them, to their Prescripts or Physical Scrowls (save only in Hospitals) but
he shall leave them with the Sick, or at least take care that they be first
signed and carried to his house; in the mean time let him command, that the
Medicines prescribed in the Scrowls be only signed with some agreeable titles
or apt notes for their distinction, to the intent that as much as in us lies,
nothing at all be smelt out by this sort of Medicasters, with what design,
intention, or for what uses the Remedies are prescribed: let every one be fined
Twenty Shillings for the use of the College as often as they shall fail in
this part.

10. Let no Fellow, Candidate, or Permissive, make use of an Apothecary whom in
the greater Meetings (at which all Colleagues of all ranks are forewarned that
they be present) the President has renounced, or declared to practice Physic,
or has been twice about that matter summoned to appear before the President and
Censors, and has not appeared, on the penalty of Forty shillings the first
time, the second five pounds, and the third Expulsion from the College. Let
the Office of the President and Censors be to inquire into such like causes,
weigh the matters, and define who is guilty of Practice; and whom they or the
greater part of them, shall judge so, we determine and will, that he be called,
and is, a Practicing Apothecary. Lastly, We charge and command the Fellows,
with all the rest of the Colleagues, that laying aside all affection and respest
of persons, that whatsomever Apothecaries of that sort they find to have
practiced, they bring their names to the President and Censors, and that under
the penalty of breach of Faith given to the College.

11. Whereas some of our Statutes seem more severely to have constituted the
penalty of Expulsion to Delinquents, so that all hope and expectation of
returning into the College being precluded, and no place is left for
repentance, it has seemed good so to moderate this severity of Laws, with some
mixture of clemency, that if any expelled out of the College, openly,
ingenuously, and submissively, confess his Crime in the greater Meetings, and
withal presently pay whatever Fines have been formerly laid on him for
defaults, and ten pounds besides for the use of the College; on these
Conditions it may be lawful for the President and greater part of the Fellows,
to restore him to his former Place, State, and Dignity.

12. We appoint that every year on the same day, and with the same suffrages
wherewith the Censors are wont to be created, that ten men be chose out of the
Fellows, that are more fit then, the rest to expedite and dispatch business; in
the number of which we will always have the President, who for the following
year are the stated Delegates or Committee men, and it may be lawful for them
at any time, according to their pleasure to meet, discourse and handle matters
of any sort, relating to the Profit, or Honor of the College, to relate their
Opinions and Consults to the Society in the greater Meetings: Lastly, to
execute and perform all other things that our most Sovereign Prince James the
Second, in Letters Patents lately given us, has committed to our charge.

13. In the Election of a Treasurer, we will that altogether the same form be
observed, which is before appointed by us in creating the Censors, to wit, that
he be chose after the same manner, at the same time, and by the same Suffrages;
and moreover we appoint that the Treasurer now Elect, before he be admitted to
his Office, be oblidged by a Bond signed with his own Seal, to the President
and our Society, that at the summons of the same President and Electors, he, to
them, and four other Fellows appointed to this purpose, by the College, shall
faithfully give an account of what is received and disburst: and lastly, the
Accounts made up, whatsomever the sum of the Remainder due to the College
shall be, he will pay it to the said College, within twenty days after the
Account is made up. Let the Witnesses made use of to this Bond be three
Foreigners, who are joined with us by no right of Community.

14. We will that the Seal of the College for the future be set to no Letters
Testimonial, save to those Fellows to whom at the time of their Admission by
the Statutes, it is granted to have, that is to those who have a right of
Voting in greater Meetings: But let them pay the Beadle ten Shillings for these
Letters, as for others by which a License to practice without the City is
granted, us being signed by the Hands and Seals of the President only and three
of the Elect, let the Licentiates pay six shillings and eight pence.

15. Whereas formerly there was no convenient place within the College,
wherein our Writings might be kept, we have thought good for these uses in the
Study of Henry Guy Esquire to build a Desk or Paper-Treasury, whereof let there be
Four Keys; one of them let the President have, another the Treasurer, and both
the two Senior Censors likewise one: in this Place and Custody we will that the
Diplomata of Princes, Bonds, and other Instruments of the College, and lastly,
all Papers whatsomever of that sort, and Parchments which are of greater
moment, be contained and kept; but we forbid that any thing be brought out
thence without the consent of the College, unless by chance or some urgent
necessity, it shall otherwise seem good to the Committee, or President, and
Censors; besides we appoint that in the same place be laid up the Common Seal
of the College in a small Cabinet made for this purpose, whose Key let the
President have, and as often as need shall be, let him open it in the greater
Meetings: neither will we that our Common Seal be affixed to any Instrument
elsewhere, then in the aforesaid Assemblies.

16. We appoint and ordain, That no Chirurgeen, Apothecary, or any such
Artificer, be admitted into the Order of Candidates, on Fellows, whoever has
exercised, any less liberal Art, or bound to Servitude, has laid his beginning
in a Shop, lest peradventure if we should so choose such into the College, we
might seem not sufficiently to have consulted either our own Dignity or the
Honor of the Universities of England, which notwithstanding we ought and
always will Honor with the highest Veneration.

FINIS.
STATUTA NOVA Praesidis Collegii, seu Communitatis Facultatis MEDICINAE
LONDINI, per Praesidem Collegii, seu Communitatem praedictam, per consensum
Praesidis, Collegii, seu Communitatis praedictae, Anno 1687 facta, and ut rata
firma ac certa permaneant Sigillo Communi ejusdem Collegii, seu Communitatis
praedictae 28 die Septembris 1687, munita.
1. UT ne quis cuiquam praeterquam Sociis absentibns revelet, aut propalet
Secreta Collegii, aut quidquam alicujus momenti quod in Comitiis (sive
majoribus sive minoribus) dictum sit, sub poena Quadraginta solidorum prima
vice, Quin que librarum secunda vice, and tertia Expulsionis a Collegio, id
autem omne pro secreto, and re momenti haberi volumus, quicquid a Praeside, vel
Censorum praesentium duobus Senioribus celandum esse in Comitiis pronuntiatum
fuerit.

2. Nullus Medicus, sive Socius, sive Candidatus, sive Permissus, Consilium
ineat cum Empirico, aut Rejecto a Collegio, aut a Medicinae praxi prohibito,
aut alio aliquo, sine Admissione, aut Permissione Medicinam exercente, qui non
sit Medicus Regius, aut Regiae Familiae, cui Stipendium assignatum fuerit, vel
qui forte e Rure advenerit nullo in Urbe commorandi Consilio sub poena December
librarum.

3. Nullus Medicus qui secundus ad aegrum vocabitur, priorem Medicum repelli
saciat, nec quidquam prius innovabit, nisi res urgeat, quam Collegam
convenerit, and ne quis fraudi locus sit; quicunque ad aegrum accersitur, ab
illo, vel astantibus percunctabitur, an quis Medicamentum aliquod
praescripserit sub poena Quadraginta solidorum prima vice, secunda Quinque
librarum, si quis autem tertia vice pariter offenderit, expelletur a Collegio.

4. Si ad eundem aegrum visendum, duo, vel plures Medici simul convenerint nemo
quidquam praescribat immo ne innuat quidem, quid agendum sit, coram aegro, vel
adstantibus priusquam conjunctis Consiliis, privatim inter ipsos conclusum
fuerit ne ambitiose nimium videatur praxin praeoccupare and reliquis liberam
praescribendi ansam praeripere, nisi subita and urgente aliqua occasion eaque
approbanda a Praeside and Censoribus coactus fuerit solus praescribere sub
poena quinque librarum, quoties deliquerit: quod si quis in hac part saepius
offendisse deprehendetur a Collegio cum ignominia amoveatur.

5. Ne qua lis, aut Controversia inter Medicos propter officiosas visitationes,
praeoccupationes, and insinuationes oriatur; statuimus and ordinamus, ut quum
ad Medicum quemlibet, alii Medici, consultandi gratia advocati fuerint, Senior
Medicus, vel alius aliquis referat aegro, aut adstantibus, quae approbata, and
praescripta communi consensu fuerint, eorundemque executionem caeteri ordinario
Medico relinquant, nec denuo visitabunt aegrum nisi a Medico ordinario, aut ab
aegro, ut id faciant express rogati fuerint, sub poena quinque librarum toties
quoties deliquerint.

6. Nemo subscriptiones, aut solutiones debitas, aut denique Mulctas sibi pro
delicto, secundum Statuta inflictas, solvere recusabit, sub poena expulsionis e
Collegio.

7. Quoniam pervagato hominnm sermon fama percrebuit, quosdam nostrae
Communitatis Medicos, Empericorum more Schedulas in vulgus spargere, quibus ut
inter plebeios sordidam, and illiberalem praxin aucupentur, facultati interim
Medicinae haud levem ignominiae labem aspergunt, Statuimus and Ordinamus, ne
quis Collega Typis Mandet, divulget, aut quoquo modo in Publicum emittat librum
aliquem, Tractatum. Tabellam, Chartam, Schedulamve aliquam, in quibus
contineatur quicquam quod ad Artem Medicinae, vel Chirurgiae, earumve praxin
spectet, sine permissu, and approbatione Praesidis, and Censorum, vel eorum
majore part, sub poena quatuor librarum prima vice, octo librarum secunda,
tertia autem Expulsionis e Collegio.

8. Si quis forte Chirurgus, aut Pharmacopola, se Praesidi, and Censoribus
Examinandum obtulerit, quo in Candidatorum, Permissorumve Numerum recipiatur;
eum, ante examinationem, aut saltem ante Admissionem, omni Jure and Obligatione
penitus exui volumus, quibus suae Communitati prius obstringebatur; neque enim
aequum; aut commodum censemus quemquam in Societatem nostram admittere qui
Fidem alteri addictam habet.

9. Quoniam Experientia compertum est, Pharmacopolas ex Medicorum praescriptis,
speciem quandam, and umbram falsae Scientiae consectari, qua se passim aegris
venditantes, non sine aliorum periculo, ad suum compendium abutuntur;
Statuimus, and Ordinamus, ne quis in posterum Collega, sive Socius, sive
Candidatus, sive Praemissus, praescriptis suis, seu Schedulis Medicinalibus,
directiones (quas vocant) adjiciant (praeterquam in Nosocomiis) sed eas apud
aegrum ipse relinquet, aut saltem prius obsignatas ad ejus domum transferendas
curabit; Medicamenta interim in Schedulis praescripta, jubeat solummodo ut
titulis quibusdam congruentibus, aut notis ad eorum distinctionem aptis
signentur, nempe ut quantum in nobis est, nihil quicquam hujusmodi Medicastris
Suboleat, quo consilio, qua ve intention, aut in quos usus Remedia
praescribantur: mulctentur autem singuli viginti solidis in usum Collegii
quoties in hac part deliquerit.

10. Nullus Socius, Candidatus, aut Permissus, Pharmacopolae opera utatur, quem
in Comitiis majoribus (quibus ut intersint omnes omnium ordinum Collegae
praemoniti sunt) Praeses renunciaverit, aut Medicinae praxin exercere, aut ea
de causa bis citatum, ut se sisteret coram Praeside, and Censoribus, nondum
comparuisse, sub poena quadraginta solidorum prima vice, secunda quinque
librarum, and tertia Expulsionis e Colegio. Praesidis autem and Censorum esto
hujusmodi causas cognoscere, momenta expendere, and definire, quis praxeos
teneatur, and quem illi, aut major pars eorum judicaverit, eum nos
Pharmacopolam Practicantem esse, statuimus and appellari volumus. Denique
Sociis, caeterisque Collegis omnibus, precipimus, and mandamus, ut seposito
omni affectu, and respectu Personarum, ejusmodi Pharmacopoeos quoscunque praxin
exercuisle deprehenderint, eorum nomina Praesidi, and Censoribus deferant,
idque sub poena violatae Fidei Collegio Praestitae.

11. Cum Statuta quaedam nostra gravius Delinquentibus poenam Expulsionis ita
constituisse videantur, ut praeclusa omni spe, and expectatione redeundi in
Collegium, nihil quicquam loci relictum est penitentiae, visum est hanc legum
severitatem Clementiae temperatione aliqua sic moderari, ut si quis e Collegio
Expulsus, culpam suam in majoribus Comitiis aperte, ingenue, and demisse
confiteatur, simulque mulctas quascunque ob delicta prius irrogata, and
praeterea december libras in usum Collegii statim solvat, illum his Conditionibus
liceat Praesidi, and majori parti Sociorum in pristinum Locum, Statum, and
Dignitatem restituere.

12. Statuimus, ut singulis annis eodem die, iisdemque Suffragiis quibus
Censores creaii solent, e Sociis december eligantur viri, ad expedienda and
transigenda negotia prae caeteris maxim idonei (quo in numero Praesidem,
semper haberi volumus) qui in annum sequentem, stati sint deligati, iisque
liceat quoquo tempore pro suo Arbitrio convenire res qualitercunque ad
utilitatem, aut honorem Collegii spectantes discutere, and tractare, suasque
sententias, and confulta ad Societatem in Comitiis majoribus refer: Denique
caetera exequi, and praestare quaecunque ipsis Serenissimus Princeps Jacobus
Secundus in Literis Patentibus nuper ad nos datis procuranda commisit.

13. In Thesaurarii Electione, eandem prorsus formam, observari volumus quae a
nobis antea in Censoribus creandis constituta est, nempe ut eodem modo, eodem
tempore, and per eadem Suffragia eligatur, tunc praeterea statuimus, ut
Thesaurarius jam electus, priusquam admittatur ad Officium suum, Chirographo
Sigillo suo signato obligetur Praesidi, and Societati nostrae, se monitu
ejusdem Praesidis and Electorum, ipsis quatuorque aliis Sociis ad hanc rem a
Collegio deligatis, accepti, and expensi rationem fideliter redditurum, and
denique calculis subductis, quaecunque reliqui summa fuerit, Collegio debiti,
eam se intra dies viginti a peracto computo eidem Collegio praestiturum, testes
autem adhibeantur huic obligationi tres extranei, qui nullo communitatis jure
nobiscum conjuncti sunt.

14. Nullis in posterum Literis Testimonialibus, apponi volumus figillum
Collegii, preterquam istis, quas tempore Admissionis suae, per Statuta Sociis
habere conceditur, iis nempe qui jus habent Suffragii in majoribus Comitiis;
solvantur autom Bedello pro hujusmodi Literis december solidos, pro aliis vero
quibus extra Urbem practicandi Licentia conceditur utpote Chirographis, and
Sigillis Praesidis solummodo, and trium Electorum muniendis, solvant permissi
sex solidos octo denarios.

15. Cum nullus olim intra Collegium locus extiterit idoneus in quo Scripta
nostra conservarentur, placuit ad hos usus in Musaeo Henr. Guii. Armigeri
Scriniam, vel Charto-phylaceum extrui, cujus quatuor sint Claves eorumque unam
Praeses, alteram Thesaurarius, duorum autem Censorum Seniorum, uterque itidem
unam habeant, hic loci atque hac Custodia contineri volumus, and servari,
Principum Diplomata, Chirographa, caeteraque Instrumenta Collegii; denique
alias id genus Chartulas quascunque, and membranas, quae sunt majoris momenti:
Prohibemus autem inde proferri quidquam injussu Collegii, nisi forte urgente
aliqua necessitate aliter visum fuerit deligatis, aut Praesidi, and Censoribus,
Praeterea statuimus ut eodem loco reponatur Sigillum Commune Collegii, in
Arcula in hunc finem fabricata, cujus Clavem Praeses habeat, and quoties opus
fuerit in majoribus Comitiis ipse aperiat, neque alibi quam in Comitiis
praedictis cuicunque Instrumento Sigillum nostrum Commune apponi volumus.

16. Statuimus and Ordinamus, Ut in Candidatorum vel Sociorum Ordinem nullus
admittatur Chirurgus, Pharmacopaeus, aliusve aliquis ejusmodi Artifex, qui aut
artem quamcunque minus liberalem unquam exercuerit, aut ad servitutem
adstrictus in Officina Tyrocinium posuit, ne forte si tales in Collegium ita
cooptentur, non satis consuluisse videamur, aut Dignitati nostrae, aut Honori
Academiarum nostratium quas tamen summa veneratione prosequi debemus, and
semper volumus.

FINIS.

