A REPLY TO A Scandalous Pamphlet ENTITLED A DECLARATION AGAINST Judicial
Astrology, WRITTEN By the Quondam (most ignorant and weak) Practitioner Mr.
JOHN RAUNCE. Wherein he is both stripped of all his weak arguments, and confuted
as altogether ignorant of the Art.

By William Ramsey Gent. Qui est artium Candidissimus amator.

Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem.

LONDON, Printed for W. Larnar at the Black-moore in Bishops-gate-street, 1650.

A REPLY TO A Scandalous Pamphlet entitled, A Declaration against Judicial
ASTROLOGY.
IT has been (and is commonly) known, that in all ages there has been one or
other that has denied, nay openly writ against the most manifest Truths, nay,
even against the Divine Scriptures themselves; being merely either stirred up
with a self-conceited pride of their own knowledge, or envy that any should
profess or mantain for truth what they are altogether ignorant of. Amongst
which beasts and envious novices, I may justly and lawfully reckon this Learned
Mr. J. Raunce, who is so impudently audacious, to condemn what in the least
manner he can nether understand or comprehend, and that is the Art of Judicial
Astrology; which he first begins to condemn, by opening the vanity of the Art,
in it self, (as he called it) which he says, is a kind of Diabolical
Divination, Page 2. line 2. of his scandalous Paper; but how he can prove it
Diabolical, more then by barely saying so, is as far beyond his wit to perform,
as it is for him to apprehend the mystery and verity of the same; and l. the 3
and fourth, he persists in his vilifying malicious speeches thus; being full of
Idolatry and Superstition, and is contrary to the Scriptures. And this he
endeavors to prove thus, No man can Divine by the Stars, but by observing of
time, and (says he) this regarding of time is not lawful, as you may find
Deuteronomy. 18. ( ver. 10. sure he means) for he names no verse, as distrusting his
understanding in the text, as well he may, if the words be thoroughly weighed
and considered, which are these; Let none be found among you which is a
regarder of times; This he picketh out of the midst of the text, and from the
midst of nine several kinds of Superstition, there rehearsed, affirming thus
generally, that Astrology is there comprehended; but I am confident all his
shallow brains cannot prove, that Astrology is in the least mentioned by name
in thole words by him recited but if he had more particularly considered the
text, and with a candid eye, he had never thus over-shot himself, and declared
himself so apparently malicious to the Art of Astrology, to apply this text to
signify Astrology; only because it mentions the observing of time, for says
he, l. 11. p. the 2. it is well known unto us, that in divining by Stars which
is Judicial Astrology, the Astrologer is not able to divine or foretell any
thing, but by observing of times; which words he brings to prove, that by that
passage of Scripture is meant Astrology, which is merely his own construction;
for, it will puzle both him, Perkins, Picus and all that ever durst to bark
enviously at the Art, to prove by Scripture, or show therein any passage
wherein God does plainly forbid men, either Jews or Gentiles, to study the Art
of Astrology, or prohibit indeed any knowledge of his Creatures, which is a
good and probable means to bring us to the knowledge of his Divine self; not to
Idolize them as he would needs possess the vulgar, that Astrologers do; when
Astrologers know and do confess they are but secondary causes, and signs of the
will and pale sure of God, inclining the dispositions and humors in man, being
composed of the 4 Elements; not compelling (as he would most erroneously and
maliciously persuade the vulgar) that Astrologers maintain. Wherefore except he
could have proved that passage of Scripture to signify Astrology by better and
sounder arguments then his own, which is so weak and groundless, that it
vanishes with himself, not fit either to be more mentioned or thought on; and
yet this Idiot is so fantastically conceited of this his own bare construction,
and censure of the Scripture, that he thereon concludes with himself, that his
opinion and judgment he so readily pumpt out of his shallow Cocks-comb, is so
invincible an argument, that he thus persists, See here now what your Astrology
is, is it any thing else then Superstition and Idolatry? For they say one time
is good, another bad, and further thus, thus you may see that what the
Scripture says God made only good, they make to be both good and evil. By
which argument he would fain conclude, Astrology to be superstitious, as if a
fatal necessity were concluded, which is not an opinion of the Astrologer, as I
said before, neither do they make time both good and bad, for the worst time as
sickness and other casualties, which perhaps he means the Astrologers call bad
times (for he declares not his mind, what he means, nor what he would be at) is
good in some sense, for it tends to the glory of God in one kind or other, how
ill or bad soever it may appear to such a Novice as him; for the world nor
naught therein, had ever been made bur for his glory, so that the Scripture is
no wise by the Astrologer contradicted, when he tells a man an ill time of
trouble, or sicknesses, Crosses, or the like, is suddenly to happen on him, he
calls it perhaps an ill time, as having relation to the patient or party, that
must undergo these afflictions; yet this time in it self brings perhaps this
suffering wrath by afflictions to God and his fear, or perhaps brings death,
however it tends to the glory of God, and therefore in it self the time is
good; Ergo no contradiction of the Scriptures by the Astrologers, in making
that time which God made good, to be both good and ill.

Again he persists in his inveterate malice, and runs on without either fear or
wit, not knowing indeed what he says, being so inveterately malicious, for he
says Astrology denies the providence of God in the disposing of the several
changes that happen to man in this life, (if ruled by the Stars) for say they
(meaning the Astrologers) thus shall this man live and dye, because of the
Stars he had in his Nativity, and of another man, thus quite contrary, by
reason of contrary positions of the Planets at the Birth. I pray consider, and
you shall see this to be very wickedness, for God so rules the world by his
providence that not a sparrow falls to the ground, nor a hair of our heads
without his permission; therefore (says Mr. John Raunce) it must needs follow,
that the whole course of our life is only governed by the providence of God
alone, and not by the constellations of the Heaven. So that, by this argument
he would fain conclude, and prove by thus cavelling, that the Stars were made
for no use, but him and such Idiots to gaze on; when as the Scripture in plain
terms tells us, they are for days and times and years. Genesis 1.14. but I would
fain he would tell me, why the immediate providence of God is not shown to
alter (from the course of the Moon) the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, nay the
Thames here in England, that every Waterman can tell him the just time by the
motion of the Moon? (for it may be he never saw the Sea.) I could mention and
instance many more effects of the Planets, but perhaps they will seem Riddles
to him, and Paradoxes, and so it may be will deny them, because he is ignorant
of them, as he does the whole Art; but every common Water-man will convince him
of this, if he have not brains either to conceive, or believe it; but to come
closer home to the purpose. The influence of the Stars on man's body, is so far
from denying the providence of God, that it clearly proves it to be the more
manifest; for God works not immediately, neither does he cause rain, or snow,
or frost, or fair weather immediately; but has left the cause of all these to
their influence, according to the several aspects and positions of the Planets,
ordaining it so from the beginning; neither does he work any new work, but what
ever happens, was pre-ordained to come to pass in its due time, so that he
does now no work, but sits and upholdeth all by his Omnipotent, Omniscient
wisdom and power: so that it adds to his glory, that when he made those
heavenly Bodies the Planets, to rule all sublunary things and times, that he
fore-knew the events, dispositions of men, alterations of Kingdoms, Commotions,
Plenties, Famines, Plagues, Healths, Sicknesses, Wars, Peace, and what not by
their effects; Neither let this seem strange to Mr. John Raunce who is so well
acquainted with the Scriptures, that he brings proof against what he
understands not; for Christ says, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the world, Matt. 25.34. and
Paul, to the Ephesians, chap. 1. v. 4. proves us to be predestined and chosen
before the beginning of the world; so that it is cleared, that what ever shall
happen from the beginning of the world and before, to the end, was pre-ordained
to happen: so that if a man by the position of the Planets at his birth be
ordained to be (according to natural causes a thief, a murderer, or the like)
what can Mr. Raunce say; that will become of that man by this immediate
providence of God, but destruction if God does not mercifully show his goodness
toward him; this does no wise certainly derogate from the providence of God,
who has ordained such and such accidents to happen to every man, from the
beginning of his life to the end. He comes then with his inveterate malicious
railings, (which becomes an Oyster-wench far better then a Scholar, who ought
to prove rather their arguments by reason and sense, then envious names,
without proofs, or indeed reason at all,) for says he, And now for horary
questions, what are they? are they any thing less then satanical delusions, as
is the vest of that wicked Art? Certainly there is no judicial impartial eye,
but will rather think him to be inclining to diabolical practices then
Astrologers, and also so judge him, to belie so public an apparent truth as
Astrology is, (as before I shut up my full discourse I shall satisfy him it is)
to call it Diabolical and no wise prove it so, which is as false as all his
frivolous arguments against it, and liars are Diabolical I am confident, since
the Devil is their Father, and the more Diabolical and apparently he shows
himself to be the Child and Instrument of the Devil, by his envy, to rail in
such gross terms against truth, which his Father the Devil has ever in all
ages strived to eclips, by such ignorant instruments and Children of his, as
John Raunce; and let him not be angry, if I should here also call him dunce,
since he tells me in his Title Page, he was sometimes a practitioner of the
Art, and is yet so ignorant as to call it Diabolical; but indeed his weak
shallow brains could no wise apprehend ^or attain to the knowledge of it: a
learned man or a wise man would rather have admired what he could not
understand, then presently to rail against it, and not able to prove it so,
and this serves very fitly to prove him really a dunce, or at least a fool to
condemn what he understands not in the least manner; for how can he prove this
Art Diabolical, which depends only on the true and perfect knowledge of the
Stars (that has no affinity (I am confident he will say himself) with his
Father the Devil) and their influences, which are but natural things; And by
knowing natural and earthly things, Paul says, we shall know heavenly things
the better, much more then by knowing the Stars, which are above us, when the
knowledge of what is beneath us, made Aristottle (that some time attributed all
to nature) at last confess there must needs be a Deity and a Godhead: and
Moses says, the Stars are signs; and David, The Heavens declare the glory of
God. Certainly, then no wise Diabolical yet this impudent, ignorant, envious
dunce (who thinks his own words (he is so self-conceited a fool) is sufficient
to condemn an Art, and such an one, as that his shallow Cox-comb can no wise
obtain (which is the ground of his envy,) does not stick to contradict him that
tells us truly what the Heavens declare, and what the Stars signify, (without
any proof but his own word, which is as vain and empty as his brain, and too
light by many ounces to prove his Argument, yet wants light to make a judicious
impartial eye see that dark ignorance whereof he dreams) and with it the
Scripture; though he says, show me in what place of the Scripture the Art of
Astrology is upheld or justified, when it will puzle all his learned brains, to
show me any one place (though he says there are many, and sets some down,
which I shall make clear to him do no wise serve for his purpose) that does
really condemn or disallow of it; but he must know that the divine word was
written wholly for our instruction to salvation, not to decide the legallity or
illegality of Astrology, or other Arts; yet what is above said, is enough to
any gallant spirit of the lawfulness of his study, and insight therein, since
they declare the glory of his Creator; I know not how then learned M. Raunce
will prove it either Diabolical or illegal, or contrary to the Scripture, since
it tends to so good an end, that the knowledge thereof is the declaring and
manifesting the glory, and greatness of the omnipotent Creator of both us and
them; But to come to his proofs of Scripture he imagins condemns Astrology.

His first is, Deuteronomy. 18. his second. Esaias 47. his third, Dan. 2. his fourth,
Jer. 10. his fifth, Mich. 5. he tells you no particular ver. where in any of
these places, you may readily turn to it: lest then you should discover his
envious knavery in wresting the Scriptures, but tells you at random the
Chapters; that so you may rather conclude as he says, then desire or seek to
trouble your self to disprove him.

Concerning his first proof Deuteronomy. 18. it is in the 10. v. though this proof be
already answered him before; yet I will say thus much, that I am confident Mr.
Raunce nor his author Mr. Perkins can prove, that in this place there is either
Astrology or Astrologers named; I might therefore with as good liberty, and
better reason, deny any such matter, then he affirms it, for it is his part
to prove, but let Mr. Raunce consider the word in the original, gnonen, which
our English Translatours in this place take for a regarder of times; yet in
other places otherwise, as in 2 Chronicles. 33.6. the same word is taken for
witchcraft, and in the 5. of Micha for Southsayers; wherefore I may ask Mr.
Raunce, why not in this place of Deuteronomy. it may not as well be interpreted
Witchcraft or Southsayer as well as a regarder of times? or else he must
understand such a regarder of times, as makes his election by Witchcraft and
Southsaying, and not by Astrology. But suppose we understand the word as the
English translate it, and as he would have, yet all observation of times is not
forbidden, neither by this place is the regarding of times by Astrology proved
unlawful, or prohibited; for Solomon the wisest of men says, the heart of the
wise knows time; and further, that there is a time for every thing, a time to
plant, a time to pluck up, a time to be born, and a time to dye, a time to
break down, and a time to build, a time to kill, and a time to heal, a time to
weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn and a time to dance, etc. to the 9.
verse, Eccles. 3.2.3.4. which none but the fool neglects: wherefore if this
were the true sense of the word, all are prohibited to observe times in
general, would not Mr. Raunce think it a strange thing, or at least that man to
be as mad as himself that should, when he should sleep, go walk abroad, or when
he should go about his business, go to bed and steep, or a man to weep when he
should be merry, and be merry when he should mourn; or go to plough when he
should reap, and the like: wherefore we must take this place to speak of the
superstitious observation of times; but this learned Practitioner Mr. Raunce,
in what he understands not, will needs intrude Astrology among witch craft and
south-saying, when all that knows any thing in Astrology, will condemn him
rather for a novice, then an Artist, since Astrology has not in the least any
relation to the observation of any times but what are natural: wherefore this
being a mere wrest of the text, or at least an ignorant mistake in learned Mr.
Raunce. I hold it not convenient longer here to insist, but leave him to peruse
for his better nodefication the 2. Chap. of Sir Christopher Heydon, in defense
of Astrology, where he may have a full resolution and confutation of his
former question and proofs, he has set down in his Pamphlet, or can in any
other; wherefore I wholly refer him and all of his simple mind, to condemn any
thing before they understand, to the serious perusal of the same, and hasten to
reply his remaining Cavils.

His next is, That because the drift of Astrology is to foretell of the
particular events of things, he will not because -- but leaves it to all that
are not drunk with Astrology, to judge how contrary it is unto the Scripture.
Truly Mr. Raunce, no more contrary unto it, nor the word of God, then you may
think me your enemy, because I sign your being a Scholar, and a learned man,
a book of Hebrew or Greek to read, which perhaps the vulgar understands not.
Shall the vulgar say because you can distinguish every Character and word,
together with his signification and force that you are a Witch, or a
Southsayer, merely because you pass them in knowledge and learning, and
therefore you are (concluding without rhyme or reason) a Witch contrary both to
God and his word? this is the reason why you say Astrology is contrary to the
word of God, because in your weak apprehension you conclude they work by
illegal means as Witches and Southsayers; but sure it is so long since you were
a Practitioner, (for you say some time a Practitioner) that I believe time has
rooted the rules of Art quite out of your memory, or it was so short a time you
practiced, that you did not fully attain unto them; but it had been your part
to have proved it so.

But Mr. Raunce, I pray what is a Comet? is it a natural Star, or a
supernatural Sign? if a natural Star, why then is it not always visible? if a
supernatural Sign, to whom does God show this Sign and wonder in the Heavens?
sure, nay I am confident, not to such weak Practitioners as contemns the Art,
as to be both diabolical and contrary to the word of God; nor to the vulgar,
that understands not in the least what it may concern: therefore of necessity
it must be shown to the Astrologer, and that to fore-warn the people of their
punishment which is likely, (without speedy and unfeigned repentance) assuredly
to fall on them for their sins: wherefore it is so far from being contrary to
the word of God, that it agrees therewith; for did not God allow both of the
art and the study thereof, he would neither show a sign by the Stars, nor
particularly to Astrologers; for he might otherwise as well foretell and
preadmonish a Nation by other signs and wonders, as by Comets and
Blazing-stars.

And now it is high time I say something of the rules of Astrology, and then
you shall see what it is, that is the foundation of Judicial Astrology. I think
rather Mr. Raunce, it is high time for you to leave off cavelling with what you
neither understand, nor can prove unlawful in the least manner, or to go to
school to learn the foundation thereof, before you venture to speak against it,
when you cannot prove any thing you say, for your words are, Now then in short,
I say thus much, viz. that all the Rules and Precepts of Astrology set down by
the wisest men in that learning, whether they were Chaldeans or Egyptians, or
any other whatsoever; I say the rules of the said Art, are nothing else, but
mere dotages and fictions of the brain of man. And this is short enough God
knows, of what you would fain speak if possible, and so short that if I should
measure it with your wit, it has the full length thereof; I thought a man of
learning would have brought proofs either by reason and Arguments of his own,
or other bodies for what he writs against; and not to content himself with a
plain dico, without either argument, proof or reason. In short, I say thus
much, viz. etc. and again, I say the Rules and Precepts of Astrology, etc. But
I say it is no matter what you say, or can say, or whether you say any thing or
nothing, except it be to more purpose. You say, it is the fictions and dotages
of man's brain; and I say, your brains are doted and besotted; therefore let me
have better reason then one Doctors opinion. I say more, how is the Art proved
to be the fictions of man's brain a whit the more for your saying so? Where do
you make it appear to be so? Or that their rules have no foundation in nature?
we see that you have no foundation nor natural reason to condemn it; for we see
nothing but your own words against it. Then I say, that you might even as well
have said nothing, and then you might have been still thought wise; for stultus
tacendo dicetur sapiens, and then you might also have gone for a Practitioner;
but now you have lost your credit, both in the one and the other, for none but
stulti will condemn a thing they understand not, nor can prove to be so;
neither can any man practice any Art, but what he is versed in; but this cavil
of Mr. Raunce his, is (I conceive) (since his doting brains cannot comprehend
the true ground and reasons of the Art) to learn them by writing against them,
and so to receive instructions from the pen of the replyer; But I know no
reason any one should do him that favor, since he is so openly malicious, nor
is any one bound to prove the grounds thereof, except he could disprove them,
or know what they are: which since he is ignorant of, is sufficient to prove
his cavil inconsistent either with reason or truth; His words are, And what are
your houses which are in number 12 what are they? and how comes it to pass
they signify thus and thus? and what are those many significations that you
give them? are they any thing else then very Fables and fictions of an old
Idolaters brain? If it be not so let the Astrologers now stand up, and prove
their Art. Stand up babes and sucklings, and answer Mr. Raunce, which asks if
this be not so and so, and never proves it so. Mr. Raunce, it had been your
part in writing against this Art, to have given your reasons and proofs, not
your conceptions (which I know none are bound to answer) and then you had done
Practitioner-like, and might perhaps have received an answer. Now Mr. Raunce
comes to write of the planetary Angels, and as he says, to tell you what they
are.

The words of your Authors upon this matter are to this purpose, viz. That from
the beginning of the world there were 7 sperits appointed as rulers to the 7
Planets, and every one of these spirits rules the world a certain time, etc.
all which is true, and I would very fain Mr. Raunce could in the least disprove
it: all that he can say is this, Now these Planetary Angels what are they? are
they any other Angels or spirits, then those very wicked spirits, which are so
often and most commonly, the chief agents for the imaginations, in their
several operations and conjurations, as it is well known unto him that has
been a Professor of Astrology, and Student in the Magic Art? I would very fain
know how by these words Mr. Raunce proves or shows what the Planetary Angels
are, as he said he would, he tells us only what the Practitioners in Astrology,
and the Students in the Magic Art know them to be; he tells us nothing of his
own knowledge, who knows as little in this, as in all his foregoing cavelling
arguments; but it seems it is his way of arguing, to ask I pray what is this
and that, is it not so and so? and is it not known, or it is known, by such and
such to be thus and thus, never proving any thing, yet condemning every thing,
merely because he is ignorant thereof* For otherwise certainly in his
Arguments, especially when it is his to prove and condemn, he would show all
his skill and strongest reasons if he have any; but as no body can answer till
somewhat be propounded: so neither can nor will I prove what Mr. Raunce knows
not, nor can disalow of, Now seeing it is thus (then says Mr. Raunce, as
concluding upon no grounds of seasons, neither any sufficient proofs) we shall
find Astrology, that is thought by many to depend upon the Stars, to have its
being from no other thing nor ground then conjuration has. If this be Mr.
Raunce his reason, to conclude an argument without reason; I must conclude, it
is like himself. And to argue with one void of reason, is to render himself no
whit better then senceless or mad; but as I said before, he had done very well
to have proved his cavils, that so he might have had an answer, and not to
content himself with the bare saying, this is so, and so: without proof; which
is not the part of a Scholar* and such an one as is to prove an argument; yet
Mr. Raunce as great an enemy as he is to Astrology in his 4. page, toward the
latter end, acknowledges the Predictions of Astrologers to be true; yet out of
a pernicious envy would fain buze the vulgar, with a conceit (that he neither
does nor can prove,) that the Devil brings it to pass; O malicious Mr. Raunce
that merely because he is ignorant of Astrology, shall without any proof or
argument, condemn Astrology to be Diabolical; which opinion of his, is
sufficiently answered above, so that in this place needs no more, but to
remember the reader, that he take notice of the envy and malice of the most
learned Practitioner Mr. Raunce. And thus have you all his cavils set down to
the full, and answered.

For the conclusion of Mr. Raunce his discourse, he makes a great profession of
zeal and holiness, admonishing all good Christians not to meddle, or have to do
with Astrology, (because he cannot comprehend it) and tells them that he was
raised up to gainsay, and withstand that wicked Art. (but not to prove it so)
I believe he is one of Mr Sedgwicks tribe (and many others (...) might name but
for brevity sake,) which was also raised up to forthtell the day of judgment,
and to preach false Doctrine in sheeps clothing; (crac'd-brain people) but I
believe Master Raunces distemper, came merely by too much practizing Astrology,
when he was a Practitioner in the same; And therefore like the Fox, who because
he could not attain to the full enjoyment of the sweet Grapes he so earnestly
longed after, went away, and concluded they were not ripe nor perfect: so Mr.
Raunce because he could not dive into the grounds and reasons of the Art,
(because it was too high for his capacity) concluds it to be Diabolical and
illegal, etc. he says, he knows that some will (as soon as his (learned)
Declaration appears,) show themselves of what spirit they are; for says he,
they will be amazed, and indeed well they may, to see his ignorance and envy;
but especially of him being a Practitioner, and yet ignorant of what he says
he sometime practiced. But Mr. Raunce, let me advise you to practice hence
forward silence, and Admiration of what you understand not, and make not your
self rediculous, enviously to cavil and rail, (without either proof or reason)
against any Art or thing you know not. And so I leave you to be reformed, for I
am heartily sorry to see your ignorance, and weakness, though you are unknown
to me; for ignorance is the root of all evil, nay, and enemy to all Arts and
Sciences; which is very unseemly in any man that will profess himself to be any
degree above a Carter: much more in a Practitioner, in one of the most liberal
Sciences at this time revealed to mortals. viz. Astrology.

Vale. Will. Ramsey.
Die 20. Augustii. 1650. Vesperi.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Would give Mr. Raunce here some Instructions in the Art, and prooss to prove
the mystery thereof, to surpass his apprehension (as in some Patet already) as
also to show the verity and sufficiency of the Art; for the better satisfaction
of the curious reader, as also of Mr. Raunce; but that I leave it to the
Practitioners in the art, whom it far more concerns and belongs to; yet since
for my recreation I have had a little insight therein, I could not for the
well-wishes I owe to both the Art and Artists, but write what I here commit to
the public view; yet I make no question but they will take him in hand, and
put him hence forward to perpetual silence; for in all his scandalous Pamphlet
he proves nothing, only runs on with an inveterate, malicious, railing speech,
grounded merely on his own shallow apprehension and conceit; wherefore, I leave
it to their consideration, to judge it their part or no to justify their Art,
not but that I would do it; but it would be better and more seemly for them
that are Practitioners therein, since he openly challenges them thereunto.

FINIS.

