New England A Degenerate PLANT.

Who having forgot their former Sufferings, and lost their ancient tenderness,
are now become famous among the Nations in bringing forth the fruits of
cruelty, wherein they have far outstript their Persecutors the Bishops, as by
these their ensuing LAWS you may plainly see.

Published for the information of all sober People who desire to know how the
state of New England now stands, and upon what foundation the New England
Churches are built, and by whose strength they are upholden now they are
degenerated and have forsaken the LORD.

The Truth of which we are Witnesses, (who by their cruel hands have suffered)
John Rous Strangers. John Copeland, Strangers. Samuel Shattook Inhabitants.
Nicholas Phelps Inhabitants. Iostah Southwick Inhabitants.


Whereunto is annexed a Copy of a Letter which came from one who has been a
Magistrate among them, to a friend of his in London, wherein he gives an
account of some of the cruel suffering of the people of God in those parts
under the Rulers of New England, and their unrighteous Laws.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.

New England a Degenerate Plant, as is manifest by their following Laws.
At a General Court held at Boston, the 14. of October, 1656.
Whereas there is a cursed Sect of Heretics lately risen up in the World,
which are commonly called Quakers, who take upon them to be immediately sent of
God, and infallibly assisted by the spirit to speak and write blasphemous
opinions, despising Government, and the order of God in Church and
Commonwealth, speaking evil of Dignities, reproaching and reviling Magistrates
and Ministers, seeking to turn the people from the faith, and gain proselytes
to their pernicious ways. This Court taking into serious consideration the
premises, and to prevent the like mischief as by their means is wrought in our
native Land, does hereby order, and by the Authority of this Court be it
ordered and enacted, That what Master or Commander of any Ship, Bark, Pink or
Catch, that shall henceforth bring into any Harbor, Creek or Cove within this
Jurisdiction, any Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Heretics, shall pay,
or cause to be paid the Fine of one hundred pounds to the Treasurer of the
Country, except it appear he want true knowledge or information of their being
such, and in that case he has liberty to clear himself by his oath, when
sufficient proof to the contrary is wanting, and for default of good payment,
or good security for it, shall be cast into prison, and there to continue till
the said sum be satisfied to the Treasurer as aforesaid, and the Commander of
any Catch, Ship, or Vessel that shall bring them, being legally convicted,
shall give in sufficient security to the Governor, or any one or more of the
Magistrates, who have power to determine the same, to carry them back to the
place whence he brought them, and on his refusal so to do, the Governor, or one
or more of the Magistrates are hereby empowered to issue out his or their
Warrants to commit such Master or Commander to prison, there to continue till
he give in sufficient security to the content of the Governor or any of the
Magistrates, as aforesaid. And it is hereby further ordered and enacted, That
what Quaker soever shall arrive in this Country from foreign parts, or shall
come into this Jurisdiction from any parts adjacent, shall be forthwith
committed to the house of Correction, and at their entrance to be severely
whipped, and by the Master thereof to be kept constantly to work, and none
suffered to converse or speak with them during the time of their imprisonment,
(which shall be no longer then necessity require.) And it is ordered, If any
person shall knowingly import into any harbor of this Jurisdiction any Quakers
Books or Writings concerning their Devilish Opinions, shall pay for every such
Book or Writing, (being legally proved against him or them) the sum of five
pounds; And whosoever shall disperse or conceal any such Book or Writing, and
it be found with him or her, or in his or her house, and shall not immediately
deliver the same to the next Magistrate, shall forfeit and pay five pounds for
the dispersing or concealing of every such Book or Writing. And it is hereby
further enacted, That if any person within this Collony shall take upon them to
defend the heretical Opinions of the said Quakers, or any of their books or
Papers as aforesaid if legally proved, shall be fined for the first time forty
shillings; if they shall persist in the same, and shall (...) the second time,
4. l. if notwithstanding (...) defend and maintain the said Quakers heretical
Opinions, they shall be committed to the house of correction till there be
convenient passage to send (...) out of the L^^^, being sentenced by the Court
of A^^^ (...) hereby ordered, That w^^ (...) soever shall revile the person of
M^g^^rates or M^^^^, as is usual with the Quakers, each person or persons shall
be severely Whipped, or pay the sum of Five pounds. This is a true Copy of the
Courts Order, as Attests

Edward Rawson, Secretary.

Made at the General Court held at Boston, the 14 of October, 1657.
AS an Addition to the late Order, in reference to the Coming, or bringing in
any of the cursed Sect of the Quakers into this Jurisdiction, It is Ordered,
That whosoever shall from henceforth bring, or cause to be brought directly or
indirectly, any known Quaker, or Quakers, or other Blasphemous Heretics into
this Jurisdiction, every such persons shall forfeit the sum of One hundred
pounds to the Country, and shall by Warrant from any Magistrate be committed to
Prison, there to remain till the penalty be satisfied and paid: And if any
Person, or Persons within this Jurisdiction, shall henceforth entertain and
conceal any such Quaker or Quakers, or other blasphemous Heretics (knowing
them so to be) every such person shall forfeit to the Country Forty shillings
for every hours entertainment and concealment of any Quaker or Quakers, etc. as
aforesaid, and shall be committed to Prison as aforesaid, till the forfeitures
be fully satisfied and paid: And it is further Ordered, That if any Quaker or
Quakers shall presume after they have once suffered what the Law requires, to
come into this Jurisdiction, every such Male-quaker shall for the first Offense
have one of his Ears cut off, and be kept at work in the House of Correction
till he can be sent away at his own Charge; And for the second Offense, shall
have his other Ear cut off, and kept at the House of Correction as aforesaid.
And every Woman-quaker that has suffered the Law here, that shall presume to
come into this Jurisdiction, shall be severely whipped, and kept at the House of
Correction at Work till she be sent away at her own Charge; and so also for her
comidg again, she shall be alike used as aforesaid: And for every Quaker, he or
she, that shall a Third time herein again Offend, they shall have their
Tongues bored through with a hot Iron, and kept at the House of Correction
close to Work, till they be sent away at their own Charge. And it is further
Ordered, That all and every Quaker, arising from amongst our selves, shall be
dealt with, and suffer the like punishments as the Law provides against
foreign Quakers. This is a true Copy of the Courts Order, as Attests

Edward Rawson, Secret.

At a General Court held at Boston, the 20. of May, 1658.
THat Quakers, and such accursed Heretics, arising aamong our selves, may be
dealt withal, according to their deserts, and that their pestilent Errors and
Practices may be speedily prevented, It is hereby Ordered as an Addition to the
former laws against Quakers, That every such person or persons professing any
of their pernicious Ways, by speaking, writing, or by meeting on the
Lord's Day, or at any other time, to strengthen themselves, or seduce others to
their Diabolical Doctrines, shall after due means of Conviction, incur the
penalty ensuing; that is, Every person so meeting, shall pay to the Country for
every time ten shillings; and every one Speaking in such a Meeting shall pay
Five pound a piece; and in case any such person has been punished by Scourging
or Whipping the first time according to the former Laws, shall be still kept at
Work in the House of Correction, till they put in Security with two sufficient
men, that they shall not any more vent their hateful Errors, nor use their
sinful Practices, or else shall depart this Jurisdiction at their own Charges:
And if any of them Return again, then each such person shall incur the penalty
of the Laws formerly made, for Strangers. By the Court.

Edw. Rawson, Sec.

An Act made at a General Court held at Boston, the 20. of October, 1658.
WHereas there is a pernicious Sect (commonly called Quakers) lately risen up,
who by Word and Writing have published and maintained many dangerous and horrid
Tenants, and do take upon them to change and alter the received laudable
Customs of our Nation, in giving civil Respect to Equals, and Reverence to
Superiors; whose actions tend to undermine the Authority of civil Government,
and also to destroy the Order of the Churches, by denying all established Forms
of Worship, and by withdrawing from the orderly Church Assemblies, allowed and
approved by all Orthodox Professors of the Truth; and instead thereof, and in
opposition thereunto, frequenting private Meetings of their own, insinuating
themselves into the minds of the Simple, or such as are least affected to the
Order and Government of Church and Commonwealth; whereby diverse of our
Inhabitants have been infected and seduced, notwithstanding all former Laws
made upon the experience of their arrogant and bold obtrusions to deseminate
their Principles among us, prohibiting their coming into this Jurisdiction,
they have not been deterred from their impecuous attempts, to undermine our
Peace, and hasten our Ruin.

For prevention thereof, This Court does Order and Enact, That every person or
persons of the accursed Sect of the Quakers, which is not an Inhabitant of, but
is found within this Jurisdiction, shall be apprehended without Warrant, where
no Magistrate is at hand, by any Constable, Commissioner, or Select man, and
conveyed from Constable to Constable, until they come before the next
Magistrate, who shall commit the said person or persons to close Prison, there
to remain (without bail) until the next Court of Assistance, where they shall
have a legal Trial by a special Jury: And being convicted to be of the Sect of
the Quakers, shall be sentenced to be Banished upon pain of Death. And that
every Inhabitant of this Jurisdiction being convicted to be of the aforesaid
Sect, either by taking up, publishing, or defending the horrid Opinions of the
Quakers, or the stirring up Mutiny, Sedition, or Rebellion against the
Government, or by taking up their absurd and destructive Practices, viz.
Denying civil Respect to Equals and Reverence to Superiors, and withdrawing
from our Church Assemblies, and instead thereof, frequent private Meetings of
their own in opposition to Church Order; or by adhering to, or approving of any
known Quaker, and the Tenants and Practices of the Quakers, that are opposite
to the Orthodox received Opinions and Practices of the godly, and endeavoring
to disaffect others to civil Government and Church-Orders, or condemning the
Practice and Proceedings of this Court against the Quakers, manifesting
thereby, their complying with those whose Design is to overthrow the Order
Established in Church and State, every such person upon examination and legal
conviction before the said Court of Assistance, in manner as abovesaid, shall
be committed to close Prison for one Month, and then unless they choose
volantarily to depart this Jurisdiction, shall give Bond for their good
Behavior, and appear at the next Court of Assistants, where continuing
obstinate, and refusing to Retract, and Reform the said Opinions and Practices,
shall be sentenced to Banishment upon pain of Death; And in case of the
aforesaid voluntary Departure, not to Remain, nor again to Return into this
Jurisdiction, without the allowance of the Council first had and published, on
penalty of being Banished upon pain of Death: And any one Magistrate upon
Information given him, shall cause them to be apprehended, and if upon
Examination of the Case he shall find just ground of such complaints, he shall
commit such person or persons to Prison, according to his best Discretion,
until he come to Trial, as is above expressed.

At a General Court held at Boston, the 13th. of May 1659.
WHereas the General Court, October. last, for the reasons mentioned in the Order
then made for the preventing of those evils which the cursed Quakers in their
principles and practices are apt to procure in those places where they come,
did order, That all such persons (not being Inhabitants of this Jurisdiction,
that are of the cursed Sect of the Quakers) who have an any time suffered what
the Laws of this Jurisdiction from time to time have provided against such
persons again arriving in any place of this Jurisdiction, should be seized on,
and committed to close prison, there to continue till the next Court of
Assistants, when he, or they shall be sentenced to banishment on pain of death.

And whereas William Breud (a known Quaker that has formerly suffered the
Laws) has notwithstanding the abovementioned Laws, come into this
Jurisdiction, being sent to prison, and openly before the Court acknowledged
himself to be one of those the World in scorn called Quakers: this court does
therefore order, that the said William Brend be committed to prison, there to
remain till the 16th. of this instant month, and then discharged the prison,
and shall depart this Jurisdiction on pain of death; and that if after the
18th. day of this instant May, he shall be found within any part of this
Jurisdiction, he shall be apprehended and committed to prison, to be proceeded
with according to Law:

This is a true copy of the Courts Order, as attested Edward Rawson Secretary.

To the Keeper of the prison in Boston, etc. you are required to execute this
Order accordingly,

Edw. Rawson.

At a General Court held at Boston, the 11. of May, 1659.
IT is Ordered, That Lawrence Southwick, and Cassandra his Wife, Samuel
Shattook, Nicholas Phelps, Joshua Buffum, and Josiah Southick, are hereby
Sentenced, according to the Order of the General Court in October last, to
Banishment, to depart out of this Jurisdiction by the eighth day of June next,
on pain of Death; and if any of them after the said eighth day of June next,
shall be found within this Jurisdiction, they shall be apprehended by any
Constable or other Officer of this Jurisdiction, and be committed to close
prison, there to lie till the next court of assistants, where they shall be
tried, and being found guilty of the breach of this Law, shall be put to death.

This is a true Copy taken out of the Courts Records, as attests

Edw. Rawson Secretary.

The true cause of the banishment of those six Inhabitants of Salem in
New England, was because they went not to their Meeting, and met together by
themselves at each others houses; the cause being so small, they were ashamed
its like to tell the crime, or what it was for, in this their sentence, seeing
also they had imprisoned, and whipped, and taken away great sums of money from
them for the same thing before.

The Law for paying 5. s. a week for such as go not to their Meeting.
IT is ordered and decreed by this Court, and Authority thereof, That
wheresoever the Ministry of the Word is established, according to the Order of
the Gospel, throughout this jurisdiction, every person shall duly resort and
attend thereunto respectively, upon the Lords Days, and upon such public
Fast-Days and days of Thanksgiving as are to be generally kept by the
appointment of Authority; And if any person within this Jurisdiction shall
without just and necessary cause withdraw himself from hearing the public
Ministry of the Word, after due means of conviction used, he shall forfeit for
his absence from any such public meeting, five shillings; all such offenses to
be heard and determined by any one magistrate or more, from time to time.

This Law was made in the year 1646. and of late have been executed upon many
Inhabitants, to the taking away land and houses, cattle and other goods from
many that could not in conscience join with them in their Worship, because
their hands are defiled with blood.

There is certain information sent, That the last General Court held in the
third Month, called May that they have made, a Law, and proclaimed it in all
their Government, That all such children, and servants, and others, that for
conscience sake cannot come to their meeting to Worship, and have not Estates
in their hands to answer this foregoing Law of 5. s, per Week, must be sold for
slaves to Barbados or Virgenia, or other remote parts, to pay their Fines.

A Copy of a Law made at New-Plymouth in New England, in the first Month, 1658.
Whereas there has been several Persons come into this Government, commonly
called Quakers, whose Doctrines and Practices manifestly tend to the subverting
of the fundamentals of Christian Religion, Church Order, and the civil Peace of
this Government, as appears by the Testimonies given in several Depositions,
and otherwise; It is Enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That no
Quakers, nor persons commonly so called, be entertained by any person or
persons within this Government, under the penalty of Five pounds for every such
default, or be whipped; and in case any one shall entertain any of those persons,
ignorantly, if he shall testify on his Oath that he knew them not to be such,
he shall be free of the aforesaid penalty, Provided, he upon his first
discovering them to be such, do discover them to the Constable, or his Deputy.

It is also enacted by the Court, and the Authority thereof, That if any ^anter
or Quaker, or any person commonly so called, shall come into any Township
within this Government, and by any person or persons, be known or suspected to
be such a one, the person so knowing or suspecting him, shall forthwith
acquaint the Constable or his Deputy, on pain of Presentment, and so liable to
censure in Court, who forthwith shall diligently endeavor to apprehend them,
and command them to depart out of the Township, and this Government; and in
case any such person delay or Refuse to depart, then the said Constable or
Deputy shall apprehend them, or him, and bring him, or them before the
Magistrate in their Township if there be any, and where there is none, to the
Select men appointed by the Court for that purpose, who shall cause him or them
to be Whipped by the Constable or his Deputy, or pay Five pounds, and then
conveyed out of the Township, and the same course is to be taken with every
of them as often as any of them transgress this Order, in case of extremity for
Harbor or Food, the Constable or his Deputy shall Reserve them for their
Money; Provided, They suffer not any person or persons to Resort unto them
whilst they are under their custody.

And forasmuch as the Meetings of such persons, whether strangers or others,
proves to the destructing of the peace of this present Government, it is
therefore enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof, That henceforth no
such Meeting be assembled or kept by any person, many place within this
Government, under the penalty of 40. s. a time for every Speaker, and 10. s. a
time for every Hearer, and 40. s. a time for the owner of the place that
permits them so to meet together; And if they meet together at their silent (so
called) then every person so meeting together, shall pay 10. s. a time, and the
owner of the place 40. s. a time.

Forasmuch as it was ordered at June-Court last, That all such as were
housekeepers, or at their own dispose, that were not Freemen, and have not
taken the Oath of Fidelity to this Government, should take the said Oath by the
time then pre^xed, or to be fined to the Collonies use the sum of 5. l. And
whereas diverse persons notwithstanding all patience and long-forbearance,
refuse to take the said Oath, and yet make their residence amongst us, It is
therefore enacted by the Court, That every such person or persons shall every
General Court be summoned to make their appearance thereat during the time of
their abode in this Government; and if any such person or persons shall refuse
to take the said Oath, shall be fined the sum of 5. l. to the Collonies use.

Whereas the multitude of Freemen is but small, and the Inhabitants of the
Townships many more, who have equal votes with the Freemen in the choice of
Deputies, who being the body of the Freemen, Representative together with the
Magistrates, have equal votes for the enacting of Laws, who by weakness,
prejudice, or otherways it has or may come to pass, that very unfit or
unworthy persons may be chosen, that cannot answer the Courts Trust in such
place.

It is therefore ordered, That at such Courts as Magistrates and Deputies are
to act in, in making Laws, and being assembled, the Court in the first place
take notice of their Members, and if they find any unfit for such a trust, that
they, and the reason thereof be returned to the town from whence they were
sent, that they may make choice of more and able persons to send in their
stead, as the time will permit.

Whereas it has been an ancient and an wholesome Order, bearing Date, etc. That
no person coming from other parts be allowed an Inhabitant in this
Jurisdiction, but by the appointment of the Governor, or two of the Magistrates
at least, and that many persons contrary to this order of Court, crept into
some Townships, which are, and may be a great disturbance to our more peaceable
proceedings; Be it enacted, that if any such person or persons shall be found,
that has not, does not, or will not apply and approve themselves so, as to
procure the approbation of the Governor, and two of the Assistants, that such
be enquired after; and if any such persons shall be found, that either they
depart the Government, or else that the Court take some such course therein, as
shall be thought meet.

It is enacted by the Court, That henceforth no public Meeting shall be set
up, but such as the Court shall approve of.

We had Information, that at a General Court at New Haven, they made a Law to
this effect.
THat every Quaker that came into their Jurisdiction the first time, should be
severely Whipped, and be kept at Work in the House of Correction; and the second
time be branded in the one Hand, and be kept at Work as aforesaid; and the
third time be branded in the other Hand, and kept at Work; and the fourth time
be bored through the tongue with a hot Iron. This is the substance of their Law
as we were informed, though not their Law word for word, because we have not a
Copy of it.

All these Laws have been cruelly and rigorously executed both on strangers and
inhabitants, to the imprisoning, whipping many several times over,
Ear-cuttings, Brandings, and Banishments, Confiscation of Goods, and at last
banishment on pain of death from their Habitations and Families, which at
present is the state of some, and many more its like may be ere this time:
Seven were banished on pain of death, and by late information five were in
prison at Boston to receive the like Sentence, besides what may be more.

A true Copy of a Letter which was sent from one who was a Magistrate in
New England, to a Friend of his in LONDON.
Honored SIR,
MY Respects presented to you and Mrs. Brown, hoping and desiring your present
and eternal welfare, etc. As for the state and condition of things amongst us,
it is fad, and like so to continue; the Antichristian persecuting spirit is
very active, and that in the powers of this World; he that will not whip and
slash, banisih and persecute men that differ in matters of Religion, must not
sit on the Bench, nor sustain any office in Commonwealth; Last election Mr.
Hatherly and my self left off the Bench, and my self discharged of my
Captain-ship, because I had entertained some of the Quakers at my House
(thereby that I might the better be acquainted with their principles;) I
thought better so to do, then with the blind World to censure, condemn, rail,
and revile them when they never saw their persons, nor knew any of their
principles: But the Quakers and my self cannot close in diverse things, and so I
signified to the Court I was no Quaker, but must bear my testimony against
sundry things that they held, as I had occasion and opportunity; but withal I
told them, That as I was no Quaker, so I would be no Persecutor: This spirit
did work those two years that I was of the Magistracy, during which time I was
on sundry occasions forced to declare my descent in sundry actings of that
nature, which although done with all moderation of expression, together with
due respect unto the rest, yet it wrought great dis-affection and prejudice in
them against me, so that if I should say some of themselves set others on work
to frame a Petition against me, that so they might have a seeming ground from
others (though first moved and acted by themselves) to lay me what they could
under reproach) I should do no wrong, the Petition was with nineteen hands, it
will be too long to make rehearsal of; it wrought such a disturbance in our
Town, and in our Military company, that when the Act of Court was read in the
Head of the Company, had not I been present, and made a speech to them, I fear
there had been such actings as would have been of a sad consequence. The court
was again followed with another Petition of 54. hands, that I might be restored
to them, or some satisfactory Reasons wherefore I might not: The court return
the Petitioners an answer with much plausibleness of speech, carrying with it
great show of respect to them, readily acknowledging with the Petitioners, my
parts and gifts, and how useful I had been in my Place, professing they had
nothing at all against me, but only in that thing of giving entertainment to
the Quakers, when as I broke no Law in giving them a nights lodging or two, and
some victuals; for our Law then was, If any entertain a quaker, and keep him
after he is warned by a Magistrate to depart, the party so entertaining shall
pay 20. s. a week for entertaining them: Since has been made a Law, If any
entertain a quaker, if but a quarter of an hour, he is to forfeit 5. l.
Another, That if any see a quaker, he is bound if he lives six miles or more
from the Constable, yet he must presently go and give notice to the Constable,
or else is subject to the censure of Court, (which may be, Hang him.) Another;
That if the Constable know or hear of any quaker in his Precincts, he is
presently to apprehend him, and if he will not presently depart the Town, the
Constable is to whip them, and so send them away; and diverse have been whipped
with us in our Patent; and truly to tell you plainly that the whipping of them
with such cruelty as some have been whipped, and their patience under it, has
sometime, been the occasion of gaining more adherence to them, then if they had
suffered them openly to have preached a Sermon: Also another Law., That if
there be a Quakers meeting any where in this Collony the party in whose house,
or on whose ground, is to pay 40. s. the Preaching quaker 40. s. every hearer
10. s. Yea, and if they have Meetings, though nothing be spoken when they so
meet, which they say, So it falls out sometimes. Our last Law, That now they
are to be apprehended and carried before a Magistrate, and by him committed to
be kept close prisoner until he will promise to depart, and never come again,
and will also pay his fees, which I perceive they will do neither the one nor
other; and they must be kept only with the Countries allowance, which is but
small, (namely, course bread and water) no friend may bring them any thing,
none may be permitted to speak to them; nay, if they have money of their own,
they may not make use of that to relieve themselves. In the Masatusets (namely
Boston Collony) after they have whipped them, cut their ears, have now at last
gone the furthest step they can, they banish them upon pain of death if ever
they come there again; We expect that we must do the like, we must dance after
their Pipe; Now Plymouth-Saddle is upon the Bay-Horse, (to wit, Boston) we
shall follow them on the career, for it is well if in some there be not a
desire to be their apes and imitators in all their proceedings in things of
this nature; all these carnal and antichristian ways being not of Gods
appointment, effect nothing as to the obstructing or hindering them in their
way or course, it is only the Word and Spirit of the Lord that is able to
convince gainsayers; they are the mighty Weapons of a christians Warfare, by
which great and mighty things are done and accomplished: They have many
Meetings, and many adherents, almost the whole town of Saudwitch is adhering
toward them; and give me leave a little to acquaint you with their sufferings,
which is grievous unto, and sads the hearts of most of the precious Saints of
God, it lies down with them, and rises up with them, and they cannot put it out
of their minds, to see and hear of poor Families deprived of their comforts,
and they brought into penury and want, (you may say, by what means? and to what
end?) as far as I am able to judge of the end, it is to force them from their
homes and lawful habitations, and to drive them out of our coasts; Masathusets
have banished six of their own Inhabitants to be gone on pain of death, and I
wish that blood be not shed; but our poor people are pillaged, and plundesed of
their goods, and happily when they have no more to satisfy this unsatiable
desire, at last may be forced to fly, and glad they have their lives for a
prey: As for the means by which they are so impoverished, these in the first
place were scupulous of an Oath, why then, we must put in force an old Law,
that all must take the Oath of fidelity, this being tendered, they will not take
it, and then we must add more force to the Law, and that is, if any shall
refuse or neglect to take it by such a time, shall pay 5 l. or depart the
Colony.

When the time is come they are the same as they were, then goes out the
Marshal, and fetches away their Cows, and other Cattle. Well, another Court
comes, they are required to take the Oath again, they cannot, then 5 l. more,
on this account 35 head of Cattle, as I am credibly informed, has been by the
authority of our Court taken from them the latter part of this Summer; and
these people say, if they have more right to them then themselves, let them
take them, some that had a Cow only, some two Cows, some three Cowes, and many
small Children in their Families, to whom in Summer time, a Cow or two was the
greatest outward comfort they had for their Subsistence. A poor Weaver that has
seven small children, or eight, I know not which, he himself lame in his body,
had but two cows, and both taken from him, the Marshall asked him what he would
do, he must have his Cows, the man said, that God that gave him them, he
doubted not, but would still provide for him To fill up the measure yet more
full, though to the further emptying of Sandwitch men of their outward
comforts, the last Court of assistants, the first Tuesday of this instant the
Court was pleased to determine fines on Sandwitch men for meetings, sometimes
on first days of the week, sometimes on other days, as they say, they meet
ordinarily twice in the week besides the Lords day, 150 l. whereof William
Nuland is 24 l. for he and his wife, at 10 s. a meeting, William Allen 46. l.
some affirm it 49 l. the poor Weaver before spoken of 20 l. Brother Cook told
me, one of the Brethren at Bastable certifled him that he was in the Weavers
house when (cruel Barlow) Sandwitch Marshal came to domand the sum, and he
said that he was fully informed of all the poor man had, and thought if all
laid together it was not worth 10 l. what will be the eud of such courses and
practices, the Lord only knows, I heartily and earnesily pray, that these and
such like courses neither raise up amongst us, nor bring in upon us, either the
sword or any devouring calamity, as a just avenger of the Lords quarrel for
Acts of injustice and oppression, and that we may every oue find out the plague
of his own heart, and put away the evil of his own doings, and meet the Lord by
entreaties of peace, before it be too late, and there be no remedy.

Our Civil Powers are so exercised in things appertaining to the Kingdom of
Christ in matters of Religion and Conscience, that we can have no time to
effect any thing, that tends to the promotion of the Civil Weal of the
prosperity of the place, but now we must have a State Religion, such as the
powers of the world will allow (and no other) a State-Minister, and a State way
of maintenance, and we must worship and serve the Lord Jesus, as the world
shall appoint us, we must all go to the public place of meeting in the Parish
where he dwells, or be presented, I am informed of three or fourscore last
Court presented, for not coming to public meetings, and let me tell you how
they brought this about, you may remember a Law once made, called Thomas
Hin^leys Law, that if any neglected the worship of God in the place where he
lives, and set up a worship contrary to God, and the allowance of this
Government, to the public profanation of Gods holy day, and Ordinance shall
pay 10 s. this Law would not reach, what then was aimed at because he must do
so and so, that is, all things there expressed, or else break not the Law in
March last a court of Deputies was called, and some Acts touching Quakers were
made; and then they contrived to make this Law to be serviceable to them, and
that was by putting out the word (and) and put in the word (or) which is a
disjunctive, and makes every branch to become a Law, so now if any do neglect,
or will not come to the public Meetings, 10. s. for every defect, certainly,
we either have less wit, or more money then the Massathusets, for, for 5 s. a
day a man may stay away till it come to 12. or 13 l. if he had it but to pay
them: and these men altering this Law now in March, yet left it dated June the
6th 1651. and so it stands as the Act of a General court, they to be the
Authors of it seven years before it was in being, and so you your self have
your part and share in it, if the Recorder lie not, but what may be the reason
that they should not by another Law made and dated that court, as well effect
what was intended, as by altering a word, (and so the whole sense) of the Law,
and leave this their Act by the date of it charged on another courts account;
surely the chief instruments in the business, being privy to the Act of
Parliament for liberty should too openly have acted repugnant to a Law of
England, but if they can do the thing, and leave it on a court as making it six
years before the Act of Parliament, there can be no danger in this, and that
they were privy to the Act of Parliament for liberty to be then in being, is
evident that the Deputies might be free to act it, they told us that now the
Protector stood not engaged to the articles for liberty; for the Parliament had
now taken the power into to their own hands, and had given the Protector a new
Oath, only in general to maintain the Protestant Religion, and so produced the
oath in a Paper in writing, whereas the Act of Parliament, and the Oath are
both in one book in Print, so that they that were privy to the one, could not
be ignorant of the other, but still all is well, if we can but keep the people
ignorant of their liberties and Privileges, then we have liberty to act in our
own wills what we please, we are wrapped up in a Labyrinth of confused Laws,
that the free men's power is quite gone, and it was said last June Court by one,
that they knew nothing the freemen had there to do; Sandwitch men may not go to
the Bay, least they be taken up for Quakers, William N^land was there about his
occasions some ten days since, and they put him in prison 24 hours, and sent
for diverse to witness against him, but they had not proof enough to make him a
Quaker, which if he had he should have been whipped, nay they may not go about
their own occasions in other Towns in our Colony but warrants lie in ambush to
apprehend them, and bring them before a Magistrate to give an account of their
business. Some of the Quakers from Road Island came to bring them goods to
trade with them, and that for far reasonabler terms, then the professing,
oppressing Merchants of the Country, but that will not be suffered, that
unless the Lord step in to their help and assistance in some way beyond man's
conceiving, their case is sad and to be pitied, and truly, it moves bowels of
compassion from all sorts, except those in place, who carry with a high hand
toward them, through mercy we have as yet amongst us worthy Mr. Dunster, whom
the Lord has made boldly to bear testimony against the Spirit of persecution:
Our Bench now is Thomas Prince, Governor, Mr. Collier, Captain Willet, Captain
Winslow, Mr. Alden, Lieutenant Southworth, William Bradford, Thomas Hinkly. Mr.
Collier last June would not sit on the Bench if I sat there, and now will not
sit the next year, unless he may have 30 l. sit by him: our Court and Deputies
last June made Captain Winslow a Major, surely we are all mercenary Soldiers,
that must have a Major imposed on us; Doubtless the next Court they may choose
us a Governor, and Assistants also, a free man shall need to do nothing, but
bear such burdens as shall be laid upon him; Mr. Alaen has deceived the
expectation of many, and indeed lost the affections of such as I judge were his
cordial Christian friends, who is very active in such ways, as I pray God may
not be charged on him, to be oppressions of a high nature.

Written in December 1658.
This Letter was published, not by the direction or knowledge of the Author,
who sent it over to his friend for private information, but seeing that upon
the perusal it is found to be of public concernment, which coming into the
hands of some, it was thought meet to be published to the view of all.

Even the sea Monsters draw out the breasts, they give suck to their young
ones. The Daughter of my people is become cruel like the Ostriches in the
wilderness, Lament. 4.3.
THE END.

