Mr. ROWSE HIS SPEECH Made in the lower House of Parliament the thirtieth of
December, 1641. In opposition of the making of Doctor Winniff, Doctor
Holsworth, Doctor King, Bishops (lately elected by his Majesty) till a settled
Government in Religion be established in this Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed 1642.

Master ROWSE his Speech made in the House of Parliament, the 30 of December,
1641.
Master Speaker,
YOu may remember the report made about seven weeks since by Master Woodward,
of an order from his Majesty sent out of Scotland, for drawing up of certain
Congideleers, for the electing of five new Bishops, whereof two are made and
consecrated; And that then I moved, for petitioning his Majesty to stay the
making of them, but other business of greater consequence for the present
hindered my enlarging such Reasons as I conceived of weight to stop the
proceedings concerning them.

And now, Master Speaker, under favor of this honorable House, I intend to
give you some further ground of my opinion then, that it was not neither is it
yet convenient, as I under favor conceive, they should be made Bishops.

Master Speaker, You know the proceedings against those Bishops which have
been great Delinquents in this State, and that we have prosecuted to our
Impeachment of them of high Treason, which was a main ground of my opnion for
the then averting that intended business in making these new Bishops, till
that business was brought to a period.

And Master Speaker, I persuade my self that there are as great Delinquents to
their power amongst the inferior Clergy, as the Bishops, I speak not with an
intent you should conceive that I reflect any ways upon the persons of any of
these that are elected or made, but that until the other impeached be
proceeded against, either to their condemnation or otherwise, as by the
Parliament they shall be found guilty, these new elected may be awhile
procrastinated and delayed.

Master Speaker,

We have (as occasion has served us) had many debates and arguments about the
quite taking away of Bishops, and many divisions in the House have been
concerning the same, and although voted for their continuance, yet the manner
of their Government not determined of, then as (I conceive) it can neither be
requisite nor convenient to make new Bishops till a certain form of their
Government be fully concluded and settled by the whole State of this Kingdom.

2. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, if we should give way to the making of these
Bishops, great prejudice may follow before we can setle them in such a
government as may agree most for the security and safety both of this Kingdom,
and the fundamental points and Principles of the Doctrine of the Church of
England.

For Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding our proceedings against Delinquents (both in
Church and State) how many Petitions and Complaints have we daily received
against pernicious, and dangerous tenants in Doctrine, besides scandalous and
slanderous aspersions delivered, by diverse of the Clergy in their Sermons, and
otherwise, since the sitting of this present Parliament, which out of doubt are
favored, nay animated and encouraged by the Bishops, which does much trouble
many people, and is a great cause of their continuance in evil, and obstinate
maliciousness of a great many of good quality and estimation, and then for new
Bishops to be made (although perchance men of great Learning and Judgment)
before the Parliament has fully agreed on the manner of their Government, and
proceedings to prosecute and punish such Delinquents as have been perverse
instruments in the Church, to withdraw the affections of many, (otherwise
perhaps reasonable well affected) from the right settling of true Religion, with
such Discipline congruent thereunto, that should be the best means to procure
the everlasting peace of King and People, those inconveniences and dangerous
consequents that may happen, may be yet worse then the former we have had too
much experience of.

3. Thirdly I conceive, the making of these Bishops, when they shall be
admitted to sit in the Lords house, their Votes there, although voted down in
this House, yet not agreed unto by the Lords, may be a great hinderance in our
proceedings, to settle such a form of Government in Religion, as shall by the
Parliament be thought requisite, they all of them contriving to continue their
old form and power of Government, and their Votes you know, Master Speaker,
have prevailed much in that House, many of the Lords, (not so many I could
wish) being much inclined toward them, and too willing to Complie with them in
their Designs, but I hope by Gods blessing, and our endeavors, we shall in
time by degrees remove such Impediments both in Church and State as hinder our
happy proceedings in redressing such things that are amiss in the same.

4. Fourthly, a fourth ground of my Opinion, that I conceive to be of weight
for the staying the making of these Bishops, Mr. Speaker, is the
Non-concurrence amongst our selves concerning their Consecration, which I
desire may not be Conclusive, till the other things before mentioned for the
settlement of Religion, and punishment of Delinquents be agreed unto; that
then such as shall be by this wise Council of State thought fit to bear any
office in the Church in places of Government, may be (by the same) tried and
proved, in their Learning, Judgment, and the holiness of their lives and
conversations, that so having not only able, but godly men, set in places of
Authority, we may expect the well Government of the inferior Clergy.

I desire, Mr. Speaker, not to be misconceived in this my speech concerning
the stay of making these Bishops yet unconsecrated, I speak not against their
uncapablenesse or unworthiness of such places of Government, but that they are
as able and fit for the same as any other; But the intent of my speech and
humble motion is, that only for the reasons before specified, they may not yet
be made and Consecrated, till such time as all things for the well Government
of the Church be fully concluded and settled* Which God grant, that having
reformed all disorders both in Church and State, we may every one sit securely
under his own vine and fig tree, and reap and enjoy the fruit of his own
labor.

FINIS.

