THE Fire upon the Altar. OR DIVINE MEDITATIONS AND ESSAYS Containing the
Substance of Christian Religion.

Not unto us O Lord, Psalm 115. -- Optimos vitae dies Effluere prohibe --
Seneca. Simile Eccl. 12. Multa tulit fecitque puer sudavit and alsit. Horat.
LONDON, Printed by T. S. and are to be sold by Abel Roper at the Sun against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1679.

Exodus 30. v. 7. And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incense every morning; when
he dresseth the Lamps he shall burn Incense upon it.

v. 8. And when Aaron lights the Lamps at even he shall burn Incense upon it,
a perpetual Incense before, the Lord, through out your generations.



TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAving conceived these Meditations for my own private Use, according to my
occasions and inclinations: And (finding satisfaction and benefit by them) I
committed them to Paper, to the intent that by resort to them, I might again
excite in my mind the like sollace and pleasure, which accordingly I have done,
and enjoyed: Thereupon I communicated them to some of my near Relations, and
upon their request to the public.

Not for any affectation that I have of popularity, for my Genius is quite
contrary to that: Nor yet for any fond or overweening opinion of them, or my
self in comparison of others who have writ well and learnedly to the same
purpose, but yet for as much as I am persuaded to it, and know that they are
well intended, and may be useful to many: And those that have the Tongue of the
Learned may (from the weakness (which they shall find in these) take occasion
to do better) I adventure to come abroad.

The Subjects upon which they are writ do challenge thy most studious intention
of mind when thou read of them; thence it is, that I refuse to be censured
upon any man's cursory reading (though I know I cannot avoid it) but upon a
serious weighing and considering of the things writ; and I may justly crave
allowance, for that they were not writ, nor designed for the public.

If any of the things herein contained shall seem to be a Treatise, rather than
Meditations, know the reason to be this, that when first they were writ, they
were diverse of them short Meditations, but for methods sake, the same were
afterward put into some Order, and so took the form of a Treatise or Essay.
Reader, thou may take these labors of mine in good part, because I seek
nothing by the publication thereof, but to be serviceable to God, to my
generation, and to thee, who am

Thy Faithful Friend, C. ROW. De Monte Higham.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line last, read acessit, p. 2. l. 23. r. the extreme, p. 3. l. 19. r.
is in my heart, l. 29. r. thereof, p. 5. l. 13. r. grow, p. 6. l. 24. dele of,
p. 7. l. 16. dele then, p. 10. l. 23. r. feedest, p. 12. l. 21. r. his love, p.
15. l. 25. r. read in all other duties, p. 46. l. 26. r. beneficence, p. 54. l.
13. read premises, p. 56. l. 29. r. bolls, p. 58. l. 9. r. prescribed, p. 84.
l. 24. r. then we, p. 88. l. 19. r. they, p. 94. l. 21. put in the, p. 99. l.
29. r. such as thus make use of it, p. 115. l. 29. r. of, p. 132. l. 11. r.
bear, l. 13. r. pledges, p. 163. l. 35. r. all things are p. 175. l. 16. r.
is, l. 28. r. give, p. 198. l. 22. r. for which, p. 200. l. 19. r. rejoice, p.
202. l. 30. r. tongues, p. 221. l. 23. blot out I, p. 231. l. 5. r. thy, p.
234. l. 13. r. this, p. 235. l. 25. put in, those injuries which are done to
our selves, p. 332. l. 16. r. is, p. 236. l. 1. put in, do it constantly
without intermissions, a double minded man is unstable, p. 241. blot out 1, and
2. lines, and l. 25. read first love, p. 250. l. 21. blot out, comforts of the,
p. 256. l. last, for. estate, r. labor, p. 239. r. oculos, p. 259. l. 8. r.
flesh, y. 267. l. 7. r. Spirit, p. 270. l. 34. r. through, p. 281. l. 26. r.
sown, p. 101. l. 5. r. of it, p. 303. l. 15. r. we become, p. 318. l. 11. r.
good, p. 315. l. 24. r. to do, p. 339. l. 3. r. oculos, p. 373. l. 5. r.
deformed, l. 15. r. spirits, p. 375. l. 11. r. God, p. 376. l. 28. r, renew his
strength, p. 284. l. 30. r. beseech us to be reconciled.

THE FIRE upon the ALTAR, OR Divine Meditations and Ejaculations, Containing
The Substance of Christian Religion.
The PREFACE.
Of Meditation.
Cor mundum crea in me Deus.
THE Heart is the fountain which sends forth, and streams it self into words
and actions; and by those it is known whether it be good or evil. He that
purposes a Regulation of his life and conversation, must begin with this as
the first mover; preserve and watch this with most diligent care, that there
come no evil into it, whereby it be disordered, and so the whole stream be
defiled and fouled (sincerum est nisi vas quodcunque infundis accessit,) Prove.
4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, Ne cures ea quae stulte miraris.
Horat. Think not on that which may tempt thee. It may be compared to a Ship
under sale, whose Pilot must ever be watchful to look to his steerage, lest he
split upon Rocks, or be swallowed up with Sands. This Pilot is Reason, Guided
and Illuminated not by any Star, Cynosura, Helice, nor other, but from a higher
Orb, the Spirit of God, which exerting it self in our actions and
conversations, is called Grace, for the Love of God, Humility, Patience,
Charity, Chastity, and the rest, as they are called the fruits of the Spirit,
are graces and beams of this light; so looking to their original, they are
called the Spirit of Love, Joy, Peace, etc. And it is that which the true Light
in the internal Horizon, and the Fire wherewith Jesus Christ baptizeth the
Regenerate, Luke 3.16. Reason then in the soul of man must always keep it self
in action, lest the affections wanting their Governor at the stern,
precipitate the soul, upon Sylla on one side, or Caribdys on the other; either
extreme of excess, or of defect; or else must steer a contrary course.

But if by continual Meditation on good things, it sets before it self always
the place for which it is bound, and the end of its creation; and has an eye
to that luminary by which it guides its course, and keeps on its course with a
perpetual motion, by every wind and gale without digressions by these means, it
may sale safely, and may expect a safe and happy voyage; and blessed be God
there is no curtain drawn between us and the light, as was to them under the
Law.

What rash person is he that will undertake any work of difficulty or
importance, but will predmeitate the means opportunities and advantages whereby
to effect it, and often propound to himself both the end and means.

What little pleasure, delight or satisfaction does he take in his business,
that never thinks of it but when he is doing it? or prepares not for it?
Certainly that work is but a burden to him, and is performed of necessity
only, not freely and cheerfully, of love or liking; but God will have his
servants to delight in him, Psalm. 37. Delight thy self in the Lord. I sat
under his shadow with delight. God loves a cheerful giver. And the Sacrifice
of the wicked is an abomination to him; how much more when he gives it with an
evil mind? Whatever we do unto him, we must do it heartily. I delight to do thy
will O God, yea thy Law is my hope, Ps. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of the
Lord. What Art or Science can be attained? what proficience can be made in any
humane study without meditating and ruminating, weighing and considering,
discussing and digesting in the mind every thing and term of Art? So he that
does desire to be a proficient in the School of Christ as a good Disciple, must
attain it by study, and must consider, weigh, examine and compare spiritual
things with spiritual.

For example therefore consider, that great proficient that obtained so great
and honorable an Epethite, as to be called, The man after God's own heart: how
often does he inculcate this very thing upon himself and others in the Book of
Psalms, from the beginning to the end? In the first Psalm, v. 2. he describes
the blessed man thus, His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
will he exercise himself day and night. And this he avers of his own practice,
Psalm. 63. Have I not meditated of thee on my bed? and thought upon thee when I
was waking? And Psalm. 119. O how I love thy Law! All the day long is my study
therein! Sometimes his meditation is of God's works, as in Psalm. 8. I will
consider the Heavens, the works of thy hands. And he affirms, That he will
meditate of all his wondrous works. And sometime he is meditating of his
Precepts, Psalm. 18. And gives the reason of his so doing, Psalm. 119. All his
delight is therein. They are the joy of his heart; sweeter to him than the
Honey, or the Honeycomb. He had chosen them, and loved them exceedingly. And
he esteemed them above all manner of Riches; above all treasure of gold or
precious stones, and above his necessary food. Having so great a value of them,
and knowing the worth of them, it must follow that he loved them with delight,
and that brings the other, frequent thinking of them; and that brings the heart
to a holy frame and disposition, and keeps it so. This is that which Solomon
presses, Keep thy heart with all diligence, And above all things keep thy
heart. For if we do pray for a clean heart, Create in me a clean heart, and
renew a right spirit within me. Yet, original corruption of nature, drawn from
the loins of our first Parents, is such, that like a running sore, though it be
wiped clean, yet still sends forth putrefaction, therefore has continual need
of spiritual medicaments to heal it, and keep it in health, and suppress and
purge away peccant humors; which medicaments, the Spirit by the word operates
in those who seek them. If then our nature is corrupted and degenerate, and
abominably wicked, and is prone to follow corrupt principles, and hardly
restrained from them, as every man's experience tells him. Let him that has
tasted the heavenly gift, and the power of the world to come, if he like to
retain the relish of it, let him ruminate upon it, keep it under his tongue, as
Job speaks of the wicked, of their delight in sin. If like water that is
heated, which soon will become cold again, our affections to heavenly things
soon grown dull and decay, we must bring them again to that fire which first
warmed them; or (if we can) not to let this fire go out, as the fire upon the
Altar did not. For in all duties of Religion, perseverance is enjoined, and
upon this very ground as that duty of prayer. Continuing instant in prayer, 1
These. 5. Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, Matthew. Watch and pray that ye
enter not into temptation. This assiduity does not only shut the door against
vain and evil thoughts, motions and imaginations, lusts and temptations; but
also keeps in the good and virtuous resolutions, and radicates them. Therefore
seek the Lord while he may be found; seek his face evermore, if thou have found
him. How little treasure have I in Heaven, if my heart be not there often by
holy meditation? but if I am assured of my interest there, I shall sollace my
self with that in all conditions; as the Athenian in Horace sollaced himself
with his chests full of money, which he contemplated: so heavenly souls, for
whom those heavenly mansions are prepared, and the Crown of Life that never
fades; they keep their hearts from sinking, and sollace themselves in their
distresses, by the hope that they have of their eternal salvation: This allays
the bitterness of their affliction; and so great it is, and wonderful, that the
heart of man cannot conceive it. But if we have an interest in them, yet if we
do not meditate of it, what are we the better for it? therefore with Moses have
an eye to the recompense of reward: And this makes it out that we have chosen
God for our portion.

As love is the principle of all Religion and Duty, which gives the life and
heat to them, without which they are but mercenary, dull and formal, without
power; because faith does work by love. The Spouse, Cant. 2. is sick of love.
All the reciprocal society of the Spouse and her Beloved, is Love. So this
practice of holy Meditation proceeds from Love, Psalm. 119. O how love I thy
Law! all the day long do I meditate therein, Psalm. 63. Have I not meditated of
thee on my bed? etc. Consequently the meditation of, and of upon our beloved
object, is our greatest enjoyment and happiness if our affections be rightly
placed; this proves that the speculative life is most pleasant.

All our graces are kept alive; all our virtues strengthened; all our good
resolutions put in execution by this means. And by the want and neglect of this
they all slip out of our minds, are weakened, decay and dye, and the contrary
invade us; as we read in 1 chap. to the Romans, of those that God had given up
to all wickedness; they liked not to retain God in their thoughts or knowledge;
therefore God gave them up, Psalm. 28. They regard not in their minds the works
of the Lord, etc. therefore we often find illiterate persons who can discourse
of most points of Religion, better, more knowingly, soundly, and more readily,
than the learned, which comes to pass merely by the help of Meditation, which
these practice, and the others neglect. David, Psalm. 92.5. meditating of the
wondrous works of God, and his thoughts which are to usward, calls him unwise
who does not consider it, and him that does not regard it, a fool. But he that
is wise (he says) he will ponder them, and shall understand, etc. intimating,
that without such pondering, he cannot understand his principal concerns: How
then can the Law of God convert a soul if it be not meditated of by that soul?
or how can the Testimonies of God make wise the simple, if they be not studied
and learned? How can they rejoice the heart, and comfort us in trouble, and
afford us hope, unless the heart rejoice in the meditation of them? How could
they be a light to our feet, and lanthorn to our paths? How can we be guided by
them, unless we thus keep them in our minds? They can have no desire after the
sincere milk of the word, who have not tasted it by holy meditation, nor can
they grow thereby unless they thus feed upon it. How can the good seed of God's
word take root in our hearts, and bring forth fruit in our lives, if the cares
of this world, or deceitfulness of Riches hinder us from considering and
meditating upon it, so as to fasten it in our hearts, and fix it upon our
understandings and affections? He that desires to draw near to God, or to walk
with him, must do this duty. He that desires to be taught of God, and hear the
voice behind him, saying, this is the way, he must be conversant in this. He
that does not this, must either be a lukewarm Christian, or an Hypocrite, or
no Christian; for an Hypocrite may discourse and talk of the things of
Religion, Mortification, Renovation and Regeneration, Repentance, Conversion;
of forsaking the world, and taking off his affections from the things below,
and setting them on things above; but he does little think of those things
which be powerful to take off his affections from the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life: and to fix them on God, and on the
beauty of holiness; but the Regenerate man that finds corruption in his heart,
will be restless in his thoughts, when he finds some corruption ready to break
out, and lead him captive to sin, until he has found out some thing in the
word of God that has efficacy, and power by his endeavor, and the Assistance
of God's Grace, to conquer every thought, inclination and imagination of his
corrupt nature. As if peradventure a slanderous tongue has provoked him with
such slanders as he most abhors; and he finds himself too prone to return the
like, viz. Railing, for Railing, Cursing for Cursing. He thereupon retires
himself, and either by his own memory calls to mind the behavior of the Saints
of God, and the holy commands of him that has called us out of darkness into
his marvelous light, out of sin, to sanctification and holiness; (And what he
commands us to do, that he has called us to) not to serve sin, or live any
longer therein, but that we should walk as Christ walked, and as he was
Reviled, and Reviled not again, but submitted to him that judges righteously;
so he endeavors also, and prays to God that he may conform himself, or else
he betakes himself (for the help of his memory) to the written word, and will
search what holy Job did in the like case, being falsely accused by his Friends;
and there finding that the Holy man answered those false accusations thus, My
witness is in Heaven, my Record is on high. This directs him, and inables him
to conquer his passion, and he rejoiceth that he has found such a powerful
Scripture, and he endeavors to improve it by meditation, that he may be able
always to make use of it upon the like occasion. And God so much blesses his
people, and directs and guides them in this business, that he often helps them,
when at a loss, and directs them by accident, to hear such a Sermon, or read
such a place as most properly agrees with their meditation, and present
occasion, whereby they receive satisfaction, and will never leave the
meditation of it, till they conceive them selves able to conquer the like
temptation. So if they be encountered with the love of the world, and find
themselves hardly beset with the bate of covetousness, or with the lusts of the
flesh, they intend with all their might, those arguments which are prevalent
with the Saints of God to take them off this sensual love to the heavenly love;
to love God and his Grace, and spiritual gifts and enjoyments, and Jesus Christ
our blessed Savior, and Redeemer, who shed his precious blood for us, and in
deeds and words of the highest expressions, has manifested his love to us,
courting us to love him again with such significant, and full expressions of
his love, as no tongue could ever express, unless they use his very
expressions, which he uses in the Canticles, to endear thee; wherein he both
advances the commendation of the several parts of the body of his Beloved, and
of the whole, says, Thou art all fair my Love. And he also promises to give
her his loves. Who so shall diligently consider of these, he will easily break
out into that expression of his love to Christ, which the Spouse makes, viz.
Thy Love is better than Wine, and ver. 4. The King has brought me into his
Chambers; we will be glad and rejoice in thee; and will find great
satisfaction, and delight in the name of him, as in a sweet perfume. Thy name
is as ointment poured forth, therefore the Virgins Love thee. And with the
Spouse, cannot but seek him, though she suffer injuries from rude persons, when
she enquires after him, still she persists, Tell me where thou feeds; for the
enlightened, converted soul knows that it must not love the world, neither the
pleasures nor profits; and if it does, the love of the Father is not in it, nor
the love of Jesus Christ; for this love expels all other; he that drinks of
this water thirsts no more. And when the heavenly Spouse has sought her
Beloved, and besought him for the kisses of his mouth, and is enamoured of his
beauty, and is satisfied with his beauty only, and remembers his loves more
than wine, and delights to hear his name, and is sick of love, he will not fail
then to bring her into his banqueting house, and defend her with his love, as
with a banner, and stay her with flaggons, and comfort her with Apples; and
also he will bring her into his chambers, and unvail his beauties to her, and
give her his loves: And now she may well despise all other Rivals of her love;
like the Eagle that catches not Flies; or like him who has drunk the sweet
waters of the fountain, he will not presently drink in a muddy puddle, or seek
to quench his thirst in broken Cisterns which hold no water.

And so for other temptations, and perils which the soul finds it self to lie
under through the temptations and snares of its spiritual enemy, and its own
frailty and inbred corruptions; she bestirreth her self till she has gotten
strength to vanquish her spiritual enemy; which having obtained, she rejoices
with joy unspeakable, and glorious in Christ, and is satisfied, and enjoys
her self more than in the things of pleasure or profit, or any other worldly
enjoyment; and sings praises to God for giving such strength and assistance
whereby it is able to overcome.

All which matters are the meditations of the gracious soul, which seeks Gods
face evermore.

And these be the means by which it endeavors to be prepared for every good
work. Although the gracious soul has in a great measure conquered the
corruptions of nature, and is sure of its salvation, and God does say to it, I
am thy salvation, yet is she not satisfied, quiet, at rest, or contented,
unless she enjoy her Beloved in a close communion, sollacing her self with him
in reading his word, praying, and meditating of him, and praising him. The
Spouse knew her Beloved was hers, and she his, but was not satisfied, unless
she might lay him all night as a bundle of myrrh between her breasts. The
enjoyment of his person, the kisses of his mouth, and his favors and new
pledges of his love, is that which satisfies her: The Flaggons and the Apples
are the things which stay her, and comfort her, and she must and will have
them, and will not be satisfied without them, because she is sick of love, (and
as Lovers use to do) so she museth and meditates in the night of the favors
she has received; and also designs and contrives which way to obtain them
again, because she remembers them more than wine; for they refreshed her more,
and were more sweet to her taste, and for desire of these, she is often
melancholy, though she be sure of her interest in him; that her Beloved is
hers, as she was when she run seeking him about the City; for his coming to her
door at such an hour of the night, and his solicitations and addresses to be
let in, and the difficulties which he went through to come to her, though the
weather favored not; all showed her love; but this enflamed her love the more,
so that she would not be satisfied without the enjoyment of his person, and all
other favors that Lovers have to bestow and can desire. She must sit under his
shadow with delight, and eat that fruit of his which is pleasant to her taste,
and be brought into his banqueting house, and repose her self in his arms;
because she admires him in all things, and in all his parts she sees such
ravishing perfection, that she will not enjoy her self at all, unless she may
see his countenance, hear his voice, or embrace him in her arms, and in her
bosom, in which enjoyments she is fully taken up, as well waking as sleeping;
for though she sleep, her heart waketh: This fire never goes out, but is
always burning upon her heart, as that upon the Altar was, which was the type
of this; and so must it also be with those who profess to be, and are his
servants, and peculiar people. And they shall also be endeared to Christ their
Beloved; and he will see all loveliness in them as his Spouse, his Garden
enclosed, his Sister, his Beloved; his Friend; he will delight frequently to
come into into his Garden and gather his pleasant fruits, flowers, and spices;
drink of the wine of the Pomegranate pressed, eat his honeycomb with his
honey; and he will be found of his Beloved in the duties of reading,
meditation, prayer, and the holy Supper, which is his banquet, which he gives
her; But she gets many a kiss from him in fervent prayer and meditation: And
when she has found him, she will not let him go; she holds him fast in her
arms, and hangs about him: But if she is but in pursuit of him, her heart is
warmed with his love, by such impressions as she will not loose till she enjoy
him.

All which enjoyments of the heavenly soul are the operations of the holy
Spirit, and the graces of God working in the heart, whose conversation is in
Heaven, by heavenly meditation of the things of God, and keeping in those
meditations which otherwise the world would justle out, if she should not be as
a garden enclosed, as a fountain sealed, that is (as if he should say)
springing waters that admit nothing to pollute or defile them, or to disturb or
muddy them. And the enclosure of this garden signifies, that fence of
watchfulness in this duty whereby those things are kept out, which would crop
off those pleasant plants, and rich spices there growing, for the use, service
and delight of her Beloved, and are for him preserved, guarded and secured.

This duty is often enjoined as a most necessary part of Divine Worship, and
pressed with very large promises; and by the experience of all the Saints of
God found to be the most available means for the avoiding of that sin which
does so easily beset us, and for getting and improving of every grace. For
reading God's word, without thus retaining God in their thoughts, is little
available; no more is prayer; for we find there be many who have frequently
both read and heard it, who still remain unconverted from the errors of their
ways, and do neither live upon it, or by it, nor endeavor to come up to it;
nor to be changed from what they are by nature, nor retain it in the love of it.

So we see that there are many that fast, and pray, and preach too, and yet are
not cleansed from sin; however they are pure in their own sight, and say, Stand
off, for I am holier than thou.

Wherefore the wise man exhorts to be swifter to hear, rather than to offer the
sacrifice of fools: And a type of this was that ceremonial Law, that those
beasts that did not chew the cud should be unclean, and not to be sacrificed.
And for want of this, the word preached to men often slips out of their minds:
their worldly affairs that take up their thoughts, give them no time to fasten
the word in their hearts, so as to take root, and bring forth fruit: but like
the seed sowed on stony ground, or thorny ground, or that falls by the way, it
comes to no perfection. Hence it is that the Lord commanded the Israelites,
Jos. 1.8. Let not this Book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate
therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is
written therein; for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou
shall have good success. The Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.8, and 9. says, Think on
these things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
me, and the God of peace shall be with you, Psalm. 107.17. The loving kindness
of the Lord endures for ever to them which think upon his commandments to do
them, Isa. 12.3. With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation:
Which promise (I conceive) extends to all duties of Religion, and so to this
aamong the rest: But (sure I am) that without this a man cannot be well
disposed, nor well perform any other with comfort: the more we make use of
this, the more joy we have in us: and this is to be always performed, others
cannot be so, Psalm. 4. Commune with your own hearts, and in your Chamber be
still. What comfort and satisfaction does it yield to the virtuous mind, to
contrive and meditate how to do well, holily, and according to virtue, the very
Idea of the action has beauty, and delight, though peradventure we are not
able sometimes to do according, because of our infirmities; and likewise the
evil mind delights in evil, Jer. 11.15. And this delight in good, and the
impression of the beautifulness and decency of the action, excites to the Act.
Although evil be present with us when we endeavor our selves to do the thing
by reason of our corrupt nature, and our Ghostly enemy.

If this were not a clear truth, it might be sufficiently demonstrated by its
contrary. The contrivance or remembrance of any unseemly or impious action, how
full of loathing and horror is it? or if they be but vain thoughts that lodge
in us, as they must needs do in those who read ludicrous, vain and scurrilous
books, or spend their time in the Theater, the mind and manners will be formed
accordingly, unless we disgust them. I mean not that the sins of God's people
are often premeditated; for if they did premeditate them, I suppose they would
avoid them; but yet sometimes they do consider of sin, but most commonly break
off their consideration, and purpose with loathing of it, and themselves too,
for their thoughts and assayes of sinning; but those sins which they committed
before their conversion, they remember after their conversion, with the
contrivance of them, with loathing; and the sins which they see others
contrive, or read, or hear of: And often the wickedest persons that are, when
they remember their foulest sins, they abhor them, and tremble, and endeavor
to put out of their minds the remembrance of them, for the horrible foulness
which they then perceive in them, and for the offense which they yield them.

This Duty then being enjoined us by God as most necessary and powerful for
attaining and improving of every grace, and for the avoiding of all, and every
sin and temptation, that our nature is inclined to, or liable to be drawn to.
Let these reasons be sufficient to convince us of the necessity and utility of
it, and the delightfulness of it, both to God and our selves, and put us upon
the practice of it, that we may be Royal Priests to God, and our bodies may be
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and our hearts God's holy Altars, upon which the
fire shall ever burn, and Incense without ceasing, Exodus 30. v. 73. The
Corrolary.

Holy Meditation is the thing whereby we edify our selves; and holy life and
conversation is that whereby we edify one another in the most holy Faith.

Of the Worship of God in general.
THAT God is, and that he is to be worshipped, is written in the heart of man
with indelible characters; for it appears, that before any Law was given, the
Light of Nature did not only instruct men of the Being of God, and of the
necessity of Divine Worship; but also afforded them such plentiful instruction
of the manner of the Worship too, that he that had an honest sincere heart,
might and did perform it in an acceptable manner; as Abel did without any other
Instructor. And Cain might also have done the like, as is intimated in those
words which God spoke to him: If thou do good, shall not thou be accepted? How
far did Cornelius the Centurion go by this light? and when by this he could do
no more, God sent his help, Romans 1. v. 20. The invisible things of him that is
of God, from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are
without excuse; because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
but became vain, etc. and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the
image of man and beast, and birds, and creeping things.

Nature then is a Mistress that teaches us of God, and of his worship, else
the Gentiles had not been given up for not glorifying him as God. Nor would
Cain have been reproved for mis-serving him. Neither would Cain (being a wicked
person) have done it at all. But like as he misserved God, so all doubting and
unbelieving, sensual, and hypocritical and vain persons, do only offer that
which cost them nothing; that which they can best part withal, easy service,
and cheap: And this corruption growing more and more upon them, and they more
and more corrupt themselves, till at length they become abominable in their
wickedness, as it is in Psalm. 53.2. When they have changed the Truth into a
Lie, and worship the Creature more than the Creator. They are driven to that
absurdity of denying the being of God, that they may avoid the greater, viz. a
confessing a Deity, and yet to yield him no worship.

Remarkable it is, that there has never been any people or Nation in the world
so barbarous, but they have both acknowledged a Deity, and had a solemn manner
of Divine Worship established by municipal Laws; the violation whereof has
been punished capitally.

And if there be any individual person or persons who do, or does deny God, or
his Worship, the same have nothing of the Image of God left in them; nor any
thing of the holy Spirit of God in them. That wisdom and knowledge which they
have in them, thus corrupted, is the Image of the Devil, or the Image of the
brute beasts; as St. James calls their wisdom, carnal sensual, and devilish:
And what they know naturally as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt
themselves; as St. Jude speaks: Their chief study, care, labor and industry;
all their designs, providence, and all their wisdom, is to satisfy their
sensual appetites, and to provide for back, and belly; therefore the Apostle
says of them, their God is their belly, and they mind earthly things. This
wisdom does expel and extinguish the wisdom which is from above. So that they
become Atheistick.

The Apostle Pet. 2 ep. cap. 3. Has prophesied that such scoffers shall come
in these last days, and he says that they are willingly ignorant. Ignorance
makes them fearless, shamless and hopeless.

That these Atheistick principles are not from our Nature, nor born with us,
but the contrary, are from the light of Nature, and by our corrupting of our
selves we become Atheists, is further proved by this.

That to us who live under the preaching of the gospel, and have liberty to
read it our selves, the glorious light thereof would shine into our hearts, if
we did not like, love, cherish, and improve that corruption of Nature which was
contracted by the fall of Adam.

But our blessed Savior has told us this truth, Light is come into the world,
but this is the condemnation, that men love darkness rather than Light, because
their works are evil. If they affect Darkness, they will improve it, and the
more evil their works are, so much the more will they improve their darkness,
and endeavor to extinguish their light hate it, and fly from it, because it
reproves them. And they desire not the knowledge of the Most High, because it
makes against them, and their designs, and against their impudence and
desperateness.

Besides which the Apostle shows another cause whereby this blindness is
contracted, viz. The God of this world has blinded their eyes. If they have
chosen the God of this world to worship, and serve him, they must needs pull
out their weak eyes, which nature corrupted had contracted, or suffer him to
put them out. Such terms as Nahash would have imposed upon the men of Jabesh
Giliad, 1 Samuel 11.

From these two causes it proceeds, that men who profess themselves wise, and
have excellent parts, yet knowing him to be God, they love him not, nor like
they to worship him, nor to retain him in their thoughts, but become vain in
their thoughts and imaginations, and harden their foolish heart. The Lord will
not by his Spirit always strive with them, but gives them up to their affected
blindness, and to serve such gods as they have chosen: Their bellies and their
lusts: And he takes away his holy Spirit from them, and that talent which he
had given them: And yet the gifts and graces of God are without repentance, for
they are changed, and not God. For seeing that neither the word of God, which
is the power and wisdom of God contained in the Gospel of our Blessed Lord and
Savior will convince them: Nor yet his great and mighty works of the Creation
of the world, and the preservation thereof. The hanging of the Earth upon
nothing, and the other wonderful works of God mentioned in the 25th. of Joh,
nor the usefulness and convenientness of the seasons of the year, and the
benefits which they themselves reap thereby, is not by them considered, Psalm.
19. Nor yet God's extraordinary providence, when their mighty preparations of
forces and Armies are defeated by silly and weak means, as those of the
Moabites were by Gideon: Or when they are subdued and overthrown as it were by
the Heavens, as the Poet Claudian expressed it, and conjurati veniunt in
classica venti; yet they will not see God's hand, but say, Though the bricks
are fallen down, we will build with hewn stone. Nay, though the Lord does
destroy them by his Angels, as in Isa. 37. the Angel destroyed 185000. of
Senacharib's Host; they will not see God's hand. Nor when an arrow shot at a
venture shall find out and smite a disguised murderer between the joints of
his armor, 1 Kings 22.33. yet others will not fear his justice, nor see the
hand of the Lord. What can the Lord do more? Either he must give them up, or
put them to shame with further miracles: And try whether Xerxes will fetter the
Winds as wisely as he settered the Hellespont, and chastise them also with
stripes. But the Sea did not for all that acknowledge any Allegiance to him,
more than ours did to the good King Canutus, who tried it, but only to rebuke
and disprove the flattery of some of his flattering Courtiers, who vainly and
profanely called him God.

But neither those Gentiles spoken of, Romans 1. nor any of those Heathenish
Atheists had that great Luminary to enlighten them, which our modern Atheists
have, viz. the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ; therefore as their light
is greater, so must their sin be, and their condemnation too, because they will
not see his light, who has in his right hand seven Stars, and his countenance
is as the Sun shines in his strength, Apoc. 1. The God of this world has
various fallacies and deceits whereby he blinds and beguiles unstable souls,
and draws them to this.

In some he blinds their mind with pride, as it is said in the Psalms. The
ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for God, neither is God in all his
thoughts, in the place before mentioned. They said in the pride of their heart,
The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stone, Isa. So we may
read in the 37th. of Isaiah, of Senacharib's proud boastings, and how he
blasphemed the holy one of Israel, and reproached the Lord; 24, and 25 verses
mention his boastings. And 2 Chronicles. 32.13. and 14. Know ye not what I and my
Fathers have done unto all the people of other lands? Were the gods of those
Nations able to deliver their lands out of my hands? 14. That your god should
be able to deliver you cut of my hand?

In this manner Alexander's proud and ambitious mind leading him first to
thirst after the enlarging of his Territories, left him by his Father; and
having conquered Athens, and become a terror to all Greece, he was chosen
their Captain General. He then thirsted for the Empire of the world; thereupon
he went into Asia with his whole Army, and overcame Lydia, Ionia and Phrygia,
and every Country that lay in his way. And at length engaging with Darius, his
innumerable Army, and extraordinary preparations and Engines, he overcome them;
and overrunning the Bactrians, he extended his Dominion to the Indies. And at
length becomes transported with the greatness of his fortune and success, and
forgets God, and assumes to himself Divine honors. And as Alexander was
transported, and blinded with pride and ambition; so are others by lust,
covetousness, drunkenness, gluttony, vanity, and other baits of Satan, quite
blinded and besotted, and held captive by him at his will, and are by
insensible degrees drawn on further and further to cast off all fear of God,
and reverence to his worship. The same who now after the Conquest obtained,
ascribes and assumeth to himself Divine honor, and calls himself God and
Jovis, Hammonis filius. He before the joining of the battle would by no means
omit to sacrifice to the gods of the place. So Curtius says, Sacrificium Dis
presidibus loci secit patrio more, he was not then an Atheist, nor yet a God.

The same causes may we assign to that Atheism of Caligula; for how can we
think of such folly and pride, but that they were blinded and besotted with it?
when just then he had counterfeited the Thunder in his brazen Galleries made
for that purpose, upon a sudden clap of Thunder he run and hid himself under
his bed, and cried out, Caligula non est Deus; he dared not then to threaten
the Air, as at another time he did.

Another Means or Obstruction whereby Satan hinders the light of the Gospel
from shining into their hearts, so that they see not God, is success in sin and
wickedness; hereby he that enterprizeth it, is emboldened in it, and takes
occasion to question the Being of God, as he, Quis putet esse deos.

And God suffers them to prosper sometimes, grow mighty, and heap up silver
as dust, that his own people should know how little to value the world, when he
gives the Kingdoms thereof to the basest of the people, Jer. 12.1, 2. The
Prophet did require of God the reason of their prospering, and prays against
them, Pull them out as sheep for the slaughter. And sometimes God suffers it
for this reason, which David mentions in Psalm. 27. that he may cast them down
suddenly with the greater ruin. So Psalm. 83.17, 18. But we find that this was
a grievance to David, as it was to afflicted Job, Job 21. Wherefore do the
wicked live? And so it is generally to all God's afflicted people; but mark the
end of them, Job 27.13.

Another Obstruction that Satan makes use of to hinder this glorious Light of
the Gospel from shining into their hearts, is, That whatsoever sin they
perpetrate, yet they sit at ease (like the people of Lachish) and find no
changes nor alterations in their estates and affairs, but all things go on
after the same manner as before their sins committed they did; according to the
course of nature, and according to the means which they use in their callings.

Sometimes the Lord is resolved to make them see, and be ashamed. According to
that in the Prophet Isaiah, c. 26. v. 11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up they
will not see, but they shall see, and be ashamed. Thus he made the Thunderer
afraid of Thunder, and ashamed. So David prayed, Put them in fear, O Lord, that
they may know themselves to be but men. When they forget themselves, they
forget God. But oh how soon can God dismay them, and make them recant whatever
they dared against God in their pride of heart! when he pleases to strike them
with fear and consternation! And then those who before prosessed themselves
wise, will confess themselves fools, because they can no longer shut their eyes
against the light, but that they must see their shame.

I am sensible that Atheists make use of this argument of fear, to persuade,
that it was nothing else that taught men the worship of God, according to that
saying. Primus in orb deos fecit timor. To this first by way of admission I
answer, that if it should be admitted, yet that is a necessary, and a good fear
which drives us to God, and restrains from evil. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. But it is a bad fear which drives us from the face of God:
as Adam after he had sinned, was afraid and hid himself. So Peter's sense of
his sinfulness made him beseech the Lord Jesus to depart from him.

Secondly, By way of negation, I conceive that love moves good people to the
service of God more than fear. 'Twas Abel's Love to God which made him offer
the best, and to think nothing good enough for God. Likewise it was want of
love in Cain that made him offer with an evil mind, that which was not the
best: therefore it must needs be slavish fear in him that caused him to give
God any Sacrifice.

But this motive of fear sometimes moves the most wicked that are to worship
God; but when the fear is over, the worship cease, Job 24. And though in
their troubles they vowed Hecatombs, they scarce will pay one of a hundred.
Besides, it is manifest, that the just and upright are little liable to fears,
Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, Psalm. 27. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall
I fear? Psa. 46. God is our hope and strength, a very present help in trouble:
Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved, and though the hills be
carried into the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof rage and swell,
and though the Mountains shake at the tempest of the same. As the Poet speaks
of the just man, Si fractus illabatur orbis impavidum ferient ruinae. Because
they that truly fear God, know that they need not fear any thing else.
Therefore in the 37th. of Isaiah, upon Senacharib's great boastings and
threatenings to destroy Juda, the word of the Lord by the Prophet was concerning
her, The Virgin, the daughten of Zion has despised thee, and laughed thee to
scorn.

I need not rehearse the examples of the undaunted courage of these people,
because they are so numerous I conceive that every one that has a tongue to
speak, can tell a Catalogue of them: as Abraham, Gideon, Sampson, Baruck,
Jephta, David, and the Legio fulminatrix Christianorum. And on the other side,
it is as notorious, and commonly known, that the most desperately wicked
sinners and blasphemers are most timorous and fearful, and are full of fears,
si vel herbam dimovere lacertae, and cord and gemibus tremunt. As Belshazzar
trembled when he saw the handwriting upon the wall, before he knew whether it
were good or bad. Because their guilty conscience makes them fear where no fear
is, and fly when none pursues. It follows, that if fear did make gods to be,
they should be the greatest worshippers of them; but the consequence is not
truth, and therefore not the antecedent or supposition.

Neither was it fear that made the differences of good and evil, true and
false, just and unjust, honest and dishonest, etc. but God who is the fountain
of goodness, and truth, and being.

But if for all this they will not be convinced to take God for their strength,
and the fear of God, and the wisdom which is from above, for the true and sound
wisdom, and still will say to God, Depart from us, we will none of the
knowledge of the Most High; and strengthen and encourage themselves in their
ungodliness, and in the multitude of their iniquities boast themselves.

And notwithstanding they see their Policy, Wit and Ingenuity, whereof they so
much boasted, to be frustrated and baffled by those means which they disdained,
and their secret sins detected and punished, and yet for all this they will not
see the hand of the Lord. And their proud flashy wit leads them with Xerxes, to
fetter the Sea, or the like vanities and extravagancies.

Then let them go on in the ways that they have chosen, till such time as the
Lord shall please to put a hook in their nose, as he did in that Assyrian
Monarchs. And let those who embrace the true wisdom, goodness and humility,
rest assured of this; That the Virgin, the daughter of Zion shall despise them,
and laugh them to scorn, Isa. 37.22. And so with David we may and must all pray
against the enemies of our Lord and Savior Christ, Psalm. 59.13. Consume them,
O Lord, consume them, that they may perish, and know that it is God that rules
in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world. For thus only could Nebuchadnezzar be
brought to this knowledge, Dan. 4.33. And thus by feeling that hand of God
which they refuse to see, let all thine enemies be forced to acknowledge thee.
And thou (O blessed Jesus!) bruise them with a Rod of Iron, and break them to
pieces like a Potters vessel, because they have said, That thou shall not rule
over them.

General Rules.
It appears from this, that it is not the worship which God requires, which
is forced from them by compulsion, with an unwilling mind, as that of the
Israelites in the wilderness, Ps. 78.34. When he slew them, they sought him.

The Rules which will show us how to worship God acceptably, are

1. That we pray, read, meditate, and perform the like services to God from
this belief. That we cannot spend our time in any worldly affair so well, or so
much for our Profit, Joy, Comfort, Delight and Satisfaction, as in this or that
duty.

2. That we give our Alms with this belief, that it is the best way of
improvement of our wealth, and therefore do it freely to such as you can never
expect any return from them, but from God only.

3. That upon these accounts we perform our services to God, with all our
might. These three prove our cheerfulness and willingness.

4. That we perform them constantly and early.

5. That we perform them invisibly to man. not expecting any reward from men,
nor a good word.

6. That we pride not our selves in our services, and despise others with a
stand off, I am holier than thou; but count our selves unprofitable servants,
and desire that our very best services be cleansed, purified, perfumed and
accepted only through the merits and mediation of Christ Jesus; and confess
that we can offer him nothing but that which is his own; for he gives both the
will and the deed that is good, and puts his Spirit into us, and causes us to
walk in his statutes, and confess also that we have need of Christ Jesus as our
High Priest, to bear the iniquities of our holy things.

7. That in all our services which we perform we seek principally the glory of
God. Thus we see that most of the petitions of the Lord's, Prayer are; and by
thus doing, we give proof that we are God's children; for they seek God's
glory, though it be with the spoliation of their own glory; as David dancing
before the Ark. And the glorious Angels worship, and fall down before God,
casting their Crowns at his feet, Apoc. 4.10.

8. That we faint not in our mind, nor be weary, but work out our salvation
with fear and trembling.

9. That we prepare our selves for holy duties.

Of Prayer.
THIS being the first Duty which we learn in our tender age, and the first in
our daily practice, whether it be because that the sense of our own needs, and
wants drives us to seek our supplies and succors from the omnipotent being,
that we thus begin the day; or from the nature of man which being yet undefiled
with the corruptions of ill examples, follows its own Instinct and
inclination; and is therefore easily taught this practice, or else takes it in
its minority; or whether it be that all do teach their infants this part of
divine worship first, as most necessary, or that they are best capable of. So
it is, that this is the first in order of practice, and eminent for its Virtue
if it be rightly performed, and of most frequent use. It will be therefore
proper enough to begin with a Regulation of my self in this particular.

Which that I may do, I will consider

1. The manner, and circumstances: And

2. The matter of prayer.

And 3. motives to excite my self to it.

The various manners of prayer are to be found in the Psalms of David: And in
those prayers which we read in scripture made by our blessed Savior and the
Saints; however it will not a little avail thee (O my soul) so set down those
particulars, which shall come to thy thoughts, as well concerning the inward
manner, as the outward.

The inward is particularly expressed in Ephesians. 6.18. praying always with all
prayer, and supplication in the Spirit. Watching etc.

In the Spirit, must be the manner, for though Watching, fasting, and all other
outward manners be had, if this be wanting only, it is but a lame, or blind
Sacrifice. Because as it is said, Romans 8.26. We know not what to pray for as we
ought. Though we have the first fruits of the Spirit, ib. v. 34. But we have
help for our infirmities from the assistance of the Spirit. And it makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered, v. 27. And he that
searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God.

When thou art such in thy prayers to God, and put up such petitions, with
intention, sighing, and groaning of Spirit, and not extention of voice, thou
know by whose assistance it is, and that thou art accepted; therefore crave
it of God. And though thou find disability in thy self, or an indisposition,
because the flesh cannot keep pace with the Spirit, thou will find the
intercession of the Spirit in thy heatr unutterable; be not therefore
discouraged or dejected, because thou can not pray vocally; for those prayers
that are not expressed, are as powerful with God, as theirs that are well
expressed; when thou find in thy self a desire to draw nigh to God, do it,
though thou want words: As the fire from Heaven consumed Elias Sacrifice: so
look up to Heaven, and crave Gods assistance, and thou may find such
enlargement in the duty to put up effectual fervent prayers in the Spirit
whereby thou may take Heaven by force: our lifting up of our hearts to God
moves him to bow his ear to us. And having such an Almighty Helper, what need
we to fear infirmities; let us trust to our Succors.

The Spirits Asistance consists in these particulars.

It excites holy desires which are pleasing to God, and sometimes dictates them
verbally, sometimes without words, and expressions. The Spirit of Grace causes
a Christian to beg for Spiritual blessings, comforts and enjoyments, and to
desire, to long, breath, and pant after them uncessantly. It causes fervency
of Spirit, firing our affections with holy Zeal for Spiritual gifts and Graces,
enjoyments, and satisfactions, helps and improvements, and keeps up those holy
flames which it kindles. So that it preserves us from looking back with Lots
wife, from drowsiness, slightness in performing duties, and from faintings
tipified by Jacob wrestling with God; it unites our hearts to God, and helps us
against discurrency, of thoughts which naturally we are subject unto. Unless we
are carried on in the duty by an apprehension of Spiritual enjoyments. It
drives away fears, and doubts which are subject to arise from guilt; and
supplieth us with a holy confidence and child-like desposition, ingenuity and
assurance, and freely opens our minds, to make known our requests to him,
whereby we can call God Father, Gal. c. 4 v. 6. because ye are Sons he has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your heart, whereby ye call him Father;
therefore as often as we find our Souls thus, let us wrestle it out with God till
we get the blessing and desired grace. Men that want the Spirit of God have
these three dispositions, Slavishness, Mercenariness, and Sensuality. They pray
out of fear, and in doubt of acceptance; and when they have their desires,
their Prayers cease, unless they be customary and formal Prayers, and they
crave but sensual things. The Spirit also supplyeth a Christian with holy ends,
and represseth carnal ends; so that in all our requests we seek the glory of
God as it is sought in all the petitions in the Lords Prayer; in such, the
largeness of our desires does not hinder the obtaining of them, but furthereth
rather; for he has commanded, open thy mouth wide, and has promise to fill
it. The larger the desires, the more pleasing to God, and the more like to
speed, for the more of the Spirit is in them.

There is no color then, why any should neglect this duty, upon pretense of
having the Spirit; for the Apostles, and Disciples of our Lord continued in
Prayer, and breaking of Bread, after they had received the spirit; for God is
to be found and met with in those ordinances, as he says, he walks in the
midsts of the Golden Candlesticks. And the Spirit is to be sought in these; for
the best of Saints have need of seeking it in a greater measure, and for
continual supplies, and watering every moment; which they obtain in and by
their communion with God in this duty. But the more we have of the Spirit, the
more we ought to be conversant in this Duty, because we are furnished with
ability; and for not using our Talents, they may be taken away; and by using
they are improved. And the more effectual and fervent they will be, by this,
that they are more spiritual. Much less may we neglect prayer, if we think we
have not the Spirit; for we pray for it.

And this circumstance of fasting and watching is sometimes joined with this
duty, to the end our prayers may be more spiritual: I mean a Fast from a meal
that none may perceive, not a Fast of 40 days, nor exchange of Flesh for Fish.
Fasting does as much promote it, as the contrary does let and hinder it; though
possibly we may use the same expression, full as fasting, yet they who have
tried know the advantage which this gives above that, to the fervency, and
earnestness, and the holiness of our desires and prayers, and to repentance,
and sorrow for our sins. And our Savior tells his Disciples of a sort of
Devils which could not be cast out but by fasting and prayer. And Mark 9.
Cornelius thus prayed, and thus Daniel, Dan. c. 9. both with good success.
David also humbled himself with fasting, for they knew well, that words of
course, as a Sacrifice that costs nothing, is nothing worth. And unless we thus
pray in the Spirit, it appears we cannot please God, for the prayer cannot
otherwise be holy, and for such things as are pleasing to God? for who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean.

Although we ought to pray in this manner yet nevertheless ought we not to
neglect the duty, though we cannot perceive the assistance of the Spirit; for
God feeds the young Ravens that call upon him. If they can call upon him, no
man can pretend a disability. And David in the 107 Psalm, shows how people
that are plagued for their wickedness, because they rebelled against the Lord,
and contemned the counsel of the most high, v. 11, and 17. Yet crying unto the
Lord in their trouble, he deliveretd them out of their distress.

Though these prayers were extorted from them in their extremities, when their
soul abhorred all manner of Meat, and they were even at Deaths door. And when
they were at their wits end, and ready to perish through their hunger, and
thirst, and bondage, which for their sins they suffered, yet in their
extremities they cry to God, whom they had sinned against, and he delivers
them.

These were not such prayers as are put up by the Spirit, for such relief; even
nature, though degenerated, can easily pray, but the dictates of the Spirit are
spiritual, yet in regard the heart and lip go together, those are prevalent,
much more if prayed in faith.

If God hears such prayers, and thou thy self have obtained thy Requests for
these or the like benefits, and temporal deliverances; thou may then be
emboldened and encouraged to ask and continue praying for all thou lackest: as
David expresses, Psalm. 116. I am well pleased that the Lord has heard the
voice of my prayer, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. And if
thou have been heard for things temporal, thou need not to despair or doubt
when thou prayest for those things which are pleasing to God, which he has
commanded thee to ask, and Jesus Christ also has commended to thee to seek,
and promised to procure.

Not but that a Child of God may and must by Faith, and by the Spirit, ask the
things of this life; for our blessed Savior teaches us to pray for our daily
bread; he prayed, Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me, yet, not
my will, but thy will be done. This submission made that prayer which was
natural, to be spiritual; although he prayed for that which he knew was
impossible. And since God in his mercy has given his peculiar people many
promises of temporal blessings; they may and must ask them in faith, in such
order as Jesus Christ has appointed, viz. seeking the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof first, and with modesty and such other circumstances as
hereafter is expressed, and God will grant our requests as far as is for our
good.

But that which is sure to prevail, is the holy appetite, that planteth Hungers
and Thirsts after righteousness; for to that is the promise annexed, and
blessing too. Matthew. 5.6. Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye, Isa.
44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty. The desires of such shall be
satisfied, though not uttered with full expressions, nor strength of Lungs, as
Prayers learned may be. Importunity, which our Savior Christ so much presses,
is comprehended under this of praying in the Spirit; for he taught nothing but
what was spiritual. And his practice too proves it to be the operation of the
Spirit, that makes us importunate in Prayer; for when he prayed he was
frequently in agonies, and prayed most earnestly. It reproves those that mind
other things, when they pray; how shall God mind their prayers? what he
teaches and urges for this is in Luke 18. where he shows that for our
importunities sake we are heard of God, and argues, that we ought always to
pray, and not to faint; to which agrees, 1 These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing.
To the same purpose our Savior teaches, Luke 11.5. Where he shows that
Importunity prevailed more than Love and Friendship, 1 Samuel 1.15. It is said, I
poured out my Soul before God. Zeal makes Importunate, and fervent in Spirit
serving the Lord. If our Lord and Savior sweat blood, we must undergo some
pain; and if we apprehend the greatness of the benefits which we beg, it will
make us zealous.

Another part of the manner which our blessed Savior has enjoined, is to ask
in his name, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness, etc. He has not only
commanded it, but to the observance of the command, annexed a promise of
reward, as large as we can desire, John 14.13. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in
my name, I will do it; this is an odoriferous perfume to our prayers. In his
name, every knee must bow; it is not at his name in the original. He is our
only Mediator and high Priest who ever lives to make intercession for us. He
presents them, and recommendeth them to his Father, mixing them with sweet
odours, and purifying them from those corruptions of our nature, which attend
them, as Salt water is made fresh by passing through the bowels of the earth.
And there is no Mediator to this Mediator; and we must needs know our own
unworthiness to be such, that there is nothing in us to deserve acceptance.

Another part of the manner is, that we pray in faith, firmly believing that we
shall receive; he that prays for wisdom, St. James bids him ask in Faith,
nothing wavering, James 1.7. He forbids that man to think that he shall receive
any thing of the Lord that wavereth, and calls him a double-minded man; for as
we oblige men to be real to us, and faithful by believing them, so we do God.
This manner of praying is commanded in many places; to this belongs waiting
upon God, Isa. 30.18. There is no promise to those prayers which superstition
has made to the blessed Virgin, nor no command for them; therefore they are
not of faith.

Another part of the manner is, that we pray with reverence and humility, Psalm.
66. Bow down thine ear, O Lord, and hear me, for I am poor and needy. Psalm. Let
us draw nigh to him with reverence, and Godly fear, for our God is a consuming
fire. The consideration of God's greatness, and almightiness, must needs beget
a reverence in our approachings to him. This reverence is discribed in the
Publican, Luke 8.13. The Publican standing a far off, could not so much as lift
up his eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying Lord be merciful to me
a sinner. 6 Mich. 8. What does the Lord require of thee, but that thou do
justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God. Isa. 57. He resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. The people of Israel were enjoined, that
when they came before the Lord with their Sacrifices, they should say, A Syrian
ready to perish was my Father, and came down to Egypt with a few. We come as
Beggars to him for his alms, and having nothing but what we receive of him, we
must therefore ascribe all to his goodness and bounty, as we have an example, 1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills, and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and
up again, ver. 8. he raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the
Beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes. And Isa. 66.7. He says,
To him will I look that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit.

The lifting up of a pure heart, and clean hands, and a reverent posture of the
body, are mentioned as necessary in the manner of praying. Whilst Moses his
hands were lifted up, Israel prevailed; but when they were down, the Amalakites
prevailed. Our Savior fell on his face, and prayed. He has also taught us
paucity of words, as most agreeable to the Omniscience, Highness, and dignity
of God; and condemns vain repetitions which inculcate the same thing again;
for these are nauseous both to God and men, and are as much the Sacrifice of
fools, as their prayers who neglecting all other things, of the manner of
praying and matter too, think it enough to say Amen. They bring religion almost
to nothing, that they may gain the more proselites. He enjoyneth also, The
circumstances of place, Mat. 6. That our private prayers be put up in private
places where no eye sees but God alone; for such prayer is sincere, because it
expects a reward from him only. Hypocrisy expects it from men. The same
circumstance he requires in fasting, Almsdeeds also, and a perfect
reconciliation to our offended brethren is required, to make our prayers
acceptable as our Lord, and Savior teaches, Matthew. 5.23. Leave thy gift
before the Altar, go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
offer thy gift. 1 Timothy 2.8. the Apostle commands to pray without wrath, and
doubting.

The circumstance of Time is also material; although we have always need to
pray because of the manifold temptations we meet with, yet we read of the
Apostles, that they went up to the Temple at the hour of prayer. That shows
that there is a time designed for that duty, Act. 3. and Apocal. 1. St. John
was in the Spirit upon the Lords day, for though this duty is always
seasonable, yet there be Special seasons, as we may find by experience wherein
we are freer in our holy desires, and better disposed, and God is nigher; the
opportunity in every work is half the work, therefore observe these Mollissima
tempora fandi. As under the law. The first fruits were to be Sacrificed, and
the first that opened the womb were to be holy to the Lord. By a parity of
reason the services that we do to God, under the Gospel, are to be of the first
things. Remember thy Creater in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12. Psalm. 63.
Early will I seek thee; and the reason of his so seeking is in the following
words, my soul thirsts for thee; so Psalm. 42. my voice shall thou hear
betimes in the morning; and early will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will
look up, Psalm. 5. when I awake I am present with thee, Prove. 8.17. Those that
seek me early shall find me. But he that seeks not early, may seek long,
before he find an accepted time. We read, Genesis 4.3. In process of time it came
to pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to the Lord.
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of the flock, and of the fat
thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering, But to Cain,
and to his offering he had not respect. The difference of the offering showed
the sincerity of Abl's heart above Cain's. For he offered, but it is not said
the first fruits of the ground, but the contrary is understood by the
opposition of the offerings, and by those words which God spoke to him, viz. If
thou do well shall not thou be accepted? From whence we are taught this Rule,
viz. That they who will offer their service, or any thing to God, may not offer
any but the best. Nor defer the time to serve him, for that which we defer, we
are loath and unwilling to do, or indifferent whether we do it or no; that
which we desire to do, or do with good will and love, we hasten, fearing lest
we should be prevented. The more forward and early our services are, the more
acceptable to God and men, for this persumes them. Now is the accepted time. He
then that deferreth loses the Accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2. And Psalm. 69.13.
David urges it as an Argument why God should hear him, and deliver him,
because he made his prayer in an accepted time, therefore slip not the
seasonable time though thou be indisposed. He that is early in his service, and
constant too, cannot possibly miss the accepted time when God will be found, as
he was found of Cornelius. For these two are joined together by David, seek the
Lord while he may be found; seek his face evermore, for by this we shall be
sure not to miss, Psalm. 116.1. The Saints first and only refuge is prayer, and
it is the last refuge of the wicked. They who fear they shall be prevented of
their usual time, let them take the present. It is a high point of Wisdom to
know the fit time and place, and the ignorance of it makes the misery of man
great. David practiced what he taught, and did not only seek early, but late
too, Psalm. 141.2. he says, Let the lifting up of my hands be as an evening
Sacrifice. The morning, and the evening Sacrifice were not to be omitted, and
he that does omit them, or either of them, finds his mind less disposed for the
duty, and the enjoyment and comfort of it, which he uses to have when he
performs them without intermission; for by the omission of one duty, God
seems to be withdrawn, and gone further from us, and not so ready to be
found, or to hear us, by how much we have withdrawn from him, and neglected,
and forsaken him. We also find Isaac going out to meditate in the evening. And
Daniel persisted in his practice of praying three times a day, notwithstanding
the peril of his life. David kept the same times, as he says, Psalm. 55. At
evening at morning, and at noon day I will pray unto thee. Love and need cause
frequent and early visits; those who are greatly beloved of God, and God
beloved of them, do pray often. Weread of other circumstances, as that of
Daniels opening his windows, and looking toward the temple; but we are not
restrained to this manner of ceremonies, for those things are abolished by the
substance; the more we observe of these circumstance, the more joy, comfort and
satisfaction we shall reap by the duty. Take time enough for preparation, for
if thou straiten thy self, thou may be diverted. But we are commanded to
pray always with all manner of prayer, that is as the occasion will permit, or
requires, for there are various manners, we cannot be always upon our knees in
public prayers, or in private; nor must one duty justle out another. All
times, and all places afford us opportunity and occasions of lifting up our
hearts, and hands to God in the Heavens, which may be accepted sometimes as
well as Sacrifice. And as in heaven we shall never cease from praising God, so
while we live here we shall never cease from praying to him, Psalm. 122. I give
my self unto prayer.

Lastly, this duty, (that it may be acceptable) does require preparation and
premeditation, Psalm. 10.19. thou preparest their heart, and thine care harkneth.

The next thing to be considered, is the matter of prayer; Which is Twofold,
viz. The Inducements to be used, and the subject matter for which we pray

Seldom is there any prayer without Inducements, and motives persuasive, with
which we urge God, and press him to grant us the things we desire.

The Lords prayer, which is as brief as may be, concludes with three
Inducements, viz. for thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the Glory, for ever,
and ever. Amen. We find in the Psalms of David variety of those. Sometimes he
urges the promises of God, Sometimes the Commandment of God, some motives he
fetches from the name of God, some from his nature, and being, as from his
Truth, his Holiness his Goodness, his Faithfulness, his Mercy, his Power, his
Justice, his Righteousness his Almightiness.

He urges the pledges of Gods love already bestowed, his loving kindness of
old. And his thankful acknowledgment of them. Also he urges his Relation as
Servant, I am thy Servant, O grant me understanding that I may know thy
statutes.

Some he urges from his own Misery, Need, Necessity, Trouble, and Affliction.

Some from his Innocence, uprightness, simplicity, sincerity, etc. Psalm. 59.

Some from his holy desires, Intents, vows, purposes, and Resolutions, and his
service done for him. His hope in God, his Trust and affiance in him. His love
to him, and his word.

He urges also, that he makes his prayer in an accepted time, Psalm. 69.13.
Psalm. 119. Hear me O Lord, and I will keep thy statutes: Let my Soul live, and
it shall praise thee; Let thine hand help me, for I have chosen thy
Commandments; give me understanding according to thy word. So that we see that
it is a good motive when we ask any grace, to show how we have endeavored and
used the means to attain it, as he does, and purpose to use them. In this Psalm
throughout he shows how he studied Gods statutes, meditated and delighted
himself in them, Psalm. 71. He urges his trust. In the O Lord have I put my
trust, let me never be put to confusion. This Motive he uses very often (as
though trusting did engage God not to fail him). It follows. Be thou my
strong hold whereunto I may always resort. For thou have promised to help me.
In the two next verses he urges his love, and desire of God, as an Argument
why he should deliver him from his ungodly enemies.

And this motive he uses often, and he very often uses that of his promise.
In the 9 ver. of this Psalm. he urges his trouble. Mine enemies speak against
me, etc. Go not from me, O God my God, have thee to help me. Look upon my
affliction and misery, and forgive me all my sin. From my youth up thy terrors
have I suffered with a troubled mind, etc. In the 12, 13, 16, 19. and 20.
verses, he urges his Resolutions of trusting in God, waiting upon him serving
him and praising him, ver. 12. As for me I will patiently abide always and
praise thee more and more, 13. My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness,
and thy salvation; for I know no end thereof. I will go forth in the strength
of the Lord, and make mention of thy Righteousness only. And prays, Forsake
me not in the time of mine Age, when my strength fails me, until I have
showed thy strength unto this Generation, and they Power unto all, etc.

Psalm. 72. He urges his holy Resolutions: Give the King thy judgments, etc.
Then shall he Judge the people according to right, and defend the poor, etc. He
shall keep the simple folk by their right, and punish the wrong doer.

Psalm. 5.2. Hearken unto the voice of my calling, my King and my God. Motiv.
for unto thee will I make my my prayer; my voice shall thou hear betimes O
Lord, early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way O Lord, (the motive) And I will walk in thy
truth; knit my heart unto thee (the motive) that I may fear thy name.

Psalm. 16. Preserve me, O God, (the motive) for in thee do I put my trust.

Psalm. 17. And in sundry other Psalms he urges the wickedness of his enemies
as a motive. ver. 8. Keep me as the apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow
of thy wings, from the wicked that oppress me, (the motive) with their mouth
they speak proudly etc.

In the 38 Psalm. he also urges the malice, and wickedness of his enemies,
together with his own sorrow, and misery, by reason of his sins, and his
enemies, ver. 2. Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thine hand presses me
sore. There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure, neither is
there rest in my bones, because of my sin, ver. 20. Of his enemies he says,
they were against him because he followed the thing that is good, but he will
confess his iniquities; these motives introduce this prayer. Have thee to help
me O Lord God of my salvation.

In the 4 Psalm. He makes use of Gods former benefits as a motive for further
beneficent saying. Hear me when I call O God of my Righteousness, (the motive)
for thou have set me at liberty when I was in trouble, Psalm. 86. He urges his
afflictions, he suffered under Gods hand, and his enemies malice, and the
goodness, and mercy of God. And concludes, O turn thee unto me, and have mercy
upon me.

Usual in his prayers is that expression for thy Name sake. They who would make
use of this as all must, must know him in that name which he himself
proclaimed, Exodus 34.6. For David did refer to this, The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth;
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin,
etc. The Lord cannot forget his own name, therefore cannot forget to be
gracious. If we can use that inducement of Moses, Lord, if I have found favor
in thy sight, it is peculiar to his favorites, and obliges God to hear.

This is a large Field, and may afford great plenty and variety; but every man
may supply himself with it, that list to read and observe the Psalms. It is
noted by Bishop Cooper, that it is not sufficient to seek from God, because of
that which he is, but we must also consider what we are: Otherwise, as Jehu
said unto one demanding, Is it peace? What have thou to do with peace? So the
Lord may answer us, though the Lord be gracious, what is it to us?

As to the subject matter of Prayer; the Children of God are sometimes mistaken
about it, and are in doubts. St. Paul accordingly confesses in the behalf of
himself, and others, we know not what to pray for as we ought. We find Moses
also mistaken in the matter of his Prayer. Exodus 33.18. Show me now thy Glory,
for God answered him, that no man could see his face and live; and that he
could not see it; yet Almighty God, to show his propensity in hearing prayer,
came as near his request as he could for God answered him in that which was as
profitable and useful for him. He made all his goodness to pass before him, and
let him see his back-parts, so that Moses lost not his Prayer, though he did
not obtain the thing he asked. Much more may we expect success in our Prayers,
when we ask such things as he has commanded us to seek, which we know are
according to his will; and our blessed Savior also has engaged for our
obtaining. The invitations being so many, so importunate, and so free, viz. To
come, and buy without money, and without price; to open our mouths wide, to ask
and have; it appears, and we must so believe, that Gods bountifulness is such,
that he is more ready to give, than we to ask or receive. And like as a Mother,
whose breasts are full, is more desirous to give suck to her Babe, than that to
crave, or receive it; such is Gods freeness to us.

It concerns us then to advise what these rich benefits are, which we are to
beg, and buy without money, or price. And if we may have what we lack for
asking, certainly we shall be convinced of the greatest folly in the world, if
we will lose them for want of asking.

Many are ignorant of their own wants, as the Church of Laodicea, who knew not
that she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, but
thought herself in the contrary estate. But God advises her of her wants, and
the remedy of it, which he shows her, is to be had of him only, viz. Gold
tried in the fire, that she might be rich, and white raiment that she might be
clothed, and eye Salve, that she might see; and freely invites her to buy them
of him, though she were poor, blind, and naked, and had nothing to purchase
them withal, therefore we may infer that all men, be their condition what it
will, may come to God in this duty of Prayer, for all their needs, as we read,
Jonah 1.5. The Mareners cried every one to his God.

For our better direction, that we may not miscarry in our suits, as the Mother
of Zebedees Children did, our blessed Savior has plentifully instructed us
what we should pray for; as he here directs the Church of the Laodiceans,
Matthew. 6.9. and Luke 11.2. The Disciples sensible of their own insufficiency,
do make it their suit to him to teach them; thereupon he gives a pattern, and
rules for them and us to use.

In which Prayer the three first, and the three last petitions are spiritual.
According to the rule which he gives, ver 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof. From this prayer of our Savior, and the rules
by him given, and from the precepts elsewhere, and the prayers of the Saints,
we find but these three things necessary to be prayed for, viz. Grace, and the
means of Grace, and the rewards promised thereto.

For, though the Children of God do most frequently use confession of their
sins, and thanksgivings together with their Prayers, as Daniel did. And David's
Psalms are most of them thus; and whether we use them as inducements for the
things we pray for, as we use confession, as an inducement for pardon, and
thanksgiving, may and ought to be used as an inducement for obtaining further
mercies, or else we look upon them as distinct duties; they are proper enough,
but not always necessary to be joined with this duty; therefore we refer them
to their proper places, and judge them much more easy as to the verbal
expression than fervent Prayer for grace, and spiritual enjoyments.

When God has filled our heart with food and gladness, and has wrought
deliverance for us, and so has given us, matter of thanksgiving; if the Heart
be but enough thankful, words of praise and outward actions cannot be wanting;
but thanksgivings and confessions are peculiar things: and for this duty, this
one motive may be sufficient to enforce it, viz. That it pleases the Lord
better than a Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs, Psalm. 69.32.

These three, viz. Grace, and the means of Grace, and the rewards, I conceive
they contain all the promises, and all that God has engaged by the new
Covenant to give to his people. They contain also all that God has commanded,
and enjoined his people, and requires of them; and they contain all that they
need, or can desire to make them happy here and hereafter.

And there is no Petition in the Psalms of David, or in any prayer in all the
Scripture, but is contained under one of these heads; for all the Prayers of
the Saints tends to this end, viz. The glory of God, and the promotion of his
Kingdom, and the means thereof.

Those Prayers which are against the opposites, namely, against sin and
iniquity, and the occasions, and helps thereof; and against every degree of
sin, and the punishments and curses due to sin and sinners, That the rod of the
Wicked may not rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm. 125. These are of the
same nature with the former, for the overthrowing, plucking down and destroying
of sin, and Satan's Kingdom, and the treading him under foot, is the preparing
the way of the Lord, that his Kingdom may come; therefore we do in this pray
against those, and in praying against those, we pray for this.

Hence it is, that God has made promises accordingly of subduing our
iniquities, and to tread Satan under our feet. That no Weapon formed against us
shall prosper. That sin shall not have dominion over us. And we pray for the
performance of these promises, when we pray the second Petition of the Lord's
Prayer, (Thy Kingdom come,) for the Kingdoms of the World cannot become the
Kingdom of the Lord, and of his Christ, but by the subsersion of Antichrists
Kingdom.

This, notwithstanding it is our duty to pray expressly, as we are strengthened,
and assisted by the holy Spirit, as well for these, as against those, and
against those, as well as for these; although implicitly he that prays for the
Kingdom of God, prays against sin, and Satan. See Psalm. 119. Turn away my eyes
from beholding vanity, etc. Likewise when we pray thus generally in these words
of our blessed Savior, we do implicitly pray for the conversion of the Jews.
Yet ought we notwithstanding expressly to pray for it, because we are commanded
to give him no rest, till he make Jerusalem a praise.

What persons we are to pray for, is also taught by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1. I
will therefore that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men; but yet we are chiefly to pray for the chosen people of
God; for thereby we express, and declare our fellowship with them, and our
relation to them, as members of the same mystical body, in Christ Jesus, and
thereby endeared to us more than our natural relations. Therefore we find the
Apostles in their Epistles praying for those they write to, and requiring the
like of them again. Paul to the Ephesians prays for them, c. 1.17. That God
would give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;
that their understanding being enlightened, they might know what is the hope of
his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints.
And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who believe
according to the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, etc. and Chap.
3.16. Prays that they may be strengthened with might by the Spirit in the
inner-man; that they may know the love of Christ: for the Saints at Philippi he
prays, that their love may abound more and more, in knowledge, and all
judgment, that they may approve things that are excellent, that they may be
sincere, and without offense, till the day of Christ, being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the praise, and glory
of God, Philip. 1.9.

By these, and the like Prayers of the holy Apostles, we learn what to pray for
as well for our selves, as others.

We learn from St. Paul's prayer for the Hebrews, c. 13. To pray that God
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, would make us perfect in every
good work, to do his will, working in us that which is pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ. For it is through Jesus Christ, if any thing we do is
pleasing to God; and it is God himself who works it in us.

Those that do not pray for the peace of Jerusalem, are not Citizens thereof;
therefore they do not love her. But they that do pray for her peace, and give
God no rest, until he make Jerusalem a praise, are Citizens of that Jerusalem,
which is from above, which is the mother of us all; and they receive comfort
from her welfare, and are sure that she shall receive a benefit by their
Prayers, and hope to receive benefit mutually by her Prayers; for as the
Apostles in their Epistles to the Churches pray for them, so they do also
desire their prayers.

I infer, that every particular Christian in his Prayers must put in suit the
general promises, viz. That all her people shall be holy, all righteous, all be
taught of God, and holiness to the Lord shall be writ upon the Bells of the
Horses. They who pray for these Spiritual gifts and graces; for themselves and
others, do pray in the Spirit, and seek the Glory of God. And by their
fervency, and zeal, and frequent addresses to God for them; and for repressing,
and subduing their opposites, viz. The sins which so easily beset them, their
iniquities and corruptions. They show forth their weariness of them, and
burden which loadeth them, from which they groan and cry to be eased and
delivered by God, because they are not able by all they can do, to be delivered
by their own industry. And because our blessed Savior has promised to ease
such, therefore they may be sure to be heard; if they (confessing their
particular burden of corruption, whether it be pride, anger, malice, revenge,
covetousness, lust, concupiscence, or the like, and mourning over it,) humbly
entreat him to succor, relieve, help, heal, cleanse, wash, purge and purify
them by the renewing of the Spirit. Or else (as he answered St. Paul praying
against the Thorn in his flesh) he will supply them with grace sufficient for
them.

From these promises we may see the reason why our blessed Savior in that form
of Prayer, teaches us to pray in the plural number, our and us; for this
includes our selves, and our fellow members of the mystical body of Christ,
some whereof are but Babes, or Children in religion, and cannot pray for
themselves, as not having received so great measure of the Spirit, so that they
have need of our Prayers, and our charity, including them, does not hinder our
requests for our selves, but rather promotes them.

We see also why sometimes they pray more particularly, but for themselves as
the Apostle Paul did against his particular malady, and burden which he
groaned under. And so David did pray against his own particular sins and
sufferings; Deliver me from bloody-guiltiness; Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity, and quicken me in thy Law; Incline my heart to thy
Testimonies, and not to covetousness, etc. For which particular graces, we may
upon occasion, pray in the behalf of others, according to that precept of the
Apostle. If any man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto Death, he
shall pray for him, and it shall be forgiven him, Likewise may we pray for the
deliverance of them from their afflictions, and perils which they lie under, as
the Apostle Paul desires the Saints to whom he wrote, to pray for his
deliverance; for nature dictates these prayers for our selves, but grace, for
others that are our Brethren in Christ.

The Hope of speeding is that which incourageth, and excites with strength and
courage in every undertaking we go about.

If we seek of God in prayer the things which are according to his will, those
gifts, and graces, and Improvements, which he has promised to give, those
things which he has invited us to ask, or commanded us to ask; those that our
Savior and his Apostles have taught us to ask; those which the experience of
other Saints and servants of God proves to be acceptable and proper requests;
those graces which we are commanded to have, those degrees of grace, and those
means which we are commanded to use, and those spiritual joys and enjoyments
which we long for, and cannot be happy without, why should we doubt of our
success? or why should we not expect a quick Return?

Let us then apply our selves to seek out those things.

As the original of all graces, we first are taught by our Savior to pray to
God, to give us the Holy Spirit: And he that obtains this, obtains also the
fruits of it. Love. joy, peace, meekness, gentleness, patience etc. And all
graces whatsoever: for as the Lord taught us our whole duty in one word, viz.
Love; so here he teaches us in one word, the sum of all we need to pray for;
for although we pray for many things, yet the sum of all spiritual things is
contained in this. And if we seek the spiritual gifts, and graces, which is
signified in that expression, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, the other things shall be added unto us without seeking. In this
also is summed up all that we ought to pray against, viz. all our spiritual
enemies, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
and every thing that Satan overcomes the sons of men withal.

This general is branched into six petitions in the Lords prayer; for by the
Spirit of God in us, we are made holy, the Temples of the Lord, and are made
capable to sanctify Gods holy name, the love of God is spread abroad in our
hearts, Gods law is written in our hearts, and put in our inward parts. By the
Mission of the holy Spirit into us, we all know him, and know his Judgments,
and do them: the Kingdoms of the World become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of
his Christ, Righteousness will run down as a River, and holiness, to the Lord
shall be writ upon us, and all our common things; every pot in Jerusalem shall
be like the bouls before the Altar. And Jesus Christ shall have the uttermost
parts of the earth for his possession; when these and the like promises are
fulfilled. And the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, so that we
pray implicity for these promises when we pray these petitions in the Lords
prayer: likewise when we pray, Thy will be done, we pray for the Spirit to
enable us to do it, and we pray to God for the fulfilling of those promises of
the New Covenant which relate to it, viz. That God will be our God, and we
shall be his people; that we shall run, and not be weary, walk and not faint,
mount up with wings like an Eagle, and renew our strength like an Eagle, that
we shall be a willing people.

So in the other petitions, Namely, that for remission of sins, we cannot be
assured of it, nor have peace of conscience, but by the operation of the Holy
Ghost in our hearts by faith, exciting in us unfeigned sorrow for those sins,
wherewith we have grieved it, and working in us a steadfast resolution and
purpose never to commit the like again. Also when we pray against Temptations,
it is intended that we crave this aid by the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, to
escape them; for thereby we are made sufficient, and able to fly them, or to
overcome them, and to be more than conquerors; so that no Spiritual weapon
formed against us shall proper. And if God gives us his holy Spirit, we obtain
also the other petitions, namely, to be delivered from evil, and to enjoy food,
and raiment, and all the necessaries of life; for these are inseparably
contained in the privileges of the Saints: For God is a Wall of fire round
about them; bread shall be given them, and their water shall be sure; so that
petition also is (by reason of the promise) contained in that of asking the
holy Spirit. The rather for this, that all other promises of the New Covenant
are employed in this. This notwithstanding, we find the Saints and Servants of
God praying in other words, and forms, and by the Spirit too. Whose Assistance
I humbly crave, for my further progress in these meditations.

Certainly when the Holy Spirit assists us in prayer, it does not only enable
us to say or pray in a perscribed form, but dictates the words, and things
prayed for, according to the necessities of the person praying, and prayed for.

Although we are not under the law, but under grace, that being dead wherein we
were held, that we should henceforth serve God, in the newness of the Spirit,
and not in the oldness of the latter.

Yet must we pray against all those corruptions of Nature, called the old man,
those infirmities, and weaknesses, and indispositions to the new nature, to
grace, and to the means of grace, and for those graces, those helps, and
occasions, and means of grace, which the Saints, and Servants of God under the
law, have prayed for, and God promised to give them.

As for instance, all those petitions of David, in the Psalms, showing his own
corruptions, weaknesses, failings, sins, and infirmities, wanderings, and
strayings from Gods Commandments, and praying for the Lords help against them,
we now under the Gospel, if we flatter not our selves (as some sects do) we all
at sometimes shall find by sad experience, that we have need to pray so too.
And those that are most renewed, and most conformable to the Image of God,
those search out most, and know there own failings, in grace, and proneness to
sin; for it may be said of us, All have sinned, and are justified freely by his
grace; for if St. Paul counted not that he had atttained perfection, but
pressed forward, neither may we imagine, that those of this age, who pretend to
it, have attained it; for in many things, we offend all.

Therefore in as much as those graces are to be in us which they sought, and
prayed for, that they should be in them, we also are to imitate their examples
of praying for them, and the improvement of them, and against the contrary,
viz. the corruptions and sins which we find our natures liable to.

Every man's condition does show him what temptations he is most liable to, and
what graces he has most need to pray for.

Those that will be rich, the Apostle says, fall into temptation, and a snare,
and diverse noisome lusts, they will be rich though: therefore have need to pray
against those temptations of pride, anger, disdain, oppression, contention,
strife, wilfulness, covetousness, love of the World, and all those lusts which
accompany a plentiful fortune; as gluttony, drunkenness, effeminateness, the
love of pleasure, etc. and that they may escape all those snares whereby the
Soul is taken, and held captive, viz. those advantages which they have of
sinning with impunity; those helps which their wealth ministers, and all the
opportunities which wealth makes for them; that by the help of Gods holy
Spirit, they may be able to take off their affections from things below, that
so they may set them on things above; that they affect not, mind nor, nor
converse with these things of the world which they have plentifully to enjoy.
That notwithstanding their abundance, they may have their conversation in
Heaven, and mind only heavenly things, and use the World as if they used it
not; buy as if they possessed not; and be rich in good works; and may be able
to deny themselves; and may be crucified to the World, and buried with Christ
in Baptism, and rise again with him in newness of life, that the life which we
now live, we may no more live it, but Christ may live in us; and the life which
we live, we may live by the faith of the Son of God who loved us, and gave
himself for us.

A special help and encouragement it is to us, if we can find out a promise of
obtaining these graces, which we thus pray for in time of need; for having
these precepts (as here before mentioned) it urges us to the practice of them,
as the Apostles profess they practiced. But the promise puts hope into us, of
obtaining the like graces, if we seek them by Prayer, Meditation, and other
means appointed by God to be used. The promise then, which we may urge, and
charge God with, in our prayers, may be this, viz. The Sun shall not burn thee
by day, nor the Moon by night; or that, That all things shall work together for
good to them that love God. For these promises were therefore given to us, that
we should have boldness at the Throne of Grace.

The contrary condition of life, Poverty, has likewise its temptations.

Therefore we find the wise Agur praying equally against it, and riches;
showing the temptations of both; and the blessedness of the middle or mean
estate. Those that experience the extremity of poverty, not having a place
where to lay their head, have many promises of a God alsufficient to trust
unto; and he will never leave nor forsake his Servants.

In like manner other conditions of life are accompanied with multiplicity of
temptations. Therefore the Scripture gives cautions, and admonitions to all to
warn them, and arm them against them; young and old, Masters and Servants,
Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, Kings and Subjects, Priests and
People: and every man's daily experience tells him what temptations he lies
under; and his proneness of nature, and inclination to them; which when the
Scripture in particular warns us against, and instructs us how to avoid; we
know that we ought by Prayer, to seek assistance and help from God; because
without his almighty help we are not able to overcome them.

For instance; The Lord commanding to fly youthful lusts. If we find our
selves, by natural inclination, liable to those lusts, we may (as the Apostle
St. Paul has given us an example) Beseech the Lord that this Messenger of
Satan may depart from us, and never cease to beseech him, until we obtain an
answer like to that which he obtained, sufficiency of grace, or else removal of
the temptation; and as often as it recurs, we may pray with holy David, Psalm.
119. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. And whilst we do continue praying,
and caling upon God; why may not we be confident in it, as the Apostle was;
That the Lord will deliver us from every evil work, since the promise is to all
that trust in him; That he will stand by them, and save them, and deliver them.

Or if by nature we are inclined to covetousness: David's prayer will stand us
in stead; Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness.

In like sort, he fearing to be overtaken with that common sin of lying, prayed
to God, to take from him the way of lying, to grant him his Law, and to teach
him his statutes; for he well knew, that there was no remedy against sin but
grace. And the Law of God dwelling in his heart, that he might run the way of
God's Commandments without halting, or looking back.

If we have been overtaken with this sin, this prayer suits for our occasion;
for by praying to God to take from us the way of lying, we intend we have more
of it than we ought, and so probably he intended, or else how could it be taken
from him?

And if we should be so unhappy as to be so overtaken with lust as he was. If
in the bitterness of our soul, and sorrow of a broken heart; washing our bed
with our tears, having no health in our flesh, nor rest in our bones, because
of God's displeasure: We pray as he did (with humble confession of our sins,
and vileness) to him, to wash us, cleanse us, heal us, pardon us; to turn his
face from our sins, and blot out our misdeeds, according to the multitude of
his mercy. Then, though for the present they are ever in our sight, terrifying
and troubling us, we shall in due time, know, that they are pardoned; and that
the blood of Christ has cleansed us from them all; and that we are reconciled
in him; and he will heal us; and we shall again be restored to the joy of our
salvation, and praise his Name in his Courts, and renew our vows, and be
stablished with his free Spirit.

Most of the Psalms contain prayers for some graces, and may stand us in stead
for our use, and serve for our direction.

If we are rash or chollerick by nature, and subject to wrath and revenge, and
have fallen thereby, or fear we shall fall. We cannot be enough sensible of our
danger, in this particular, because we must expect hourly temptations, and how
far our wrath and choler may carry us, we know not (especially if we should
chance to meet with others, as chollerik and rash as our selves) if we do not
always pray to God to help us in, and deliver us from this temptation, (as it
is, for the most part in all the sins of our complexion, or inclination, very
difficult to stand against them at all) if God do not stand by us, and
strengthen us, and support us; and if we forget our selves, and do not hang
upon him for help, call upon him, trust in him, and fear and distrust our
selves. These will always be buffetting us.

He that is sensible of his weakness in this particular, and his danger, and
mourns by reason thereof, desiring to be delivered from it, seeks help by
reading, meditation, conference, and this means of prayer, which must also be
joined to the other, besides the use of natural means too: For so we find the
Apostle Paul using them; for he says of himself, I keep under my body. We
strive and run as in a Race. So fight I, not as one that beats the Air. In
labors often, in sastings often, etc. For hereby we both show to God, and man,
our burden, that we groan under, and desires to be delivered from it; if we
use all these means to get our deliverance. But on the contrary; how little
desire to be delivered from wrath or lust does he express, who seeds himself to
the full, drinks wine in bouls, pampers his body with high feeding and
drinking, which are the fuel of these fires? or how does he seek humility of
God, who delights himself in actions of vainglory, and the applause of men,
and seeks honor of men by bravery, revenge, vain ostentation, high looks, a
lofty gate, pomp, prodigality, and the like. Certainly those sins which by
nature we are most inclined to, these by natural helps and adjuments we must
oppose; not cherish and foster by incitements and allurements. The wise Agur
accordingly prayed against the means of sin, and the occasions, against the
means and occasions of fullness, and want. If we so well knew our own proneness
to these mother sins, as he did, and were so wise as he was, we would pray as
he did, to be delivered from the means and occasions of sins. This is contained
in that Petition, Lead us not into temptation.

In like sort praying for any grace, or improvement of a grace, we must use the
means, both spiritual and natural; and pray for them, and the occasions of
them; as mortification, sobriety, watchfulness, etc. Hence we are taught to
pray to God to send us Pastors, who shall feed his people with knowledge. And
because this is a necessary means of grace, God has promised it, and by the
promise we are invited to ask it. Suitably we find David praying, Psalm. 119.12.
Teach me thy Statutes; v. 18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous
things of thy Law; v. 26. I have acknowledged my ways, and thou heardest me; O
teach me thy Statutes. Make me to understand the way of thy Commandments. Make
me to delight in the thing that pleases thee.

More especially in this specified sin of wrath and revenge; if thou labourest
under it, desiring to be delivered from it, and the evils and dangers attending
it; thou ponderest and meditatest of those Texts of Scripture which reprove and
repress it; as is that, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, says the Lord.
Let not the Sun go down in your wrath. Leave thy gift upon the Altar, and go
and be reconciled, and then offer thy gift. Prove. It is the wisdom of a man to
pass by an offense. Anger rests in the bosom of fools. If when ye suffer
wrongfully ye take it patiently, happy are ye, for the Spirit of grace and
glory rests upon you. Thou shall reap improvement of thy patience in a good
measure by these meditations. And by subduing thy body, and withdrawing from it
superfluities (especially such as more naturally excite this humor in thy
body) and by careful watching against the first beginning of wrath.

And then if thou add to these this last remedy, viz. Prayer, beseeching God
through Jesus Christ (who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctisication, and redemption) to make us so wise as to pass by offenses for
his sake; and to take from us that folly of anger; that as fury is not him, so
it be not in us neither, who are his children, who does good to all; that we
may be like him in this; and that by our slowness to anger, and by our patient,
bearing of wrongs, and our meekness and submission to God (if it be his will
that we shall suffer wrongfully) we may perceive, and know, that the Spirit of
grace and glory rests upon us; and in that rejoice.

Then we may be assured that we shall obtain the victory over these lusts and
messengers of Satan; and be able to do good for evil; to love our enemies; to
bless them that curse us; to pray for those that despightfully use us; and so
run the ways of Jesus Christ's Commandments, and take up his yoke.

I say, we may be assured of obtaining these excellent graces by these means:
because God has promised it in the prohesie of Isa. c. 32. The heart of the
rash shall understand knowledge. The Lion shall lie down with the Lamb, c. 29.4.

Certainly the change of the heart, and renovation in knowledge, and
understanding is the chief thing in our Quickening, and vivification in the
Spirit, and in every grace; this God having often undertaken, and promised. As
in that promise, That he will take away the heart of stone, and give his people
a heart of flesh. And that he will give them a New heart, that he will put his
Laws in their hearts, and write them in their inward parts.

We may assure our selves that he will do it. If we supplicate him in faith in
Jesus Christ: And use our own endeavors with the means. And if we do obtain
this, so that we can savor the things of God, and delight our selves in the
Lord, and count all the ways of his Commandments pleasantness, search for
them, as for hid treasure, dig for them, seek them evermore; we have obtained
the greatest, and chiefest matter, and the rest we may assure our selves, that
we shall by the like means obtain: and by degrees be able to run the ways of
Gods commands: discretion shall preserve us, and understanding shall keep us,
and deliver us from the temptations, and allurements to these and other sins we
shall be able to keep our watch against our spiritual enemies, that would
destroy us.

But although our heart be thus changed and we renewed, so that with our mind
we do the Law of God, yet it is great danger but that sometimes with our flesh
we shall serve the Law of sin, because, when we would do good evil is present
with us: unless the hand of God continually hold us up, which that it may, we
must invocate his mercy, and almighty power; using all the means premised, and
with watchfulness against the first beginning of evil, Oculus ad coelum, Manus
ad clavum.

So that our surest perservative is this of prayer, although we are renewed in
the Spirit of our mind. Our own woeful experience tells us so; (as this holy
Apostle tells us by his experience.)

For we know how that we have often endeavored our selves to hallow the name
of God, and to (...) his will in the resisting of these sins of our complexion,
and to avoid the temptation. And to that end and purpose have read, meditated,
heard the word preached, and resolved upon the practice of it; we have made
that covenant with our eyes, as Job made with his, or the like, to avoid and
shun the occasions of that sin which we most fear. But yet upon trial we have
found in our corrupt hearts, so much of the old unregenerate man, that when we
would do good, evil has been present with us, and ready to surprise us, and
lead us captive. And how to do the good we would, we know not, and we could
only bewail our wretched condition, crying out with the Apostle, O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin, and death!

Therefore we must be always at the Throne of Grace, as those holy men were;
David, Psalm. 119. v. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy Commandments, v.
35. Make me to go in the paths of thy Commandments, v. 36. Incline my heart to
thy testimonies and not to covetiousness, 37. Turn away mine eyes lest they
behold vanity, and quicken me in thy Law, 38. Stablish thy word in thy Servant
that I may fear the.

Expressing his holy desires, with fervency, and earnestness, and Importunity,
Behold my delight is in thy Commandments. O quicken me in thy Righteousness.
And protests to God how he had used the means in studying and meditating of
Gods word.

If we accordingly practice. And with such holy desires, pantings, and
breathings with such servency of affection, with (...) purpose, resolutions and
vows, with such Importunity, under the sense of our needs and dependencies on
him. (For the Spouse her self, though she be assured of her Beloved's kindness
and love toward her, and her own love reciprocally toward him; so prays,
Draw us, we will run after thee) which shows what great need we have of
craving God's almighty help, when we are strongest; and with David have sworn,
and are steadfastly purposed to keep his righteous judgments.

If we do accordingly pray, then we may also obtain to be men after God's own
heart, as he was; for we have a promise for it, viz. The weak shall be like the
house of David. He will incline our hearts to his Testimonies. He will work in
us both the will and the deed. He will order our steps in his Word. He will
draw us, and we shall run after him. And we shall do his will on Earth, as it
is done in Heaven. And he will order our feet in his Word. Direct our going.
Make us to delight in that which is good. And though our soul be always in our
hand, yet we shall not forget his Laws; but claim them for our heritage and
portion for ever.

Because he is true, who has promised to guide us, lead us, keep us, uphold
us, strengthen us, watch over us, to be with us in trouble, to deliver us; to
tread Satan under our feet; that no weapon formed against us shall prosper;
that he will water us every morning, and every moment; and we shall run, and
not be weary, mount up with wings like Eagles, and renew our strength like the
Eagle; and he will make our way perfect; and those that are planted in the
house of the Lord shall flourish in the Court of God; they shall grow from
strength to strength, and grow up like the Calves of the stall. And though we
do fall when we are confident in our own strength, as the Apostle Peter did;
yet shall we rise again: But he that fears always is more happy; for he will
watch against the beginnings of evil actions, and will use these means
premised, and shall not fall; for God will hold him with his hand, because he
trusts in him only; and will bear him, as a man does bear his Son, Deuteronomy. 1.31.

And as we are taught in the precedent instances, so may we suitably be
instructed out of the holy Scriptures in all other temptations to other sins.
If it be excess in drinking; which raging vice has invaded a great part of the
world. And men are not content to allow themselves in it, but generally strive
to draw in all those with whom they converse, in spite, as it were, of all
holy admonitions, moral precepts, natural restrictions, policies, prudential
constitutions and councels of the most renowned wise men, vertuos men, most
excellent Lawgivers: And their own daily experience of the mischiefs and
ruins that this sin brings upon those that are guilty of it.

The remedies whereof being so much predicated, and so little practiced, must
needs convince the world of a great deal of practical Atheism and Infidelity.
But thou that see this fault in thy self, and art grieved at it, desiring to
be delivered from it, and find it as difficult as to cut off thy right hand,
or pull out thy right eye; follow the prescribed instructions, and imitate
those prayers, and thou shall reap thy desired grace, and quit thy soul and
body too of the sin, and with it, of many more which accompany it, and are
occasioned by it.

Because God has engaged to be found of them that seek him; to help them that
have no power, nor strength; to be with thee in the fire, that it shall not
burn thee, and in the water, that it shall not drown thee. That thou shall call
upon him in time of trouble, and he will deliver thee, and thou shall praise
him. He will pour water upon him that is thirsty, Isa. 44.3. He will subdue our
iniquities, Mic. 7.19. He gives power to the faint; and to them which have no
might he increases strength. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength, Isa. 40.29, 30. The God of Peace shall sanctify you throughout, in
spirit, soul, and body. Faithful is he who has called you, who also will do
it, 1 These. 5.23, ^4. Sin shall not have dominion over you, Romans 6.14. A new
heart will I give you, Ezekiel. 36.26.

But it would seem tedious to run through all the sins which humane nature is
prone to, and to adapt the promises in holy Scripture to particular sins and
lusts, under which we labor, and desire to be eased. I therefore pursue it no
further, the rather, because the precedent instances are easily imitated by
those who read, and meditate in the Scripture, which all they do, who desire to
break off their sins by repentance.

This Direction I conceive to be necessary, viz. That those who come to crave a
promise of God, do also consider the qualification; and in the first place seek
that, else the promise belongs not to thee. For example, if in thy trouble
thou prayest that all things may work together for thy good, pray also, that he
would circumcise thy heart, and cause thee to love him with all thy heart: And
pray for this in the first place, for the other will follow upon it. This is
according to God's own direction. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof; all other things shall be thrown in to you.

And in this manner we are to put in suit all the promises. We must look upon
the promised blessing as the invitation and encouragement to seek the grace
that is the qualification; and he who prays for the grace, implicitly and
most strongly, prays for the promise annexed. And there is no grace but has a
promised reward annexed; a cup of cold water given in charity, shall not lose
its reward; or but two mites where little is. Then we must believe that no good
works shall lose its reward.

And there is no blessedness promised to any, but those who are qualified with
this or that grace, as may be seen in the 5th. of St. Matthews Gospel, and in
other like places.

And he that seeks godliness, seeks all the promises of this life, and that
which is to come, as incident thereto; therefore seek this first: For many that
have the qualifications of these promises and blessedness, are yet in doubt
whether they are sufficiently qualified, and think that they ought to be better
qualified for them, and desire to be better qualified, as well for their own
joy and comfort, as also that they may be more excellent and lovely in the eye
of their Lord and beloved Savior. And grace wherever it is, begets a holy
thirst for a greater measure, and will still thirst, till it enjoy the highest
perfection of degrees in glory.

Therefore they pray chiefly for grace, and the improvement of every grace in
themselves and others, according to that Col. 1.8, 9. Since the day we heard of
it, viz. Their love in the spirit, mentioned in the 8th. verse) we cease not to
pray for you, and to desire that you may be filled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. And chap. 4.12. That ye may
stand perfect and complete in all the will of God, Phil. 1.11. And be filled
with the fruits of righteousness, etc.

And for the Blessings, Rewards and Promises which God has made, and limited
to those who have these graces and qualifications.

No man that prays for them in the behalf of those that are qualified, can
doubt of prevailing; as when we pray, Psalm. 7.4. Let all those that seek thee
rejoice, Psalm. 40.16. Psalm. 33.22. Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us, according
as we hope in thee, Psalm. 25.21. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for
I wait on thee; and the like. Because we oftener find these blessings and
rewards positively asserted to be the portion and peculiar privileges of those
that seek God, call upon him, love him, delight in him, trust in him, rely upon
him, have their mind stayed on him, hope in him, fear him, and wait upon him.
Then we have found them particularly prayed for, in the behalf of them who are
so qualified. Yet we do well to pray for them, as well for our selves, as for
the whole Church of God.

Now in regard there be many promises free, and without any condition on our
part, it behooves us, when we fear that we are not qualified for a promise, that
we press God with those promises which are free, as that, I will love them
freely, Hos. 14.4. I will pardon their iniquities. I will heal them. Hos. 14.5.
I will pour out my Spirit upon them, Joel 2.28. I will put my Laws in their
hearts, and write them in their inward parts, Jer. 31.33. I will be merciful to
them, and their sins and their iniqnities will I remember no more, Jer. 31.34.
He will subdue our iniquities, and cast our sins into the bottom of the Sea,
Mich. 7.19. I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
I will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25. I will put my fear in their hearts,
Jer. 32.40. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, Ezekiel. 36.26. Psalm. He will teach sinners in the way, Isa. 32.4. The
heart of the rash shall understand, Isa. 42.7. He shall open the eyes of the
blind, Isa. 44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground. These, and many others are promised upon very little or no
consideration to be performed on our part. As some are for asking, seeking,
coming to God, looking up to him. If we had the sagacity of the Canaanitish
woman, we should perceive a door of hope through a little cranny.

For God will be sometimes prevailed with for a very petty consideration
performed from a sincere heart, because he knows our frailty. This David well
knew, when he prayed, Let the liseing up of my hand be as an evening Sacrifice.
So did the woman that brought two mites to enrich the Treasury. And the Thief
upon the Cross. Also there are promises, which are merely free, and grounded
upon the privation and want of all consideration on our parts, as that;
Therefore will the Lord wait to be gracious.

And at other times the Lord will not be prevailed withal, but with great
entreaty and importunity of prayer, and fasting, and almsgiving: As we read
our blessed Savior told the Disciples in the case of dispossessing unclean
spirits.

And Cornelius also with his prayers used fasting, and alms, much.

But sometimes the Lord will not be prevailed with at all, as he said to the
Prophet, Though Noah, Daniel and Job should entreat, etc. Therefore he commands
him not to pray for that people: and though Moses and Samuel should intercede,
Jer. 15.1. As it is said in the first chapter of Proverbs, Because when I
called, ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye
have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof, I also will
laugh at your calamity.

Nevertheless we must continue praying, though the Lord seems inexorable; for
though he tarry long, it may be that he only intends to exercise thy faith and
patience, and other graces. And he will fulfill his promise for thy deliverance
in his own time, not thine. The Rod of the wicked may rest a long time on the
back of the Righteous, but shall not always.

With this direction too, that thou observe when thou prayest against any
affliction or calamity, that thou chiefly prayest against the causes of them,
and those sins upon which God uses to threaten and denounce those calamities,
especially if thy conscience tell thee of any particular sin which might
procure them.

And that thou submit to him who sends it, with patience (if his will be not to
remove his hand) confessing it to be his mercy, that thou art not consumed, and
hear the Rod, and him that appointed it.

And (if by thy great afflictions) thou be deprived of all comfort, and made
the spectacle of all misery, yet thou art to trust to thy amends at the last
day.

Though worms consume thy flesh, yet it may be comfort enough to support thee,
that thou know that thy Redeemer lives, and thou shall see him at the last day.
So Job. By execution some go to Heaven, as the Thief upon the Cross.

The promised Blessings and Enjoyments, Benefits, Deliverances and Immunities,
and earthly Comforts, must not be taken or understood absolutely, but
subordinately and relatively, viz. as may conduce and further the spiritual and
eternal welfare of those who are heirs to them, and have title to claim them;
therefore they must be sought with submission and modesty; as we find Jacob
praying but only for food and raiment; and our Blessed Lord and Savior, when
he prayed, that the bitter cup of his sufferings might pass from him, it was
with submission, Nevertheless not my will, but thy will be done.

Because these prayers are the dictates of nature, which the Saints and
Servants of God do not use to enlarge, but suppress; albeit God oftentimes
grants them with an overplus; as when David asked life, and God granted him
long life, viz. for ever. Solomon wisdom, and God gave him besides, riches and
honor. And Jacob asked but food and raiment, and the Lord increased him to two
bands. And Abraham a child, and God granted him seed like the sand of the Sea.

But in these prayers too we do not find the dictates of Nature only, but the
dictates of the Spirit usually combining in the same petition; For it is
probable that Hanna did design the Glory of God in asking a child, as the
consecrating him to God gives reason to suppose; although we read of another
cause which was the contempts which she sufferd for her barrenness, and her
grief thereof conceived, which drove her to seek to God for succor, and
praying, vowed, if God would give her a male Child, then she would give him to
the Lord all the days of his life, which vow she performed.

If we also praying for ontward blessings vow, and retribute to God, our
prayers are warranted, and are spiritual. Especially if we design the glory of
God therewith.

Those who have received such prayers with an overplus, are much more bound to
consider what they shall retribute, and if they they have vowed too, let them
perform, lest they lose all again for their unworthiress, and Ingratitude.

And with these cautions God does sometims allow beggars to be chusers, as
(...) what sex her Child should be. And so Lot got Zoar to be spared, when God
had appointed it to destruction.

The good Emperor Titus thought it an unbeseeming thing that any person should
depart from his Princes presence sad; therefore he granted all petitions; then
shall not his Prince be much more gracious?

To sue to God upon his own promise is an argument of faith, much used by the
faithful people of God: as we find in many of the Psams. And an argument
wherein God delights, as he does in every work that is of faith. And no man
that ever prayed thus, lost his labor. I cannot affirm that they always
obtain the things of this life, because they are not absolutely promised.

Though godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to come, and
no good thing shall be wanting to those that live a godly life; they that fear
the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good, Psalm. 34. Yet these
worldly blessings are not absolutely good for every person, in every condition,
therefore are not absolutely promsed. But yet if we do seek these bodily
comforts by use of means, we ought to join prayer with the means, else God will
frustrate the means. As we read 2 Chronicles. 16. he did when Asa sought to the
Phsiycians to be healed, and not to God.

But spiritual mercies, and graces, and the gifts of the Spirit, are absolutely
good, and absolutely promised, and every man may, and must seek them evermore,
because they are commanded to have them, and to seek them, and they are
promised to those that seek them, and those who seek them not, are threatened.

Those graces which we have, we are not able to retain, and keep of our selves:
the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. 2.2. was labourious, patient, zealous against evil
persons, tried the pretended Apostles, and for the name of Christ Jesus
labored herein without fainting. And yet for all that reproved in the next
words: Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love. The like perils (I suppose) attend all the Sarvants of God. (Though
some are of opinion that the Elect cannot fall away) yet we see they do sall
foully. And therefore they shall do well to pray to God for supportation. As
David, Psalm. 119. prays, Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. And he prays
for all graces in particular, but it cannot be supposed that he was destitute
of all, therefore it is certain that he prayed for many which he then had;
Probably because he was sensible of his weakness, and danger of falling, if God
did not water him every morning, and every moment, as he has promised to do,
or if God did not keep him, watch over him, strengthen him: hold him up with
his arm, which the Lord has promised to do. Therefore we may be sure that we
need it all. And that he must be sought too to perform these gracious promises.
And the Lord will keep, and increase in us those graces which we have. And
deliever us, and save us from those corruptions, and lusts which we think we
are free from; otherwise we who seem both naturally and spiritually fortified
against some sins, may fall in the thing wherein we excel; for so did Moses; he
spoke unadvisedly with his lips, though he was the meekest man upon the earth.
What perfection then can any man pretend to, in any grace, so great, as not to
need continual prayer to God to support him, water and strengthen him, with his
grace, and holy Spirit? lest he fall.

David protests his delight was in Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. v. 39. And yet
he there prays, v. 35. Make me to go in the paths of thy Commandments:
Incline my heart to thy Testimonies.

In regard the people of God do esteem grace a thing infinitely desirable, and
sin infinitely detestable, and formidable, therefore they think they have not
enough of any grace, till they can do Gods will on earth as it is done in
Heaven. And think they are in danger of falling, because they have seen great
Saints sometimes to fall into dreadful sins. Therefore pray to be kept from all
sorts of sins; Keep me from presumptuous sins, said holy David; and they think
they can never fear them enough, or fly them enough, nor pray against them
enough.

The wickedest of men will pray for remission of sins, but they seldom pray for
healing them, and renewing their hearts, that they may be inclined to Gods
Commandments, that they may be a holy people, and that God would fulful his
promises of grace in them, to put his Spirit in them, and to write his Laws in
their inward parts.

It is cursory with common swarers, upon their oaths, to say immediately God
forgive me, and presently swear again. This shows no repentance, nor sorrow for
sin, nor desire of amendment; it rather begs license to offend with impunity:
what other thing do those who make their daily confession to their Priests and
Friars of such sins which they have committed, and intend to commit again, upon
the first opportunity, and never think of repentance, or amendment; to pray for
it themselves, or to desire others to pray for them; profane Esan shall rise
up in judgment against them.

But do thou pray to be delivered from thy offenses, Psalm. 39.9. That God would
create in thee a clean heart, and establish thee with his Spirit, Psalm. 51. And
that God would open thine eyes that thou may see the wonderful things of his
Law, and that he would teach thee his Statutes, and make thee to go in the
paths of his Commandments, and the like; and then thou will be sure of pardon
and sanctifying grace, Psalm. 119. and peace of conscience, and that thou have
fellowship with God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, 1 John 1.3. And thy
joy shall be full, v. 4. ib. Because thou abidest in him, walking as he walked,
though not so perfect.

We must also pray for these graces with a full purpose and resolution of
endeavoring our selves to the utmost in the use of the means for attaining
them, otherwise our Prayers are but only said as Children are taught to say a
Prayer. It is but lip labor, to draw nigh to God with our lips, when our
hearts are far from him.

And those who pray for any grace which God has promised, and resolve not to
use their own endeavors for the attaining it, do not pray in faith, because
they separate the Commandments from the promises. For he that has promised to
give them to us, has also commanded us to get them, and to labor for them, to
strive for them, to sell all for them. And yet to continue instant in Prayer
for them too, that he would bless our endeavors, and give us the desired grace
for Jesus Christ's sake, in and by whom only thou can hope to prevail.

We must also be sensible of our own need, which we have of these graces which
we seek, or else we shall not be servent in Prayer. For instance, if thou
prayest to God to fulfill that promise, that he will tread Satan under thy seet,
thou must be sensible of this, that he does in some temptations, get some
ground of thee more or less, for which thou art grieved, and countest it thy
unhappiness. It may be, thou perceivest thy self to have been more angry than
became a patient man, or that thou have spoke more than thou did perfectly
know of thine own knowledge, or else have (through the bad example, or
importunity of thy company) drunk one Cup too much, or have had uncharitable
thoughts, or been tempted to any sin. Thou art therefore grieved that Satan
has found any thing in thee to work upon, and do desire so much strength as
to shake him off resolutely and readily at thy will and pleasure, as Joseph
shook off his Mistress, if God will be pleased to grant it, according to this
promise, and many more to the same estect: Thou must also be sensible of the
great advantage and benefit which the grace desired will bring. If thus thou
can pray, thou may be sure to speed whatever promised grace thou desire,
whatever degree of grace any Saint of God has had, thou may have it for
asking, if thou ask in faith. The patience of Job, the chastity of Joseph, the
zeal of David, the Justice of Lot, the righteousness of Noah, the meekness of
Moses, the faith of Abraham, and Peter; the charity of St. John, the temperance
of the three Children, and love of God, whereby they gave their bodies to be
burned for him, etc. For God has promised, that the weak shall be as the house
of David, and the house of David, as God.

It is not my scope to enumerate all those promises of grace which God has
made, it is every man's great concern to know them, and crave them of God, as
their portion, which Jesus Christ has purchased with his blood for them; and
to live upon them, and lay hold on them.

Those general promises which God has made to his Church and People; if thou
can not clearly entitle thy self in particular, thou may notwithstanding
pray in the behalf of the Church, and shall not fear to speed.

Those promises which tend to the ruin of the enemies of the Church, and God's
enemies, are every man's concern to pray for: and though he be weak in faith,
that he can hardly lay hold of them, yet if he pray for them, that God may be
glorified, he does well, and may assure himself that he shall succeed, because
he seeks it for God's glory. For the promises of destroying sin, and Satan, and
his works, and treading him under foot, is God's own interest, as well as ours.
And God is more ready to do it, than we to ask it; therefore we can never doubt
of the granting of these petitions.

Now, most of the promises of the New Covenant, which are to express what God
will do for his people, are of this nature either what God will do against
their enemies, or for them. And being they were freely made, they may (we hope)
be freely performed (if we seek them.) These are briefly contained in the four
last petitions of the Lord's Prayer; and if we can find faith to believe that
we shall receive these, we shall easily find faith to believe that God will do
the other, which are briefly contained in the three first petitions of the
Lord's Prayer.

Since it is so, that we must pray to God for every grace, and every good
thing, we are to know, that we cannot have them of our selves without his gift.
If we know how often we have resolved against any particular sin, and yet when
we have but entered into temptation, we have again done the like. Though we must
needs acknowledge this, and pray to God that we be not any more tempted. And
ascribe it to him that he suffers us not to be tempted above our ability.

That we may be able to stand, let us diligently consider, and weigh all those
snares of Satan whereby we are subject to be overcome, and have fallen, and
more especially watch, and pray against these, that thou may be able
(through the spirit) to overcome them. And pray also against such temptations
which thou see other men overcome by, and doubtest whether thou thy self
could have resisted. And particularly those, whereby thou read in the
word of God, that men have been overcome, especially those whereby good people
have fallen; beginning with our first parents temptation to eat of the fruit of
the Tree of knowledge.

For though our blessed Savior has overcome Satan for us, yet must we
overcome him also, and tread upon him; therefore has he forwarned us, and
armed us to fight, and given us his Spirit to assist us in praying, and
fighting, and watching against him, and his temptations, viz. The cares of the
world, and the vain pleasures and deceitfulness of riches, and persecutions,
etc.

Pray then, that thou may not hearken to any of the suggestions of Satan,
much less believe them, as Eve did. (Though he pretend kindness) nor give ear
to those who are overcome by him, as Adam did to her, though he knew that the
suggestion came from Satan.

Beware that the consideration of the many graces which thou find in thy
heart, do not embolden thee to transgress, or make bold with God in small
matters, for which fault some of the seven Churches of Asia were reproved, and
severely threatened, but pray against this temptation. Look not upon what thou
have, so much as upon that thou want, and come short in.

Sometimes Satan speaks directly against Gods word, alleging that to be no
sin which God has forbid, or that the punishment which God has threatened,
shall not be inflicted, but the contrary good shall be to the sinner, thus he
dealt with our first Parents, and prevailed. And thus he attempted our Lord and
Savior.

Sometimes he extenuates it; sometimes he makes use of the falls, and sins of
other Saints, and Servants of God, as an excuse for us, if we do the like; some
are persuaded they can repent when they will.

To some he pretends, the Gospel to be a law of liberty, and a license to sin,
and that they shall not be condemned for sinning, but for want of believing the
Forgiveness, and Remission through the blood of Christ, through whom we Hope
for mercy. To this I answer, that we must seek glory by grace; he that does not
so, will miss it; The desire of our soul is to thy name; my soul thirsts for
God, Psalm. 42. And many other prove this.

And when ever he makes use of true premises, he insers false conclusions.

Generally he assaults by surprise, and takes the advantage of time, and place,
as when our Savior had fasted forty days, and forty nights, and was hungry,
and in the wilderness where was no relief, he tempts him to make bread of
stones. He will not suffer them to consider the danger, nor mind the cure, till
it be late, and then he persuades them, it is too late or incurable.

When ever he makes use of Scripture, he misconstrues it, and misapplyeth it.

By small and imperceptible degrees he draws us to greater and greater. When he
has made his way by one sin, or one degree in a sin, he argues, this is no
more than that we have already done; therefore why may we not do it now, as
heretofore? That he may not deceive thee by this fallacy, make a covenant with
all thy senses, and look not upon that which tempts, nor harken to it.

Another fallacy of Satan is, that he preswades some that they do not sin,
unless they are within the express letter of the Commandment. The Fornicator he
makes believe that simple Fornication is not forbid in the seventh Commandment,
for that forbids adultery. So the covetous, he makes believe that he is not
within the condemnation of the second Commandment, though he worships Mammon in
his heart. It is but (...) which he gives his goddess. And likewise the Papists
when they pray to the Blessed Virgin and other Saints. And when they fall down
to the host, or any thing else carried in lieu thereof by the knavish bearer,
they pretend they worship not Idols, but yet in their catechises they have left
out that Commandment, and split the tenth Commandment in two to make up the
number.

Another deceit is in misvaluing time whereby he steals away the present
opportunity, and by anon and to morrow he puts off from the present. Idleness
and delays are pernicious, most of Satan's Fallacies may be urged against
himself as the reasoning of the unprofitable Servant, because he knew his
Master to be a hard man, he hid his Talent in a Napkin, it was more strongly
urged against him. For he ought so much the more to have improved it. This way
of refelling him is like the cutting off Geliahs head with his own sword. When
he makes use of his fairest Insinuators, be not ashamed of rudeness to them.
Thou may answer all his suggestions with a Scriptum est, as our Savior did.
This sword of the spirit cuts all Satan's snares asunder. As Joseph cut them
asunder saying, How can I do this and sin? He would not so much as hearken to
the fair tempter, nor be with her; when she laid hold of him, he fled from her
without a complement. So must we keep Satan at swords point, for if we suffer
him to come within it, we lose our guard.

Non sic retribuam Domino, may be answered to all. Non sic Patri, Adjutori,
Salvatori, consider the many pleasures, comforts and enjoyments which the Lord
allows thee to sollace thy self withal, how free, how pure, how satisfying,
and contenting they are; and compare them with those which are offered by
Satan, and see how thy exceed them in goodness. For these which Satan tempts
thee to are allayed so with bitterness, that the very sweetness is turned into
bitterness, the Honey into Gall: The damnable alloy (which I mean) is the gripes
of conscience in the very act of enjoying them, and the flashes of Hell fire as
often as they come into memory, expressed by that of the Poet, Et coeco verbere
pulsat; That is, they are slashed by their own conscience. Also the detrement
which these bring to the body, estate, and good name. Why then should thou
not choose to enjoy those which God has given thee as a loving Father, and be
satisfied and content therewith, rather than be licorish for such filthy sweet
poisons?

Consider, that every wilful sin puts thee out of God's protection.

He pretends that our good works cannot further our salvation, nor our evil
works hinder it; thereupon he infers, that it is to no purpose to strive to
enter into the strait gate, and to wrestle with our corruptions, as St. Paul
did. But yet we must believe that God will reward them that diligently seek
him, though we are unprofitable servants.

If thou know that this or that is a trap set to catch a fool, if thou will
come into it, what art thou? But if thou will be wise, do that which thou
know thou shall never wish undone.

In secular concerns we seldom will close with the first overtures, if it be a
matter of any importance, but we desire time. In like sort let us put off the
first proffers of our lusts, and we shall never be surprised, and the second
assault will be weaker, and we shall be prepared better to resist them.

That thou may the better slight the temptations of thy spiritual enemy,
consider how they offer themselves servily, and if thou will not go out of thy
doors to fetch them, they will come home to thee.

He suggests to men destitute and afflicted, What profit have thou of thy
righteousness more than if thou had sinned? Job 35. To this the answer is,
That no man ever served God for naught; a cup of cold water for his sake has
its reward; and Jehu's hypocritical service was rewarded to the fourth
generation.

Let the love which thou bear to God and Jesus Christ, repress all opposite
rival Loves, viz. to the objects of sense and fancies; such as are the Sirens
voices.

He puts the opportunity into the hand, and then suggests, that they shall
never have so good an opportunity, unless immediately they lay hold on this: If
he can but persuade thee of this, he has already overcome thee.

He endeavors to persuade us, that the Serpent will not bite; but be not thou
so silly as to trust him. But if when thou beholdest a horse that is given to
be skittish, and to strike; and because he is of curious shape, and of a good
courage, and pleases the eye, thou must needs be stroaking him; thou will find
(to thy sorrow) that he will not be sensible of thy kindness: And such are all
sinful allurements: Therefore consider their nature, and not their appearance,
and withhold thy hand from fond stroaking them.

And if there be any thing lovely in the creature that allures thee, consider
also that there is as much deformity and loathsomness mixed with it, and
covered under that skin deep beauty.

If thou have been deceived, and have rued thy sollies, and repented and vowed
against them, do not again build that which thou have destroyed, and return to
thy vomit; but say of thy lusts, as Ephraim of his Idols, What have I to do
with them? For what has the new creature to do with the old man? the
regenerate with unclean lusts? the holy with corrupt communication? the
mortified with carnal pleasure and concupiscence? the humble with pride? the
charitable with malice and revenge? Thou fightest not under the same banner,
but under the Captain of thy salvation Jesus Christ; do not betray thy Party,
thy Captain, and thy Cause Do not go to be drunk in thine enemies Camp; nor
sleep there, lest he spoil thee of all thou have; or take away thy life, or
make thee his prisoner. Remember that thou art running a race, stoop not to
catch the golden ball that Satan throws in thy way, to make thee lose the race.
By Patient continuance in well doing thou seek glory; let go thy lusts.

These snares and baits of Satan, are to be studied of those who are sworn to
fight against them, that they may be able to refel, and answer them; and in
respect of our weakness to do it, we must crave God's assistance, who has
promised it, in many promises, Isa. 29.24. They that have erred in spirit,
shall come to understanding, etc. v. 18. The deaf shall hear the words of the
book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity. No weapon formed
against thee shall prosper. They shall be all taught of God.

He promises to watch over them, and keep them night and day, lest any hurt
them; and to help them, strengthen them, sustain and hold them up with his
right hand; to be with them, and never to leave nor forsake them; to deliver us
from evil; to tread Satan under our feet, that we shall bruise his head, etc.

And in regard we know not in what particular occurrences of our lives, or in
which occurrences of the day, our spiritual adversary has laid his shares to
catch our souls, whether in our religious services, or in our natural actions
of eating, drinking, or sleeping, or apparel. Whether from our Relations,
Servants, Neighbors or Enemies; or a stranger met upon the way, or hapening
into our company, or from our own infirmities of body or mind; from our
business, or from our recreations; yet in all we know there is danger, if God
keep us not, guide us and direct our ways, and gives an issue to the
temptation. Therefore we ought to be diligent in seeking God, Heb. 11.6.
believing that he will reward them that diligently seek him, keep them, watch
over them, guard them, guide them, defend them, stand by them; and be a Sun and
a Shield to them.

And though we pray, Lead us not into temptation, yet certainly we must be
tempted; for then only can virtue show it self, when we are tempted to vice. To
talk of virtue, and to do many virtuous actions gladly, just then when we come
from a lecture of virtue, may be no virtue; for many have done so as well as
Herod and Felix. But to live holily, righteously and uprightly in the midst of
a wicked generation, grieving his righteous soul with beholding their unclean
conversation, as Lot and Noah did live, shows their virtues to be true
graces. For instance, of her that was never tempted to unchastity, we say,
casta est quia nemo regavit. So of Monks, Friars, Eremites, Nuns, and the like
of that Religion, who are retired from the society of men, and from
temptations, what temptations can try them?

Though I, and many others are not strong enough to count it joy when we fall
into temptations, as St. James bids us in the case of the temptations of
affliction; and therefore we pray that we be not lead into them. Yet when we
have been in temptations, and have overcome them, we have had much joy in the
sense of our grace whereby we have overcome, whether it were temperance,
patience, charity, or any other grace, and we could say the temptation was for
our good.

Motives to the Duty of Prayer.
Being sensible of the dullness and indisposition of my soul to this religious
and most necessary duty of a Christian, and desirous by all means to shake it
off for a better disposition, I held it expedient to consider of some Motives,
which may awaken me out of this spiritual Lethargy.

These I fetch from four heads or Topics, viz. A Jucundo, Ab Vtili, A
Necessario, and A Facili. The four Angels of this Quadrature, are to seek him
as a Beloved, as a Portion, as a God, as a Father. To prove the pleasurableness
of it are these places, Isa. 12.3. With joy shall ye draw water out of the
wells of salvation, Joh. 16.24. Ask that you may receive, that your Joy may be
full; and many of the Psalms, and the Book of the Canticles throughout proves
this: From whence we may infer, That the more we use this duty, the more joy,
comfort and satisfaction we enjoy. I will make them joyful in the house of
Prayer. He that with a sincere heart has made trial in the time of his
sadness, can testify the truth of these promises by his own experience. And
the Scripture testifies of Hannah, That when she had prayed her countenance
was no more sad.

To know God in all his Attributes is comfortable to his servants; but of all,
to know him in this, That he is a God hearing Prayer, and has heard thine, is
most sovereign for the warming and strengthening of thy faith, and all other
graces, and quickening thee in holy duties. One prayer heard is the earnest of
hearing another, and consequently of helping thee in all thy needs.

This is intimated in those expressions, Eccles. 9.7. Go thy way, cat thy bread
with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for the Lord has accepted thy
work.

For if these services be God's delight, no reason that they should be our
burden, or a melancholy task. This cannot be; no man was ever made sad by
this duty; but the melancholy are made cheerful by it always, and transported
with joy. And if they be accepted by him with delight, then we know that they
shall not go unrewarded. The suits of a Lover to its Beloved, how readily are
they embraced and answered? Such is relation between God and his Saints.

We know also how acceptable and delightful the service of a child is to his
Father; though it be but weak and small, yet it is sweet, pleasant and
delightful; and does more endear them to one another; and when children are
wronged, whom else should they fly unto for succor? Herein we enjoy God as a
loving Father in Christ, and he enjoyes us as children, and caresses us.

This urges us to present these duties; for we endeavor that our presents and
services we do to men, should yield them delight; for thereby we expect
acceptance of our persons, and a grant of our suit. And as a Father, he
obliges us to it, by his lading us with his daily benefits. And bearing us in
his arms (as a man bears his Son) in all the way that we ge, Deuteronomy. 1.31. All
which he easily forgets, who neglects this duty; but he that duly performs it,
acknowledges God in all his ways. And as the heavenly Host rejoice to fall
down and worship him that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb; so the Saints
militant by the offering of prayers and praises, rejoice before God.

The Motives ab Utili, to prove the profitableness of it.
All temporal and eternal good, that is, or ever shall be, is the profit which
is proposed to be reaped by this Duty; and on the contrary, the avoiding of all
temporal and eternal evil.

First, It eases us of a great deal of care. Be careful in nothing; but let
your requests be made known unto God, etc.

St. James, c. 5. Is any man afflicted? let him pray.

Luke 18. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

Joh. 16.23. Whatever you ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.

The Lord has invited and persuaded us to this Duty, by the greatest promises
that we are capable of, Romans 10.13. Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the
Lord shall be saved.

Jer. 33.3. Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and
mighty things which thou know not. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you, Isa. 30.19. At the voice of thy cry, when he shall hear it, he will
answer thee.

Joh. 15.7. Ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Matthew. 21.22. And
all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer believing, ye shall receive it.

Joh. 14.13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, I will do it.

Matthew. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. Job 22.7. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him,
and he shall hear thee, Zech. 10. v. 1. Ask of the Lord Rain in the time of the
latter Rain, etc.

Matthew. 6.6. Thy Father who sees thee in secret, shall reward thee openly.

Psalm. Thou shall call upon me in time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall praise me. When we can hope for no help from men, God will even then
help those that call upon him.

These and many other promises has God of his mercy and goodness made to thee,
to invite and encourage thee to the performance of this Duty, for thine own
good and profit, of soul and body, in things temporal and eternal, and for the
shunning and avoiding of all evils and inconveniences, fins, and the
punishments thereof, and all that humane nature is liable to suffer or fear.
And by these the Utility of the due peformance of this Duty appears. And all
those who have made trial in sincerity, will confess that it is good to draw
nigh to God.

If we know that in him we live, move, and have our being; that he is God that
made us, and preserves us, and upholds all things by his power; then to him we
will seek for all things necessary for our life and happiness, because we know,
that what we have, or desire to have, we must have it from him, of his free
gift. And knowing that we brought nothing into the world, we must acknowledge,
that all we have, we have it from him.

Therefore, if we desire the continuance and preservation of that we have, or
seek any other good, we must seek it by humble prayer and supplication of his
free mercy and goodness.

This the Light of Nature teaches: Those who seem to themselves to be rich,
and to have need of nothing (like the Church of the Laodiceans, Rev. 2.) do but
deceive themselves.

These miserable wretches cannot perceive or understand what need they have of
praying. They have the more need, because they understand not their need. If
the Thief upon the Cross obtained Heaven with a prayer of six words, who will
not come to such a liberal giver? If we consider of God in his relation to us
as a Father, and our selves, as his children; we can have no stronger motive
than this, to draw us to seek all good things we stand in need of from him.

For if we can by faith in Jesus Christ apprehend this relation, how can we
doubt of receiving the things we ask, and stand in need of? for we must needs
know his love to be great to us, if we find a reciprocal love toward him.

And although we be prodigals, and but of little faith, our blessed Savior
tells us, that yet we are children, and under his care.

And this argument he makes use of to invite us to come to God in prayer; the
force of Nature must needs be strongest in him, who made Nature. The motives
which excite him, must needs be stronger and greater than those which excite
us, as he is greater.

And he makes use of the argument to those who are evil ( If you being evil,
know, etc.) To prove that God will give his Spirit to them, if they ask it,
though before they had received the Spirit of Christ, they were none of Gods
children by adoption; for this is given by Christ, to those only who believe in
his name, Joh. 1.12.

Between God, and his adopted children there is a double Relation of paternity.
That citation in the Acts of the Apostles out of the Poet Aratus, that we are
Gods offspring, does relate to the general relation whereby God is the Father
of all mankind as he was Adams: So Abraham is the Natural Father of the Jews.
But the Relation by faith between God, and us, and Abraham and the Jews, is the
only saving Relation.

By the first Relation, we do know, that we must worship God, and pray to him,
and we may hope to prevail but by the second we are sure to speed, we have
boldness and title to all the promises, and access with confidence to the
throne of grace.

The motives from necessity are of two sorts: The first are fetched from the
necessity of the absolute Command of God laid upon us. The second from our own
needs and necessities which press us to it.

Those commands already mentioned in the precedent motives, may be resorted to,
without repeting them. In every thing let your requests be made known to God.

This duty in many places is persuaded to us with gracious promises, rather
than commanded; which manifests the Infinite goodness of almighty God, thus to
draw us to our duty with the cords of love, as in the precedent heads.

Here follows some absolute commands engaging us to it, Ezekiel. 36.37. I will be
cried after. Jer. I will be called upon. 1 Pet. 4.7. Watch unto prayer. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Pray without ceasing. Continuing in stant in prayer. Praying always
with all manner of prayer and supplication. 10. Zac. 1. Matt. 6.6. And pray.
Our blessed, Lord and Savior joins to the precept, the strongest argument to
enforce it that can be conceived, Joh. 14.13. He propounds and promises for
our reward, whatsoever we ask; the like, Joh. 15.7.

And as the use of this duty gains us every thing: so was it the use of this
that first gained us an interest in God as to our feeling; and the more
frequent use of it we make, the more interest we gain in him; and again,
disusage of this loses the sense of our intrest in God and Christ, and this is
the finding promised; such shall know God and them selves to have interest in
him.

The motive which most strongly forces us to this duty whether we will or no,
is our own wants which force us to seek to him as our refuge. Josephus tells
how, that in the siege of Jerusalem, the Romans army passing over a lake that
was frozen, the Ice began to crack, and the whole army together fell down upon
their knees, and prayed. The Mareners that were in the ship with Jona in the
Tempest, did the like. So David shows in the 107 Psalm. How people afflicted
with all miseries for their sins, when they are at deaths door, call upon the
Lord in their trouble, and are delivered; for he says in another Psalm, The
Lord is known as a sure refuge.

Let us therefore find out our needs for soul and body; for they are sent for
this purpose, to move us to resort to God in this duty, which for lack of the
sense of them is often neglected. And we forget our Creator, and our dependence
upon him, till by the rod upon our backs, we are made to hear him that has
appointed it, and to seek to him, as our God, our Rock, our Castle, our
Buckler, the horn of our salvation, and our present help.

Generally. First, consider the slipry, estate of thy youth wherein thou
stand environed with daily temptations, and dangers, through which of thy
self thou art not able to pass without many falls: man knows not how to walk,
Eccles.

This consideration will move thee to seek to him to be guide of thy youth, who
only can guide thee, and has promised to guide thee continually, and to keep
thee, Isa. 40.17. I am the Lord which teaches thee, etc. Which leads thee by
the way that thou should go, Psalm. 25.22. Thy soul will hang on him if thou
consider that his right hand upholdeth thee, Psalm. 63.8.

Confider what is in thy heart naturally, what thoughts and Imaginations come
spontaneously into thy mind; are they holy thoughts, and motions, which stir,
and are fomented at such times as this duty is either wilfully neglected, or
through much business omitted; or are they vain, worldly, profane and sinful?
if these be; then be careful, that when thou awakest thou be present with God,
and let thy soul instantly fly unto him. And seek him early in those words of
David in the 63 Psalm. througout. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee,
etc. Or in the like words, and Let thy soul fly unto him before the morning
watch, Psalm. And continue seeking him ever more.

All those that know God, as theires; their Interest in him, gives them this
boldness of seeking him in all occasions. And if any seek him not early, they
doubt of their interest, and property in him. Or of their needs; for we are not
afraid to lose that we never had, nor desire to have; neither do we think we
can make use of that which neither owneth us, nor we own that.

That which we seek early, constantly and solicitously, is that which we know
we need and live upon, and cannot live without. Therefore thus seek thy God;
and thus show thy carefulness to preserve thine Interest in him, and to improve
it, and to make use of it at all times; and to acknowledge him in all thy
ways, in thy outward blessings and preservations, and inward gifts, and
graces, etc.

Thou that art at thy best as Adam was, thou must needs know thy mutability and
instability, and that thou also (though strong) art in danger of falling at all
times, and in all places as he fell. And the Rock it self, the Apostle Peter
fell, and David by slender temptations. Therefore let not thy many graces, and
perfections cause thee to overlook, thy insufficiency, or despise the strength,
and subtilty of thine adversary who is compared to a roaring Lion, but
contninue thou instant in this duty, and watch lest thou fall as they did. And
as Moses, Noah, Lot, and David, and other Saints have fallen. Blessed is he
that fears always. If when we would do good evil is present with us, much
more is it present when we are about secular affairs.

And further, Thou that art thoroughly sanctified, consider what need thy graces
have of continual watering, that they may not wither, nor decay; for God (who
bests knows our needs) would not have promised to water us every morning, and
every moment, were there no need; but because it is necessary, he promised it,
and we are to beg, that he would water us with his own teaching, with his word,
and new dictates of the Spirit. And make our soul as a watered Garden. And a
Garden enclosed, and a Fountain sealed, that no polluting thing may come into
it, to defile it; and that he would quicken us in his statutes, so that all men
may be convinced of their necessity, and thereby be moved to the performance of
this so necessary, so profitable, and delightful a duty. And to seek his face
and his grace evermore, and to be always upon our knees at the throne of grace
when we can: other necessities there are which may move us daily to the duty,
as namely the burden of those sins which lie upon our consciences, which
whosoever has felt, knows how pressing it is, and of how great importance
the easement will be to his soul, that God would speak peace to it. And say to
his soul, that he is his salvation.

This guilt does sometimes lie festering in the soul, and does not disquiet at
all, but woeful is the state of it then. He that is most speedy in his
repentance, will most easily find it; as the Apostle Peter, when he had sinned
in denying his Lord and Master, immediately went out, and wept bitterly. But
David, who lay in his guilt, found it a sore burden, too heavy for him to
bear, Psalm. 38. And was almost consumed by means of God's heavy hand, Psalm.
39.11. His chastisements made his beauty to consume away like as it were a moth
fretting a garment. But this brings him to confess his wickedness, and be sorry
for his sins, ib. Psalm. 38.18. and to pray to God to help him, v. 22. And God
heals him in his own time. Though he suffer him long to lie under the burden,
that he may fear to commit the like again. And that seeing his own sinfulness
and unrighteousness, he may seek his righteousness out of himself in Christ
Jesus.

How many sudden and unexpected provocations and temptations do hurry men into
the greatest sins that ever they committed in their lives? as this of the
matter of Vriah did David: So that we must fear always, and watch, and pray to
God to keep us, and work in us both the will and the deed that is good.

How many sad and unexpected accidents do we see daily befalling other men, as
good, as wise, as strong, and as wealthy as our selves; some by fire, some by
water, some by shipwreck. All the four elements by which we live; and the very
meat we eat, and the drink we drink, bring sudden and unexpected death and
destruction upon unprepared and secure mortals. Sometimes a Tyle falls upon
their head, of which death is caused: sometimes they stumble, and falling,
break a bone, and so death comes. And a thousand ways more which no man's
wisdom and strength can foresee nor prevent.

All which, when we see them to befall others, we know they might as well have
befallen our selves, if God did not keep us, and deliver us from all evil; and
we must acknowledge with David, Psalm. 41. Thou upholdest me in health.

And, that he would be pleased so to do, we call upon him, as it is meet and
necessary.

Consider whether this be not the end and purpose for which God suffers them to
befall men; for so it is intimated in that place of the Prophet. In their
affliction they will seek me early. For God complains there how they had sinned
and provoked him, and had forsaken him; but he would have them return by this
means.

And this is intimated likewise from that of Daniel, c. 9. v. 13. All this evil
is come upon us, yet made we not our prayers before the Lord our God, that we
might turn from our iniquities.

Whosoever has been brought to extremity, and found no means in himself to
escape, he knows this to be his refuge. And if he has obtained his deliverance
at the hand of God, and shall afterward forget, or neglect his worship, he can
ill expect that the Lord will be found of him at his time of need afterward.
But this is too frequently done, as it was by the rebellious Jews, Isa. 63.16.
There they come, saying, Doubtless thou art our Father; but when God shall
shake them off, and say unto them, as he said to them; If I be a Father, where
is my honor? certainly they will be put to shame, and silence, and confusion
of face.

Hence we may take occasion to consider the miserable and helpless condition of
those who wholly neglect this duty; and will only pray in their extremity:
Their own consciences (it is to be feared) will accuse them, and tell them,
that they are of their Father the Devil; and probably they will then seek to
him too. As Saul did when the Lord had forsaken him; and the Lord may send them
to their lusts which they have served.

But what spiritual extremities are the children of God often brought to, when
the Messengers of Satan are sent to busset them, (as the best may fear they may
be.) And when these and the outward troubles concur to make up a fiery trial,
(such as the holy Apostles experienced many times, as they testify, viz.
Without were troubles, and within were fears; and in many other parallel places
is testified) how are they put to it, when Satan thus bruiseth their heel, and
they are afraid that he will bruise their head also? because they seel no power
in themselves for the present to bruise his with the two-edged sword of the
Word. When they find by experience, That the Righteous shall scarcely be saved;
That the way to Heaven is narrow, and found but of few; The Devil like a
roaring Lion rages to devour them, and they see not those that are for them,
and how strong and many they are; and God hides his face, and the light of his
countenance, and makes them as his enemies, and seems to have forsaken them;
and though they have called long, he hears not; and their distracting griefs
and pains are so bitter, that they cannot consider of the days of the right
hand of the Most High.

Let these considerations enter into our hearts; for if our case may happen to
be such, then let us be sensible of our dangerous condition we are in, or soon
may be; and we shall seek in time for strength, supportation, preservation and
deliverance from him who has promised to be with us in trouble, and never to
leave nor to forsake us; And to keep us, to guide, help, and deliver us, and
bring us to honor; And not to suffer our feet to be moved. Oh when shall it
once be (O Lord) that thou will tread Satan under our feet, and make us more
than conqueror over him. We cannot be enough sensible of our spiritual dangers
of our immortal souls.

The frequent admonitions of our blessed Savior to watchfulness, self-denial,
prayer, seeking of God, and other means to be used by us, that we may be able
to stand, show us how difficult a thing it is; and God suffers his servants
sometimes to be brought to the highest top of the precipice, and then plucks
them as brands out of the fire of Hell; that they may see their danger: for
unless they do see and know their danger, they will be but cold in prayer, and
such prayers can never prevail, or obtain any promise, Quid quisque vitet nun
quam homini satis, Cautum est in horas. Horat.

But those who are sensible thereof, will be fervent and frequent in prayer to
God; and they will take Heaven by force. If they can by importunity and
affiduity, they will obtain of God the same answer that the Apostle Paul
obtained, sufficiency of grace, and in their weakness he will perfect his own
strength; but if they had sufficiency of gifts and parts to conquer
temptations, they would not know that God does it, nor seek him, nor depend on
him.

Let us not imagine that such dangers and difficulties rarely befall the people
of God. When Jesus Christ tells his Disciples, that through many tribulations
they must go to Heaven; They must be hated of the World; That in the World they
must have trouble; Men shall say all manner of evil of them falsely for his
sake, and pronounces a blessing upon such sufferers. If we will come after
him, we must deny our selves, and take up our Cross. So the Apostle, That we
have need of patience, that when we have done Gods will, we may inherit the
promise.

And they of their own experience testify that they found the truth of his
sayings. David said, Psalm. 119. My soul is always in mine hand. From my youth
up thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind. All the day long have I
been afflicted, and chastened every morning. And the pains of Hell came about
me, the snares of death overtook me. I am troubled above measure. Psalm. 119. If
my delight had not been in thy Law, it had not failed, but I had perished in my
troubles. My tears have been my meat day and night. Shall we then expect to go
to Heaven upon any easier terms? nay but we must wade thorough with the same
staff of comfort. Consider what difficulties God's children do find in every
good work, and what opposition of contrary principles. When they would do good
evil is present with them. What great necessity then have they of this duty?
Those things which are hurtful to our bodies, we can easily leave them, but not
so the things which are hurtful to our souls, though we are mortified, as St.
Paul was, by keeping under our body, and renewed in our hearts by the Spirit.
Be sensible then of these difficulties, as the Apostle was, and of thy
remaining corruptions, and thou will cry to God with importunity, as he did,
and watch against thy spiritual adversary, and thou shall have cause also, with
him, to glory in God through Jesus Christ. Look upon temptations as fire, and
thy corrupt nature as the gunpowder.

Also those who by their own experience can affirm, that they have called upon
the Lord in their trouble, and he has delivered them out of their distress,
and saved them and delivered them from all their fears; and that by him they
have been unholden ever since they were born. That he has been to them a
present help in trouble. That he has ever stood by them, saved them, and
delivered them. Has never left them, nor forsaken them. That he has known
their soul in adversity. That he has been their helper. That in the multitude
of the sorrows of their heart, his comforts have refreshed their souls. And
those whose conscience bears witness to them of their sincerity and
uprightness, as Job's did, Job 31. chapter throughout. And know that their Nature
is renewed by their quickness in the actions of grace when they are tempted to
sin; even these are sometimes dismayed and cast down, as David expressed it in
this saying; sc. Psalm. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, So Job 13.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face? But if the Lord does show the light of his
countenance upon them, and his presence go with them, then they can rely upon
the Truth of God's promises, in the valley of the shadow of death, in the midst
of the fiery furnace, and in the Lion's den; and though he should kill them,
they will trust in him. And they can praise him when he takes away, as well as
when he gives, and pray unto him. But our own experience of his Truth, and our
own purposes, vows, and resolutionns, and watching, without his presence, his
supportation, and the light of his countenance, will not be sufficient to bear
us up in the fiery trial, no more than it did Peter and David, and the other
Saints; therefore he has promised to be with us in it. In the sire he will be
with us, that it shall not burn us; and in the water, that it shall not drown
us; and so he was with Job, though he hid his face, and seemed his enemy. The
spirit of a man can bear his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear?
Psalm. 42.

These considerations teach us how great need and necessity all men have of
diligence in this duty; consider also whether it be not meet and necessary for
the children of God to seek those privileges which Jesus Christ has purchased
for them, by this duty of prayer. Because our Blessed Savior did thus seek his
privileges and birthright as God appointed, Psalm. 2.7, 8. Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

And thus the children of God do ask for, and beg their rights, and
privileges, through the name, merit, and meditation of Jesus Christ by the
Spirits assistance.

As the Lord taught them to do.

As in that particular privilege of putting the Spirit into them, promised by
God in the new Covenant. Christ Jesus commands them to ask it.

Therefore they ought also to pray, that God would tread Satan under their
feet. That he would deliver them from every evil work, that he would keep them
night, and day, watch over them. Be a Sun, and a shield to them, a wall of fire
about them; and so for the rest of their privileges.

Besides the precedent Motives, and many more which might be alleged, we may
consider the examples of those who have practiced this duty with success; some
few we will here insert.

As, Moses first, when his hands were lifted up, Israel prevailed against their
enemies in battle; when they were down, the Amalakites prevailed against them.
One pair of hands lifted up to Heaven in prayer, prevailed more than many
Thousands that were lifted up in battle. Moses recounts several such gracious
dispensations of God toward him, Deuteronomy. 9.19. and 10.10. He fell down before
the Lord forty days and forty nights, and the Lord hearkened unto him, ver. 25.
He fell down again before the Lord forty days and forty nights when the Lord
would have destroyed them, and 10. c. 10. v. And the Lord harkned unto him at
that time also. And the Lord would not destroy them. Exodus 32.10. The like.
Many times would the Lord have destroyed them, had not Moses put up his
petitions for them, Numb. 11. The fire consumed the people, and Moses prayed,
and it wa quenched.

Phineas, when Gods wrath was hot against this people to destroy them with the
plague, prayed, and so the plague ceased.

How often did he yield to Abraham's prayer for sparying Sodom? so often that
Abraham, was ashamed to urge him any further. And Samuel is among such as
called upon his name, and he heard them, and while Daniel was speaking in
prayer he obtained his suit.

David says, Psalm. 36.4. I sought the Lord and he heard me, and deliverd me
out of all my fear. And in diverse other Psalms he testifies the same; and
Jehosophat when he knew not what to do against the great host of his enemies,
prevailed by prayer 2 Chronicles. 20. Which examples and many more the scripture
sets forth to show how prevalent, acceptable, and delightful this service is to
God, and to excite us to it with boldness and confidence, as the Apostle makes
use of the example of Elias, who by prayer opened and shut the Heavens, for
this purpose to excite us to the duty, for though there be passions, and
infirmities in us, and our services be but weak, yet God looks upon us, as a
tender parent looks upon his child, and pittieth, and pardons the defects, in
regard of the willingness of the obedience, and receives our services with
delight, because he sees something of himself in us, and so he is loath to deny
any thing. God was not offended with Isaiah when to satisfy one man he required
that the Sun should go back. And so loath is God that any prayer should be put
up to him in vain without success, that he wills us not to pray for such things
as he intends not to grant. When Samuel prayed for Saul; How long (says he)
will thou pray for Saul since I have rejected him? 1 Samuel 16.4. So Jer.
7.15.16. I will cast them out of my sight, therefore pray not for this people,
neither make intercession for them, for I will not hear thee.

What shall we then think of the strength of prayer?

It seems to hold Gods hands that he can not do what he would, for Deuteronomy. 9.13.
Before cited God says to Moses: I have seen this people, that they are a
stiff-necked people, Let me alone that I may destroy them, Exodus 32.10. Moses
would not let him alone, and God hearkened unto him, and did not destroy them.
So that it was as Moses would.

O omnipotent prayer that thus prevailest with the almighty! O invincible, and
all conquering believer that can wrestle with the almighty and prevail (as
Jacob did!) that can hold him so fast, that he cannot go, unless thou please
to let him, else why does he say, let me go? and Jacob answered, I will not
unless thou bless me; and he did bless him. Jacob got what he would of him,
before he would let him go; so God suffered himself to be overcome.

In like sort when the sentence of Death was gone out against Hezekiah, his
prayer caused God to change it.

Furthermore, he is not only overcome, but commanded by prayer (understand it
with reverence) Isa. 45.11. Concerning the works of my hands, command you me;
accordingly we find Joshua speaking, Sun, stand thou still in Gebeon, and thou
Moon in Ajalon. Josh. 10.12. And they stood still.

We read how prayer changed nature, altering the property of fire that it
neither burned nor scorched the 3 children, stopped the mouths of the Lions,
whereby we see how that by means of this, we may be safe in any place, and God
will be with us, and nothing shall be able to hurt us, Psalm. 91.15. He shall
call upon me, and I will answer him; It has no limitation of matter, or
restriction of time, or place, so that we need not despair of any thing we ask.

It is necessary also that we pray for the fulfilling of the Prophesies
thereof, Mala. 1.11. In every place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and
a pure offering, the epis of. Ye are a Royal Priesthood, Exodus 19.6. Ye shall
be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, Therefore we must have something to offer,
Heb. 8.3. The Spirit of prayer and supplication is in stead of the legal
Sacrifices.

If the people of God have such holy appetites as they express, Psalm. 42.1^. As
the Heart pants after the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God.
My soul is a thirst for God, and Psalm. 63. My soul thirsts for thee. My flesh
also longs after thee. And in chap. of Isaiah, With my soul have I desired
thee in the night, and in the Canticles throughout, beginning, v. 1. Let him
kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better than wine. (The
soul is kissed by Christ when it is assured of his love to it, and of its own
love to Christ, and the Heavenly spouse, her desire is to her beloved as is the
wives to her husband. And is as unsatiable in her desires as the greedy Userer
is for riches.)

Then must they needs seek him whom their soul loves, and desires, and
longs for, in this, and in all other ordinances, as the spouse expresses her
solicitousness, and vigilance, in the seeking and persuit of him. That they may
relieve their needs, and satisfy their spiritual thirsts, and hungers, and that
they may mitigate, and assuage their grief and pain, caused by the holy
love-sickness; for if they are forced by occasion of business extraordinary to
omit some duty, they cannot enjoy themselves, and then they long for those
spiritual refreshments which duties afford. There be two principal motives
which make us frequent, and earnest suitors at the Throne of grace, viz. Desire
of communion with God, and enjoyment of him in his ordinances. And desire of
more grace. And God does most commonly satisfy these two desires in this, and
in all other duties; for being well performed from these two principles, they
are our sollaces and delight, and also Gods delight. Therefore will he hear
them, and reward them. Albeit Gods holy people ask temporal blessings of him,
and the comforts of their life, and temporal deliverances; so that it may be
objected, that they have other principles, and motives natural of performing
duties, than these two spiritual.

I Answer, that it is the disposition of the New nature of the child of God to
desire the obtaining of temporal mercies, and blessings by and through this
way, and means of seeking them of the gift of God by prayer only, that so they
may enjoy them as pledges of his fatherly love, mercy and faithfulness, and as
returns of their prayers. And so they will be the more careful to use them to
the honor, and glory of God. And in them they enjoy God, and his loving
kindness, which they value, and comfort themselves with, more than with his
gifts, as it is expressed in the Psalms, in this saying, thy loveing kindness
is better than the life it self, and the heavenly Spouse desires not to be
enriched but by her husband; and for further answer I say, If God has at any
time heard us for outward blessings I conceive he has obliged us to ask them
of him still; as if I salute or visit my neighbor and acquaintance, and he
returns the like civilities, I am to continue my complisance, but if he answer
them not, then he casts me out.

Another Motive may be fetched from the Priestly office of Christ, who ever
lives to make intercession for us. And offers up our prayers in his golden
censer perfumed with incence, and sweet odours. If so, then must we be careful,
and make sure, that he have our prayers always to offer up for us, else we
shall neglect him, and his office, and the access with confidence which he has
purchased for us. Also we shall neglect the mercy of almighty God who is said
to be rich in mercy to all them that call upon him in Faith, Ephesians. 3.

Also we shall neglect the gracious assistance of the holy Spirit which helps
our infirmities in this duty.

Consider also what Vows and promises we have made to God upon extraordinary
occasions, for the due performance of this duty, Psalm. 61.8. I will always
sing praise unto thy name, that I may daily perform my vows, Psalm. 116.16.
Consider whether the facility of the duty be not a sufficient Motive to it; for
I conceive that there could not be made a more easy command than this of our
blessed Savior, Ask and ye shall have; Man could not have desired an easier.
It is expressed by David in his Psalms thus, Open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it. To ask is the easiest thing that we can do unless it be to open our
mouths. In this respect Christ's burden is light. The prayers which he enjoins
are short; he forbids long ones. Besides, the great rewards of so small a
service make it yet lighter, because of the disproportion between this and
that. And they are yet more light by reason of the assistance we have from Gods
holy Spirit.

I intend not that all prayers are performed with ease alike. The fervent
prayers of the Saints which are put up for such graces as they need, and
against such lusts, temptations, corruptions and trials as they labor under,
are mixed with sighs, and groans which cannot be uttered; but all their
prayers are not such, for those which are but for common mercies ought not to
be such; for even the wickedest will pray and howl for Corn and Wine, as it is
in Hose few words are injoined in these prayers. And thus they are most
consistent with faith in Gods promises, that he will not suffer us to want
these Necessaries of life.

Compare these services with the chargable Sacrifices of the Jewish law, and
the burden of ceremonies which they were not able to bear, and these will
appear but easy and light.

But that which facilitates this duty most, is faith, whereby believing we
shall obtain we ask of God such things as we need for our soul, and body, as
confidently and boldly as children use to ask of their parents the things they
need, their food, and raiment, and the like: these esteem it no difficulty to
ask whatsoever they have a mind to, but a pleasure and delight, and doubt not
of speeding, especially when they are invited and encouraged by promises.

The freeness and easiness of access which we have to God in Christ's name,
makes the duty facil; for Jesus Christ the Son of God has made way for the
poor, and needy, and empty handed beggar; they need not bring a present to make
their way. But then when thou see no good in thy self, if thou (grieved
thereat) desire grace, and seek to him for it, these are Motives with
which thy Savior will be persuaded to give thee of his fullness grace for
grace, and will be moved thereby to intercede for thee to his Father: what
beggar will not go thither for relief where he is assured to speed.

The paternal relation between God and us, instructs us, of the easy access;
what ever we need we know he is ready as a Father to give; he takes care of us,
and will provide for us, he expects but to be asked he has prevented our
asking with invitations, and will hardly stay till we have done asking, but he
will grant it, because he delights in granting the requests of his children,
else he would not grant them with such overplus, nor invite us to ask.

And it evidenceth to us that we are his children, when we do make use of our
free access upon all occasions. And believe his readiness to grant.

And if a prodigal Son might find such free and kind reception, as our Savior
says, then he that is the dear Son and pleasent child, and has title to all
cannot be denied.

1. Preparatory Ejaculations.
Lord draw nigh to me, Now that I draw nigh to thee, and if for my unworthiness
thou can not be so propitious to me, as thou would be to thy child that is
obedient, then draw nigh to me, as the Father was pleased to do to his unworthy
prodigal son. But if thou will neither of these, yet be thou pleased to help me
as thy Servant, and Son of thine handmaid, but if this, thou will not, then
Lord relieve me as thou did the Cananitish woman, as a Dog of thy family,
with the crumbs of the bread of life; thy holy Commandment has taught us
importunity, therefore if thou can not hear me for any relation, hear me for
my Importunity.

2 Preparatory Ejaculation.
Lord thou have made thy Servant to know his own insufficiency; I find daily,
that fain I would do good, and be such as thou command us to be, but when I
would do good, evil is commonly present with me, and how to do the good I
would, I know not. This sense of my own insufficiency in every grace, makes me
a daily and hourly Beggar at the Throne of grace, for the Spirit of grace.

And I will never cease begging, because thou have showed thy self more free
to give, than we to ask, or receive, and have made such free invitations, and
offers to all that will come to thee, or ask of thee. And I am resolved to take
no denial, because I come upon thy importunate invitations. If I should take a
denial, or go away without my errand, I should seem to doubt of the verity, and
truth of thy promises, and free and gracious invitations; therefore I will
never leave knocking till thou openest unto me. But at evening, and at morning,
and at noon day, and also at midnight, will I knock till thou please to open
unto me, and relieve my needs.

3 Preparatory Ejaculation.
2 Chronicles. 16.3. Lord when ever Jsrael in their troubles did turn to thee, thou
were found of them. And thou promisest that thou will be found of them that
seek thee, we seek thee now, and resolve to seek thy face evermore, be thou
found of us; and be with us Lord; since thou art open hearted, and handed, why
should we be close mouthed.

4 Preparatory Ejaculution.
Lord, since thou give both the will, and the deed that is good. And we can
have nothing to offer thee, but what is thine own, provide now (O Lord a
Sacrifice for thy self, and put heavenly desires, and affections into our
hearts by thy holy Spirits assistance, that we may seek those things which thou
have freely invited us to ask, and art willing and desirous to give. And then
our prayers shall ascend up to thee as incence, and the lifting up of our
hands, and hearts shall be as a Sacrifice; do thou prepare our hearts, and
thine ear will harken thereto. And thou O blessed Jesus, perfume these our
prayers, and intercede for us.

5 Preparatory Ejaculation.
Lord, we have experienced how forward our natural parents are to succor, and
help their craving little ones; they will often overdo their abilities in their
kindness, and they do only wait for opportunities to do them good as far as
they are able. But thy goodness infinitely surpasses that of Humane Nature.
How then can we doubt but thou will hear, and help us in all our needs, when we
fly unto thee for succor? and take the opportunity to do for us above all we
can ask and think, for so thou have heard some of thy Servants. We are resolved
to ask as largely as we can for all Spiritual gifts and graces, because thou
have bid us to open our mouths wide, and thou will fill them; it is they will
that we should ask, and receive, that our joy may be full, it is our interest,
and our inclination too, so to do, for our natural relief; Incline thou our
hearts to be as hungry, and thirsty, covetous, and greedy for grace, and the
relief of our souls, as ever we were for the relief of our bodies in our
greatest distresses when pined for hunger, or thirst, for such thou delightest
to relieve.

6 Preparatory Ejaculation.
Lord, let us not think to offer thee such services as cost us nothing, or the
worst of our flock, as Cain did, or as those that draw nigh to thee with their
lips, when their heart goes after their covetousness. Lest thou should bid
us to go and offer them to our governor, and see whether he will accept them,
but let us serve the with the first, the best, and perfectest, as Abel did.
Lord why did thou proclaim thy name, merciful and gracious, long suffering
and abundant in goodness? Why have thou made so many gracious promises and
invitations to us but to envite us to come unto the for releif?

A Prayer.
LOrd remember thy new Covenant, and give us all those graces which thou have
freely promised to us thereby. First love us freely. Then give us the man
Christ Jesus whom thou have given for a Covenant to the people, with him give
us thy Spirit; put it into our hearts let it dwell in us; and cause us to walk
in thy Statutes, and to know thy Judgments and do them; for it is this unction
that teaches us all things, and inables us to do every good work, when of our
selves we can neither think, nor do good. And give us all the graces of thy
Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Meekness, Gentleness, Brotherly kindness, and
Charity; and then we shall know, and be sure, that thou have put thy Spirit
into us, if we feel no Envy, Lust, Pride, Wrath, Malice, Covetousness, or
Profaneness stirring in our hearts. And according to thy Covenant of Grace,
give us a new heart, and put thy Laws in our hearts, and write them in our
inward parts, and be thou our God, and make us thy people, and take away our
unmalleable heart of stone. Also make us all to know thee, from the greatest to
the least. Let us also know Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Let us know thee
as our God alsufficient, that we may trust in thee. As our gracious Father,
that we may cast our care upon thee, and delight in thee, and love thee, though
thou chastise us. As our Shepherd, that we may not fear the Wolves that would
devour us. As our Husbandman, that we may submit to thy pruning. And give us
also to know our selves to be thy people, thy children, thy sheep, thy vine,
and all other relations wherein thou have put us. Let us know thee to be our
portion, and that by our seeking thee, and choosing thee to be our portion, and
our selves to be thy portion too, and thy Jewels. And that by our pureness,
holiness, preciousness, and humility, and littleness in our own eyes, and by
thy watching over us, and keeping us. Make us to know Christ Jesus as our King,
to give us Laws, and govern us; as our Priest to atone thy wrath for us, and
reconcile us to thee, and persume our services, and intercede for us; as our
Prophet, to teach and instruct us in the knowledge of thee, and thy will. Let
us know him as our Lord, our Savior, our Brother, our Husband, our Beloved,
our Ransom, our Bread of Life, and Water of Life; and as our Head, our
Cornerstone on which we are built; as our Vine, whereof we are branches; as
our Shepherd, as our All. That we may be able to say, Whom have we in Heaven
but thee? or whom in Earth that we can desire in comparison of thee? That we
may rejoice in him always. And fulfill thou in us that promise, that we shall
be all taught of thee, and shall need no more one another teaching. Make us to
hear that voice behind us, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it. Let us not
stop our ears, nor turn from it. Give thy Son the Heathen for his Inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession; and those who will not
submit to him, let him bruise them with a Rod of Iron. Make Jerusalem a praise.
Let Righteousness run down like a mighty River; and let holiness to the Lord be
writ upon us, and all our common things. Make every pot in Jerusalem like as
the bolls before the Altar. Pardon our iniquities, heal our backslidings, and
receive us graciously. Let the Sun of Righteousness arise on us, with healing
in his wings. Subdue our iniquities, and cast our sins into the bottom of the
Sea. Wash away our scarlet sins, and make us clean and white as Snow: Make the
Lion to lie down with the Lamb, and to cat straw with the Bullock. Make the
heart of the rash understand knowledge. And let not the fool err. O Christ
give thou light to them that sit in darkness! Give sight to the blind. Plant in
the barren Wilderness the Firtree, the Mirtle-tree, the Cedar, the Shitta-tree,
the Pine Tree, the Olive, and the Box-tree. Make the barren Wilderness a
standing water, and watersprings in a dry ground. Pour water upon the thirsty.

And give us all those means of grace which thou have promised. Give us Pastors
according to thine own heart, which shall feed us with knowledge and
understanding; and such as shall teach us by their lives, as well as by
doctrine. And since thou have appointed afflictions for means, make us to
rejoice in them, and hear the Rod. Water us every morning, and every moment
with the dew of grace; and make our souls as a watered Garden. As a Garden
enclosed, as a Fountain sealed, that no polluting thing may come into us to
defile us. That we may be more pure in heart, more holy, delight in thee more,
and feed upon thy Word more. That we may grow up like the Calves of the stall,
be fat, and well liking. That we may flourish in the Courts of the house of the
Lord. That we may run, and not be weary, walk, and not faint; mount up with
wings like an Eagle, and renew our strength as an Eagle. Give us all those
means of improving our graces which thou have promised. Strengthen us, sustain
us, support us, and hold us up that we may not fall; lead us and guide us in
that way whorein we shall not stumble. Make us to feed by the Rivers of Waters,
thy holy Ordinances, upon thy holy Word, and the Lord's Supper. That the weak
may be as David, and the house of David as God. That thy willing people may be
more and more wiling; that they may be zealous of good works, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, knowing that their labor is not in vain in the Lord.
Quicken and water the means of Grace. Make us able to mortify our members
more, and deny our selves more, to suffer losses, sicknesses and afflictions,
more contentedly, willingly, and patiently, put a new edge upon those motives
which first moved us to forsake our lusts and the world, to embrace the love of
God, and the fear of God, the knowledge of God. As the eyes of a servant are to
the hands of his Master; and the eyes of a Maid to the hands of her Mistress;
so let our eyes be ever upon thee, for help, strength, and direction. Give us
the means of guarding and defending our selves against Satan. All the Armor of
Light, the Shield of Faith; the Sword of the Spirit, the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, and for a Helmet, the Hope of Salvation. Teach us the Art of
well using all these pieces of this spiritual Armor, both the defensive, and
the offensive, that we may with them beat down every thought that exalts it
self against God. Teach us all our military postures, that we may be able to
stand. Watch thou over us, though we our selves watch too; and do thou keep us
night and day, for thy promise sake. Bear us in thy hand, as a man bears his
child. Go with us, never leave us nor forsake us. Make us to know thy will, and
do it. Be thou our guide unto death. Direct thou our way, and order our steps
in thy Word. Incline our heart that we may delight in thee. Deliver us from
every evil work. Let no spiritual weapon formed against us prosper. Preserve
our bodies and souls blameless unto the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and make us able to overcome all our spiritual enemies.

Lord, whatever promises thou have made to us, thou made them because thou
did desire to give us the things promised. Thou only desiredst an opportunity
from the receiver, or to be sought to for them. We seek to thee according to
thy command; therefore let thy mercy which first moved thee to promise them,
move thee now for thy Truths sake to give them, as well all other thy promises,
as these mentioned. And give us all those mercies which thou have invited us to
ask, or thy Son has invited us to seek. Lord heal our blindness with thy
eye salve, which thou have invited the blind to seek of thee. And strengthen
our weak sight more and more, that we may behold clearly the glory of the Lord,
and may be changed into the same image from glory to glory, and may see the
things of our eternal concernment. Relieve our nakedness with those pure white
Robes which thou have invited the naked to buy of thee, which will never be
soiled, nor wax old. And relieve our poverty and penury with thy refined gold,
which will enrich to eternity, which thou exposest to be sold to the poor and
needy, who have nothing to purchase it withal. Show us wherewith we poor, blind
and naked sinners, shall purchase of thee these necessary supplies: For if we
continue without them, we shall remain miserable, and perish for lack of them.
Lord, our rags we are willing to part with for those unspotted Robes; our
wretched poverty for that refined gold; and our blind eyes for that clear and
quick sight which thy eye salve will make in us; that we may be capable of
seeing the remedies of our poverty and nakedness. Show us how we may purchase
of thee wine and milk without money, and without price, to relieve our thirsty
souls. Lord give us the thirst and desire of those precious liquors, to
satisfy our thirsts, and do thou satisfy our souls with those Rivers of
pleasure which are at thy Right hand for evermore. And that we may lack no
grace, and thy relief may supply all our needs and spiritual wants. Give us of
the fullness of Christ Jesus, grace for grace, that we may know that be lives
in us, as our Head, and we in and by him. Give us to be like him, and to
imitate him in all holiness. Make us to walk as he walked, that we may know
that we are members of his body. Give us Patience, Humility, Meekness,
Temperance, Chastity and Charity, Mortification and Vivisication, Faith, and
Obedience of his fullness. Give us all those graces that any of thy Saints and
Servants have had, and all those degrees of grace. Give us all those graces
which thou have commanded us to have, and all those degrees of grace. Make us
perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect.

Give us all those privileges which Jesus Christ has purchased for us. Give
us more assurance of the pardon of our sins, and our reconciliation to God, and
the joy thereof. Give us the peace of conscience, and the Peace of God which
passes all understanding. Give us the Joy which is in the Holy Ghost, which we
enjoy in holy duties. Let us taste and relish these sweet enjoyments with more
satisfaction and joy, that the excesses of our souls may be in these
enjoyments, and we may keep them in our mouths, and hide them under our
tongues, as we do sweet morsels: And let the enjoyment of these carry us
through all difficulties. Give us more confidence in our accesses to the Throne
of Grace, and a belief that thou art more ready to give, than we to ask; for
thy fullness is more full, than our emptiness is wanting. Thy fatherly care to
provide for us, is more faithful, and careful to do it, than we to seek it;
though we are resolved to be always begging and craving, because we know we
shall always be wanting in this life, and we will not lose our desires, and
thy bountiful gifts, for want of asking.

The cause which moved thee to make such gracious invitations to us, and such
great and precious promises of grace and mercy, was only in thy self; for thou
invitest the thirsty to buy Wine and Wilk without money or price. What then is
there that we can buy it with, that is neither money nor price? it can be
nothing but to exchange our thirst for the thing which we thirst for, to
relieve it, to open our mouths. Therefore as the cause which moved thee to make
these invitations and promises was in thy self, Lord seek in thy self the cause
which may move thee to perform them. The qualifications of thirst, want and
need we have, and shall have as long as we have any life. But if we be dead in
trespasses and sins, quicken thou us, because thou only can do it by thy holy
Spirit.

In the assurance of thy free mercy then (whereof thou by thy free promises
have convinced us) and by the performance of the chiefest of them have fully
satisfied us, enable us to assure our souls of thy readiness and willingness to
hear, and help us, through the merits of Christ Jesus; and in assurance
thereof, to come boldly and with confidence to the Throne of Grace. And give us
sure evidence of our interest in all other privileges. That our joy may be
full, assure us that our place of defense is the munition of Rocks. That bread
be given us, and our water shall be sure. Bless us, and make us a blessing. Let
showers of blessings come down upon thy people. Give us to lay hold of Christ
for only Wisdom, our only sufficient Righteousness, our Sanctification, and
Redemption. Tread Satan under our feet, that we may bruise his head, as often
as he goes about to sting our heel. Destroy his works. Let the Spirit of the
Lord set up his standard against him. And let not Antichrist any more deceive
the Nations; but destroy thou him, and the Whore which is drunk with the blood
of Saints. Succor those that are tempted. Be with thy people in the fiery
Trial, that is to come upon all the world to try them; as thou wast with Joseph
in the prison. Lord, let not our sins stand as a cloud to hinder these our
prayers from ascending to thee, or cause thee to turn away thine ear. For
though they are so many, that we scarce know how to confess them, yet thou have
pardoned as great sinners as we, when they turned unto thee; and it is usual
with thee to seek thy lost sheep, and to receive thy returning Prodigals.

Lord, thy free promises, and importunate invitations by thy self, and thy Son,
give us this boldness of access to thee; for thereby we are assured that thou
art more desirous to give than we to receive. Hear us therefore through the
merits of thy Beloved Son, our Eternal High Priest, in whom only we hope to
prevail with thee, in whom thy Promises are Yea, and Amen. And accept us in
him, who has purchased this Access for us, in whom we trust, that he now
intercedeth for us, whilst we are praying to thee: And that he persumes and
presents these our supplications at the Throne of Grace; To whom with Thee, and
thy blessed Spirit of Grace, be all honor, praise and glory, Eternally, Amen.

Enter not into Judgment with us, O Lord, for our best services; for in thy
sight shall no flesh living be justified.

A shorter Prayer for daily use.
LOrd, draw nigh unto me, now that I draw nigh unto thee, for thy promise sake,
for thy mercy sake, and for Christ Jesus sake. And assist me with thy Spirit,
that I may pray unto thee in the Spirit, and in Faith, believing that thou art
more ready to give, than we to ask or receive thy graces and thy mercies.

Lord, relieve me according to all my needs, and according to thy infinite
goodness, and according to thy gracious promises and invitations. Relieve my
spiritual blindness with that eye salve which thou have invited the blind to
come unto thee for. Relieve my spiritual nakedness with that fine white linen
which thou have invited the naked to seek of thee; and cloth me with humility,
patience, temperance, chastity and charity, and every grace. Relieve my
spiritual poverty with that fine gold which will enrich our souls to eternity,
and make me rich in good works. Relieve my spiritual hunger and thirst with the
bread of life, and the water of life, so that I may never hunger or thirst
after any thing else: And make me more hungry and thirsty for thee, and thy
grace, and more sensible of my needs. Lord, I pray not for my self alone, but
for me and mine, and all the Israel of the Lord. Let my seed be a seed unto
thee, and all that shall come of them to the end of the world. Remember the
entail of thy blessings to us, and to our seed for a thousand generations. Let
the Kingdoms of the world become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ
Let holiness to the Lord be writ upon all our common things. Make us all to
know thee, from the greatest, to the least. Let us need no more to teach one
another, saying, Know the Lord. Let us all be taught of God; and let us hear
the sweet voice behind us, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when we turn
to the right hand or to the left; and make Jerusalem a praise. Love us freely,
pardon us, and heal us. Subdue our iniquities, and cast our sins into the
bottom of the Sea, that they may never rise up against us. Give us new hearts.
Put thy Laws into our hearts, and write them in our inward parts. Be thou our
God, and make us thy people. Put thy Spirit into us, and cause us to walk in
thy Statutes, and to know thy Judgments, and do them. Cause us to love thee
with all our hearts, and with all our souls. Put thy fear in our hearts, that
we may not depart from thee all our days. Let thy Spirit always dwell in us,
and abide in us as our Helper, our Almighty Comforter, our Light, our Guide and
Instructor, our Teacher and Remembrancer. Let our bodies always be the Temples
of the Holy Ghost. Let thy Spirit be always acting in us love, joy in the
Lord, peace, meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, charity,
chastity, purity, temperance and sobriety, zeal, knowledge, faith, affiance in
thee, mortification, vivification, hope and humility, patience, contentation,
and submission to thee, and every grace. Give us Christ Jesus too, whom thou
have promised to give for a Covenant to the people; first give him us for a
Covenant, then give him to us for our King our High Priest, and our Prophet,
our Wisdom, our Righteousness, our Sanctification, and our Redemption, for our
Beloved, our Bridegroom, and our Husband! The joy of our heart, and the desire
of our souls. O blessed Jesus! give us thy self in all those offices and
relations which thou be to thy people. Give us the kisses of thy mouth, and
the sweet pledge, of thy love, and communion with thee in every duty, and
refreshment of our graces; and particularly in this duty. Bring us into thy
Chambers, and let thy left hand be under us, and thy right hand embrace us.
Repose thy self as a bundle of mirth betwixt our breasts. Vnvail thy beauties
to us, that we may be enflamed of thy perfections, and may evermore run after
thee. Give us thy self for our Brother, and make us the adopted children of thy
Father; and give us the same nature that thou had. Give us thy self for our
Head, and do thou live in us, and let us feel thee living in us evermore; and
let us live in thee, and receive of thy fullness grace for grace. Give us thy
self for our root, and let us be grafted into thee, and bear such fruit as thou
borest. Give us thy flesh for the food of our souls, and thy blood for the
drink of our souls, to nourish them to eternal life, and to give them eternal
life. O God, give us thy self for our God, our King and Governor, our Refuge,
our Tower of Defense and Safeguard, our Help in time of need, our Father, our
Husband, our Portion, and exceeding great Reward. And let us seek all our
desires in thee, and in Jesus Christ. And let us know that we are thy People,
thy Saints, and thy Servants, thy Redeemed and Ransomed of the Lord, and thy
Portion, and thy Jewels, thy Children, and thy Spouse; and that thou rejoycest
over us to do us good, as a Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride; and do thou
watch over us, and keep us night and day, lest any evil befall us; and hold us
up that we may be safe. And give us all those graces which thou have promised
by thy new Covenant, and all those degrees of grace, and all those means of
Grace. Give us all those graces that any of thy Saints and Servants have had,
and all those degrees of grace, and all those graces that thou have commanded
us to have. Make us perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. And give us all
those blessednesses that accompany those graces. Let all things work together
for our good. Let us want no manner of thing that is good. Let us be like Mount
Sion, which cannot be removed. And keep us secretly in thy Tabernacle from the
strife of tongues; and satisfy us with abundance of peace; and accept of our
praises too in Christ Jesus, for a thousand mercies to me and mine; for all the
mercies wherewith thou ladest us, and make our lives comfortable; especially
for delivering us from Hell, when we have been ready to throw our selves into
it. Thou can not do a greater thing for us, till thou bring us to Heaven;
therefore let us retribute all we have or can do to thee, and Jesus Christ our
Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Of Thanksgiving to God.
A Meditation.
Exodus 23. None shall appear before me empty.
THIS practice of the Servants of God is general; for we read of none of them
who did not render unto God for his mercies received; so that he is none of
God's people who omits this, neither does he acknowledge God to be his
benefactor. One sacrifices to his net, viz. to the subordinate means; another
ascribes all to chance and fortune; and howbeit many profane people too have
made their acknowledgments to God; as Saul would reserve the best of the Cattle
for sacrifice. Cain would also sacrifice. But of such Solomon says, The
Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; as Readiness was. God
speaking of the degenerate Israelites, says in the Prophecy of Isaiah, They
come before me as my people. For the light of nature (which is not easily
extinguished) dictates this to us. Accordingly we read in the Proverbs of
Solomon, of the Harlot paying her vows. They sing praises to God just then when
they are freed from their affliction; but within a while they forget God, and
the wonders which he has done for them.

To render some thing is an acknowledgment which we perform to one another; for
we know we can hold nothing of another without a rendering. But the rendering
which we must make to God always, is our heart, and all we can do and suffer
for him. Hanna did not think it enough to render the fruit of her lips, but
thought she had enough favor showed her that her prayers were heard, and was,
satisfied therewith, and thankfully rendered the entire benefit received.

David did not satisfy himself with praising and magnifying God, and resolving
to praise him as long as he lived; but he would have built a Temple to him too,
but that God would not suffer him; yet he proceeded in that purpose so far as he
could; for he provided the materials for the Temple.

And shall I think it enough to offer God thanks and praise? (for though this
is honoring God) yet why should I suffer my self to be outdone by the weaker
sex? why should I think to keep all Gods benefits to my self? for my own use?
she for one prayer heard, and for own favor received, renders the same again,
because she had no other thing of equal value to her.

What shall I render for so many prayers heard, and for so many mercies
received? I am at a loss what I shall render; but I am resolved to do all I
can, and suffer all I can for him, and to Sacrifice my most endeared lust to
him. I will praise the Lord with my mouth, and my tongue shall fail when I
tell of his mercies; for I know no end of them. But this shall not suffice me;
I must endeavor to build up his Temple too as far as I may; not any Temple
made with hands, but I have frequent occasion to meditate how much God does for
me, and how little do I for God! and taking a view of the designs and
interests which the world in general carries on, and how vigilant they are,
and industrious in their own secular interests, insomuch that they quite lay
aside the design of Jesus Christ, and the promotion of Gods Glory, of goodness,
and virtue, and every grace: Yet there must be a holy seed, a peculiar people
zealous of good works, and a Spiritual Temple, and there must be some to carry
on the holy interest and design of Gods glory both by doing, and suffering
graces; and therefore I have resolved to my uttermost ability, to promote this,
and the rather, because I see so many carrying on Satan's design, as if the
Devil were let loose. Ten Lepers were cleansed: They all received equal benefit
but one only of ten acknowledged his benefactor, and returned him thanks, let
not the paucity of thy companions discourage thee in thy duty and good
resolutions.

Lord that I may do thee this service the better, affect me so with the sense
of thy mercys and goodness now and always, as I was affected when I first
received them: For then I admired thy goodness, and thought I could never love
thee enough, and praise thee enough. And then I enjoied the sweetness of thy
mercys, but much more I enjoied the sweetness of thy self, for I did enjoy thee
as the Lord God alsufficient. And as a God hearing prayer, and as My God.

And I enjoied my self as thy Servant.

And that I may the better do this duty of thankfulness, let me remember the
affliction and oppression, sorrow and grief, fear and fearful misgiving of mind
that I lay under before, the Lord delivered me, and let it be evermore before
me, and affect me with the sense of it else I can never be thankful enough for
thy mercy, for so thou prescribedst to thy ancient people the Jews, that when
they brought their offerings before thee, they should make their recognition,
and say a Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and came down to Egypt with a
few, etc.

And I find holy David praising God in this manner. Praised be the Lord who
remembered us in our low estate, Psalm. And few there be who may not (as fitly
as he) use this form. But if there be any who have not experienced this
condition, it is to be feared they shall; for as great as they are reduced
daily.

He also remembers his fears before God and praises him for his deliverance
from them all.

And there is no man so valiant but sometimes his fears make him at his wits
ends, therefore all mankind may use this form too.

And for deliverance from troubles we may all praise God, as we find him doing,
Psalm. 34.

He further praises God for deliverance from afflictions, from breaking his
bones, ibid. We also may remember the time when we have narrowly escaped the
like danger: Therefore we must acknowledge it thankfully to Gods gracious
preservation.

He praises God also for raising him up from his sickness. This occasion of
praise we all have had. He praises him for delivering him from his enemies,
and all that will live Godly must have enemies, as he had, and shall have
occasion to praise God for delivering them from them. He that is born after the
flesh will persecute him that is born after the Spirit, but shall not prevail
against him: For if he should prevail, how then were it better that a Millstone
were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the Sea, then that he should
offend them that are such?

And all those that belong to God, may say with him. By this I know that thou
favourest me, because mine enemy does not prevail against me, for the Lord
will not leave them in the hand of their enemies, though they persecute them,
and wrong them in word and deed, and despitefully use them, and say all manner
of evil of them falsely.

He only that is little in his own eyes can be thankful to God. Therefore David
assaying to give God praise for his mercies, first strips himself of all
pretense of merit, saying. What am I, and what is my Fathers house? And the
blessed Virgin in her magnificat ascribes lowness to her self; whom God exalted
so highly.

He only can bless God for afflictions, who is sensible of his straying
inclination. And Gods restraining goodness.

The troubles of the righteous are many, but the Lord delivers them out of all.
Therefore their thanks and praises of God must not be few. I will show forth
all his praises, says he in the Psalms. And I will always give thanks unto
the Lord; his praise shall ever be in my mouth, Psalm. 34. He shows the cause;
In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy comforts have
refreshed my soul. If we are sensible that God has heard our prayers, we must
remember too that he has heard our vows. It is but a reasonable imposition of
a never-failing Benefactor; I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise me,
Psalm. For we receive our wages before we perform our service.

And what does it avail the Lord? and what does accrue to him whether we are
delivered, or whether we perish in our affliction? our praises is all that
redounds to him, the benefit to us.

This duty is so delightful and satisfying in the very act of performance, that
it is a reward to it self, Psalm. 63. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and satness, when my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. Thus he sings
sweetly in the ears of God, of Angels, and of good men, and in his own ears
too; or else how was he so fully satisfied whilst he performed it? And why else
did he so often perform it? with such studied variety? Certainly it does much
delight a man to recount how much God has favored him, helped, and heard him.

The Royal Prophet does not only recount his own troubles, and sorrows, and
perils, and travels, that he had gone through from his youth up; but he
recounts also the National mercies; what God wrought for them when he brought
them out of Egypt, and downward to his own time. Also he admires God's
goodness to all sorts of men in affliction; as at large may be seen in the 107
Psalm. as particularly to men driven from their own place and Country, into
strange Lands, wandering without succor. To prisoners cast into dungeons,
because of their sin. To sick men, and to seafaring men, when they reel to and
fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end; then they cry
unto the Lord, and he delivers them; Lord, How Good, How Gracious art thou!
When our condition is so desperate, that we know not what to do, which way to
turn us: And know no way to escape, no more than he that flies from a Lion, and
is torn in pieces by a Bear. When we see that we cannot be delivered without
God will please to work a miracle. When we seem to our selves irrecoverable,
like the dried Bones in the Valleys (in Ezekiel's Prophecy) or like a dead Tree
withered and plucked up. In this forelorn and hopeless condition, when no man
regards our perishing, we come to God for help, and he in whose only power it
is to help, does help us, and deliver us, and makes the dry bones live, and we
have seen the salvation of the Lord, and the wonders that he does for the Sons
of men; and have been transported with joy, as the Israelites when they came
out of Babylon were.

I acknowledge that there be some who come in no misfortune, nor are plagued
like other men: But all those whom Christ Jesus has chosen to be his
soldiers; he trains up in this discipline.

But if it were so, that I had not gone through such perils, such afflictions,
and such troubles, as I see and hear to befall other men. Have I not much more
cause to praise God for keeping me in health, than for raising me up again,
being fallen sick? from keeping me from the perils which befall other men, than
for delivering me, if I had been in danger, and for keeping me from troubles
wherein others are plunged. If I consider the calamities of men far greater
than my self: As for instance of him who is more worth than thousands of us,
our Sovereign Lord the King. Can I choose but bless God that my distresses,
afflictions, and perils of life, have not been so many and great as his? But
how great and good above me was he that was after God's own heart? What pains,
perils and troubles did he not go through first in his person; his reins
chastened him in the night; he had no soundness in his bones; then from his
superiors, Saul persecuting him as long as he lived; from his inferiors; his
servant curses him to his face; from unkind neighbors, as Doeg the Edomite;
from his Relations, his wife scoffing him, his Son rebelling, and another
commits a rape on his Sister, etc. Besides the temporal mercies, he also tells
us what God has done for his soul too, as Psalm. 103. and blesses God for
forgiving all his sin, etc. ib. For this we can never praise God enough.

Meditations and Ejaculations.
Go about Duties, not as labors, but thy only enjoyments. Delight thy self in
the Lord, and expect the Reward. LORD, since thou have promised thy holy Spirit
to them who ask it of thee, I beseech thee give it to me; for without it I
cannot serve thee, nor walk in obedience to thy holy Commandments; for by
reading and hearing thy Word, I can only know my duty; I cannot retain my holy
resolutions which are stirred up in the duties one hour. Therefore do thou
create in me a new heart, and a new nature. Regenerate me by thy Spirit, and
the immortal seed; and write thy Law in my heart, and give me thy holy Spirit,
the Almighty Helper, the Comforter, and hold thou me up, and I shall be safe.

Make me willing to undergo conflicts with sin; for hereby I shall have comfort
in the hour of death, and the day of trouble. O give me peace of conscience,
the comforts of a wellspent life, that I may be able to say with Hezekiah, Lord
remember how I have walked before thee in all simplicity, when the day of death
comes. Make me wise to consider always my latter end, and what thoughts I
shall have then of the world, and all its comforts; let this restrain me from
giving up my self to them, else I shall be a fool in my latter end, as the
wicked are, and cry out, that the world has deceived them; their consciences
being then awakened, which in their lime-time they stifled; and then the
Hypocrites have no hope: Therefore Lord give me grace and prudence, to make
provision against that time, that the sting of death may be taken out. Let me
believe the terrors threatened against the wicked, that I may never come to
feel them. Let me find Christ my Advocate when death comes upon me. And that I
may not die in my sin, make me by thy grace continually to die to sin. Deliver
me from every evil work, and preserve my body and soul blameless unto the
coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Lord, above all things, give me to fear sin, and the transgression of thy Law,
who art the great Sovereign of the world, its Creator and Preserver, to whom we
owe both our persons and obedience; and if the Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the Law, much more let me who have as well the written Law and the
Gospel, as the Law of Nature, do the things contained in the Law, else how
shall I escape thy wrath? But (having tried our obedience) thou have found us
all rebels, and in thy justice may damn us all, if thy mercy in Christ Jesus
do not save us.

Since Jesus Christ our Savior was made under a Law, and the glorious Angels
fulfill thy commandments, and hearken to the voice of thy word, and man has no
such perfection as his Savior, or the Angels; but our wisdom and our
perfection is in obedience to the Law: Enable us to keep it; for herein God
has showed us what is good, Micah 6.8.

Every child of God is as a soldier keeping a garrison in an enemies Country.
Therefore Lord, as I put on my apparel, let me remember to put on the Armor of
light, and to watch and be provided to fight thy battles, let me not be
destitute of any piece of this Armor, but give me all Christian virtues. I am
naked naturally, and without this Armor; but unless I have it of thy gift, I
cannot put it on, but must perish by my nakedness, for I cannot have any truse
from my spiritual adversary who watches to destroy us.

And give me the skill of an expert warrior to use these Arms against the
Devil, the World and the flesh; enable me to put off all sins which hinder the
planting, and growth of grace in our hearts, for we cannot serve God and
mammon; let me depart from evil, that I may do good. Let me feel the power of
Christ's death, that I may partake of his resurrection. Let the sense of my
forepast sins make me the more diligent in thy service. Since my darkness is
passed, let me put off the works of darkness. Let me not delay considering my
danger, and the shortness and uncertainty of life, and the greatness of the
reward. if I do thy service: For to him that is faithful in much, thou will
give much; ten Cities for improving his five talents to that number.

That I may fear sin, and not make light of it, or a mock of it, as fools are
said to do; let me consider the great evil of it: That it is the foolishness
and brutishness of a man, the darkness and nakedness, the blindness and
sottishness, and death of the soul, which makes us said to be dead in
trespasses and sins; and that the effects of sin are the worst of evils. That
it makes us like to the Devils. That one sin makes us prone to all other sins:
As David's adultery made way for murder: As the Heathen who liked not to
retain God in their thoughts, God gave them up to all uncleanness: So it
hardens the heart against repentance, and blinds the mind, that it cannot
understand good from evil: And finally, that it loses God's favor, and all
things that are worth desiring, and makes us liable to endure all evils that
are worthy to be feared; and let these considerations work in me an antipathy
to it. And on the contrary, that I may apprehend the excellency of holiness,
and the fear of the Lord; which is the best of good things, as sin is the worst
of evils; and as sin is the greatest folly and stupidity, so holiness
contrariwise is the greatest wisdom, and to fear God, and do thereafter, is
good understanding. That the righteous is more excellent than his neighbor;
and they that are precious in God's eyes, are honorable; that it makes us like
the Saints, and like to Christ, and like God; to be perfect, as God is perfect;
to be holy, as he is holy: That it is our security, and ingages God to be a Sun
of perpetual comfort, and a shield of defense to us. That if we do good, none
will harm us. But to the wicked there is no peace. And that it gains God's
favor, and all those things that are worth desiring in this life. And
eternally Lord! Let these considerations work in me a hunger and thirst after
grace.

O give me to apprehend the terror of the Lord! that I may fear him
accordingly, to consider that thou gave the Law with thunder and lightning;
that those that despised Moses Law died without mercy; that I may fear to
offend against the Gospel, and the blood of Jesus Christ, counting it unholy,
as all that are not sanctified by it do. Let me apprehend the strictness of thy
precept. Thou have commanded that we keep thy precepts diligently. That we have
covenanted in Baptism to do it; and upon our repentance likewise, and renewing
of cur Covenant with thee; and every thought of our hearts is under this Law.
Therefore that I may walk accordingly, let me be diligent in all God's
Ordinances, which are both food and physic to the soul. Let me use frequent
prayer, which will surely make me weary of sinning; if sin does not make me
weary of praying. And give me unweariedness and constancy in the duty of
reading, searching and meditating in the Scriptures. Let me hide thy Word in my
heart, that I might not sin against thee. Let the Word convey the Spirit into
me, since it is received by the hearing of faith, and not by the works of the
Law; and let me often renew my Covenant with thee in the blood of Jesus Christ.

LORD, since thou promisest a reward to him who overcomes. Let me have grace to
fight thy battles, and let me not expect the reward till I have done thy
service; let me contemn the labor, and the allurements that would divert me,
while I look upon the encouragement. Though Satan offers present rewards for
sin, and puts an edge upon the temptations, and makes them suit my temper,
either in the things of the world, or the flesh, and my heart is ready to
betray me within, and my reason is ready to follow my appetite, yet let my
jealousy over my heart, and my constant watchfulness prevail against them all,
through Christ Jesus by whom only we can overcome so powerful an adversary as
Satan is, who is unwearied in his temptations: For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, nor by flesh and blood, but by Faith in Christ, upon whom we rely
for the victory. Therefore give us the shield of faith. Faith reflecting upon
the glory to come, and the love of Christ past, who left Heaven for us, that we
might leave earth for him. And let us know that we fight Christ's battles, an
that he is our Captain, and will succor his that are tempted, and we shall be
able to do all things through him that strengthens us when we call upon him.

And fighting thy battles, and overcoming thy enemies, give me the promised
reward of blessedness, the white stone, the sentence of absolution from the
guilt of sin, and the seal of thy favor to my soul, whereby I shall taste the
joys of Heaven which the men of the world apprehend not.

THAT I may fear to sin, let me weigh seriously the seeming pleasure, and
profit it offers, with its losses it brings. What profit have carnal pleasures
satisfying the senses, and the pleasing of the fancy, the vain breath of man's
applause; unless I view Heaven, and happiness as fables, how can I neglect them
for these base things? or Satan and my own lusts beguiles me, and deceive me?
for if I were indifferent in my Judgment, I must needs contemn these poor
bates, as Solomon did after he had made trial of them. O Lord inlighten my
understanding, and rectify my Judgment, and my depraved will and affections,
that I may not be cheated, nor be willing to be deceived; that I may not buy
pleasure at so dear a rate, being a lover of it, more than of God, who is
blessed for ever; let me not set so light by God, and blessedness, and Heaven,
and my true eternal interest, teach me to fear the loss of my soul, and the
favor of God, and the peace of conscience, all which either early or late, the
sinner finds he loses. Give me that spiritual eye salve whereby I may discern
the vizard and sucus of sin. Teach me to consider all the seeming gainers by
sin: youthful persons, who are in the strength, and vigor of their age, who
make the most, and the best of their pleasure, of whose merry meetings, the
wise man has said, Their laughter is madness. And the sins of their youth are
the sorrows of their age, when they cry out with Job, Remember not the sins of
my youth; and thou make me possess the sins of my youth, or what gain can
the great ones of the earth boast of, though they drink a greater draught of
pleasures than other men? who the more they seem to gain, the more they lose;
they lose the peace of conscience, and the favor of God, and his blessings;
but if any gain, it is those who after sining are saved by repentance: But
these, all their life after do complain of nothing but there sins, and with
great difficulty do recover their peace with God and their conscience; for what
likelihood is there that that should prove profitable to any that God does
forbid, or would God gain any profit by it, if it were my loss to forbear it?
the Lord does not envy us, he that can afford us Heaven, would he grudge us the
pleasure of sin which the Devel will allow us? can this be good for us, that is
against God? is that like to be a man's good which deprives a man of internal
peace and injoiment of himself, and which every man either in present or
afterward does speak against? can that be gainful to a man that loses his
souls eternal salvation? If the ship be drowned in the ocean, all that is in it
is drowned. What gain can that be, that is so short, that in the next moment we
must say it was, and is not? and for that we have lost eternal happiness: Or
had I lived the days of Methusalem, and all my days had been days of
pleasure, and this were my last day, what would remain of profit of it all? or
what joy, or satisfaction, or comfort to bear me up against the fear of death?
would not a little tidings of death, and Judgment, confound me in the midst of
my pomp, and jovialty, as it did Nebuchadnezzer. Do not the wickedest when they
sin, think to repent of it? and would they so, if it were there gain, and
commodity? or if I should get by sin, would not that gain be loss? should I
not throw away riches gotten by unjustice upon my unfeigned repentance? did not
Judas throw away his 30 pieces? what man in all the world, either that
repented, or that repented not, ever gained by sin? What gained Adam, or Cain,
the old world? Jerusalem, Sodom, Sampson, Lot, David, or Peter? but besides,
that it costs the penitent sinner, what has it cost Christ? therefore as thou
have made us reasonable men (O Lord) let us make choice of that that will make
us happy, thy favor, and let us not sell it, and all our happiness as it were
for a mess of pottage. If sinners think nothing too dear for sin, let me think
nothing too dear for Heaven. When sinners cast away their souls for a lust, and
yet say that we lose our labor for Heaven, how incompetent Judges are they;
but of holiness what fruit have we not? what is it not profitable for, either
in this life, or that which is to come? it confers all that sin would strip us
of.

That I may fear to sin, Let me consider that our God is a consuming fire,
though he be ours; so that we are his people, yet our privileges must not
exempt us from this fear; for thou have commanded us to abstain from sin for
this cause; and all thy people. Whoever sinned found thee a consuming fire to
punish them; as did David; When he cried out, My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. The Lords judgments were grievious upon
him; murder and rape committed in his house his Son drove him from his Throne:
so Eli felt this also when his Sons were vile, and he lightly reproved them;
and Job, when he felt one spark of this fire, cried out, My soul chooses
strangling rather than life. Therefore let all thy people consider the terror
of the Lord, and remember that thou art a consuming fire; and let them walk in
the fear of the Lord, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost. And as they call on
the Father, who without respect of persons judges every man according to his
works; so let them pass the time of their so journing here in fear, remembering
that our blessed Savior could not escape this fire, when he undertook the work
of satisfaction for sinners, but cried out under it, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken men? And in respect of our proneness to sin against God, let us
keep our selves with this, as with a bridle and curb, and to keep up our
vigilance for religious duties working out our salvation with fear and
trembling, considering what it is to fall into the hands of the Lord* Knowing
that it is not a sinful servile fear, which is to fear the smart more than the
offending of God; for this has an enmity joined with it; for whom we fear with
servile fear, we hate; but this filial fear proceeds from love, and the tender
sense of God's displeasure against sin. And though we could say with the
Apostle Paul, that we know we have a house in Heaven; yet was he still keeping
under his body for fear of sinning. For the Righteous shall be recompensed on
earth, and where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? To these the Lord shall
come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that know not God, and to them
that obey not the Gospel. He will wound the head of his enemies. He that
believes not shall be damned. His wrath shall be poured out like fire. The
indignation of the Lord shall consume his adversaries. The damned spirits, and
fallen Angels, are under this fire. But thou have given thy Son Christ to be a
Savior, to save thy people from it. O Lord! save us through our dear Savior's
merits from this worm that never dies, and fire that never goes out; and let
thy people fear not those who can hurt the body only, but those who can hurt
both soul and body, and cast both into Hell fire.

Lord, thou have pronounced them cursed who do thy work negligently: yet how
negligent am I in all religious duties, and my heart goes sometimes after
covetousness, and sometimes after vanities? O give me thy grace! that I may
serve thee with a perfect heart. That I may seek thee with my whole heart. Let
me not think to divide my heart to God and Mammon; because it is thine all, and
thou will have all or none, because thou made it, and Christ has bought it.
Let me not be weary of these duties, but be willing to labor in them, and wear
out my body in them, and strive with zeal wrestling with the Lord for a
blessing; since I have experience that thou art a God hearing prayer, and have
not stopped thine ear to mine. O Lord God, I am not holy, but thou have
promised we shall be all holy, and required that we should be holy, as thou art
holy; how infinitely short does the best of men come of this pattern? The
Apostle Paul confesses he was carnal, sold under sin, and that he had not
attained, but pressed forward, that he might attain. Lord, give us with him, to
see our sinfulness, that we may in like manner (as he was) be stirred up to
strive after holiness, and fulfill thy promise, That we shall all be holy.

Lord, inlighten my understanding, that I may see what a shameful thing sin is,
that the very brute beasts do not so brutishly as sinners: For the Ox, and
Ass, who know their owners, reprove them who refuse to acknowledge thee to be
their Lord; and all others, do more rationally without any reason, than man who
has understanding, yet casts off all understanding, and is not ashamed of sin.
For it is a shame to speak of the things that are done of them, yet are they
not ashamed when they commit them. O let me consider how naked a sinner renders
himself to the view of the world! and when God himself shall put him to shame;
as it is written, As thou have put the Son of God to open shame, so God shall
put thee to shame. And when it shall be their everlasting work to think of the
reasons that moved them to sin, and to refuse such duties; and to see the folly
of all those reasons, this will be shame and confusion. O Lord, let me be
ashamed of my sins in time, savingly, by true repentance, that I may avoid the
eternal shame and confusion: and remember with grief all the hard thoughts
which I have had of thee, and thy ways, and grieved that I turned no sooner
from sin to God: That being derided for holiness, I have so little of it. But
let me not be of them of whom it is said, The Lord has laughed at their
calamity; for he has seen that their day is coming. Made upon hearing of Mr.
J. B.

O Lord give me that earnest, and first fruits of eternal life, which thou
usest to give thy afflicted servants in this life, which may make me, as it did
them, to rejoice in afflictions with joy unspeakable and glorious; to undergo
with joy all manner of slanders, and to take joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, knowing that they have a more enduring substance in Heaven; give thy
servant to know this of himself, which may make me able for the like
sufferings, and to undergo all that the wicked can inflict, not accepting of
deliverance; and grant that I may see him by faith who is invisible, and Jesus
Christ my Savior, my Helper, and my Redeemer, my Recompense, and my Reward.

O Lord let me not put any stress upon my own works for my salvation. If with
thy servant Paul I could say, that as touching the Law I am blameless, yet then
also must I not count that I have attained, but desire to be found in Christ,
not having mine own righteousness; and be sensible that I have deserved thy
wrath, and fly to the Righteousness of Christ; and say with David, I will make
mention of thy Righteousness only: And with Daniel, Not for our righteousness,
but for thy mercy sake save us. Deliver me from the Legal Pharisaical spirit,
thinking to establish its own righteousness, not submitting to the
Righteousness of Christ. Let my righteousness exceed theirs. Let me mortify
the body, and live strictly as they did: and whatever duties they performed,
let me perform: but let me not leave the others undone; and those which I do,
let me not do to be seen, but let me perform them to thee in secret, that thou
may reward me openly. Neither let me trust in my felf, nor despise others,
nor strain at a Not, and swallow a Camel.

Lord, let not worldly things disturb my quiet; though the Earth be moved, and
the Mountains shake at the tempest of the same. Let the River of Life of thy
holy City, make glad the people thereof. Give me the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness. Give me grace, voluntarily to take Christ's yoke upon me, and to
learn of him meekness and humility, that I may find rest to my soul, which I
can never find without holiness of life, and faith; therefore give me both,
that I may be able to say, in all conditions, the Lord is my Shepherd,
therefore I can lack norhing.

Lord, as thou have given us many commands for the duty of prayer, and
watchfulness the reto, with constancy, without ceasing; and that in all things
we should make our requests known unto God, and to encourage us herein, thou
have promised to reward it openly; what we pray for secretly, and have set
forth unto us in thy word how thou art a God hearing prayer, and many examples
of it. And that it is the duty in which thou do most delight, and by my own
experience I have always found thee such. Therefore let me redeem the time for
this so beneficial duty, according to the example of thy Servants. David seven
times a day, and Daniel three times in spite of the Tirants threats; for thou
have always given me the mercies which I asked, and I fear I have lost many for
want of asking.

Lord in my distresses, and troubles, let me not seek for vain comforts in the
Creatures, but for those comforts which thy word and thy Spirit afford thy
Servants; for Christ has promised, that he will not leave us comfortless, but
will send us a comforter. O now send this comforter into my heart, that I may
rejoice with the joy of thy chosen ones, and not with the joy of the World,
this thou have often refreshed thy Servant with, in the midst of the sorrows
which he had in his heart.

Lord let me not neglect the day of my visitation, for thou have said that thy
spirit shall not always strive with us. Therefore when we feel thy holy Spirit
inclining our hearts to good, or drawing us from evil, let us follow its
motions and the express calls of thy word, when it seems to us, to speak in
particular to our souls, that we may escape that threatening which says,
because I have called, and ye have refused, you shall call, and I will not
answer: I will laugh at your calamity; so when thou visitest us with mercies or
afflictions, then thou bowest our ear to discipline; for in affliction the
wicked often will seek thee; but not to see thee in thy merciful dispensations
is more brutish then the Ox, or Ass who know their keepers that feed them. Lord
let me know the time of my visitation; let me lose no opportunity to do good;
for we know not how soon the opportunity, or our lives will be taken away;
therefore let me lay hold on all opportunities, and redeem all time possible
for God's service: As Paul in the Gaol converted the Jailer; and Philip in his
Journey the Eunuch; and Christ when he was on the Cross dying, conveyed grace
to the hearers, and salvation to one of the thieves. Let me value my time by
the duties which may be done in it; and let me not spend it in doing that which
is impertinent, or doing nothing; much less in doing ill; but in things
necessary; which is but one thing, to serve God; the things of this world being
only for convenience. Teach me to number not only my days, but my hours, that
I may husband them well to thy glory; especially my youthful time let me
consecrate to God, since I cannot be too soon out of the paw of Satan, into the
arms of Christ: Let me not listen to the Devil when he tells me I shall serve
God hereafter; but let me give thee the first fruits of my age, and of the day,
and not the flower to the Devil, and the dregs to the Lord; and let me consider
what value I shall have of time when I come to die.

Lord, when thy afflicting hand is stretched out to afflict me in the ruin of
my estate, or the loss of my reputation and honor, or any earthly good, how do
I search and try my spirit, and fear to commit the least sin against thee? but
no sooner have thou removed thy hand, and the danger that threatened is
overpast, but then how careless do I walk again? and think not of the terror of
the Lord, to keep my heart in awe, neither do I fear thee, according to my fear
I had when in danger; neither do I seek to thee, serve thee, and delight in
thee, according to all my vows, and admiration of thy goodness; because thou
have been so merciful to hear my prayer, and deliver me from all my fear, but I
am ready to think that it is for my own goodness and virtue, that thou have
wrought this. Of this sin thou warnedst the Israelites, and we are all too
prone to it; O pardon Lord thy servant, and heal him of this evil; and give him
to walk in the same awe and fear of thee, and the like obedience to all thy
commandments, and love to thy ways; watchfulness against sin, and in it self
examination, and humility when the trouble and danger is past, as when it is
impendent, and then I shall know that I have a filial fear of thee, and not a
servile fear.

Lord, since thou make thy Mercy, and thy Almighty Power, the inducements to
awe us, and allure us to keep and observe thy Statutes, saying to Israel, I am
the Lord, the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, and
out of the house of bondage; therefore enjoynedst thy people to keep the
Commandments following. Let me always keep a remembrance of thy mercies; and
because thou did enjoin them the keeping of the Passover, in commemoration
of their deliverance out of Egypt, and that they should continually when they
made their offering acknowledge, that their Father was a Syrian ready to
perish; Lord let us in like sort reflect upon thy mercies and deliverances, and
our former sufferings, to humble us, and to be thankful to thee, and praise
thee; and whilst we enjoy the benefit, let us give thee the glory; and the
rather, because one mercy is the earnest of another; as holy Paul argued; God
has delivered me, and will deliver me, therefore let me put a due estimate
upon them, by apprehending my unworthiness of them, which the more I apprehend,
the more able I shall be to know the true value of the mercy, and God's
goodness in it. The more low I am in my own eyes, the more high will God's
mercies be in my eyes. If we pray for mercies, it is for love of our selves;
but our praises are not so many, nor so earnest as our prayers for them. Lord
increase our praises, and let us say with David, Praised be the Lord who has
remembered us in our low condition, and has delivered us from all our fears and
troubles, and keeps all our bones, so that none of them is broken, and ladeth
us with daily benefits, and makes our life comfortable. And let my soul praise
him not only with my lips, but with a constant living to his praise, and using
the mercies which he has given me to the honor of him who gave them.

Lord give us grace to mortify our earthly members and affections, since the
promise is, that as we have been planted with Christ into the similitude of his
death, so we shall also be into the similitude of his resutrection. And let
this mortification be universal of all our sinful and sensual affections; and
let it be constant and perpetual, without intermission, looking to the pattern
of Christ on his Cross for our imitation, and instructed thereto by thy holy
Word, and stirred up thereto by a godly sorrow for our sins committed. And to
this end let us cut off the superfluities of every lust and corruption, that
may fortify and strengthen it: And that we may destroy it in the birth; and
keep far off the danger of it; as holy Job made a Covenant with his eyes not to
look upon a Maid, considering that I can never be safe near a danger: though
sin seem to me as a right eye, or hand, yet by thy grace let me have power to
renounce it, not only forbearing the act for fear of punishment, but destroying
and mortifying the habit and inclination: And although the body of sin and
death do remain, as in Paul it did, yet let it be to me as a burden and grief
of soul, crying out with him, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of sin and death*

LORD God, the fountain of goodness, above all things give me faith in thee,
for then I must of necessity love thee, if I believe thou have loved me, and
given thy Son for me, and shall have in my soul the joy that is unspeakable.

Lord, when thou layest thy heavy hand of affliction upon us, to cause us to
search and try our ways, and that we should examine our selves, and turn unto
the Lord; in stead of this our wicked heart is prone to cast off God, and say,
Why should we wait upon God any more? what profit is there in serving him? Who
is the Lord? we will own him, and his goodness no more: In stead of humble
repentance, we are prone with Job's wife to curse God; and with those wicked
ones prophesied of to come in the last times, in the book of the Revelations;
of whom it is said, That after all the Vials of wrath and the 7 last Plagues
poured out, they repented not, but cursed God, or else we are prone to charge
God foolishly, as they in Ezekiel. 8.12. said, God has forsaken the earth, or 18
Ezekiel. That our Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and our teeth are set on edge;
yet we their children have eaten sour grapes too: or we are tempted to have
hard speeches of God, accompanying our natural complaints, and call God's
providence into question, as if thou did not govern the earth, or not well;
because we think thou do not hear us soon enough, saying, Why have we fasted,
and thou hear not?

Now that we may eschew these iniquities, let us see first the fruitlesness of
this course; though we roar all like Bears, and mourn like Doves, it does not
better us, nor abate our afflictions. So is it causeless, for thy plagues are
the just punishments for our sins: and it is the Lord's mercy that we are not
consumed (as said the Church in Babylon) and that we are living. And why should
a living man complain for the punishment of his sins? for that we are alive is
more than we deserve. That thou give us our life for a prey; for we know we
are all sinners, and our sins exceed our punishments. It was never so bad, but
it might have been worse with us; and at the worst we have some mercy. For
David says, I know that of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me. In thus
murmuring we overlook all Gods mercies. As Haman, when he had reckoned all his
advancements yet said, all this is nothing so long as Mordecai the Jew veiled
not to him. In this we show our exceeding great pride, which makes us think all
that God has given us is no more than our due.

In this is direct rebellion against our God, and denying the Lord, and his
justice, and his holiness: all which blasphemies are hereby committed, and God
summoned to the creatures bar, and we condemn him of injustice.

LORD, heal us of these our iniquities, and reform our complaints, that we may
have none but filial complaints to thy self, as our Blessed Lord Jesus, who
said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And whatever we suffer, to say
with Jeremy, in his expostulation, Lord, thou art Righteous, yet let me reason
with thee; Why does the ungodly prosper? And in all extremity of afflictions,
retain this thought of God; that he is righteous and good: And let our
complaints of the instruments of our afflictions be mixed with prayers for
them, as Stephens were. And let us strive to bring up our wills to God's will,
and to submit all to thee, saying, as our Savior did, Lord, if it be possible
let this cup pass from me, Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done.

And, that thou may remove thy afflicting hand, and thy Rod, and thy
servants sins, and punishments may be removed; let us first amend our lives,
and forsake our sins: Search and try our ways to find out the sins we lie
under: For thou have said, If thy people which are in Captivity shall bethink
themselves, and turn unto thee, thou will help them; but if when thou
hearknest, thou hear no man speak righteously, or to say what have I done?
how can thou repent of the punishment when we repent not of our sins? Let us
therefore remember from whence we are fallen, and let us turn again to the
Lord, and forsake our wicked ways, lest thou say to us as to Israel thou
sayedst (10 Judge. 10.) You have forsaken me, go and cry unto the Gods that ye
have served. And having tried our ways, and forsaken our wickedness, let us in
humble, holy, fervent prayer, lift up our hearts with our hands to our God in
the Heavens. Saying, we have transgressed and rebelled but thou have pardoned.
Thus Davi'd Princes took counsel against him but he gave himself to prayer, and
thus the Mariners in the storm to Jonas, awake thou sluggard and call upon the
name of thy God. And then our God will save us, as he did the Israelites in
Babylon; under Ahasuerus, when commissions were out to slay them. And his hand
is not shortened to us, neither has he forgotten to be gracious to them who
confess their sins with their aggravations, as the Prophet does, we have
transgressed and rebelled. And justify God, as Ezra. Thou have punished us less
then our iniquities have deserved. Made upon hearing of a Sermon to the same
effect.

LORD, whatever duties I perform unto thee, let me do them from the principle
of love, and not of custom, or necessity to silence the natural or awakened
conscience, since thou acceptest the will more than the gift, as thou did the
poor widows two mites; and it is this that perfumes our Sacrifices, and it is
thi^ that thy word calls the fulfilling the law. And all that thou have
required of us is contained in thi^ (as it is written) what does the Lord
require of thee, but that thou love the Lord thy God? and my Son give me thy
heart. O Lord God take this poor worthless heart, too good for the World, and
those brutish pleasures which we so willingly give it to, and eagerly, and
earnestly affect, but not any way good enough for thee, who by thy bounty, and
beneficence to us, every day do oblige us more than all we have, or can do
will requite; but the world can do no such things for us; and if beauty,
excellency, worth, wisdom, kindness, beneficence, parentage, free love, pardon;
or any other motive whatsoever would prevail to win, and allure us, in thee it
is. I will therefore resolve to devote my affections to thee, and ever to begin
my meditation in the morning when I awake, with the sweet remembrance of thy
undeserved kindness to me. When we were cast out in our blood, in the open
field, in the day of our nativity, when no Eye pitied us, to wash us, swaddle
us, salt us, bath us, and bind us up, then thou passedst by, and castedst thy
eye of love upon us, and did all these things for us and nourishedst us, and
broughst us up, and then the time of love was, and thou made us beautiful,
and comely in thy own righteousness, and marriedst us to thy self, and
bestowedst upon us thy self: And all that is thine: And all that are thine. And
all this did thou to us, as a stranger passing by, and unconcerned, for what
had our perishing been to thee? but thou as the good Samartan, did freely
pity us; nay, while we were thy enemies thou did all this for us, shall not
all this love move us? nor, is this all? Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what the Lord has
prepared for them that love him. If we consider the particular benefits we have
received from the hand of God, and how highly we valued them, and earnestly
sought them before we had them, and the great evils we have been deliverd from,
and how much we feared them, and how restless we were in the fear, till we were
delivered from them, we shall admire thy goodness, and love thee with
admiration. And if we consider thy excellency, we may love, and admire the
perfection, and beauty of thee; and thine infinite wisdom, and power in all
thy works, in the Heavens, in the earth, and in the ocean, in the Sun, Moon,
Stars, the Seasons of the year the living creatures, and in the smallest of
them. O Lord, since we cannot but see all loveliness, excellency and
desirableness in thee, let our first, and last meditations begin, and end the
the day with thee, eager to take the first opportunity of approaching thy
throne, and as loath to leave the sweet contemplation of thy exelencies and
goodness.

O Lord God almighty, thy holy word teaches us, That except we eat thy Sons
body, and drink his blood, we have no life in us. And that whosoever eats his
flesh, and drinks his blood has eternal life. ( Joh. 6.53, 54.) Give us
worthily to receive this Sacrament, that we may have eternal life. Give us to
come to it with grace in our heart, that our graces may be increased, and
strengthened, as by the food of our souls, as the body is by the food of the
body; which is not betterd by food, if it be not living; no more can our souls
be, if we be dead in trespasses and sins: and as the body turns the most
wholesome nourishment to its hurt, to diseases, if the stomach be full of ill
humors; so our souls shall be worse, (as Judas was) for these holy Sacraments,
if we come not to them prepared with repentance. Therefore as the Lord was
pleased to wash his Disciples feet, before he gave them the Sacrament of his
body, and blood, that they might be clean, and fit for the perception of these
mysteries; so according to this example, let thy faithful people prepare
themselves with repentance, and perfect charity; and if we remember that our
neighbor has any thing against us, ler us leave our gift at the Altar, and
go, and be first reconciled to our neighbor, and then perform our Sacrifice to
God; and apprehending and discerning the Lord's body, that we commit no
irreverence. And as our souls are prepared, so let us prepare our bodies, as
thy servant David, when he eat the show bread (1 Samuel 21.5.) answered the
Priest. Women had been kept from them three days, and the vessels of the young
men were holy. Let our bodies be sanctified by fasting, temperance, abstinence,
prayer, and humiliation, lest as the Ark of the Covenant, by which the Lord
conveyed the greatest benefits to the Israelites, being taken by the
Philistines, brought to them the greatest calamities, and so it did to Vzzah,
for but touching it irreverently. In like manner these heavenly gifts, if we
eat them unworthily, shall prove our damnation, and if they who but touched the
hem of his garments, or received him into their house; received such benefits,
shall not they who receive him into their souls be healed of all their
infirmities? and as the ancient martyrs, by receiving these mysteries were
strengthened to undergo all that tyranny could lay upon them. Let them in like
manner strengthen us against all that Satan, and the world can do against us.
And as the daily Infirmities of our body are helped by our bodily nourishment,
so let our Infirmities of our souls by this our Spiritual nourishment be
relieved, and us be satisfied and delighted therewith as with heavenly manna. O
Lord, sacrifice and offerings, and burnt offerings thou would not have, but
thou gave a body to thy only begotten Son, that he should offer up himself,
in whom thou art well pleased. And this Sacrament was instituted by him in
Commemoration of his death, and the acceptable Sacrifice of his life for the
sins of the world. Lord by his death and Sacrifice of his life unto thee, which
we hereby celebrate, be reconciled unto us. This is that pure Sacrifice which
the Saints shall offer up unto thee in every place.

LORD, since thou turnest the malice of men, and the unjustice which they do
thy Saints to the advantage either of their secular concerns, as Joseph's
imprisonment was, or of their souls, Lord enable me to suffer wrong, and to
take it patiently, to suffer railings and reviling as David did Shemei's
railing, saying, If the Lord has said to Shemei, curse David, who shall say,
why have thou done so? So let him curse, for who can tell whether the Lord will
requite good for his railing. If I loath the fool in them, I must not act it my
self by returning the like. Let me consider that by patience I possess my Soul,
and that it is better to suffer wrongfully, than as an evil doer, since it is
the will of God that we should suffer, and let our graces be exercised hereby.
And let us consider him who endured such contradiction of sinners, Jesus our
Lord, lest we faint, and be weary in our mind, for the consideration of his
suffering such reproach and the frequent remembrance of him has efficacy, and
virtue to strengthen and support us, who are willing to be conformable to his
sufferings; but we had rather that this cup might pass from us.

LORD whenever we fall into any sin, we find immediately that we have lost our
own innocence, and thy favor; so that we cannot go about our affairs with that
quietness, and peace, and serenity of mind as before we did, and in all that we
do we fear it will have but bad success, because we dare not look up to thee
for a blessing. Lord, give us to consider this, when we are tempted, that we
may fear sin more, and make it out to our understandings, how we do by sin
crucify again unto our selves the Lord Jesus, and put him to an open shame; for
we are all ready to pronounce an Anathema upon the Crucifiers of our Lord;
therefore let us not suffer these his Crucifiers to live.

He that sees in secret, he will reward thee openly. Let this encourage us to
frequent Prayers, and duties. But O Lord our services are so few and so slight,
and perfunctory, and sinful, while our hearts go after our covetousness, and
lusts, so that we forget before whom we are, and what we are doing, and so our
duties are sacrilege, and our services, provocations, sins, vain oblations,
abominations, filthy rags, like Nadab and Abihu's strange fire, like the
offering of the lame, and blind, when we have a male in our Flock, so that thou
may justly deal with us, as Pilate did with the Gallilaeans, whose blood he
mingled with their sacrifice. What reward then can we expect? O Lord, we
beseech thee though our prayers are sinful, yet accept them offered up in the
Golden censer of Jesus our Mediator, which is full of Incense, which are the
Prayers of the Saints, and let these filty rags be washed in his blood, and
then they will be clean, and white as Snow, and then thou may reward them;
but yet that reward is thy free mercy, therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto
us but to thy name is all the praise; for what can we do, for which thou
should reward us with so many mercies here, and with life eternal? Any one
of thy mercies is of more value then all our services could deserve or requite,
if we should continue in the duties of prayer, and praising thee night and day,
all our lives, for we owe thee all we have, or can do. It is thine; as we are
thy creatures, and we were but unprofitable Servants after we had done all we
can, and we have need of an almighty Redeemer. Then let us not murmr if the
Lord does delay to hear us. Neither let us say, it is in vain to serve the Lord.
Let us consider also, that thou do delay out of mercy, to try our patience,
and perseverance, and other graces, and to make us more servent, or may be
because thou will not reward us with temporal blessings, but eternal, which is
far better, and let us not press, or be importunate to receive our reward here,
lest we go without the eternal reward, but let us be willing to trust God,
though he delay.

LET me not come near to that which may be a temptation, or if a temptation
come upon me unawares, let me not say in my heart, I shall be strong enough to
resit it, and so trust to my own strength; but let me have grace to observe
those ways, and methods of resisting sin, as thou have appointed in thy word.
Therefore let me fly immediately from the temptation as Joseph fled from his
Mistress leaving his Cloak.

If by chance I fall into the Company of Drunkards, let me not say, I shall
preserve my sobriety, because I love that, and hate that loathsome vice of
beastly intemperance, but let me avoid them, and not look upon the Wine, when
it moves it self right, and gives a pleasant color in the Cup; or if it
should be so, that I have no inclination of my self to this, or any other sin,
yet let me not therefore venture my self upon the temptation, but let me fear
sin always, considering how foully Noah, and Lot fell; let me never be found
standing or walking in the way of sinners, nor sitting in their seat; but let
me be always found in the way of God. And what is said of the adulterous Woman,
whoever touches her shall not be innocent; let me fear the same in every
temptation, and avoid the least meddling with it, or approaches to it; and as it
is also said concerning the same, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, pass
away; so let my practice be in all other temptations. And as it is said of
Gluttony, for remedy of it, if thou be a man given to thy appetite, set a
Knife to thy throat. So in all other temptations, let me lay violent hands upon
the peccant member; if my right eye offend me, let me pluck it out. Lord, thou
know that I am resolved not to sin to avoid the greatest suffering,
therefore teach me wisdom that I may prevent and guard my self against all
provocations to sin; that I may not draw upon my self a necessity of suffering.

MAKE us to accept Jesus Christ our Savior upon his own terms, as he offers
himself to us in the Holy Gospel, to be our King, to rule us, and reign over
us, our Prophet, to teach and instruct us, as well as to be our high Priest to
atone and sacrifice for our sins. Let us not think to have the privileges of
Christians, without the duties. Make it to be a greater pleasure to us to deny
our selves in sins, then ever it was to give our selves up to them, that we may
be meet to receive Heaven, into which flesh and blood cannot enter. Let the
Holy Spirit inflame us always with that divine fervent affection to God, that
inspired the Spouse when she said, or ever I was aware, my Soul was like the
Chariots of Aminadab. O sweet Christ! do thou put grace into our hearts by that
sweet voice behind us, saying, this is the way, walk you in it; for thou only
art our great Prophet and teacher who can make us learn, and our high Priest
and mighty Savior, delivering us from our sins, and making us as innocent by
thy atonement, as if we had never offended; for those whom thou make free,
they are free indeed; if thou will not take away the being of sin in us in this
life, yet assist us with thy grace to subdue it deliver us out of the power of
darkness, and the Prince of darkness. And what benefits thou have purchased for
us by thy death, apply them to us by thy intercession; deliver us from death,
and give us the Crown of life, which thou have promised to all them that love
thee; and since thou art desirous of our salvation; and it is because we will
not come unto thee, that we have not life. O Christ, make us a willing people,
as thou have promised, for our salvation is wholly from thee. But our damnation
from our own wills, and if we perish, our blood is upon our own heads. O sweet
Christ, our Prophet, and teacher, teach us by thy word, and thy Spirit the
things that belong to our peace. Guide me by thy Spirit, and then bring me to
glory.

LORD, what is there in us for which thou shouidest desire our love? Lord in
thee is every thing that is lovely, therefore ought we to choose thee for the
object of our love. But we seek that happiness in the World, which we cannot
find any where but in thee, and having found naught but emptiness, vanity, and
the loss of all our labor in the pursuance of content, peace, and happiness in
the affairs, and matters of the world, let us at last betake our selves to
seek it in thee, and thy ways; to learn of thee, to take thy yoke upon us,
that we may find rest to our souls.

LORD, what pretense can sinners have for which they cast off thy yoke, and
will not have thee to rule over them, upon whose daily benefits they live? when
they rebel against their Princes, and shake off their yoke, it is either for
their lewd lives and wickedness that they judge them unworthy to rule,
therefore scorn to be subject unto them: Or for their oppression that they are
not able to bear their grievous burdens, but what iniquity have sinners found
in thee? thou have put the Question to them, but they can find no answer.

LORD, since thou have showed me that every Saint must live in the same
holiness of life that thy Servants the Apostles attained, and St. Paul, said of
himself, that he was crucified with Christ, yet he lived, yet not he, but
Christ lived in him, and he lived that life by the faith of Christ who gave
himself for him; give us thy grace in like manner to crucify our selves to the
World, and to live no more to it, nor to our selves but to live by Christ in
us, so as we may be said not to live. And if thou give us to live the life of
faith, and not to the World, and live to thee let us not impute this our well
doing to our selves for of our selves we cannot think a good thought, but to
Christ who lives in us, who only can enable us thus to live.

In all our distresses, let us pray to the Lord, and use the means, as when
the Arabians, Ammonites, and Ashdodites conspired against Jerusalem, 't is said
( Nehemiah. 4.9.) Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch
against them day and night. But let us not like King Asa, seek to Physicians in
our sickness, and not to God.

LORD while I am supported by thy Spirit I shall be able to live blamelesly, as
Lot did in the midst of Sodom; but the strongest of thy servants will fall as
he afterward did, if thou withdraw the Assistance of thy Spirit, and shall be
as that Apostle: who denied the Lord Jesus Christ whom before he sought for,
and resolved to dye for, though he was the Rock. Therefore let me never be
confident, lest thou leavest me as thou did him. And when I hear of others
miscarriages, let me be thankful to thee for holding me up, and ascribe it to
thee, as the Angels in the Book of the Revelations, are said to cast their
Crowns at thy feet; and let us learn not to judge uncharitably of those that
are overcome by temptations.

LORD, when we pray unto thee, our prayers are so interrupted with worldly and
sinful thoughts; and the things we pray for being mostwhat temporal mercies and
deliverances from bodily evils, they are not such prayers as our own reason can
think worthy thy acceptance. But Lord, though we offer thee the lame, and the
blind (if we have no better in our flock, thou will accept it; therefore I will
not cease to pray unto thee, though I cannot approve my own prayers; for thus I
come unto thee without money, or price, that thy gifts may be free.

O that I could account the corruption of my nature to be my misery, as Saint
Paul complaining of the law of his members warring against the law of his mind;
so that he could not do the good he would, cries out, Miserable man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of sin? And make me as sensible of the
strength of it as this holy man was.

LORD, if I fall into sin, let me not be insensible of it; as the adulterous
woman, who eats, and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done (...)
wickedness: But like as David, after he had sinned, and the Prophet Nathan had
told him, God had done away his sin; yet his grief and sorrow for having
offended God, gave him no rest; so that he wept day and night. So let my sins
grieve me as often as I remember them.

Meditation.
SINCE the Apostle Peter, wherein he was confident of his strength above all
others, immediately fell, I will ascribe my standing to God only, and praise
him who holds me up: And pray with David, Lord, hold thou me up, and I shall be
safe: And watch and take heed to my self, and always fear lest I fall; since I
know that I stand not by my own strength; for corruption of nature is as strong
in me as in others; and the tempter the same to me as to them; but the Spirit
of God only makes the difference; therefore I will praise God who upholds me,
and keeps my feet from falling; for it is not I that live the life of faith,
but Christ that lives in me; therefore with the Elders in the Revelations, I
will cast my Glory and Crown at his feet, from whom I have received it. And the
consideration of this my weakness, shall teach me charity toward those that
are overcome with temptation, that I may restore them in the spirit of
meekness; but not judge them, lest I condemn my self; as David did himself in
the Parable of the yew Lamb: And as Judah condemned himself in condemning
Tamar. And let me not flatter my self, like the Scribes and Pharisees, who
said, If we had been in our Fathers days, we would not have been partakers
with them in killing the Prophets.

LORD, establish thou me with thy free Spirit, whereby I may stand in the hour
of Temptation, and run, the ways of thy Commandments freely without rub or let:
without dullness, and without danger of stumbling, or falling, that the Spirit
may be willing, though the flesh be weak. And with Paul, when he was full of
the Spirit, he was content not only to be bound, but to die for Christ; so may
I also since thou love only the cheerful giver. And as it said, 5 of Judges.
9. Thy heart is toward the governors of the people that offered themselves
willingly. So make me always to cast off readily and freely every tempter that
goes about to seduce my affections from thee, disdaining to harken to them.

LORD, give me to avoid not only gross sins, but also the smallest and first
degrees of sins, viz. To turn away my eyes from beholding vanity. Not to look
upon the wine when it moves it self right in the cup; to make a covenant with
my eyes, not to look upon a maid, gives me understanding in the way of God that
I may know these small degrees of sin to be sins, and the danger of them, to
avoid them, and all other of the like nature. Then I shall know that I have a
New heart, and that thou have put thy Spirit into me, which I desire to know
above all things.

LORD, let not my heart deceive me, either making me think that I have more
grace, than in truth I have, as Peter's did him, so as that he thought, though
all men denied thee, yet he should not; or by making me think I have not those
corruptions that I have, as Hasael, 2 King. 1.13. When the Prophet told him
what cruelties he would commit upon the Israelites he answered, is thy Servant a
Dog? Yet did he commit the same; but let me know my own weakness, and vileness,
that I may not trust to my own strength in any temptation, but let me rejoice
in God my strength, and know that thou art my strength, and that thou only
hold me from falling, and keep my feet from slipping, and orderest my
goings, and make me to run the ways of thy Commandments. And inclinest my
heart to thy testimonies. O hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. Keep thy
Servant also from presumptuous sins, and from the sins of infirmities, and let
me always know my own insufficiency, weakness, and corruptions, and watch, and
pray against them, not only against gross sins which the heathen, and
unbelievers detest, as drunkeness, swearing, murder, and adultery, theft, and
the like, but against every degree of sinfulness, and every vain and lustful
thought, and idle word, unseemly gesture, which I can easily espy as motes in
another eye, while I hardly discern the beam in my own, but do thou O Lord,
take away from me this blindness of heart, with the effects and consequences
thereof, by causing the day star to arise in my heart.

LORD, let my former experiences which I have had of thy goodness, beget a
confidence in me in all dangers, as it did in David, when he went to encounter
Goliath. He remembered the slaughter of the Lion, and the Bear, and concluded,
the Philistin should be like one of them. And breaks out saying, though 10000
men should set themselves against me round about, yet will I not be afraid; and
though as many Devils also are against me, let me not be afraid; let me
remember thy promise, saying, call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shaltpraise me. And let me not rely upon, nor trust in
the outward means, the arm of flesh, though I do make use of it, as Nehemiah
whenhe builded the walls of Jerusalem, he set watches, and they took their
arms, with their spades, so wisdom teaches, but yet not to trust to the Sword,
or think that our bow shall help us, for so did that Philistine. Wherefore said
David thou come to me with thy sword, and thy spear, but I come to thee, in
the name of my God.

Lord, teach me the power of prayer, especially mingled with faith. And to
consider, that thou have heard the wicked when they have sought thee, as Ahab,
because he walked heavily, and mourned, thou would not bring the evil in his
days. And thou heardest Manasses, and thy poor people that cry unto thee in
their trouble thou deliverest out of their distress, as exiles, prisoners,
Mariners, and sick persons, when their soul faints in them, and they cry
unto thee, being at their wits end. And thy own children, though men of
passions, and like infirmities to thy Servant, as it is said that Elias was who
prevailed with thee. And Moses when he prayed, the Isralites prevailed, when he
ceased to pray the Amalakites prevailed. And Joshua prevailed and caused the
Sun to stand still, and altered the course of nature, Isa. 37.21. So Hezekiah
when he prayed against Senacherib. So Asa 2 Chronicles. 14. When the Ethiopians
invaded Juda with a thousand thousand, he prayed saying, Lord it is nothing
with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power, help us,
O Lord our God, for we rest on thee. So the Lord smote the Ethiopians, and they
fled, and the people of Juda spoiled them. So Jona in the whales belly. Lord
let me not regard iniquity in my heart, lest thereby my prayers be hindered, so
that thou will not hear them, neither let me ask any thing to consume it on my
lusts. But grant that I may lift up holy hands in thy name, and that I may pray
with humility like the Publican, who smote upon his breast, saying, Lord be
merciful unto me a sinner, and not like the Pharisee. And with fervency crying
mightily to the Lord, Jona 2.8. And with perseverance, crying night and day
unto thee, Luke 10.11. And let me pay my thanks unto thee for the things thou
have already bestowed upon me, and say, I will call upon the Lord who is worthy
to be praised, and so shall I be saved from my enemies, and give me that
confidence he expressed; let me know that the Lord is my light, and salvation,
and I shall be able to say as follows, of whom then shall I be afraid.

Meditation.
If ye by the Spirit to mortify the deeds of the Flesh, ye shall live. Let me
not think that I can resist the motions of lust, and sin, by reason, or moral
arguments, but only by the Spirit of God, and let me not think that I have
attained, but let me press forward to greater degrees of grace.

LORD, show me how bountifully thou rewardest every office which we do to thee;
for as thou rewardedst the Woman who poured the Balsom upon thy head with this
honor, that wherever the Gospel should be preached, it should be recorded of
her; so do thou requite, and reward every Cup of cold Water that is given for
thy sake: make me sensible of this, that my charity may not be so cold, as many
times I feel it, nor my services, and duties to thee, so few, and lukewarm, and
lifeless, but I may always abound in the work of the Lord. Make me willing,
Lord, to suffer the reproach of Christ, and to endure that contempt which is
usually put upon holiness, and the professors of it. As David did when Michal
scoffed him for dancing before the Ark; as also when the rebukes of them who
reproach thee, fellupon him. And again, he complained that the Judges, those
that sat in the gate, spoke against him, and the Drunkards made Songs on him.
Accordingly as Jeremy also complained, saying, I am a Derision daily, every one
mocks me. And the Apostles sped no better, than when they had most of the
Spirit, when the holy Ghost descended upon them, and they heard every one speak
in his own language; the ignorant people, said, they were full of new wine. And
our blessed Savior when he cast out the Devils, they blasphemously said, he
did it by Beelzebub, and he suffered, bearing the reproach of the shameful death
of the Cross. Let us be strengthened by these examples, and remember, that he
has pronounced them blessed whom men revile, and speak all manner of evil of
falsely for his name sake: Considering that it is certain we shall be reviled
and slandered for his name sake, and that our well bearing it is an evidence to
us of our soundness, and integrity in religion, since the hypocrite may be
reproached for his seeming holiness, but rather than suffer the persecution for
it, will fall away. Since the men of this generation will not be laughed out of
their gain, interests and callings, the assurance that we have of reigning,
with Christ will make us willing to suffer.

LORD, show me the evil fruit, and ill consequence of bad company that I may
fly them. How that the Israelites, by being mingled with the Heathen, learned
their works, for which they suffered. How that he that walks with the wise,
shall be wise. But for David to dwell with Mesech, and in the Tents of Kedar,
'twas his calamity and woe, for it is said in the word, that they sleep not
unless they do mischief: But they are blessed who walk not in their council,
nor stand in their way, nor sit in their seat; and are the Companions of them
that fear thee. Let me prefer solitude before vain Company, considering how it
helps devotion, the Soul being free from those divertisments which such company
procures. So our Savior separated himself from company, when he prayed; and
has commanded us, when we pray, to enter into our Closets. So Peter went out
from the company, and wept bitterly; and so in the Psalm we are directed:
Commune with your own heart in your Chamber, and be still. So Isaac walked
forth to meditate. But in vain and lewd Company, the righteous Soul cannot but
be grieved with their unclean conversation. It is a Hell to thy Servants, as
the Worldly man's conversation is a burden; they are so busy about many
affairs, that they mind not Mary's choice: but to be in thy Courts one day is
better than a thousand. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the house of my God,
than to dwell in the Tents of ungodliness, Psalm. 84.10, 11.

LET not my confession be without contrition, lest it prove but as Saul's, or
Judas's, but as Peter's was when he went out and wept bitterly, which will the
better be effected, if I take the present time, as he immediately when he heard
the Cock crow, went out; for the Devil deceives us with promises of future
repentance that he may steal away the present opportunity. Therefore we are
commanded to exhort one another while it is called to day: remembering the
unhappy condition of the Cripple at the Pool of Bethesda, who had none to help
him into the water when it was moved, till another got before him; and Felix
(in the Acts) trembling at the preaching of Paul, put him off for a farther
hearing, to a more convenient time. But to day is the time to hear thy voice.
And if thou call'st, and we will not hear, then we shall call, and thou will
not hear. While God calls, one tear will do us more good, than an Ocean of
tears, when it is too late. And for what use has God given man his tears, but
to weep for his sins; then let us with David, make our Tears not our Physic,
but our meat, and drink, which we cannot do, if we extenuate our sins, or
excuse them.

LORD, if thou go not forth with our armies, we are put to shameful flight.
If thou assist us not in our callings, our labouurs are but in vain: except the
Lord keep the City, the Watchman watches in vain. In vain we rise early, and
go late to bed, except the Lord give us his blessing. Therefore will we seek
the Lord, and his blessing, upon our Labors. And though we find no worth in
our prayers, for which the Lord should hear them, or reward them, but punish us
for them, yet nevertheless it is his command that we should offer up our weak
services to him, and he has promised to hear us for the things we ask for in
his Sons name, and in obedience to that command. And in the faith we give to
his promise, we seek to him, to assist us, and to let his presence go with us.
For the Lord has showed us by frequent experiences; That those who have most
means, do not seldom miss their purpose, or if they by Gods blessing do
attchieve their purposes, yet it is frequently without the use of those means,
by some accident; that it might be seen to be of God, and not of man, and our
unbelief be convinced. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, who has often brought to
pass my desires without any considerable means by me used. And all that is
within me praise his holy name, because he has accepted my two Mites, my
worthless Prayers; for his mercy endures for ever.

Meditation.
When I am tempted to any sin, let me consider how I have loathed my self
heretofore when I have been overcome by any lust or sensual pleasure. If I have
at any time yielded to the pleasures of any of my senses, which is all that the
world can offer; though it has been but to a very small degree, as to drink
one glass more than the necessity of nature, or a competent refreshing
required; for though it makes not drunkenness, yet it sets the mind too much at
liberty from that strictness and watchfulness, that mortification, and
crucifying the flesh, and self-denial that the Scripture requires; or if I give
way to a lustful thought, or glance, or action whereby my mind is carried to
effeminate meditations from the more serious and virtuous considerations which
an honest mind should meditate, how do I seem sordid to my self, and degraded
from my pristine excellency. And though the person whose beauty, excellency,
and perfections drew me aside thereto be incomparable, yet when I consider the
baseness of the last acts of lust, and fruition, to which all this tends, and
serves, how poorly do I think of all those allurements of beauty, and parts,
carriage, wit, and other excellencies, since they are the motives and
incentives to concupiscence. And I no sooner perceive, that I have yielded too
much to any temptation of lust, or covetousness, or any other whatsoever, but I
presently perceive that my honor is gone from me; or if I know of any other
who has yielded to any temptation, I think the same of them. All these
arguments, and reasons are not sufficient to restrain from relapsing into the
very same offenses, and sensualities; for sense with one glance of the eye
captivates the affections in a moment, whereas reason and strength of Argument
prevails only upon deliberation; so that I cannot expect to stand by my own
strength, unless thou Lord hold me up I shall fall one day by these my
spiritual enemies. And it is by thy power only that we are kept from the evil
of the World. Therefore as the eyes of a Servant are to the hands of his
Master, so shall my eyes be to thee. And I will continually pray unto thee, for
supportation, and strength, since thy strength is perfected in our weakness:
why then should my weakness discourage me? and for grace, and faith in thy
promises, since grace alone is sufficient for us: and faith alone is the
victory whereby we may overcome the World, that by faith I may look upon the
infinite joys of Heaven, and contemn the vain and base joys of this life, or
else be terrified with the horrid torments thou have threatened to the
disobedient, and fear to do evil.

LET me think it greater pleasure to resist lust, or any sensuality, than to
yield to it; for if I resist, I satisfy and delight my reason, which delights
in manly, noble, resolute actions, and in eschewing the contrary viz.
Effeminate, sensual pleasures, which the mind does oppose, and disdain as
brutish, and below it, for how is it possible that the mind should be
satisfied, contented, or delighted with the objects, and delights of the
senses, any more then the senses can enjoy, or take delight in the objects of
the mind or intellect, since the senses are of the Brutish nature of the
meanest creature, and the mind and understanding is of the divine nature of the
Creator, and since the Saints are said to be made partakers of the Divine
nature, let us endeavor to partake of the Divine nature, by holiness of life.
And if we have received Christ in his teaching and in his Sacrament of his
supper to walk in him, that our life may grow out of the death of Christ. Not
to be unprofitable Servants, as Israel was said to be, an empty vine, but let
us be ever sowing the fruits of righteousness, that we may reap accordingly,
and be studious to know the things which belong to our peace before they be hid
from our eyes, and to do them too, lest thou remove our light from us,
remembering that if we be like the dry, and unprofitable chaff, we shall be
burned with unquenchable fire. But the Gospel brings forth fruit in all the
World, Colos. 6.1.

LORD, if thou do but seem to have forsaken me, so that when I think of thee
I don't perceive comfort, but fear, though I have all the outward comforts and
all the pleasures which the World can afford, I am in horror in the midst of my
pleasures, I will therefore walk in the ways of righteousness, for her ways
are ways of peace, and all her paths pleasantness; and this will bring a man
peace at the last. Blessed are they that do righteousness always, they walk
with thee, and have sweet communion with thee, and thou will come in, and sup
with them, and abide with them; then has their soul fullness of joy, but I fear
I grieve thy holy Spirit continually in this, that I am carnal, and do not live
by faith above the World; Lord, that I could live as those whose conversation
is in Heaven, whose treasure is there, and they are always adding to this
treasure, who are spiritually wise, whose hearts are fixed upon thee, and go
not astray as the Israelites, did in the wilderness, forgetting God their
Savior, who had done wonders for them; but they thought not of his hand, nor
remembered what wonders he had wrought for them, but lust came upon them in the
desert, wherefore the Lord thought to have destroyed them, had not Moses stood
in the gap to turn away his wrath.

If we in like manner forget thy mercys and require meat for our lusts, we fear
thy wrath will be kindled against us to destroy us, but we trust that we have a
greater than Moses, Jesus Christ, to turn away thy wrath by his offering up his
life as a ransom for us, and bearing the iniquities of us all. Let my life be
hid with Christ in God, that when Christ who is our life shall appear, we also
may appear with him in Glory. Lord, let me remember how scarcely the righteous
are saved, and with what difficulty as it were by the gates of Hell, how
difficulty St. Paul keept his body under, fearing lest while he preached to
others himself should become a reprobate; and give me that spiritual puissance
and holy fortitude to bear my self undaunted with difficulties in the heavenly
warfare.

O Lord God, my afflictions are sometimes full of horror, they seem to come
from the same justice by which thou castest the wicked into Hell. And they are
to me like Hell; whilst they so dismay and terrify me, and thou seem to
have forsaken me in my afflictions and temptations; and I have no hope that
thou will ever remove them, but that thou have sent them to confound me. And I
can hardly refrain from the expression of the wicked Cain That my afflictions
are greater than I am able to bear. And being at my wits end, I am afraid that
thou will not enable me to bear them, and have rejected me as thou did Saul,
and have taken thy holy Spirit from me, and that thou art mine enemy, and I
fear I am unreconciled to thee because I don't feel filial affections to thee
when thou chastisest me; neither do I say thou have chastised me less then I
deserve, but I am ready to murmr, and to have hard thoughts, to think it more
than I deserve, because I think it greater than any other man's affliction; also
because I find thou have been more ready to hear the prayers of others for
deliverances, than thou art to hear mine: As that of Hanna, when she was
despised for barrenness, she prayed to thee once, and thou heardest her, and
her countenance was no more sad. And at the third time thou answeredst Paul,
when he desired to be delivered from the thorn in the flesh, and did give him
grace sufficient for the temptation: But as for me, I mourn, being desolate,
and take no comfort night and day, and thou regardest not. But now that I
consider that the man who was according to thine own heart, (when he had
grieved the holy Spirit) as I pray God I never more may do, cried out as I do,
The pains of Hell came about me, the snares of death overtook me. Take not thy
holy Spirit rom me. And again, From my youth up thy terrors have I suffered
with a troubled mind. And, a horrible trembling has overwhelmed me. And, My
confusion is daily before me, and the shame of my face has covered me. I take
it to be the portion of the Saints, to be much afflicted; and to go to Heaven
by the gates of Hell.

O show me, Lord, wherein I may enjoy my self, and find satisfaction, and
content without remorse, regret, or subsequent sadness. If it be in any action
or contemplation of mine, it must be in religious duties, when I serve thee
with a quiet, undistracted, well composed spirit, and am sensible that I enjoy
thy favor, and approbation. But certain I am, that I could never enjoy my self
so as not to be sensible of emptiness, unprofitableness, wearisomness,
unsatisfactoriness, desire of change, tediousness, and vanity, and vexation. In
all those things which the natural man can do, think, or speak, or enjoy,
unless the Spirit directs me in them to spiritual ends, to the honor and glory
of God. This therefore makes a clear conviction, That the happiness of man, and
the end for which he was made, is to glorify God in keeping his commandments
with an upright heart. And to love him with all the soul, herein only can man
find true joy, content, peace, rest, quiet, satisfaction and enjoyment for his
soul. Let me be always satisfied, delighted and ravished with these joys; let
my soul be satisfied as with marrow, and fatness, when my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips; let me sit under thy shadow with delight, and let thy
fruit be pleasant to my taste, even thine only, and let me be ravished with the
joys of thy house; let the breasts of thine ordinances satisfy me at all times;
let me be always ravished with thy love. With joy let me draw water out of the
wells of salvation, and make me joyful in the house of prayer. Let my soul
thirst for thee, and my flesh long after thee, even as the ^art pants after
the water Brooks, so let my soul long after thee, my God. Let my delight be in
thee, and in those rivers of pleasure that are at thy right hand for ever more.
Let me set me set my affections on things above, where Christ Jesus sits at
the right hand of God for ever, and take of my affections from things below,
and my conversation, and let it be above. Let all my fresh springs be in thee,
at midnight let me rise and give thanks unto thee because of thy righteous
judgments. Let me be a companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy
commandments.

Let me be assured of thy love to me by all thy spiritual and temporal mercys
and means of grace, and hope of glory. And let me be assured of my reciprocal
love to thee by my willing obedience to all thy commandments. That I may know
that my beloved is mine, and I am his. And if at any time thou hear my
prayer, and grantest my request; let me consecrate those things unto thee,
which I obtain by prayer, as Hanna did her Son. O Blessed Lord Jesus, these
sweet kisses are better than wine.

SINCE all who will live Godly must suffer persecution, and it is said that if
we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, prepare, fit and strengthen
me to undergo all the troubles and afflictions of this day, and of the whole
course of my life which Satan, and the wicked, and ungodly men of the World
shall contrive against me. And let me expect every day afflictions for Christ's
sake, and reproach, and a cross, and trouble in this World, since our Hope is
not in this World, but is reserved for us in Heaven; and in this World we are
to be of all men most miserable; therefore let me not expect beds of roses
here, but to go through many tribulations, and a fiery trial; patiently waiting
for the time when the Lord shall tread down Satan under our feet: And when the
Lord shall avenge the blood of the souls that lie slain, under the Altar,
crying for vengeance upon the inhabitance of the earth, remembering that none of
all these things shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus, but we shall be conquerors over them through Christ Jesus. And
let me not be offended at the Cross of Christ, knowing that the Gospel is
offered upon the terms of self-denial, and taking up our Cross, and knowing
that thou do comfort thy Servants in all afflictions, and that as their
afflictions do abound, their consolations do much more abound; but rather let
us count it all joy when we fall into these temptations, knowing they work in
us patience, experience, hope and repentance. So David before he was afflicted
he went astray but by his afflictions learned thy Judgments, and he said, it is
good for me that I have been afflicted. And my afflictions seem not greater
than his when he cried out, Thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, my
moisture is like the drought in summer. All the day long am I afflicted, and
chastned every morning, I am dried up, and my heart is like the melting wax, my
heart pants, my strength fails me, and the light of my eyes is gone from
me; my lovers, and my friends stand afar off, and no man cares for my soul. But
Lord, I will make my prayers unto thee in an acceptable time, and call upon
thee in the time of my trouble. Lord, how long shall mine enemies triumph over
me, Lord, when will thou comfort me? Lord, as others have found thee full of
compassion, and mercy, so let me find. Think upon thy compassions which have
been ever of old. Remember not against me mine iniquitys, but do away my sins
for thy names sake.

Meditation.
I don't enough apprehend my proneness to every sin, and lust, but think my
self free from sin, and from the danger of falling, because I feel it not
stirring for the present, whereas the reason why it is so, is only because
various diversions take up my thoughts otherways, and keep out those, so that
they are but only laid asleep as it were, and are easily awaked by any
temptation, if the Lord don't strengthen me, and the least opportunity lets
them loose upon me, so that I am not able to resist them. Lord, let me watch
against all those sins that I find my nature inclined to, and against such as I
find no inclination to, but an utter aversation from, because my nature is
wholly corrupted, and it is the power of God only, that keeps me from all sorts
of sins, and temptations; therefore let me fear every temptation, and sin, and
watch against them, and pray that I enter not into any temptation, for if I
once but enter into the temptation; I am sure to fall if I have no better
support than my own strength; though the temptation be but weak, my strength is
weaker. Lord, do thou either give me more strength, or temptation less; let me
never enter the lists with this enemy but se defendendo, flying him as far as I
can; let me not desire to know what sin, or lust is, but let me love the
ignorance of it.

Lord, when I confess my sins which I have committed against so many means of
grace, thy mercies, Judgments, promises, Threatenings the testimonies of my own
conscience, of thy holy Spirit, and the testimonies of the wicked also, I must
needs acknowledge thy justice in all my punishments, and thy long suffering in
this, that thou do not confound me, nor quite cast me off, as thou did
Saul, but punishedst me less than I deserve. And I admire thy goodness in this,
that in the midst of thy wrath thou rememberest mercy, and have delivered me,
when in my affliction I sought thee; herein I rejoice; and I beseech thee Lord
make me contented to be restrained from sin by sorrow. Lord, thou art my God,
and my Lord; therefore let me acknowledge thee in all my ways; wait upon thee,
serve and obey thee; and let me not live as if I were without a God, nor
according to my own lusts, denying the Lord that bought me, as those do who
make their belly their God, or Idolize the unrighteous Mammon, and vanities of
the world, neither let me question thy power in the want of means. Thou art my
Savior and my deliverer, my Buckler, the Horn of my Salvation, and my refuge,
my Stony Rock, and my Castle, therefore let me have grace to fly unto thee in
my time of trouble, to trust in thee, in thy power, and in thy goodness, for my
refuge and defense; and stay my self upon thee, and commit my way unto thee as
unto a faithful Creator; make my Prayers continually unto thee. Thou art to thy
Servants, their hope, and strength, and present help in trouble; therefore let
not the surprise of any trouble dismay me, as if I were hopeless or helpless;
thou art the Defender of all them that put their trust in thee, mighty to save,
God all-sufficient, therefore let me walk with thee, and be perfect. O thou who
art the Rock of ages, the helper of the poor, and fatherless, helpless, and
destitute. The Fountain of living water. Let me always run unto thy fountain
for true comfort, not to broaken Cisterns. Let not the baseness of my nature,
or my sins dismay me, for thou know whereof we are made; but let me look up
to Christ, as the Israelites being stung, did to the brazen Serpent, and be
healed; Let me taste of the Tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God,
and live, even the body and blood Jesus Christ, as often a I eat of this Tree of
life in the blessed communion assure, me that I am healed of all my passed
sins. Thou Lord art life and truth, I will therefore be guided by thee, believe
in thee, and be dead to the World, and all creatures, and live unto thee, and
upon thee. In Christ let us have life, even the new life of the life of faith,
and not of sense. That the old man may dye daily. That Christ may live in us,
as the head lives in the members, and we in him by faith in the promises of
eternal life through him: As Abraham did in the Land of promise, though he had
not as yet received the earthly promise, neither did he set his heart upon it,
nor seek it, or suffer himself to be hindered by it in the persuit of his future
felicity. Thou to a believer art all that is desirable in all conditions
whatsoever, whom have I in Heaven but thee? And whom in earth that I can desire
in comparison of thee. Thy goodness is infinite, and though our sins be never
so great, yet thy thoughts exceeding our thoughts, so far as the Heaven is
higher than the earth, we may have Hope in thy mercy; because it endures for
ever; and is over all thy works. The Lord will never leave nor forsake those
that trust in him, though he suffered Daniel to be cast into the Lions Den. The
three children into the firye furnace, the sword to be put to Isaacs throat,
yet then he delivered them, for the Lord knows how to deliver his. Lot was
delivered though Sodom was burned, and so was Noah in the deluge.

As thou art the God of our strength and therefore we need not to go mourning
through fear of the enemy; so art thou our exceeding joy, whereby we are holily
transproted to rejoice in thee in singing thy praises, Psalm. 43. Praise the
Lord O my soul and all that is within me, Praise his holy name, Psalm. 103

As thou art gracious, and merciful, patient, slow to anger, ready to forgive
the sins of thy people for thy names sake, so art thou also righteous in all
thy ways, and holy in thy works. If a man will not turn, thou will whet thy
sword, and bend thy bow, thou will bring upon such all the curses written in
thy book till thou have destroyed them, for so thou have done to thine own
people the Jews, who would not believe thy threatenings to be warned thereby.
Thou who shewedst mercy to Niniveh repenting, after the judgment pronounced,
and to Ahab going mournefully when he heard the judgment threatened against his
house, (which shows that thy threatenings are conditional, viz. if we turn not)
thou likewise laidest thy hand so heavy upon thy Servant David, day and night,
that his moisture was like the drought in summer. The light of his eyes was
gone from him, he was almost consumed by means of thy heavy hand, he had no
health in his bones, nor no soundness in his flesh, his tears was his meat day
and night. All the day long was he punished and chastened every morning,
because his iniquities were gone over his head; these and many more as Eli,
Lot, and Noah are set out in the word for examples of the truth of thy
threatenings against sin though repented of. Give me therefore thy grace that I
may watch against sin, and all temptations, and occasions thereof, and against
the least degrees and beginnings of sin, and all appearance of evil, with
prayer that I entter not into temptation, and the Lord support me, and hold me
up that I fall not in temptations. And when I pray unto thee in the name of
Jesus Christ my Savior for pardon for my manifold sins. O Lord, remember that
thou have declared thy self to be the Lord, gracious, and merciful, slow to
anger, that forgivest the iniquities of thy people for thy name sake, and let
thy mercy be magnified by the greatness of my sins: my sins are more in number
than the hairs of my head. But thy mercys as infinite, thy thoughts are not like
our thoughts. For as far as the Heaven is above the earth, so far are thy
thoughts above our thoughts. And let the greatness of my Redeemers merits be
magnified by the greatness of my unworthiness. He is mighty to save. And though
our sins be as scarlet, he can make us white as snow, by his blood which he
has shed for us; for if he be Lord of all, and the World was made by him, then
was he able also to reedeem all the World that come unto God by him for
redemption; do thou but assure me that the least drop of his blood, the least
sigh of his heart, or the least degree of his humiliation, was for my sins, or
had respect unto me among the rest, and I do undoubtedly believe they are fully
pardoned, and I am saved from all the curse that is due unto them.

Lord, since thou have imputed to him my sins, for it is said that he has born
the Iniquities of us all, it is but just with thee, that I should be acquitted,
and have his rightoeusness imputed to me, else why did he suffer?

LET us then be made the righteousness of God in him, since he was (for that
end, and purpose) made sin for us, since thou have given him for a covenant to
the people, give us also to find in our selves that we have him, and with him
all those promises of grace that belong to this covenant which in him are
verified and fulfilled. With him therefore give us thy Spirit in our hearts to
cause us to walk in thy statutes, to know, and do thy judgments; cause us to
love thee with all our hearts to delight in thee, and to fear thee, to run and
not be weary, and to be holy in all our common things etc.

Of Afflictions.
Let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, are the first and second step to
happiness; therefore that we may not be so effiminately fearful to touch the
Cross (as we are) nor be so longing and licorish to gratify our selves in
whatsoever our heart desires, is this meditation.

Afflictions are Christ's School whereby he teaches his followers in the
discipline of holiness, as he is said to have learned obedience by the things
he suffered so he prescribes a suffering condition to his; and they who are not
partakers of his sufferings but are without chastisement, are said to be
bastards, and not sons of their heavenly father: so it concerns us to expect
them, and not beds of Roses, oiled paths, or the pleasures of the senses; and
that we make a sanctified use of them, for those holy ends, and purposes for
which they are sent, whether it be for our conversion from the state of nature,
and unbelief, by true and unfeigned repentance, or to renew our repentance
after some fall, to awaken us out of security, or to improve our patience, or
holiness, humility, or any, or all our graces, and so to purify us to himself,
for as soon as they have attained their end, he removes them from us, for he
does not afflict, nor grieve willingly the sons of men, to help me to make a
sanctified use of them, are these meditations.

Fides Fructifica.
1 James 4. Let patience have her perfect work.
Meditation.
LORD, teach us with thy blessed Apostles Paul, and Silas, to sing Psalms in
the midest of the Dungeon, and with the three children, when the furnace is
made three times hotter than at other times. And that we may have perfect
patience, make us sensible that the hand of God is upon us for our sins
deservedly, as the thief upon the cross was. If we have no success either in
our spiritual or Worldly affairs, let us believe that it is the hand of God
for our sins: That we have not made better use of the afflictions which God
has laid upon us, to purge us of some sin, and do not search out the causes
thereof, and try our ways, it is our sin, for his hand is streched out still;
for if we know that God chastens, and scourges every Son whom he loves, we may
then understand that with one judgment God punishes us for the sins passed,
and delivers us thereby from sin and destruction for the time to come. As
when his Servant David had sinned by numbering the people, God sent the Prophet
to him to declare his will to punish him with one of those three evils, he
cried, I have sinned, so that wherever sin is, there God detests and
punishes. The righteous shall not go unpunished. But the Sons of Ely when
their Father reproved them for their sins, it is said, They hearkened not because
the Lord would destroy them. Therefore it appears that it was a toaken of Gods
Fatherly love to David that he punished him for his sin, that he might repent
of them, and not lie in them, and die in them. But whom God suffers to run on
in sin without any crosses, and afflictions, rebukes and chastisements, they
are none of his children. Another reason why God afflicts his children, is to
take their hearts from off the love of the world, that we may use the world as
if we used it not, Jer. 45. I bring evil upon all flesh, and seek thou great
things. If any one loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. But
when we are in prosperity, we say as holy David did, Psalm. 30. Tush, I shall
never be cast down, but it follows, Thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled; he then sees his weakness, and vanity, and too much security which he
expressed in his prosperity, the Lord was pleased to withdraw the light of his
countenance that he might not set his affections upon the world, nor rejoice in
the things of the world, but in the enjoiment of God, and live upon that.

Thirdly, consider that God does suffer his people to be afflicted for the
exercise of their graces, as he did Jobs patience, hope, faith, spiritual
fortitude, and his other graces, Job 13.15. Though the Lord should kill me, yet
would I trust in him, said he in his affliction, James 1.23. Count it all joy
when you fall into temptation, Knowing that the trial of your faith works
patience. Solomon said, Chasten thy Son, and thou shall have comfort of him; so
does our heavenly Father; so that to the faithful, afflictions should be cause
of joy, because they are the means of grace. The worst creature that ever was,
will oftentimes make as great a show as the best in prosperity: silver is tried
in the fire: consider God never laid any thing upon his children, but he gave
them strength to suffer it, or did mitigate the pain; He staieth his rough wind
in the day of the east wind, Isa. 27. Psalm. 94.12. Blesis the man whom thou
chastenest, O Lord, and teach him in thy law.

13. That thou may give him patience in time of adversity until the pit be
dug up for the ungodly.

Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, etc.

My joy shall be in the Lord; though the fig tree should not blossom, etc. yet
would I rejoid in the Lord. No chastning for the present seems joyous, but
grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness, as David testifies. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but
now I have learned the judgments of thy mouth. That is, he learned the
practicing of them; for though he knew them, he went a stray, and by affliction
was reclam'd, Psa. It Is good for me that I have been afflicted.

Meditation
LORD, let it be thy will to perfect my graces by my afflictions, and to
purify, and refine me of all my corruptions, as silver is refined in the fire,
for if I still feel pride, and envy, wrath, scorn, and contempt of my meaner
brethren in my heart, or be inclined to revile such as have fallen, I may
justly fear, that though thou have removed one judgment from me, yet thou will
bring another greater upon me, and if I will not be thereby humbled, and taught
to bear with the infirmities of my brethren, so as to pity, restore, and help
them, thou may justly heap more, and more plagues upon me, and mine till
thou have destroyed me. And since thou have said, that the same measure that we
meet to others shall be measured to us again, Teach me that I may forbear all
distastful words, and scornful behavior, and all passion, and censure toward
others, that are under me, though but my Servants, least those who are above
me, or under me, should requite me with the like. If thou suffer me to be
railed at, and reviled, as thy Servant David was often, and as all holy men of
God, and Saints have been, and must expect to be, let me not look upon the
persons so railing, but receive it as from God, as he did, saying if the Lord
has said to Shimei, curse David, who shall say why have thou done so. So let
him curse, for who can tell but the Lord will requite good for his railing, and
so the Lord did requite it, and let me learn not to judge others, by what they
suffer but consider the bitter mockings which the Disciples of Christ
underwent, as the Lord had foretold them; but chiefly let us consider what
contradiction of sinners our blessed Lord and Savior underwent, lest we faint
in our minds, and be weary. And let us learn thereby to speak evil of no man
though most highly provoked no not in our passion, lest we seem to disbelieve
or contemn the blessing pronounced upon such sufferers.

Meditation.
IN their Affliction they will seek me early. When by Affliction we are
deprived of all worldly comfort, then we will seek it in God; therefore it is
necessary for some people to be always afflicted, and I may be one of them,
Heb. 12.10, 11. They viz. our parents, Chastened us for their pleasure, but he
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. Now no chastening
for the present seems joyous, but grievous, nevertheless afterward it
yeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised
thereby. So that the end of Gods Afflicting us, is to improve our faith,
patience, holiness, and other graces, and he will make these means efual, Isa.
26.9.

Meditation.
O My soul, let not lying lips, slanders, backbitings, nor false accusations
provoke thee to let loose the reins to revenge and wrath, but rather give place
to injuries, lest thou justifiest the Sons of Zerviah, saying let us cut off
this dogs head, and condemnest holy David. And thou may hope for the like
requital if thou do accordingly, but thou had rather that the Lord would keep
thee secretly in his Tabernacle from strife of tongue.

Another end why God afflicts his people, is to make them like to Christ, as it
is 2 Timothy 2.12. For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we
suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. If we deny him, he also will
deny us, and Romans 8.17. Joint heirs with Christ. If so be we suffer with him,
we shall also be glorified with him, we are chastened: of the Lord that we may
not be condemned with the world. They suffer with him, who suffer innocently.

The third end is the trial of faith, as the St. Peter 6.7. Though now ye are
in heaviness (if need be) through manifold temptations, 7 v. That the trial of
your faith, being much more precious than Gold, though it be tried in the fire,
might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, etc. So they try our love
too.

Meditation.
O my soul, let thy impatiente bearing of lyings, slanders, backbitings, and
false accusations humble thee, and drive thee to seek to God by prayers, and
tears, to assist and help thy weak patience, and faith, and make thee more
conformable to Christ, thou can bear other injuries, learn to bear these,
that thou may be blessed.

O my God, do thou preserve me, support me, and hold me up, that I may not fall
by wrath, and impatience, though the injuries I receive be never so great,
unjust and false, yet let me be supported by thy word, and thy Spirit in me
assuring me of reward in heaven. O my God, let me contentedly submit to thy
chastisments, and let me be assured that thou will bring good out of evil, and
that they are sent by thee for my good, that I should not be condemned with the
world, (1 Cor. 11.) And by thy assistance I shall go forth to thee without the
camp bearing thy reproach, Heb. 13.14. And my patience shall be perfected. And
assure me that in this unjust suffering I take up the Cross of a Christian.

Another end why God afflicts us, is to make us call to mind our sins which
procured the afflictions, as Joseph's brethren called to mind theirs of selling
their brother. It makes us to search, and try our selves what sins we lie in,
and have not repented off.

Meditation.
LORD, Sanctify them to us for this end, that we may not lie in our sins, nor
dye in them. But may be awakened, to search and try our ways, and call to mind
our sins and repent of them with a godly sorrow, unto salvation, and turn unto
the Lord with all our hearts, lest otherwise we perish with the world. And let
the blessedness which thou have pronounced upon thy mourners, and the comfort
which thou have promised them, come on them in the sight of their persecutors,
for their comfort will be the discomfort of them.

Another end why Gods afflicts us, is to restrain us from some sin which we are
prone to, so he restrained St. Paul from pride; for if God did not restrain us,
we should fall oftener than we do, not only into those same sins which we have
formerly committed, but also into all others which the nature of man is subject
to commit, and which we think our selves quite free from, as Hasael, when the
Prophet told him what Villainies he would commit, answered him, saying. Think
thou that thy Servant is a Dog? yet he did what the Prophet had foretold, 2
King. 8. So God withheld Abimeleck from sinning with Abraham's wife; so David,
before he was afflicted he went astray, but learned Gods judgments by
afflictions. And said, Thy Rod and thy Staff have comforted me. by which saying
of David it appears, That another end of Afflictions is for Spiritual comfort.
Therefore it is said in St. James, Count it all joy when you fall into manifold
temptations; For as sin, as soon as committed flies in our face, and tells us
that we have deserved all the curses threatened in Gods word, for our
consciences immediately tells us that the wages of sin are death, and damnation;
so afflictions brings to mind our sins, and makes our consciences search
themselves what sins lie unrepented off. Then our repentance, brings remission,
and peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, communion with God, and
watchfulness, and carefulness against sin for the future. But to make us more
capable of the comfort, it seems meet to God to visit us by afflictions.

Another end of afflictions it to abase and humble us. That we may walk humbly
with our God: humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God that he
may lift you up; where both these ends of afflictions are conjoined, viz. The
joy of being lifted up, with the humiliation; he humbles whom he in tends to
exalt.

Another end is for purgation. I will purge away all the dross, and tinn. Which
does supose that there are some sins committed by, and some corruptions
remaining in the Servants of God, as it is in the 9 of Daniel 11. Yea, all
Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey
thy voice, therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that is written
in the law of Moses, because we have sinned. Every branch in me that bears
fruit he purges, Isa. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of jacob be purged.

As our Savior was made perfect by suffering, so all that are made perfect,
are made perfect by sufferings.

When our consciences checks us, it causes us to search, and try our ways, as
it is in the Prophet, after I was afflicted, I smote upon my thigh.

Another end to bring a man to himself, when before he would not know himself,
nor could understand his frailties and weakness; also to bring a man to Christ,
and to make him go out of himself, and the thought of his self-sufficiency, and
self confidence, to seek his salvation in Christ alone; for if the word does
not work upon us, God does work by the Spirit of bondage, upon hard
consciences, as David said, my reins chasten me in the night season. So was
the Prodigal Son brought to himself to bethink him of his Fathers house, and to
return home.

LORD, sanctify them to thy Servant for all these ends, that I may find all
those opperations wrought in me, and let me wait patiently upon the Lord,
laying my mouth in the dust. As water that stands still without motion or
agitation putrifieth; and the Air corupteth unless it be moved with some gales
of Wind; so the minds of men become degenerate, and their virtues, and graces
soon languish, unless they be excited, and exercised by variety of fortune,
troubles, and new difficulties; the most troublesome accidents that befall,
teach and improve a wise man most, and learn him the best lessons. Time of
Trouble is the season for Prayer. If Esau had not come against Jacob with an
army, he had not wrestled with God, nor got the blessing. Psalm. 50.15. Call
upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise
me: so it is the season for Gods mercy to those who seek it by prayer,

And as if the sense of our necessities would not force us enough to this duty
of prayer, he injoynes it by precept, and inviteth with a promise which shows
both our backwardness to the Duty, and Gods readiness to accept our prayers,
and show mercy to us; and sometimes he is fain to be found of them that seek
him not, and he is fain to send his Spirit to help us to pray; and sometimes he
is fain to hear us when we have but a purpose to pray, as David said in the
Psalms, I said I wll confess my sin, and thou forgavest my iniquities, and
sometimes God is fain to prevent us, as Isa. 64.10. Before they call, I will
answer; and sometimes he will not stay till the end of our Prayer (as it is
said) Whilst they cry, I will say, here am I. So the Lord speaks, Jer. 31.21.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; so, whilst Daniel was praying,
at the beginning of his Prayer God answered, Dan, 9. the Prodigal desired to be
but as a hired Servant, and the Father brings forth the Fatted Calf to
entertain him; so God gives us more than we ask.

Is any man afflicted, let him pray; it teaches that Gods Children are not
free from troubles, nor can expect so to be. It teaches also that those
prayers that are extorted from us by necessity are heard, necessity, may first
set men awork to pray as it did Jacob. Though men would object against them who
come to them in their necessities, yet Christ and man had never come together;
had it not been for necessity: necessities are not a putting us off, but a
drawing us to God, as appears by these Invitations. It Is folly to neglect God
in our trouble. When Joab would not come to Absalom, he sets his Corn on fire,
and then he came. Dan. 9. Though all this be come upon us, yet have we not made
our prayers unto thee. Gods aims are accomplished when thou come to him, Hos.
5.15. I will hide my face, and they will call upon me early. Let not the
affliction simply without regard to the precept, and promise drive us to God,
2. Cor. 1.10, 11. God has delivered me, and will deliver me, etc. Your helping
together in your prayers. The qualification of the Persons and of the prayer,
are contained in this; the effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails
much. Nothing will make us more fervent than afflictions. Sometimes God does
not hear us at the first, to make us more fervent: his delays are no denials,
God has several ways of deliverance that we know not of; we must not obtrude
our own model upon God. David, Ps. 34. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and
delivered me out of all my trouble. Sometimes God will not give a temporal
deliverance, that he may give a spiritual; sometimes he will give both. As St
Paul said, God has delivered me from the mouth of the Lion, and will also
deliver me from every evil work. The Martyrs in the 12th of the Hebrews would
not accept of deliverance from men. There is a Spiritual deliverance in part,
as Paul's from the Thorn in the Flesh, or in the whole. God sometimes delivers
us by death, as Sampson was from the Philistines sometimes he delivers by
death, from eternal death.

Again, seldom does deliverance fail, when either we are enlarged to pray for
it, or encouraged to wait upon God for it; when thou preparest the heart, O
Lord, thou inclinest thy ear: so Fathers teach their Children to ask what they
have a mind to bestow.

Till we are past sinning, we shall not be past suffering: Because suffering
follows sin, as the effect follows the cause; and suffering is the usual means
which God makes use of to restrain us from sin, and to set our graces on work,
which begin to decay in the Sunshine of prosperity.

Though affliction be the fruit of sin, it may be the mother of virtue; where
it is not the mother, it may be, and most commonly is the Nurse, or foster
mother, making us renew our vows and resolutions, for God brings good out of
evil, or otherwise he would not permit unjustice, and opression to be done to
his children, by the men of the World, of whom he says, he that touches you,
touches the the Apple of mine eye. And if the members suffer, the head suffers
also; and our blessed Lord and Savior says, that he that offends the least
of the Children of God, 'twere better for that man that a Millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were thrown into the midst of the Sea, than
that he should offend one of those little ones. Since Christ himself accounts
their sufferings his, as these and many other Scriptures prove he does; if in
all theit afflictions he is afflicted; if they affect him in the tenderest
place, the apple of his eye, then surely he will not permit them to be
inflicted in the least degree, or quantity more than he sees necessary
fortheir good.

From hence, viz. the sense of Gods tender love to his Children might spring
that undaunted confidence, and full assurance of faith, which Gods people
sometimes discover, as Holy Job said, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in
him. David when the people talked of Stoning him, encouraged himself in the
Lord. Habakkuk the Prophet would rejoice in the Lord, though the Fig Tree
should not blossom, neither should fruit be in the vine; though the labor of
the Olive should fail, and the Field should yield no increase, though the Flock
should be cut off from the fold, etc. The innumerable company of Martyrs in the
late Queen Mary's days, and in the 10 persecutions, when the bodies of the
Servants of God were given to be meat for the wild beasts, and others burned
with fire, for the testimony of Christ, and would not accept deliverance, in
hopes of a better resurrection.

Their faith was the substance of the things hoped for, and it secured the
possession of them which verefied that truth, in Psalm. 107. He shall not be
afraid for any evil tidings, his heart is fixed, and he trusts in the Lord.

Faith draws off the mind from temporal things to eternal, and then from the
dark ways of Gods providence to his promises in his covenant, and so makes a
man to commit himself to God, as it is 2 of Tim. 1.12. I know whom I have
trusted.

Faith puts all into Gods hand, and we are safe when we know our goods are in a
sure hand.

Submission to God is an act of faith, and love, and an act of obedience,
thereby Job blessed God taking away.

David submitted himself to God. Saying, if the Lord has said to Shimei, curse
David, who shall say why have thou done so, etc. Who can tell whether the Lord
will requite good for his railing? readily did Hezekiah submit to all that God
pleased, when the Prophet told Eli of the judgments threatened against his
House, 2 Samuel 15.21. His submissive answer is, It Is the Lord, let him do what
seems good in his sight; he laid his mouth in the dust: Guilt makes us fear
when God removes the pillar of security from under our heads by any affliction,
but the knowledge of God by former experience fortifies faith. This made the
Apostle argue, God would deliver him, Psalm. 35. I trusted in thee, for I said
thou art my God. His interest in God, and Gods Interest in him, made him trust
in him, 2 Chro. 13.18. The children of Judah prevailed against the Israelites,
because they relied upon the Lord. Another help of faith is prayer. Thou shall
ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance. Another is
obedience; the old Prophet went out of Gods way, and the Lion slew him.

The comfort of the Cross to the People of God is greater than the joy of
worldly men in their abundance of corn, wine, and oil, the Prophet Habakkuks
joy in the Lord, in the want of necessaries of life, Hab. 3. Proves it: for
what worldly thing can bear up the mind in Adversities? Jobs hope, and
assurance, that with those very eyes he should see his redeemer made him suffer
all things patiently, but all Hamans greatness and happiness did not avail
against a disrespect.

But worldly joy kills the joy in the Holy Ghost. They that live in pleasure,
the Holy Apostle says, they are dead while they live: when Afflictions have
taken off our heart from the love of the world then we seek more durable joy,
then is Gods time to give his Servants joy in the Holy Ghost, the peace of
conscience, and pardon of their sins. Though for a season they are in heaviness
through manifold temptations, they rejoice in the hope of glory to be revealed.
As sorrowing, they are, though they always rejoice, as having nothing, yet they
possess all things in value. Their sorrow is but in semblance, their joy real,
and in substance. Their seeming sorrow for a season; their rejoicing perpetual.
Well then might they take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and rejoice
that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ and prefer
afflictions before the pleasure of sin.

I had utterly fainted but that I believe verily to see the goodness of the
Lord in the Land of the living, Psalm. This anchor of hope kept up his fainting
soul.

As Stephen being stoned, then saw Heaven opened. So does faith give to the
suffering Saints, and Martyrs, a prelibation of the joys of Heaven. As it is
resembled by the first fruits of Canaan which were brought to the Israelits in
the barren wilderness. It Is usual with God to depress those which greatest
afflictions whom he intends to exalt high. And so those to whom he reveals
himself most as St. Paul experienced.

This Apostle, though afflicted, had joy unspeakable and glorious, and received
abundance of glorious revelations, Psalm. 23.4. David, though he walked through
the valley of the shadow of death, would fear no evil, for thou art with me
(said he) this apprehension of Gods presence, and almighty supportation, will
banish all fears; but Psalm. 46.3. He was not so strong in faith as not to fear,
for he says. Though I am sometimes afraid, yet put I my trust in the Lord. He
recovers himself out of his fainting fits by the use of the means.

Twice in one Psalm we find him fainting, and checking himself for it, in these
expressions; Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why so disquieted within me?
Then he raises himself up again to hope, and trust in God by the experience he
had had of Gods help, and his interest in him, as his God. He is the help of my
countenance and my God. Therefore hope thou in God.

Bless God for this, that he has given us greater things than we are willing
to lose, and that he has given us Christ whom we can not lose. Let this
comfort us; consider if we are afraid of suffering here, how should we be
afraid of hell!

If we leave our present enjoyments for God, it shall all be made up in Heaven.
God gives us good things that we may have something of value to leave for
Christ, Philip 1. They rejoiced and waxed confident by St. Paul's bonds.
Suffering adversity credits the Gospel, and creadits thee who suffer; for
Satan, and his instruments are known to strike at the fairest, and best,
according to that saying, placet in vulnus maxima cervix. Sen.

If afflictions are cause of joy to a believer, as the scriptures make out, as
that of St. James, c. 1. Count it all joy when you fall into temptations;
knowing that the trial of your faith works patience, etc. Then in respect of
their spiritual good they ought to contemn temporal losses, as this holy
precept teaches. The example of the practice of this duty was in those blessed
martyrs, who took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, not accepting
deliverance from their persecuters. The like example we find in St. Paul, Gal.
1.14. He glories in his afflictions, saying, God forbid that I should glory in
any thing save the Cross of Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I
to the world. It may be rendered by which the world is crucified to me, etc. i.
e. Though the contemplation of the Cross of Christ and his bitter sufferings
did thoroughly motify the Apostle; the contemplation of the same operation of it
to him made him glory. Or the afflictions which he suffered for Christ, which
wrought such a mortification in him, made him therefore glory in them. The like
is put in practice by other Saints, as it is, Romans 5.2. By whom also we have
access by faith etc. v. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also,
knowing that tribulation works patience: And patience experience, and
experience hope. Besides these graces and many others which are wrought in the
soul by afflictions. The reward which is given to those who do so suffer, may
well make them seem light, and also matter of rejoicing, viz. That exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. They do not only yield the peaceable fruits of
righteousness, which alone were sufficient to make our lives happy, but by
these is wrought our eternal happiness also, as before is expressed: They work
for us an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. This will prove the truth of
Christ's Doctrine, Mat. 11. ult. My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
Which may be intended in this sense, that all hardship, and pains, which humane
nature can undergo, is but light in comparison of sin, or the punishment
thereof, or else that they are but light in respect of the reward here, and
hereafter or light in respect of the almighty suportation, as it is in the
Psalm. 119. v. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. And that of the Apostle
Paul, I can do all things though Christ that strengthens me, for which
supportation they may rely upon this promise, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. And that I will be with the in the fire, etc. Another maine cause
that makes light the burden of Christ Cross or yoke, is Love, the Soul
submits willingly to God because it sees in him all causes of love, all
exeellency of Power, majesty, and glory, are in him. All perfection of beauty
in him, every excellent work from him. His kindness, love and beneficence to
us, above our merit, Hope, or expectation, his paternal relation to us as his
creatures, and adopted children in Christ, his pitying of us, and pardoning
our sins, and not punishing us according to the fear of our guilty consciences,
his peculiar pity to Humane Nature, more than to fallen Angels; the need we
have of him, and the benefit we expect from him, on whom for all temporal and
eternal good we depend. The similitude also of natures may cause love; for
after the image of God man was made, and is so renewed; the necessity, and the
utility of Gods chastisments, he that had had very good experience of them upon
the same account with the same success, confesses in the Psa. 119.67. plainly
in these words, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have learned
the Judgments of thy mouth. And It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
Psalm. 119.71. Unless we are pure in our own eyes. And have better conceits of
our own hearts, than of him, who was a man according to Gods own heart, we
cannot but see with the same eyes as he did: That God does afflict men for
their good, to sanctify them, and teach them in the ways of eternal life, as
it is Psalm. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teach in the way,
that thou may give him patience in time of Adversity, etc. Neither were his
afflictions for the short season of a day or a year. But constant, Psalm. Even
from my youth up, thy terrors have I sufferd with a troubled minds; and Psalm.
All the day long have I been afflicted, and chastened every morning. Psalm.
119.109. My soul is always in my hand, yet do I not forget thy law. Wherefore
St. Pet. 1 Epist. 4.12. Bids them, think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial which is happened unto you, as though some strange thing had happened
unto you, which implys, that afflictions in the highest degree are common, and
familiar guests, to be daily expected. Those were no light ones whereby David's
very soul was in his hand, and in jeopardy, Zach. 13.9. I will bring the third
part through the fire. It shows the truth of our profession, if we can go on
cherfully without outward encouragements. Therefore when God would show the
sincerity of Job by removing that objection of Satan. Have thou not made a
hedge about him? he let loose the tempter to afflict him with all sorrows, and
to deprive him of all comforts. When God would perfect in us the grace of
patience, he does it by affliction as it is, Jam. 1.4. and that where it is
makes a perfect Christian, as we ought all to be, as it is Mat. 5. ult. Be ye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect.

Paul to the Philip. Cap. 1.12. Says, The things which have happened unto me
have fallen out rather for the furtherance of the Gospel so that my bonds in
Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places. So far are
afflictions from hindering us in the heavenly race, or from hindering the
sowing of the seed of grace in the heart of others, that the patient suffering
of the Saints of God provokes others to imitation, and to search, and inquire
what is that principle and Basis, upon which such resolutions stand, Psalm.
25.10. Though they are afflicted, they acknowledge that all the ways of the
Lord are mercy, and truth, to such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies
they, know that of kindness, God afflicts them, the very same kindness is in
afflicting them, as was in adopting them, His paternal love; The assurance of
which convinces them that all things shall work for the good of them that love
God. This principle every true believer has; and this made Moses to choose
afflictions before the pleasures of sin, viz. The assurance of his interest in
the love of God, and the glorious privileges of the Saints, by faith in gods
promises through the merits of the bloody passion of our Redeemer and the Hope
which they have of the repositum in the world to come.

Our Blessed Lord and Savior was not only our example of suffering wrongfully,
and undergoing all griefs and sorrows, whom being our captain and head we
ought to follow: But being our King also has made it a law, for all that will
come after him, to deny enjoyments, and to take up the contrary, which our
nature so much declines, crosses. The discipline which he trained up his
disciples to, and all his followers, was suffering. The parable of the builder
sitting down, and first to cast up what his building will cost him, coucheth
the cost, and pains, grief, and self-denial which a Christian must resolve to
undergo for Heaven, and happiness. He told his followers that the world would
hate them, pesecute them, and kill them for his, and the Gospels sake.

The parable of the Merchant, who having found a field, wherein was contained a
treasure hid, sold all to purchase it, shows what we must part with for
Heaven. Consider the sharneful, painful, cursed death of our Lord. How they
designed his derision in the robes, Crown of thorns, salutation, in contempt
spitting on his face, etc.

If our hopes were in this life, we were of all men most miserable. What then
can a Servant of God expect here?

The comfort of the Scriptures are suited to such a condition only, and a great
part of the Scripture would be useless, if there were no such condition. David
in 119. Psalm. The same is my comfort in my affliction, thy word has quickened
me. Great are the troubles of the Righetous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all Psalm. 34. v 19. and 7. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that
fear him, and delivers them, and the whole Psalm is made to show the
blessedness of them that trust in the Lord, and the faithfulness of God toward
such as trust in him in time of affliction, and many other of David's Psalms are
to the same effect, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures
might have Hope. He is a Father of the Fatherless, and a help to the
friendless. Our heavenly Father will not endure to hear his children cry long;
though heaviness endures for a night, joy comes in the morning, and Psalm.
140.12. I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the
right of the poor. The patient abiding of the meek shall not always be
forgotten before the Lord, 3 of the Revela. ver. I will be with thee in the
fiery trial, that is to come upon all the earth to try them.

I will be with thee in the fire that it shall not burn thee, and in the Water
that it shall not drown thee.

The hatred which the men of the world bear to the people of God, is by the
Spirit of God in the Scriptures set forth as a principal cause of their
calamities the Cap. of the op. of St. Cain was of that wicked one and slew his
Brother, wherefore? because his works were evil, and his brothers good:
conttariety of works is cause of hatred, as well as contrariety of natures: men
blush not before them that are like them, the contrariety makes them blush,
Galat. 4.29. As he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born
after the Spirit. So it is now, he alludes to Ishmaels mocking of Isaac. This
is most fully set forth in Psalm. 37. Fret not thy self because of the ungodly,
nor be thou envious against the evil doers, ver. 29. The wicked sees the
righteous, and seeks occasion to slay him, ver. 14. The wicked have drawn the
sword, and bent the bow, to slay such as be of an upright conversation. ver.
12. The wicked plotteth against the righteous, and gnasheth upon him with his
teeth, ver. 33. The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when
he is judged, ver. 39. And 40. The Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord,
he is their strength in time of trouble. And the Lord shall help them and
deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them because they
trust in him, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to them
that love God, 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? v. 35. Who shall
separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation, or distress or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? for thy sake are we
killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. 37. Nay
in all these things we are more than conquerers through him that loved us.
These consolations did not only support the suffering Saints but made them
triumph over all their torments. Take joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
Rejoice in the Lord in the want of all things. When they had nothing, to
possess all things. Sing in the dungeon despise death, and not accept
deliverance.

Psalm. 119. David by delighting in Gods word was supported. Satan's envy to the
Servants of God, and all that all belongs to God, raises up persecutions to
the holy seed. The Dragon in the Revelations is set forth persecuting the
woman, Rev. 12.8. Satan has great wrath, because he has but a short time,
therefore the persecutions under the Gospel are greater than those were under
the law, St. Paul was not only ready to suffer afflictions for Christ, but to
dye also. Satan was not contented when he had prevailed, in the trial of holy
Job, to the taking away of his substance, nor yet when he had prevailed for the
depriving of him of his children; but his body also must be smitten.

The office of the Comforter would be in vain. If Gods people were never
dismayed. If there were no broken heart to be healed, and bound up, there
needed no strong consolations of the Holy Spirit, nor no Oil of joy, and
gladness, if no spiritual heaviness were. He could not restore beauty for
Ashes, if no Ashes were upon our heads, nor wipe all tears from our eyes, if
they wept not before. The Sun of righteousness should arise with healing in his
wings in vain, if none had need of healing. The Blessedness to those that mourn
that they shall be comforted were needless.

They are necessary also that the scriptures migh be fulfilled. They are
plentiful for this assertion. Through many tribulations we shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

If we endure not tribulations, whereof all are partakers, then are we
Bastards, and not Sons. All that will live godly must suffer persecutions, 2 Timothy 3.12. Many are the troubles of the righteous. If our Hope were in this
life only we were of all men most miserable. By all which it appears that the
Saints are the people that are to be oppressed, for they only can bear wrongs
and oppressions, Psalm. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, yet do we
not forsake thee. Judgment must begin at Gods house. The Spouse in the
Canticles says, Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has
shined upon me. She had been in hardship, and underwent what injuries, Wind and
weather could do to her, and knew that worldly men would censure her as wicked
and forsaken of God. Gods ancient people the Jews when they sined were carried
into captivity in Babylon according to the Prophesies. They were restored again
upon their repentance. And sinning again, were utterly destroyed by the Romans
under Titus's command.

The Scriptures, which threaten plagues, punishments and curses, cannot be
fulfilled, if afflictions should not befall us. Six of the seven Churches of
Asia were threatened, unless they repented. Will any one think that the
impenitent escaped unpunished; there is not any one of those punishments which
God threatened from the beginning of the holy Scripture to the end, but came to
pass, save only where repentance prevented them, as was the case of the
Ninivites. And in some degree Ahab, and Manasses, show their repentance,
answerable to which their remission was, but our first parents found the truth
of all Gods threatenings, so did the old world that was drowned. So did Gods
ancient people the Jews of whom 'its said, 14 of Hose 1. Thy iniquities have
distroyed thee. For all those curses and plagues threatened against them, and
their City (as Josephus who was in the calamity, and an eye witness, writes)
did come to pass, not one excepted. David's family was foretold of that
Judgment that the sword should not depart from them, and the truth of it they
felt. So Jezabel, and Ahab, Lots wife, these knew the terror of the Lord, and
are set forth as examples to us (as it is in St. Judes epist.) Our Blessed Lord
and Savior has undergone that curse which was threatened to our first Parents.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the Death. And if he had
notundergone it for us, we all must have undergone it in our own persons. Call
upon God therefore O my soul, with earnest prayers, constantly, and fervently,
that he would support thee, and hold thee up in the time of the fiery trial,
that is to come upon all the world to try them. But especially in the time of
spiritual desertions, which by reason of our frailties befalls the best of Gods
Servants, as it did our blessed Savior upon the Cross, when he cried out, My
God my God, why have thou forsaken me, and the spouse Cant. 5.6. Sought for her
love, but could not find him, and Psalm. 13.1. v. David says, How long will thou forget me Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me, Isa.
38.14.15. Hezekiah mourns as a dove his eyes fail him with looking upward, 15.
I shall go softly all my days in the bitterness of my soul, and the 5 Cant. 6.
And Psalm. 102. Show that all the Servants of God must expect that God will
withdraw himself sometimes, and v. 8. This shall be written for the generation
to come, that the Lord will regard the prayer of the poor distieute, he will
not absent himself for ever, he will be found again.

This was the Zenith of our Saviors sufferings, and none but Saints can lie
under this suffering. But God is with them though they see him not; for he has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, 2 Chronicles. 16.2. The Lord is
with you while you are with him. And if God be with us, who can be against us?
And we must convince our selves of this comfortable presence of God with us, by
our presence with him. If we walk with him, desire, and love him; for if he be
with us, he warmes the Soul, and the love of God is spread abroad in our
hearts, then we must continue seeking till we find him, Cant. 1.7. Tell me my
Spouse where thou restest. Because she thought he was all Lovely therefore she
sought him. And because she could not be without him. Psalm. 80. v. 87. All my
fresh springs are in thee. She trusts in him, and stays her self upon him, when
she is in darkness, and sees no light, as it is expressed in those words;
Though he slay me, I will trust in him. It is like death unto the soul, and it
can find no joy, nor content, no rest, nor quiet in this condition. When Zion
said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me; it was her
misunderstanding of her own condition; for it follows, But I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands. When we know we have God's presence with us, we are
ravished, like the Spouse in the Canticles; Ere ever I was aware my soul was
like the Chariots of Aminadab. She is vigorous in holy duties, and carried with
an Impetus to desire an enjoyment of God in his Ordinances. But in the
withdrawings of God, and the hiding of his face, the soul is troubled. If any
trial be a fiery Trial, this is. It it more fiery than that of the three
children in the furnace. But comfort thy self with these promises; I will be
with thee in the fiery trial, that is to come upon all the world, to try them.
The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart. And, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them
that fear him, and delivers then of Look upon them as sent from a merciful
Father for good ends, either to restrain thee from sin, to humble thee, or to
drive thee to seek God by prayer and fasting, and other holy duties, which thou
happily have neglected; and therefore the Messengers of Satan are sent to buffet
thee. Look upon Christ bearing a part of thy sufferings, and suffering with
thee. Look upon the Holy Spirit helping thy infirmities; and look upon the
Crown, and the exceeding weight of glory which they work.

But if thou have walked with God in prosperity, put him in mind of it, as
Hezekiah and Job did. Also comfort thy self with the Love of Je-Jesus Christ
thy Savior revealed to thee, who suffered the like, that he might know the
better to succor thee; his unspeakable Love. For seeing it is so, that he
sees such beauty, loveliness, and perfection in his beloved Spouse, as he
expresses ( Canticles 4. throughout.) If he be so inflamed of her love, as is
there expressed, he cannot (if he would) long absent himself from her, nor
brook her absence from him. In the first sixth verses he admireth her several
beauties; and in the seventh verse, least he should seem to have overlooked any
imperfection, he gives a large commendation of the whole, and exempteth it
from all imputation of Imperfection: Thou art all fair my Love, there is no
spot in thee. Verse. 8. It follows, Come with me my Spouse, etc. He must needs
desire her company, in whom he sees such excellent beauty and perfection.
Further reasons he expresses of this his desire of her company, in the
following verses. In ^^e 9th. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my
Spouse, thou have ravished me of my heart, with one of thine eyes, with one
chain of thy neck. How fair is thy Love, my Sister, my Spouse? How much better
is thy Love than Wine? and the smell of thine ointment than all spices? Thy
lips, O my Spouse, drop as the honey comb; honey and milk are under thy tongue;
and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebenon. A Garden enclosed
is my Sister, my Spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. Thy plants are an
Orchard of Pomegranats, with pleasant fruits, Camphire, with Spikenard, etc.
These are the amorous Courtships which thy most loving and lovely Savior
courteth thee with. These and many more of like love and kindness he uses to
thee to satisfy thee of his love, and to gain thine. And having said all that
in love could be said, and done all for thy love that could be done, unless it
were the last Act of giving thee his hearts blood, suppose him thus speaking to
thee, immediately before his passion. And now my Sister my Spouse, what will thou have me say, or do more? will thou have my hearts blood? If thou will, I
am ready to give it thee. Methinks I see the Spouse astonished at this
ravishing kindness, and grieving fore that her need is such that she must have
her lovers hearts blood to heal her, she answers thus; O Blessed and most
dear Lord, worthy of all love, and service, for this real expression of thy
love, how can I entertain such excess of love but be inflamed with love to thee
again? and if I am inflamed with love and desire of thee, how can I admit of
this thy wonderful offer? the effusiion of thy blood! And yet I must accept of
this thy offer to cure those my greifs which otherwise are incurable. And so
with tears she breaks off her speech, because her heart is broak? and she
knows not how to answer such high and real expressions of love. But yet the
Lord, (who is love) rests not there, he does for us above all that we are
able to ask or think.

And seeing that thou must needs have his hearts blood to cure thee, or perish,
he suffers death, and inviteth thee to the funeral banquet, and there under
the complexion of of noble wine presents thee with his hearts blood to drink,
and under the complexion of bread presents thee his heart to eat. And now thou
must needs feel thy self revived and healed with the heat and virtue of this
heavenly food, and thou know thou have ravished him of his heart, therefore
may rejoice in thy Beloved.

Ejaculations.
LORD, Since I cannot experience thy goodness and mercy in my deliverances, or
thy faithfulness in keeping promise to them that trust in thee, hope in thee,
call upon thee, delight in thee, and love thee, unless I first experience
troubles, dangers, calamities, and the malice of my enemies and fiery trials
from which thy promise is to deliver us, to save us, and be with us in them:
Then make me be contented to fall into these troubles and trials, the fire and
the water of affliction, and let them not seem strange to me though never so
fiery. Neither let me be cast down, or dismayed, faint, or sorrow, as those
that are without hope and have no promise of God to trust to.

LORD, Supply me with all suffering graces as well as doing graces, let me be
strong and of good cheer and undaunted, encouraging my self in the Lord, let me
not be so cowardly and fearful, and base spirited, as to lie down under
afflictions. Let me remember thy loving kindnesses of old, that I may encourage
my self with them. Thou have delivered me, therefore let me trust that thou will still deliver me, and therefore let me bless thy name when thou shall take
away from me, remembering how freely thou gave it to me,

LET the righteous be bold as a Lion, and daunt their enemies, so that they may
never rise up against them any more.

SINCE thou have often given me clear and undoubted evidence of my Title to
eternal life, and have showed me that the way by which I must pass thither is
through many tribulations, make me willing to take the means with the end, and
to go to Heaven by that way as thou have appointed to all Saints.

How can I imagine that thou have exempted thy Servants from affliction, when
thou have said the contrary, and that Judgment must begin at the house of God,
and that through many tribulations they must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?
and I know by my own experience, that it is good and beneficial to my soul that
it should be so. Therefore I do not only submit to them, but choose them, as
Moses did. I choose rather that Satan should prevail against me to impair my
estate, or to cast me into prison (if thou will have it so) as thou have
foretold thy Saints that some of them shall be, Revel. 2. For their probation.
That thereby I may be restrained from sin, and made to walk humbly with my God,
and closely, than that thou should suffer me to fall into any sin, that
should wound my conscience ever after.

LORD, If in our affliction we stand to thee, we know thou will not leave us.
But will stand the by us, and save us, and break all the snares of ungodly to
pieces, therefore fear not worm Jacob.

LORD, cause the uncessant lies and slanders with which the world afflicts thy
people, that they serve to make their virtues more conspicuous, because thy
promise is to make their righteousness as clear as the light, and their just
dealing as the noon day, therefore do thou assert their righteousness, though
for a while their enemies Eclipse them; yet let their bright shining break out
like the Sun out of a Cloud and dazel the eyes of their enemies, and remember
too thy promises, to root out those false tongues which slander them, and to
stop the mouths of those that speak lies; and since it is vileness that
vilifies goodness, and baseness debaseth honor; let us contemn them, and let
us look to the weight of glory which they work for us.

The Soliloquy.
O my soul, that thou could in this thy day see the things that belong to thy
peace, that thou could have grace to lay hold on this season of Prayer, the
time of thy affliction, seasonable both to thee to Pray, and to God to hear,
and to implore his mercy with strong cries and tears, and give him no rest with
thy Prayers who gives thee no rest with his Chastisments; as his hand is heavy
upon thee day and night, so let thine eyes be ever looking unto him from whom
thy salvation must come, and let thy hands be ever lifted up to him, and always
be mindful of his promise and word wherein he has caused thee to put their
trust, Saying call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Let
it be thy comfort in thy trouble to quicken thee in thy faintings, that thy
hope may not fail, nor thy patience tire, nor thy Prayers cease, nor the holy
fire of Zeal upon the Altar of thy heart go out. That fire that came down from
Heaven, Divine love to him that made thee, and redeemed thee, and to his
servants, and all that bear his Image. Let thy affections be set on things
above, and wait thou still on the Lord; hold fast on him, stay thy self on him,
though with Jonah thou should be cast into the Sea, or with the 3 children
into the fiery furnace; for his hand is not shortened that it cannot save; now
say Lord look upon my assliction, and misery, and forgive me all my sins; Lord
pity, and pardon, and heal our souls; let not thy wrath wax hot against the
people of thine inheritance whom thou have redeemed. Let not thy jealousy burn
like fire for ever. Lord remember thy loving kindness of old; wherefore have
thou made all men for naught? Lord all thy waves, and storms are gone over me,
yet is my soul resolved not to go back from thee, nor to behave her self
frowardly in thy covenant, nor to charge God foolishly, still I will learn
obedience by the things which I suffer; still will I make my Prayer unto God,
and cease not, but increase them; and still will I make my confession before
him; still will I believe that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall see him
with these eyes though worms consume my flesh; for I shall utterly faint
unless I can still believe that I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living, and unless I can with patience tarry the Lords leisure, and
still put my trust in the Lord, although he should seem to make me as his
enemy, still will I bless God, though he should take away all my comforts, for
I can enjoy none in the want of health, or inward grief of Soul.

Though my troubles and griefs are never so many, I have Gods word that he will
deliver my soul out of all, and he has delivered me, and therefore will
deliver me: afflictions shall not always rest upon the back of the righteous,
in measure he will debate with them: the end of the righteous is peace. Bless
the Lord O my Soul, if he has spared thee nothing but thy life, and confess it
to be his mercy that thou art not consumed, and that it is because his
compassion fails not. And though he visit thy iniquity with rods, and thy sin
with scourges, yet it is his Fatherly mercy that he does not utterly take his
loving kindness from thee. That he thus brings thee to the sight of thy sins,
and restraines thee from others.

Meditations, on several Scriptures of Zeal.
Romans 10.2. They have a Zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.

Med. LORD, Teach me to bound and moderate all my affections, and duties, which
I perform to thee, according to the rules which thy word has laid down, lest I
mis-serve thee as the Jews did, and Saul, before he was converted, and instead
of a reward procure a punishment. Teach me to labor first to know thy will,
then to do it, and not to overdo it, as Peter, who would not have his feet only
washed, but his head also. Let knowledge proportion my Zeal to thy will.

This teaches me in repenting for my sins, not to sorrow above measure, and so
to avoid despair, concerning which sorrowing the Corinthian was warned.

This teaches me not to overdo any ceremony of worship.

It teaches not to run out of one error into another, like Sabellius, who out
of Zeal against Arrius heresy confounded the Divine, and Humane Natures.

It teaches that knowledge is better than Zeal; since that only makes Zeal good.

It teaches us not to be unseasonable with our acts of Zeal and religious
duties, but to observe fit times; so Abigal would not rebuke her husband when
was drunk. So Paul condescended to the Jews for peace sake to have Timothy
Circumcised.

There is a season to stand up against sin, and out of season it is not to be
done; the works of our calling must be done in their time and the works of
Religion in their time. Knowledge must direct us to the means as well as to
the end; we must not do evil that good may come of it.

Though we cannot love God too much, and consequently cannot have too much zeal
to God, yet the love and zeal to God may be expressed in such actions as may
most disobey God, and be disservice to him, as this of the Jews, and Paul's;
when out of zeal he persecuted the Church; and that expressed by our Savior,
Whoever shall kill you, shall think he does God good Service.

This zeal of the Jews is mentioned for their praise; the qualification of it
(though not according to knowledge) was their unhappiness: many pretend zeal,
when they seek their own interest, as Jehu did, and those late Sectaries who
ruined his Nation.

A Meditation upon hearing of a Sermon of Mr. J. B. and discussing it with my
self.
Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor labor, nor invention, in the Grave, whither thou go,
for trifles and idleness no time.
Meditt. That this is the time of doing our duty, the next life the time for
reward. 2. The brevity of this Life, which is given us to prepare for Eternity.
3. That now, or never we must do it, we cannot re-call time; that which is
passed will never be more, 2 Cor. 6.2. This is the accepted time, this is the
day of Salvation. Life shall never be restored, Job 13. If a Man dies, shall
he live again? our ife is like the fighting of a Battle; we must now loose or
win the Battle. And now we have offers of Grace, and now if we refuse Christ,
we can never have him: after our Life is ended, the work we have omitted cannot
be done, and our Life is but short: why then sit we as if we had no business?
why do we not awake, and about our task? Do we look to have Preachers sent
after us in the other World, to offer us that which we neglected and despised
in this World? or do we trust to, Orate pro animabus? While thou have
opportunity to do all thy work, that thy duty calls thee to do; fail not of it
for want of a willing mind. First, Delay it not till to morrow: That which thou
would have forborne, thou would have excused for the whole. It is nothing
else but the wickedness of the Heart, Infidelity and doubting, that makes us
unresolute, and wavering, unstable, dull, slow of heart, and indisposed.

Do it with thy might, with vivacity, cheerfully, willingly, strenuously, and
speedily, as Phineas executed Gods command against the Adulterers: And for his
reward, God gave to him, and to his seed after him; the everlasting Covenant of
Peace, and the Priesthood.

It is a point of Virtue, Meekness, and Charity, to reprove them but gently;
but those which are done to God must be reproved sharply, though it be to our
nearest and dearest Relations; let not the flesh draw thee back. This implies
that we should do it with forecast, care, and preparation.

That we should not do it slothfully, but with vigor, and diligence; hide not
thy hand in thy bosom; the slothful, the simple, and the ungodly are Brothers.

in all his purposes, says St. James; Therefore walk closely with God, as one
that is well resolved; not with weariness, and lookings back: A curse is
pronounced on him that does the Work of God negligently. Be steadfast, and
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; and have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness.

-- Pars multa natat modo recta capessens.
Interdum pravis obnoxia. Hor.
Cautions explicatory.
Not to oppose good conduct and mature deliberation, because nothing requires
Wisdom so much as the things of God: therefore it must be joined with that
might, vigor, and diligence here required. The treasures of Wisdom that dwell
in Christ must be communicated to his Members.

2. The things of the World must be done with a fear of overdoing them, and in
a manner as if we did them not; not with equal zeal and care with the things of
God, not like Martha.

3. It is not a little vexatious violence that is required; but we must labor
to get over the difficulties, that disturb the Soul; Temptations of
Covetousness, Ambition, the golden Ball in the way, the cares of the World, etc.

4. To labor in those things which God calls to do, not what flesh ingages to
do; but the works of our outward callings are here intended also, as Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy brow thou shall eat thy bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. He that will
not work, let him not eat; success is the reward of diligence: And the promise
is to the diligent, they meet with many unexpected opportunities. It should
stir up Parents, and Masters of Families to be serious in their Family duties,
to waken them from their insensibility, drowsiness and sloth: Let them reprove
sin with indignation: Let not one word come from them jestingly of God, nor any
vain, wanton, or unsavory discourse; but as it is, Deuteronomy. 11.6, 7, 8. You must
speak of the Word of God as you lie down, and as you rise up. It must be your
discourse and table talk; such as by good education or estate, are advanced
above others. And all Persons in Authority are admonished to be diligent in
their duties, 1 Thessalonians. 5. let us not sleep, as others, but watch. It should
stir up them that are rich to give liberally and willingly. Withold not good
from them to whom it is due. To do good and to communicate, forget not, for it
is a pleasing sacrifice to God: It reproves lukewarmness, the Laodiceans sin.

Consider, how odious that is to God: because thou art neither hot nor cold, I
will spew thee out of my Mouth. It Is not enough that thou art not against the
ways of God; for the unprofitable Servant was cast into outward darkness; the
barren fig tree, whose time of Fruit was not come, was cursed. The unwise
Virgins, who slept, and suffered their Lamps to go out, were shut out from
coming in to the Bridegroom.

Consider the Curse upon them that do the work of God negligently. A negligent
Servant is hateful to God and man, but a diligent Servant shall share the
Inheritance with the Sons, Pro. What delight can dull, lifeless service be to
him whom we serve? Our service should be suited to the delight of him whom we
serve. And

Our service should be to the honor of him whom we serve. But slothful, and
lifeless service is to the dishonor of God, therefore he says, Mal. 4. v.
Offer it now to thy Governor, and see whether he will accept it.

The fruit of Christ's death, is the Zeal of good works, Titus 2.11.14. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people Zealous of good works. From

Thence it appears that the note of Gods people is a Zeal of good works,
namely the works of mercy, charity, and piety, They shall run and not be weary,
walk and not faint.

That obedience sway the conscience, that the ends, and aims be good, that we
should advance piety to the utmost, and repress sin.

If we expect any benefit by our service, we must not do it negligently, but
with Zeal; the more Zeal, the more comfort, and satisfaction, and the more will
be our reward.

Zeal breaks through any restraints that would keep us from God. Though Michael
scoffed, yet David would not leave off his dancing before the Ark.

Consider how violent, and earnest carnal men are in the ways of sin, and shall
they serve Satan better than God is served? wicked men are so active, and
laborious, that they are said to draw iniquity with cart-ropes, they are not
drawn into sin, but draw sin; there is no lust but costs them some self-denial.
Their pride must feel no cold; the worldly man incroaches not only upon the
pleasures of his life by rising early, and going to bed late, but also defrauds
himself of necessary comforts; they are wise in their generation, like the
unjust steward.

If Ammon be sick for Tamar, shall not the Spouse be sick for Christ? shall
they take more pains to undo themselves, than the Servants of God to save
themselves?

Consider, that you have been violent in the ways of sin, and will you not do
as much for God? Romans 6.19. I spoke after the manner of men; as you have
yielded your selves Servants of sin, so now yield your selves Servanss of
Righteousness unto holiness. So much as you have spent in and upon sin, it is
but a modest proposal of the Apostle, that you would spend so much in the
service of God. How can your conversion be right, when sin has more of your
heart than God? 2 Cor. 5.13. If we be besides our selves it is for Christ; he
had been mad against Christ; 'twas not unmeet if he seemed mad for Christ, your
pace was furious, like Jehu's, for your beloved lusts, will you be slow for God?

Consider, It may be you set out late toward Godliness, therefore you must
make the more haste; Let the time spent in your lusts be sufficient. All men
set out too late; we are transgressors from the womb; God loved us before we
were, from eternity, he loved us before we loved him, or knew how to love him.

Consider what Christ has suffered for us, his bloody agonies, and the sorrows
of his Cross. He is the Captain of our salvation, and we must follow him. He
has given us heaven as God gave Canaan, to the Israelites, but they were to
force their way. The power of Satan is broken, but some relicts are left for
our exercise.

Consider the enemies of our souls are violent. The Devil compasses the earth,
therefore we had need to stand upon our guard; the enemy watches, and do you
sleep? Whilst men slept the enemies sowed tares among their Corn. Whilst we
are careless, the enemy prevails; when we make speed in our flight, the enemy
has no advantage. Whilst the Disciples were a sleep, Judas, and his Company,
were watching. Small measure of grace must not content the professors of
Christianity. Except your righteousness exeed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. A temporary
believer goes far, but a true believer must go farther.

Consider that all things in Religion are high, and call for more than ordinary
from us. There are great obligations upon us. He had no greater gift to give
us, than his only Son. He could do no more for us, then he did, in his agonies,
and sufferings, and laying down his life, undergoing that intolerable pain
that made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? So that in
love God has gone to the uttermost for us, in his power he has not so: every
mercy received obliges us to do more than we have done, the supplies of the
Spirit of God which come in upon us, and help more than we have done. The
supplys of the Spirit of God which come in upon us, and help our infirmities
oblige us. The heathen, some of them have gone so far by the light of nature,
that because they could not mortify their lusts, they have put out their eyes,
this they did without those helps which we have. Christ Jesus a person of the
God head meriting our salvation, and interceding for us. The Spirit helping us
to work out our salvation; and the holy precepts of the law of God which is
pure, converting the soul, Psalm. 19.19. Psalm. 119. The law of the Lord is
exceeding broad. It is another obligation that we have a hope exceeding all
that we can imagine, 2 Cor. 4.16. We have a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory laid up for us.

Besides these obligations, the dreadful threats might make us earnest in the
works of religion, which if a man do but think of it, causes horror.

Consider the danger of coldness in dutys, if we don't go forward, we go back,
like those that row against the stream.

Before we lose our first works we lose our Love; first men grow careless, then
off goes religion and the service of God. Some that are high in professing are
cold in practice. To provoake one another to love and good works is a good
contention; for solemn piety we cannot do too much: In sin every thing is too
much, in grace nothing enough, in particular exercises there may be too much in
the love of God, there can be no excess; many come short, Romans 2.9. They come
short of the glory of God, 2 Peter 1.11. We are to labor that an abundant
entrance may be given us into the Kingdom of Christ Jesus.

Consider if your heart is dead, and cold, you loose the comfort of Christian
privileges and duties, a dead Christian is as none, A change without life is
but a morral reformation. That is true conversion where we are not merely
changed, but quickened by a new principal of life, heathens have been changed
from profaness to a morral life. I am come says Christ that you may have life,
and that you may have it more abundantly. All the true members of Christ are
living stones in that building whereof he is the corner stone. our Hope is but
a fancy if we be dead, and slugish, 1 Pet. 1.7. It is called a lively Hope, and
our life a living by faith.

Consider the burning Zeal of the ancient Servants of God, Psalm. 119. My soul
breaks out for the fervent desire that it has always to thy commandments. My
soul is a thirst for God, Psalm. 42. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks,
so longs my soul after thee O God, Psalm. 16.3. O God thou art my God early
will I seek thee, My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs after thee. And
Psalm. 119. Do I not hate them that hate thee? and am I not vexed with them that
rise up against thee? yea I hate them with a perfect hatred as though they were
my enemies. So Righteous Lot was vexed with the unclean conversation of the
wicked; others loved not their lives unto death.

The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence and the violent take it by force,
Jacobs wrestling with God prevailed.

It is one of the characters of those that are Redeemed, as it is said in the
Epist. of St.

That he may purchase to himself a peculiar people Zealous of good works.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate. Many lets we find.

Be not weary of well doing. But the further we run in this race, the fresher
we are; and like bodies tending to their center, Velocius in fine quam in
principio, So the Righteous bring forth more fruit in their latter end. When
Christians show their fervor of Spirit in the service of God, it is but a
scandal to religion to say they are young converts.

The hypocrite desires no more but what may be sufficient to serve his turn,
but the true Christian desires to grow in grace, and to abound in the work of
the Lord, and is grieved that his graces are not perfect.

By this we imitate Christ, for it is said of him, The Zeal of Gods house has
eaten him up. It was his love to God which caused such Zeal; so David's love
made his eyes gush out with water to behold sin.

Our Blessed Savior wrought out our salvation by agonies. And we are commanded
to work out our own salvation with fear, and trembling. And all the duties of
religion are wrought with Agonies, striving, and Zeal. First our faith is to be
strived for, Philip. 1.17. (...). Then in prayer we are to strive, as it is
said, Striving togetheir in prayer. And this is that circumstance that makes it
prevail. The effectual fervent prayer of the righteous avails much. The whole
Stadium of the Christian life is to be run; that motion is the most violent in
nature.

The whole life of a Christian is a continual fighting of a battle, wherein we
put forth all our strength: That gives no time for Diversions; and but very
little for necessary refreshings, with food, and sleep. All our service we do
to God, must be with a fervent Spirit: If this fire goes out, our services are
dull, flat, and liveless.

(For where there is life, there is heat) the maxim holds as well in things of
Grace, as in things of Nature; therefore if thou would not offer a sacrifice
without a heart, so ought thou to beware of dullness, and coldness in Duties,
and Graces.

So if thou would not have thy Spiritual Enemies to get any advantage
against thee, thou must be watchful. And that thou may fight against them,
and subdue, and conquer thy corruptions, thou must put forth all thy strength,
and all little enough, when we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in High places.

And although we do thus fight, and put forth all our power, and watch against
these enemies that they get no advantage, and redeem the time from our worldly
business, diversions and recreations; Yet we shall find our selves so hardly
beset at all times, and too easy to be overcome; unless we look to Jesus
Christ the Author and Finisher of our Faith for his succor, through whose
assistance we become more than Conquerours; who is both able and willing, to
succor his that are tempted. This looking to Christ, is to set him before us
to imitate, and call upon him in time of Temptation with fervent Prayer, as
before is mentioned; and to wait upon him for strength: as the eyes of a Maid
are unto the hands of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon thee, until thou have
mercy upon us. And so doing, we shall find that he is our strength, and present
help in trouble, and know how his strength is perfected in weakness.

He that says, he is not able of himself to overcome his Spiritual enemies,
therefore will not put forth all his power, and use all these means, he is
content to be led Captive by them.

What is it will make thee earnest and servent? Consider,

What it is that lies at the stake, what thou strivest to save, and searest to
lose? Is it a small and light matter, or is it a thing of more value to thee,
than the whole World? Thy Immortal Soul, and the Eternal welfare thereof? This
thou strivest for.

Who does not strive and struggle to save his Life, when in danger? much more
then must we strive for the saving of our Eternal Life. What perils, and
labors do Men undergo by Land and Sea, to get a livelihood for their bodies,
though they know not how short a time they may live to enjoy it, and frequently
lose their precious lives, in the acquisition of the sustenance of their Lives:
But how few venture so far for the Eternal sustenance of their Soul; or labor
so hard, or undergo such difficulties to solace or save their immortal Soul?
How readily does the Sea-beaten Merchant tossed with the Winds and Waves of the
Raging Sea, throw hastily overboard all his precious substance gotten with
great labor and peril of Life, to save his short uncertain Life? And wisely
too. But much more wise is he that throws away his perishing goods, his life,
and all; to save his Immortal Soul, and his Eternal Life, and well-being. He
that is the only wise has told us, that we must sell all to purchase Heaven;
that we must cut off our right hand, and pull out our right Eye, if they offend
us; that he that will not forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, and
life it self for him, is not worthy of him; he that will save his Life shall
lose it. Lord God, we will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy
ways; delight in thy Statutes; rejoice in the way of thy Testimonies, and take
counsel of them. But quicken thou us according to thy Word, Ps. 119.14, 15, 16,
25. that we may not faint nor be weary. Be wise then, O my Soul, for thy great
interest; thy main chance, to save that with the expense and loss of thy
perishing momentary concerns, and to bestow thy pains and industry upon this.
And let the Children of Life learn this Wisdom of the Children of the World,
for our most wise Author of our Salvation has taught them so to do. Do thou
fly sin, as they fly poverty and shame; seek understanding and the knowledge of
God, as the World seek Silver, and search for her as they search for hid
Treasures, Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2.4, 5. Let it not suffice thee to seek him by night in
thy bed, whom thy Soul desires. But rise, and go about the City, enquire for
him of the Watchmen, and of all that can probably make any discoveries of him;
charge them if they find him to manisest him to thee; cry after knowledge, lift
up thy voice for anderstauding; as well in thy private prayers to God, as in
thy eager pursuit after it, in such places as it is to be found in. Where thou
sowest sparingly, thou do make expectation of reaping sparingly, or else thou
may be ashamed of thy sparing. But a far more sordid, and shameful thing it
is to be sparing of thy cost, and pains; when thou sowest for Glory,
Immortality, and Eternal Life; and have God and Jesus Christ engaged for thy
satisfaction. Thou need not to fear to part with all thou have to purchase
this precious Pearl that is invaluable; the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Crown of
Righteousness that never fades, since there is no hazard of spoliation; nor
any of Anticipation, or prevention, or for uncertainty; as St. Paul argues on
his own behalf, touching his running, fighting, and striving; for all that use
the same means must attain it certainly. Be zealous against sin as he was, that
vexed his Soul with the unclean conversation of the wicked; but beware of zeal
for God against God; such as Paul's was before his conversion.

If every virtuous action affords satisfaction to him that atchieveth it;
then the more strenuous he is in doing it, the more perfect it will be, and the
more satisfaction it will yield. Lord let this cure the Green Sickness of my
Soul.

Meditat. Psalm. 34.4. I sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me out
of all my sear.

A preparatory Ejaculation.
Lord, if Christ Jesus our head, (thy dear Son) suffer with us; then deliver us
we beseech thee for Christ's sake, for why should he be afflicted?

A Prayer. In extremity of sickness, and peril of Death.
O thou that art the Father of the fatherless; the comfort of the comfortless;
the helper in all needs; the healer of all sickness; the succourer in all
wants; the ease in all pains; the calm in all storms; the composer of all
perturbations; the asswager of all grief; the deliverer from all dangers; the
refuge from all fears: stand by me now and save me, as thou have promised; and
let me see Heaven opened to receive me, and the Angels ready to convey my Soul
into Abraham's bosom.

And thou blessed Jesus who art mighty to save, and have finished the work of
our Redemption alone, and subdued all our enemies; draw nigh to us in the time
of our sickness; when Man's help is vain, when our bodily pains are so many,
and great in every part of our body, that no part can relieve the other. The
mind being altogether unable to fix upon any inward solace whereby to sustain,
and bear up it self; put forth thy Almighty power to succor me; be my
comforter, and conquer death for me, and keep away Satan and all his
Temptations.

A Meditation upon peril of Death.
If Croesus when taken prisoner by Cyprus, and sentenced to be burned, upon the
instant when he expected his execution, was exceedingly rejoiced, by calling to
mind the wise sayings of Solon, and was willing to die: Shall not I much more
rejoice in death, and be willing to change this unconstant transitory life for
the joys of Heaven, when I call to mind the comfortable words of my Savior,
and the never-fading joy which he has assured me of in the world to come?

Med. 2. LORD, I have had such a great delight in the sweet conversation of
some of thy Saints and Servants departed this life, that I have desired to be
dissolved, that I might be with them; shall I not much more desire to be
dissolved to be with Christ the Lord, whose sweetness infinitely surpasses the
Sons of men.

Meditations in my sickness.
Med. 1. Do thou pass the tedious nights of thy sickness in restlesness, and
Dolours; Let it not greatly trouble thee, if thou spendest those restless hours
in holy Meditation; for those Meditations are a sweet savor to God, and
service wherein he delights, and God draws nigh to thee to instruct, and
teach thee in his ways, and thou drawest nigh to God, to learn his righteous
Judgments, and to delight thy Soul in him. And better it is that thou
should want thy rest, than God to be without such services, or thou without
thy Spiritual comfort.

Med 2. As every step of our journey to Heaven is beset with Temptation, so it
is with tribulation of necessary consequence, therefore expect it, and not
halcion days of tranquillity; the expectation of them will make them more easy
to be born.

Med. 3. If thy temporal losses are the cause of inward, and spiritual gains,
and improvements to thee in thy graces, and thou have found them so formerly,
then are they still no cause of grief. And do thou O Lord make thy Servant
amends for the want of temporal comforts with the affluence of Spiritual.

Med. 4. If the time of sickness, or Affliction be the time and season of the
comforts of the comforts of the Holy Ghost, and not prospetiry. This is to be
chosen and embraced rather than that, Moses made this choice. And thy
allurements to the contrary cannot be compared to his which he despised.

Med. 5. All Afflictions are either from God or for God; if from God, they are
the chastisements of a merciful Father for our good, if for God, they are our
glory, Philip. 1.29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only
to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake.

Consider then that they work for us, not against us; and what they work for,
(...), 2 Cor. 4.17. No Tongue can express the greatness of the eternal glory
which they work for us, nor any hyperbole upon hyperbole; for being borne with
love, and child like submission, they endear us more to God, and kindle and
inflame his love toward us.

Consider them in themselves, they are but light, and for a moment, for before,
v. 8. He says, We are troubled on every side perplexed, v. 9. Persecuted, cast
down, yet neither distressed nor in dispare, nor forsaken, nor destroyed, which
words fully express both their heaviness, and their lightness, and concludes
with their lightness. And he makes a double end, or final cause of these
Afflictions, grace, and glory, for in the next verse, v. 10. He says, Always
bearing about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of
Jesus might be manifest in our bodies, with which agrees that, Romans 8.
Nevertheless afterward they yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness to
them that are exercised thereby.

Would thou have the life of Jesus manifest in thy body? or Jesus Christ to
live in thy soul? then be content with Afflictions, sickness, and pains
continually; or would thou have an hyperbole on hyperbole of glory, then
embrace the Cross, which works it for us, and love God afflicting thee.
Would thou have eternity of Blessedness hereafter, then be content to be
fitted and prepared for the enjoyment of it, by a moments misery; if thou
desire these ends, use those means.

Med. 6. The Lord has said it in his word, that the voice of joy, and
thanksgiving is in the dwelling of the righteous; heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning.

He says he creates Israel a rejoicing. Trust thou then in the Lord O my soul
that thy grief shall not always last. That the Rod of the wicked shall not
always rest on thy back. That he has not forgotten to be gracious to thee.
Thou have found by thine own experience, the truth of these gracious dealings
of God, and may break out into praises of his goodness, with the words of the
Prophet, Isaiah 25. O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise
thy name; for thou have done wonderful things, thy counsels of old are
faithfulness and truth, v. 4. Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength
to the needy in his destress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat,
when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall. Therefore
according to thy loving kindness of old, now O Lord in the midst of thy wrath
remember mercy.

Med. 7. What Son is there whom his Father chastneth not? let me see the love
of a Father in thy chastisements that it is the cup which my Father gives,
that it is thy loving correction, as David calls it, Psalm. That it is but when
need reguires. That it is less than I deserve, that it is that I should not
perish with the World; That thou do not afflict nor grieve me willingly; but
as unwillingly as a Father his Son in whom he delights; it is affliction to
himself. That thou layest no more upon me than thou will enable me to bear.

That in all my afflictions, Christ suffers with me, and he that touches me,
touches also the Apple of his eye; that when the Lord afflicts me with one
hand, he supports me with the other. That he corrects me not in wrath.

That fury is not in him. That his wrath endures but a moment.

That he will save the afflicted people, Psalm. 18.27. That it is an undoubted
evidence to me of my Adoption, and filiation. And that it shall work in my soul
Patience, Humility meekness, and all other peaceable fruit of righteousness in
this life, and an unspeakable weight of eternal glory hereafter. That as a
Father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth me.

If this I be assured of, I shall count afflictions matter of joy and
rejoicing; for as I desire the ends, grace and glory, I must embrace the means
that God uses to subdue my iniquities, and to teach me obedience, and make me
better, and account it loving correction.

Med. 8. If I would attain the end, I must be contented with the trouble and
difficulty of the means. Heaven is purchased at no less a rate than All for it:
Whatever is dear unto thee as thy right eye, in this thou must deny thy self.
Have thou tried and found the difficulty of mortification, forsaking of the
world, and self-denial? and of thy self thou art not able to attain to them, to
conquer thy passions, viz. thy anger, by an invincible patience; thy revenge,
and malice, by doing good for evil, and by submission to him who has said,
Vengeance is mine; or else thy covetous mind of possessing much, and trusting
to the multitude of thy riches; or else the lusts of thy flesh, and youth,
pride, or vainglory, love of pleasure, and ease, and indulging thy self.

What thou find thou art not able of thy self to do, those acts of
mortification thou have prayed to God to enable thee to do, viz. that these
messengers of Satan that buffet thee may depart from thee.

The Lord by his visitations and afflictions takes away the strength of thy
corruptions, weakens them, and brings them under, and so does that for thee,
which thou were not able to do thy self; thou have cause to say with holy
David, Psalm. 119. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn the judgments of thy mouth; whereas, before I was afflicted I went
astray. Then thou have cause to rejoice also, as the Apostle St. James bids the
Brother of a high degree rejoice when he is brought low.

It may be thou had need of subduing, and keeping under thy body, and instead
thereof, have been rather inclined to pamper it, feeding to the full, and have
waxed fat, and kicked. The Lord, out of his mercy to thee has sent afflictions
to purge thee, and heal thee, and to keep under thy body, that thou should
subdue thy corruption and lusts which are ready to break out, do what thou
can by mortification, self denial, fasting, abstinance, and prayer, which
dutys thou have been unwilling to undergo, or at least in such sort, and
measure as the Gospel requires.

Thou must not only be conntent to use and undergo the means, but if thou will
have grace and glory, thou must pray for the means also, and desire it.

Thou know that visitations and loving corrections are those means which thy
heavenly Father is forced to use to reclaim those that go astray, and to
improve those that are weak.

Thou know many of thy graces are weak, and want improvement; thou prayest
to him to fulfill his promises of helping and strengthening his that are weak;
if so, thou must pray for these means which he has appointed, and take up thy
Cross that thou may be able to follow thy Savior.

Med. 9. Thou know the Discipline which God uses to his prodigal and
undutiful children; If they forsake his ways, he visits their iniquities with
rods, and their sins with scourges, though he does not utterly take his loving
kindness from them. We read not of any of the Saints of God, who went
unpunished for their sins. Job cried out, that God made him possess the sins of
his youth. David's sins took such hold upon him that he was not able to look
up, he was even consumed by means of Gods heavy hand; there was no health in
his flesh, nor rest in his bones, by reason of his sin, Psalm. 38.3. Then he
confessed his wickedness and was sorry for his sins, and they were ever in his
sight when the rod was upon him, v. 17, 18.

Though we also believe our selves to be the Garden of God, we too must be
content sometimes, to endure the pruning hook; that our superfluous, and dead
branches may be cut off.

And that the cold North wind, and tempestuous South wind arise, and blow upon
us, that our spices may flow out, and our Beloved may eat his pleasant fruits,
Cant. 4.15, 16.

Med. 10. Examine thy self whether thy heart be not more tender of offending
God in the time of thy affliction, than it is in the time of prosperity, and
whether thou find thy self so well disposed for works of piety, and charity
in the time of thy prosperity when the world smileth on thee, as thou art in
the times of thy Visitation.

If so thou find, and that thou desire to reap those fruits of
righteousness.

Thou must then endure to have the fallow fields of thy heart brake up.

Meditat. 11. The many temptations that a Christian encounters in his heavenly
race, are not to be numbered, or expressed. It is so large a field, that I
might sooner lose my self in it, than make a full survey of it.

Yet to help a little, that we may know what to expect, and prepare for, we may
Meditate of the terms which are used to describe, and express them, as namely
that it is called a warfare, a wrestling against principalities, a running a
race, a Pilgrimage, a so journing here, taking up the Cross, the yoke of
Christ, bearing a burden, labor of love, working in the vinyard, a passing
through the vail of Baca, a strait Gate, a narow way. That he that will venture
for it must sell all to purchase it, also they are described by preparations
for war, and for building.

We must seriously weigh, and consider of these difficulties, least we fall
upon the like absurdities as those do who undertake building, or warfare
(instanced by our Savior) without due calculations of the charge with their
own abilities, and thereby are forced to desist from their work shamefully with
the loss of all their charge, and estates.

Med. 12. God is pleased to exercise the graces of his Servants by various
sorts of afflictions; this affliction in the body by sickness seems the
greatest; therefore Satan moved the Lord to smite Job in his body, after he had
afflicted him, in the loss of his Estate and Children; and for all that Job
retained his integrity still; yet the malice of the subtle Tempter surmised;
That if God would put forth his hand, and touch his bone, and his flesh, he
would curse God to his Face: thereupon God put him into Satan's hand, to do
with him what he would, only saving his Life.

The enemy of Mankind having obtained this liberty, who but a Devil can imagine
the cruelty by him used to this poor Man, in every part of his body? certainly
all the torments that he could inflict, he did inflict them: he thus being
afflicted, and with the noisomeness of his sores, driven from the society of
Men; loathing himself, and loathed of all Men; setting himself down among the
Ashes, and scraping the filth from his body with a Potsherd. Satan then
insinuates his Temptation by an instrument, of all that can be imagined most
prevalent, his Wife, she thus bespeaks him: Do thou still retain thine
integrity? Curse God and dye. But what success does he get? not such as he had
when he made use of the same subtilty against our first Parent, uxorious Adam,
but the contrary, a repulse; as course and severe, as the motion was absurd,
and impious: but yet then after seven days silence and consternation of
himself, and Friends; he cursed the time of his Birth, and Conception; because
they gave life to him with so much misery. Health being (in the Judgment of
wise Men) the choicest Jewel that God has to bestow on mankind in this Life:
the loss of that, depriving us of all other Earthly blessings, and comforts; of
Food, Raiment, Wealth, Honor, the Light of the Sun, Wife, Children, Friends
and Relations, and of the enjoyment of our selves, it must consequently be the
very greatest affliction. This being added to the other two; namely, the loss
of all his substance, which might have relieved his distressed condition, and
defended him from the contempt of the base people, and that other loss of his
beloved offspring, that were formerly his solaces, and might now have stood by
him, and ministered to him, when all others had forsaken him, filled the bitter
cup of his affliction, yet in all this did not Job sin; he retained his
Integrity, and disproved Satan's Objection; that he served God for the gifts,
and benefits he enjoyed. If this should be thy condition; resolve thou to trust
in him, though he should kill thee, and wait till thy change come. And though
he has left thee nothing for which thou may be obliged; yet bless him, and
remember, that he that took thy comforts from thee, is the same who gave them
to thee, and he may do what he will with his own: and as thou art his creature
thou owe submission to him, and to do him all the sevice thou can, and
having done all, yet can not pretend the least merit.

Besides which thou expectest eternal recompense for all thou do or
suffer.

Med. 13. God had but one Son without sin, but never a on without suffering;
since that thou can not escape afflictions, resolve with thy self to wade
through them with as little loss as thou may, and prefer the temporal loss,
though never so great, to avoid the eternal loss bearing in thy body, 2 Cor. 4.
Always the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be manifest in
thy self.

Med. 14. If thou will have the things of the world, thou must take them with
their charges, and burdens; Transit cum onere Terra. So must thou take Heaven
also with the charge and burden, through many tribulations thou must enter
into it. Great must be thy troubles, if thou be righteous. If thou forsake
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Houses, and Land, for Christ's sake, the hundred
fold reward is promised, but with trouble.

Compare then (O my Soul) the immence series of thy own Afflictions of bodily
sicknesses, and infirmities, also thy inward perturbations of mind, with these
Scriptures which have foretold thee of them; compare them also with the
Afflictions of other Saints, David, Job, the three Children, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, all the Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles, and the head of us, and
them our blessed Lord and Savior, and be thou contented to suffer with him and
them; the Servant is not above his Master, if they do these things in a green
Tree what will they do to the dry? etc.

The preface to the following Meditation.
Having considered Gods people in their adverse and melancholy state of
suffering intend a while (my soul) the issue, end and success, for thus they
are contemned in the eye of the world, and their life looked upon as madness,
for the world knows not that they have a better, and more enduring substance in
Heaven, Heb. 10.34. It knows not that these Afflictions work for them a more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory

It knows not that they are sent to make them partakers of his Holiness, nor
sees the munition of rocks about them; they know not the supports that they
have in their sufferings, from Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, nor the joy
proceeding from the exercising, and improving their Faith, Patience, and other
Graces; nor the carresses, and embraces between Christ, and his Spouse; and
although they may read his Love Letters to her, yet they do not understand the
hope which she has by the comfort of the Scriptures. And though they see them
meet at the Ordinances, they know not how that God makes them joyful in the
house of prayer, Isa. 56.7. Psalm. 69. How they are satified with the pleasure
of Gods house.

How their souls are satisfied, as with marrow, and fatness, when they praise
God with joyful lips, Psalm. 63. Or how they rejoice in the Lord. And sing for
joy, nor that it is their privilege that God has given them his statutes, and
his laws. Nor how it is a privilege to suffer for Christ and not to be
dismayed, while they have God for their shield, Prove. 30. And because they know
not of their joys, and comforts, they like not their ways, nor choose their
portion; because they are led by their senses, and this life is lived by faith,
and not by sight. And the God of this world has blinded their eyes, that the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ might not shine unto them.

Our Savior tells his Apostles, that they are the light of the world, their
successors, who preach to us, should show us fully the sweets, pleasantness,
comfort, safety and profitableness of Religion, and draw us with the cords of
love, as Christ leads his Spouse into the banqueting house, into the garden of
Nuts, and allures her with all manner of sollaces and courtships, Cant. 7.13.
At our gates are all manner of pleasent fruits, new, and old, which I have laid
up for thee, O my Love; so ought Pastors to inculcate these privileges of Gods
Children as Gods word does, 54. of Isaiah at large. And our blessed Savior in
the 6. of St. Matthew. where he shows Gods paternal care over men, to ease them
of care, that they may intend the matters of their eternal salvation. And
largly inculcates Gods love to them, and his own love.

Fides Exultans
Meditations of that Incomparable Privilege which Gods Children only can have.
The joy in the Holy Ghost.
Motto, The voice of joy and thanksgiveing is in the dwellings of the righteous.

The holy Scripture is very full of proofs to make it out that they have this
privilege, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. 1 These. 1.6. Having received the word in much
affliction and with joy of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 7.4. I am exceeding joyful
in all our afflictions. I am filled with comfort, Psalm. 5.11. Let all those
that put their trust in thee rejoice; Let them ever shout for joy, because thou
defendest them. Let them also that love thy Name be joyful in thee, Psalm. 97.
v. 12. Rejoice in the Lord O ye Righteous, Acts. Repent and be baptized every
one of you, for the remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost. And Psalm. 59. My joy shall be in the Lord. Our blessed Savior
testifies the truth of this Assertion, John 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, whom the world cannot receive, because
it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, because he dwells
with you, and shall be in you. Comfort gives joy. The natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit. Besides the Authorities cited, and many more, which
might be cited. It is evidenced by reason, that the Saints have such a
privilege. The first Reason to prove it may be this; That the chief object of
their desire is grace, Psalm. 42. As the Heart pants, etc. Psalm. 63. From
whence I argue, That the desire accomplished is sweet to the soul, Prove. 13.19.
And their desire shall be accomplished, Prove. 20.24. The desire of the
Righteous shall be granted, Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him. Now that the object which is chief in their desires is grace, is
proved by Psalm. 26.8. The desire of our souls is to thy Name. And Psalm. 119.97.
Oh how I love thy Law! all the day long is my meditation therein. Desire is the
act, Love the passion from which it proceeds, Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the
Law of the Lord. Delight is the enjoyment of that which is loved and desired.
Fruition or enjoyment is joy. So the holy Spouse accounts it, Cant. 1.2. Let
him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth for his love is better then wine. The
Holy Ghost does, and will work these desired graces in their souls, and Christ
will return reciprocal love, and carresses to his Spouse, and the fullness of
joy, and will come in and sup with him that opens to him, Revel. 3.20. Then the
soul injoyes her self, when she sits under his shadow with delight Can. It is
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.

Another Argument to prove it may be a Congruo. It well became the goodness of
so good, and gracious a Sovereign, when according to his Kingly office he put
the yoke upon the necks of his Subjects to facilitate the yoke, and sweeten the
lives of his faithful Subjects in the greatest measure, when his goodness was
such that he laid down his life for them. John 10.11. I am the good shepherd,
the goodshepherd lays down his life for the Sheep. He draws them to obedience
by love, the gratest that can be imagined; he promises them rewards, greater
than could be conceived. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, what the Lord has prepared for them that serve
him. And to facilitate their obedience, gives them the holy Spirit to help
their infirmities. And sends him for a comforter to relieve, and comfort them
when they are afflicted, oppressed, or destitute of comfort in the world, which
he foresaw they would be, therefore promised to send it, and his Truth will not
suffer him to fail; so that when their afflictions do abound, their
consolations do much more abound: And when their outward man does decay, their
inward man is renewed day by day; that makes amends for what their outward man
suffers, with the certainty of their hope begotten and strengthened in them by
the Holy Ghost; That our vile bodies shall one day be made like to his glorious
body: That when this earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, we have a building not
made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens; which hopes the Holy Ghost does
assure to us, and thus gives us joy unspeakable.

This privilege, and many other, Christ Jesus has purchased for, and given to
his people, to oblige and endear them, that they should be a willing people, 2 Timothy 5.2. By whom we have access through faith unto this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we
have boldness and access with confidence to the Throne of grace, Gal. 2. v. 20.
The life which I now live, I live by the faith in the Son of God. He is the
Author of our salvation, and of all the privileges we enjoy, because, to as
many as receive him, he gives the privilege to become the Sons of God; and
that entiltes them to all privileges.

Another Argument may be fetched a causis; for as there are pleasures, and
comforts, desires, and enjoyments natural, causing the joy natural; so are
there found pleasures, comforts, desires, and enjoyments supernatural,
undependent, separate, and removed from the natural, and had and enjoyed
merely, and only in the privation of those (according to that of the Apostle)
when we have no comfort in the world, then we have most in duty. As having
nothing, yet possessing all things; which joy is fully described by the Prophet
Habakkuk, c. 3. Though the Figtree should not blossom, neither should fruits be
in the Vines; though the labor of the Olive should fail, etc. yet he would
rejoice in the Lord: And it is promised by our blessed Lord and Savior, Joh.
10. My joy shall no man take from you. Which the blessed Martyrs in the Epistle
to the Hebrews found true, when they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
and would not accept deliverance. Christ calls it his joy, partly because he is
the Author of it, and does give it, according as he promised; and partly in
opposition to the joys of the world, which proceeds from worldly causes; and
because the world cannot take it away, no more than it can give it; for
afflictions and persecutions cannot take it away; therefore it is said, Heb.
10. To you it is given to suffer; that is, with joy, and patience, and content,
for otherwise it were no gift.

Another argument to prove this privilege is from the Identity of the
principles of the new nature of the Regenerate man, which is the Spirit. These
that are such are lead by the Spirit, which is in them; they live after the
Spirit, they are in the Spirit. The Spirit of grace, and of glory rests upon
them, and being Spiritual, they are delighted with, and savor the things of
the Spirit only, and Spiritus sanctus exhilerat sui participes, he quickens,
and stirs up those graces that are in them, and replenishes them with the dew
of Heaven, without which continual supply our graces would fail, Zach. 4. The
two Olive Trees emptied themselves by golden Pipes into the Lamps.
Mortification, and Vivification, and all graces are wrought in us by the
Spirit. John 4. The water that I shall give him, shall be a well of water
springing up to eternal life. Romans 8.22. If ye by the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live, 1 Pet. 1.22. Since ye have purified your
souls in obeying the truth, through the Spirit, being born again, etc. Both the
Will and the Deed are from him, helping our infirmities. That which is their
meat and drink, which they hunger and thirst for, and live upon their Pabulum
Animarum, must be so qualified, as to refresh, strengthen, delight, and
comfort, and so it does.

This privilege will be further made out by the effects thereof, which the
Heavenly soul does enjoy, therefore it is proper to search out in what
particulars the Holy Ghost does rejoice, and make joyful the believing soul;
the particulars are contained under three heads; First in their duties
performed, the Holy Spipit does exhilerate the souls of the faithful people of
God; this head contains both active, and passive duties, whereby they do
exert and put forth their graces, in doing and suffering the good will of God.
For duties well performed are their enjoyments, because they do find the
assistance of the Holy Spirit inabling them in the performance of them, when
they find themselves insufficient, and indisposed; and this is matter of joy,
and comfort to them, because they have performed by the Spirits assistance the
work of prayer, and praising God, according to his will, and they are confident
that they shall enjoy that blessed privilege which Christ has purchased for
them, by his blood, viz. confidence in their access to the Throne of Grace, and
assurance that they shall receive their petitions through the merit of his
bloody passion and intercession. And as every degree of sin, if but a sinful,
or vain thought, makes a child of God loath himself; so every degree of
holiness, and every good thought, yields him pleasure, content and enjoyment.
Hereby they are encouraged, and delighted to walk with God in holy Meditation
and converversation. So suffering with Christ also called by David, loving
correction, is matter of joy. If we suffer with him, we know we shall also
reign with him; therefore they are willing to bear his reproach, which they are
enabled to do by the assistance of the Spirit in the time of their trials; he
revives the spirit of the contrite ones, Isa. 57.15.

A second head to which these particular acts may be referred, is the sealing
and ensuring the exceeding precious promises of the Gospel to them, whereby
they are enabled to live upon a promise by faith in him who made it, and is
able and willing to perform it to them that trust in him, through the merits of
Jesus Christ. And they find themselves contented, and willing to live upon the
promise, and to wait God's leisure for the time till it is accomplished; and
for the manner of the accomplishing thereof: And these workings of the Spirit
are all matter of joy and enjoyment to the soul to find them stirring in their
hearts, because they know it to be the Spirit.

By this they lay hold of the promises in the greatest latitude: I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Whosoever dwells under the defense of the most High,
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. No good thing will he withhold
from them that live a godly life. They shall want no manner of thing that is
good. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I shall deliver thee, and thou
shall praise me, Psalm. 50.15. He will not be afraid of evil tidings, Psalm. 107.
No plague shall come nigh his dwelling, Isa. 54.17. No weapon formed against
thee shall prosper, etc. And that all things shall work for their good; but
chiefly they lay hold on the promises of grace.

These consolations are always bestowed upon God's suffering Servants, and are
most proper and suitable to that condition. In the multitude of the sorrows
that I had in my heart, thy comforts refresht me. The holy Ghost working in our
hearts show us our Adoption, and the Pardon of our Sins: and that God is at
peace with us, and assures us of Gods favor, and of Life, and Blessedness to
come; and so sweetens the bitterness of the Cross, by a better hope. Thus God
is to us a Sun and a Shield. And in this sense, it is the earnest of Heaven; as
it is said, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has Sealed us, and given us the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts.

The nature of an earnest is to be but a little part of a greater benefit to
come. It Is also called the First Fruits; which shows, That the Saints enjoy
Heavenly Happiness here, in some degree; for the first Fruits, and the full
Crop are of the same nature: and so is the Earnest, and the whole reward. God
kisseth the Child whom he chastised, to assure him of his love, and his Bowels
yearn till he does it.

But yet it is not peculiar to Gods afflicted People only to live upon their
Earnest, their Hopes, and the promises of Heaven, and prelibations of Glory.
But those also who are not in a suffering condition do so, as Abraham did in
the Land of Promise: and Moses in Pharoah's Court; and all the Servants of God
do mortify the Deeds of the Body, and are Crucified with Christ, that they may
live to him, and Christ may live in them, Romans 8.22.

The Third place or Head to which these Spiritual Joys, and Comforts may be
referred is, In appropriating those many High and Glorious Privileges of
Blessedness and Happiness, which Christ has purchased for his People, Isa.
45.24. Isa. 62. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. and Revel. 1.5. These Privileges can only be
rightly understood (I conceive) by those who are heirs of them; for if the
Carnal Man could understand the value of them, he would seek the World less,
and them more; and would like the wise Merchantman in the Gospel, sell all to
Purchase them: for therein is all Blessedness and safety.

Yet (I conceive) That all that have right to them, do not at all times know
their Interest in them, because the suffering privilege seems to cross the
enjoying. For Isa. 49.14. Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has
forgotten me; when the Lord said, He has graven her upon the palms of his
hands. And David, Psalm. When I made haste, I said, I am cast out of the sight
of thine Eyes, nevertheless, thou heardst me. He did not then enjoy these
Privileges, because God sometimes works by contrary means to accomplish his
Promise. And not by those means on which we had our expectation: God has not
tied himself to means. Hence the Soul rashly concludes against it self, as
David did, Psalm. I shall one day perish by the hands of Saul. So in Lam. 3.18.
The Church concludes against her self, My strength, and my hope are perished
from the Lord. But the Holy Spirit does make out to the Soul its Right and
Title to these Privileges. First summarily, and comprehensively when the
Spirit certifieth us of our Adoption into Filiation with Christ Jesus
throughout his Passion, and merit, making us his Brethren, and so Children of
the same heavenly Father: as it is Romans 8 16. The Spirit it self bears Witness
with our Spirit that we are the Children of God; the soul knows its title to
all other privileges and blessings, as it is said, all are yours, ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, but it does not always thus satisfy the soul,
because sometimes we grieve the Spirit; they have the effect of their Adoption,
but they have not always the comfort of their Adoption, nor the sense of it,
therefore, Tim. 3.5. We are commanded to give deligence. To make our calling
and election sure. Because he does not give us the sense, and comfort of it
without diligence, and it is not preserved without diligence; all that are lead
by the Spirit of God, are the Children of God, though God might sometimes hide
his face from them. As the unregenerate are all their life time under the
Spirit of bondage, and entitled to all curses, and put out of Gods protection,
and though they are not all their lifetime in terror, as Cain was when he said.
Whosoever meets me, will slay me. Sometimes they are free from the impressions
thereof. And Gods children are sometimes without the impressions of joy, and
the certain apprehension of their title to it, or their joy is less sometimes,
and is not full for want of diligence in exercising their graces, or else it
may be through weakness in grace, or it may be for want of seeking it of God by
prayer, and Meditation thereupon, or for some unkindness done to the Spirit of
grace, or may be only because God pleases to give it but at special seasons.

But who is there so strong but may sometimes feel corruption stirring in his
heart? either an inclination to hearken to the tempter, or some sinful thought
injected, or else perceives his corruptions not so much conquered as he would
have them; and his heart so much renewed as he would have it. These cause much
grief and sadness in the soul which desires to be delivered from them. For the
regenerate soul is more sensible of one grace that it wants, or is weak and
defective in, than it is of many graces which it possesses. But when it
overcomes that temptation which it has most cause to fear, then has it double
joy.

Also who is there so watchful, careful, and tender of offending the Holy
Spirit, but sometimes is unkind to it, and causes a breach of love? But as it
happens in friendship, he that falls out with his friend, presently falls out
with himself for it, and seeks all opportunities of reconciliation. So the
Child of God when he has grieved the Spirit, does afflict himself for it, and
will not rest till the knot of friendship is stronger tied, and the love made
greater.

Now when this Irradiation of the Spirit of God upon our Spirits is thus
interrupted, by the hiding of Gods face, or the light of his countenance from
us, we are then troubled, as David was or as the Spouse in the Cant. When her
Beloved had withdrawn himself. And she sought him, and could not find him, but
never left seeking him till she did find him. Being wholly inamoured of him, as
she expresses by her delight in the persume which his fingers touch left up the
locks: If he leaves so much sweetness behind him where he but touches, and
goes away what glorious ravishments does he bring into that soul wherein he is
entertained? here the Spouse suffered as it were an eclipse, but not total:
when the light of Gods countenance returns again, then her light returns
also; this is the Spirits bearing witness with our Spirit; and these bear
witness to one another of Gods love to us, and our reciprocal love to God, and
consequently of our Adoption, and title to all privileges, and blessings: this
testimony also inflames our love more, and more to God, and makes these high,
and holy Impressions upon the soul.

1. A child-like ingenuity in the service of God; when a man obeys God, not out
of the impulses of a natural conscience, but from love.

2. The heart is borne out by the encouragements of another world.

3. Every occurrence makes us go to God.

4. Impress, It makes us ready, and willing to suffer, and undergo joyfully any
loss, or pain, or reproach for God, not accounting our lives, or any thing else
dear, if we may serve God with it; as the blessed Martyr suffered, and were
assured that Christ had suffered for them, and for them purchased a Kingdom, it
makes us willing to forsake the world, knowing that we have a dwelling place in
Heaven; It makes the soul humble, heavenly, contented, patient, Holy,
peaceable, charitable, pure, and unspotted of the world. For their great and
chief desire is to know their duty, and the good will, and pleasure of the
Lord, that they may yield their ready and cheerful obedience to it, and may be
able to do it: when the soul is thus disposed, every condition of life is
sweetened to it by the Spirit of Adoption, because it looks upon all things
that befall it, as coming from its heavenly Father in love. And desires, and
endeavors that all things may be to him, and to his glory.

And when the soul is thus disposed, and finds it self enabled by the Spirit to
do and suffer freely, willingly, and readily, all the good will and pleasure of
God, and to submit all things to God, and feels such filial affection to God,
such love, such patience, humility, and other workings, and impresses of the
Spirit in it. It has the Testimony of the Spirit upon it, that it is the child
of God, because these dispositions and impressions are wrought in it by the
Spirit, and now it can lay title to every privilege of blessedness.

And the sense and apprehension of God's great love to us in the redemption of
mankind, and of our own redemption in particular, and the sense of the love of
Christ Jesus to us in our redemption, and the knowledge of our particular
interest in it. That all his sufferings had respect to me in particular, and my
title thereby to all privileges is wrought by the holy Spirit, and is
testified to us by the holy Spirit, and from thence arises our love to God,
and to Christ by the operation of the Spirit; as David expresses in the 18th
Psalm; I will love thee, etc. This is the highest degree of the soul's
enjoyment, and the highest of its desires, and the fullness of its happiness,
and has all that is desirable, and there is no ultra, no further thing
desirable. It follows, that being in Christ, we take him for our portion,
then will we walk as he walked, 1 John 2.6. conform our selves to him, take him
for our pattern, our example, and guide; learn of him, go after him, which is
to be done chiefly by denying our selves, and taking up our Cross, not doing
our own will, but the will of God, (...), he humbled himself to become man;
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, Phil.
2.7. Humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross; he denied
preferment when they would have made him a King, and when Satan offered him all
the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory thereof: He denied honor when he
would not suffer his miracles to be divulged. And this is performed with joy
too, because (though it crosses our nature) yet it is the very life of our new
nature, as it was his meat and drink to do the will of his Father.

The soul that feels this Joy, has Heaven let into it; therefore it is willing
to go to God. This is both oil and wheels to the soul in its heavenly race.
When thou shall enlarge my heart, I will run the ways of thy Commandments,
said holy David.

This proves the truth of that saying of our Savior, I have overcome the
world; and shows us the impotency of our spiritual adversaries, which God
delights to see his servants to overcome, as appears in the trial of Job, and
the blessed Martyrs, who rejoiced in their sufferings.

By this others are encouraged to come in to the Church of God, Cant. Whither
is thy Beloved gone? said they to the Spouse, that we may seek him with thee.
The durableness of this joy is expressed by our Savior's saying, My joy no man
takes from you. All that oppression and persecution can do, cannot take it
from us.

It is proved, 1. Because Christ is both able and willing to give and continue
it, maugre the opposition of evil men.

2. Reason, because the supports of this joy are the promises, which men cannot
impeach, nor impair: Their portion is not within the knowledge of the world,
nor within the reach of the world.

3 Reason, the preserver of this joy is the Holy Ghost.

4. Because the seat of this joy is within, 1 Pet. 3.4. in the hidden man.

5 Reason, because the seed of this joy is a principle remaining in them, John.
His seed remains in them, that is, the new nature, the principle of Holiness,
which is renewed day by day, though their outward man does decay, and it
grows into a nearer communion with God.

6 Reason, because the enemies that oppose this joy are conquered. Christ has
overcome them for us; and we by faith overcome them. Sensible troubles may take
away sensible joys, and external comforts, but not internal; no more than
external joys can take away a sinners sorrow; our enjoyments may be taken
away, and not our joys. If then they rejoice in the midst of their trouble,
how will they rejoice in Heaven, when they have mere joy? When we enjoy the
world most, we have least of this joy: the external joy takes away the
internal, as the external heat causes internal cold. Beware therefore, O my
soul, that thou suffer not thy self to go out to external joy. And beware, my
soul, that thou do not esteem troubles greater evils than they are, or ought
to be esteemed; but as fatherly chastisements sent to mortify or corruptions,
to take us off the love of the world, and to remove our affections from things
below, to things above; then thou will not be much terrified, or dismayed by
them, but make a sanctified use of them, to improve thy graces, and walk by
faith; and not after the ways of thine own heart, and the sight of thine eyes.
This spiritual joy does arm thee (O my soul) against the frowns and allurements
of adverse and prosperous fortune. As Moses chose to suffer affliction with the
people of God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin. And our Savior, for
the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame: For
this joy ennobleth the soul, that it scorns to be beholden to visible objects;
as Abraham showed the nobleness of his mind, that he would not be beholding to
the King of Sodom to make him rich. So it is said of Jehosaphat, that his heart
was lifted up in the ways of God.

This joy and rejoicing in the Lord is enjoined us as a duty, and it proves our
sincerity. When God is sweet unto us for himself, in the want of outward
blessings; when we can trust God, and not see him, it is a sign we trust him in
truth, when all the providence of God seem to run counter to his promises.

That fruit is sound that can hang in a windy day: It Was a proof of Abraham's
love to God, that he could follow him into a strange place, where he had no
place to set a foot on. This joy, as it begets mortification, and self-denial,
so these begets this joy.

It is a sure preservative against Apostasy. He that can rejoice in God when he
is in adversity, will not be removed by adversity, the joy of the Lord is our
strength and stability, Phil. 4.7. The Peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus, Coloss.
3.15. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts. It rules in us, if we can
rejoice in a God All-Sufficient: Then the Soul says to all the Devils offers,
we have enough already, according to that saying of the Apostles to our
Savior, Lord, whether shall we go, thou have the words of Life? The reason why
Satan's offers seems great to Men, is, because Gods seem little.

This is a holy disposition of the Soul that does most glorify God. Therefore
it is said of Abraham, that he gave Glory to God, he did not stagger through
unbelief. It may well be called a Treasure, as the Apostle says, we have this
Treasure in Earthen Vessels; and our blessed Savior speaks of the Treasure
in the Heart; for by this we are assured that all things are ours, if we are
Christ's. Whereas on the contrary, if we are none of his, we may think that we
are rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing; and yet we are in
truth wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked, as it is said of the Church
of Laodicea, Rev. 3.17. and this treasure is Christ formed in us, of whose
fullness we receive Grace for Grace. And 2 Pet. 1.4. we are said to be partakers
of the divine Nature, because it is in us: and our blessed Savior says, that
we are grafted into him, and unless we abide in him we cannot bear fruit: That
is, the fruit of the Spirit, which is by him derived to his Members, as he
says, If I live, ye shall live also. The same are the fruits of Righteousness,
and fruit unto Holiness; and all have the same end, viz. everlasting Life.

Treasure where ever it is, is matter of joy: If sin, and departing from God be
an evil, as every Man finds early or late, when he casts away the bait that
beguiled him with anger, then Holiness must needs be good, and yield joy.
Though the Children of God are often sad; yet every act, and working of the
Spirit upon the Soul of Man, either is matter of joy immediately, or mediately,
the heart that is broken by the Spirits operation, finds it self bound up, when
it has been broken enough, and has joy.

Particular instances of the Assertion.

That the Saints have joy from the assurance of the pardon of their sins is
express; that the knowledge of our pardon is matter of joy, our Lord and
Saviors speech to the sick Man, proves, Be of good comfort thy sins are
forgiven thee: for by this speech our Savior did intend to give him more
comfort, than by restoring to him his bodily health. Blessed is the Man whose
Iniquities are forgiven; the Apostles knew they had this blessedness, as it is
expressed, In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness
of our sins. David was assured of his pardon by Nathan sent to him upon that
very message: and as we pray daily, Forgive us our Trespasses; so we find that
David after he knew he was pardoned his sin, did so pray likewise for
remission, and did also believe that they were remitted, and rejoice in it, as
he expresses, Ps. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits,
which forgiveth all thy sins, etc. And all other Servants of God, pray for, and
obtain it in due time.

Privileges of Saints.
Those that are Gods Servants have the Tutelage of the Angels, Ps. 34. They
tarry round about them that fear him. They have God God standing by them, to
save them. Ps. They have Jesus Christ strengthening them. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, and the Spirit helps them.

The knowledge of our Interest in God and Christ; that he is our God and we his
people, he our Father, we his Children; he our Shepherd we his Flock; that he
is our Strength, our Rock, Castle and Defense, Psalm. 18. he our Beloved, we
his; he our portion, and we his portion; he our Head, we his Members; he our
Redeemer, etc. And all those Texts which express his Relation to us, or ours to
him. And what he has done, does, or will do for us, must needs comfort us, and
rejoice us in all conditions, Psalm. 23. The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore I
shall not want; he makes me to lie down in green Pastures, etc. And holy David
when the people talked of stoning him, he encouraged himself in the Lord. And
our blessed Savior would banish all fear from the hearts of his people, by
virtue of their Relation, Luke 2.32. Fear not little Flock, it is the Fathers
pleasure to give you a Kingdom: And none can deprive us of enjoying our
interest in him, as the Prophet Habakkuk expresses it; no condition, no time,
nor no place: when the Apostles were cast into the Dungeon, they sung, 1 Thessalonians.
5. Rejoice evermore, God would not command it always, if it were not possible
to be. This enjoyment of our interest in God is greater than any other
enjoyment, and the Soul most desires it, Cant. 1. Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his Mouth, his Love is better than Wine. That the Saints have peace
of conscience, and joy proceeding thereof, is proved by that, Romans 5. That
being justified toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have
access through Faith unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice under the
hope of the Glory of God. They are called the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness. They are said to be found in peace of them that love peace. And
every Man that has made trial of it, has reaped this fruit, peace and
tranquillity, and enjoy it in their Souls according to the promise of our
Savior, Matthew. And ye shall find rest to your Souls; and it is the design of
the Gospel to give this peace, and rest to the Souls of Gods people, by
assuring them of pardon of sins, and Salvation according to that Prayer of
David, say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation. The excellency of the privilege
may be gathered from this Argument, that it was Jesus Christ's Legacy, which he
left to his Friends. And it may be gathered from the Prayers of the Apostles, 2 Thessalonians. 3. Now the Lord of Peace himself give you peace always, by all means, 1
Pet. 5.14. Peace be with you all that are in Christ. Isa. 26.3. Thou shall keep
him in perfect Peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee,
verse. 22. O Lord thou will ordain peace for us. That the Saints have freedom
and confidence in Prayer, and joy thereof. If the Lord has delight in their
prayers, he will give them reciprocal delight. The promise of our blessed
Savior assures us of this privilege, he says, Whatever you shall ask the
Father in my Name he will give it you. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy
may be full. David found the truth of it when he said, The Lord has heard my
petition; The Lord will receive my prayer, Psalm. And Moses in

The Lord heard me this time also. And Jam. 5. v. 16. The effectual fervent
prayer of the righteous avails much. The greatness of the Joy is expressed in
the instance of Hanna, her countenance was no more sad after she had prayed.
And agreeable hereto is that of Solomon, Eccles. Eat thy bread with joyfulness,
for the Lord has accepted thee. He that has once obtained his desires of God
by prayer, is transported with excess of joy, and is emboldened and encouraged
for all that he wants, and can hardly be dejected or dismayed in any trouble,
if he call to mind the same; for the experience of this privilege inlargeth
the soul to enjoy God as his God, in whom he has a sure interest; and to a
thankfulness of consecrating those mercies (as Hanna did) to God.

As they have privileges of enjoying, so have they of doing. That the
righteous person performs holy and virtuous actions by the assistance of the
Spirit, with more freeness, facility and delight, than they can be performed by
any principle of morality, good nature, or ingenuous education, is plain; for
this and that being compared, we shall easily see that those that are virtuous
by the light of Nature, have had more falls than those that are illuminated by
the Spirit, and the Word of God. Therefore David prays, Psalm. 51. Establish me
with thy free Spirit. And Psalm. 119. I shall run the ways of thy Commandments
when thou have set my heart at liberty. For instance, consider with what
facility and readiness Joseph being solicited and tempted by his Mistress to
unchaste embraces, avoided, put by, and cast off the temptation: How can I do
this great wickedness and sin? Genesis 39. And it came to pass as she spoke to
Joseph day by day that he hearkened not unto her to lie with her, or to be with
her. And it came to pass, that Joseph went into the House to do his business,
and there was none of the Men of the House there within: And she caught him by
the Garment, saying, lie with me. And he left his Garment in her hand, and
fled, and got him out. Here encountered, and assaulted with so strong a
temptation of unchastity, importunately, and uncessantly, assailing him, backed
and assisted with the temptations of Ambition, and Covetousness; and fit
opportunity to accomplish it with secrecy; and no restraint at all but the
All-seeing eye of God; would any of the moral Philosophers thus easily, and
readily have conquered such a Temptation, and held it out against the continual
importunity, and opportunity, by the strength of Right, Reason, Honesty and
Truth? Certainly they would have broken out into Impatience, Rage, and bitter
invectives of an angry, proud Spirit, studying revenge, and defamation of the
Tempter; and the extolling of their own virtue, or otherwise have transgressed
against some of the cardinal virtues, which would have give^ an offense another
way to their own disparagement, the offense of others, and the discredit of the
profession of Philosophy. But the freeness, readiness, and facility of the new
Nature yields abundance of peace, joy, delight and satisfaction to him who is
renewed and acted by it; and gives no offense to the beholders, but full
satisfaction. And as in this instance of Chastity we have considered it: so may
we as fully and clearly see the sweet face, and comely beauty of this new
Nature, and the joy that it yields in the mirror of patience acted by holy
Job. And his facility of repelling, and vanquishing all the Temptations of
Satan, his Wife, and his three Friends. And this freeness, smoothness,
readiness, and facility is so delightful in all the encounters, that the new
Nature has with the old corrupt unregenerate part, that the generosity thereof
being compared with the morosity of the severe, sullen, churlish, rigid
Philosophers; that like the beams of the Sun, will make this quite lose its
borrowed luster, like the Moon at midday. Yet those virtuous persons found
such sweet delight in virtue by the dimn light of Nature, that they esteemed
the contemplation thereof above all enjoyments, and all content to be in the
practice thereof. For they were not Men stripped of outward enjoyments, and
forced to retire, but eminent. Among the rest, Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Pius
the Emperor.

How great then must the joy and content be which the Soul enjoys when it
feels the actings of the holy Spirit, carrying it above the strength of
Nature in Holiness and every Grace through the Spirit? whereby it is assured
that Christ lives in it; and enjoys him as the Spouse enjoys her Beloved,
in which relation the Soul rejoices with exceeding joy, as it is described in
the Canticles. And this relation is inseparable from that Relation of being the
Sons of God, 1 John 1.1, 2. We are the Sons of God, but it does not appear what
we shall be. The joy of being a Son of God; and to be accepted of God; as it is
said, Acts 10.35. In every Nation they that fear God are accepted. This must
needs satisfy the Soul with joy, peace, and content, and remove all grief and
fear.

The Apostle says, This is our rejoicing, that in simplicity, and Godly
sincerity, we have our conversation in the World; it is the Nature of Grace to
give inward joy. And it is often pressed as a duty incumbent upon Believers to
rejoice in the Lord. For such have no cause of fear, distrust, or despair, be
their condition what it will, Psalm. 46. Though the Earth be moved, and the
Mountains shake at the Tempest; though the Waters rage and swell, here is
repose, and rest, and refuge in the midst of troubles. And every grace of the
holy Spirit does causally bring satisfaction, peace and joy in themselves. And
as they excite one another; they cause happiness, as well efficiently in genere
causarum, as conditionally by virtue of the pact or Covenant of God made in the
Gospel through the merit of Christ Jesus. And by those Graces we are restrained
from those evils of sin, and errors, misdoings, and mistakes, ignorances and
follies, as procure to Men shame, fear, grief, guilt, and the Wrath of God due
to sin. Though meritoriously Christ only can deliver us; yet he has enjoined
these operations of his Spirit as the means to make us Subjects capable of his
merit. And though it be said, that while we were sinners he died for us, and he
justifies the ungodly, yet he does not justify ungodliness; but they are
changed by the renewing of the Spirit in the new Birth, in all their faculties;
namely, in the Judgment, Will, and affections; whereby they are first
enlightened to understand the principles of Christ's Doctrine, and do believe,
and do resolve to practice the same as it is commanded, resigning and
submitting our wills to his, who has made us, and redeemed us: all which
operations of the Spirit do excite joy in the Soul of the Regenerate, viz.
first, it rejoices in knowing the truth, and the good will of God, and every
particular discovery thereof rejoices the Soul; but chiefly it rejoices to
find Grace in it self, and a conformity to that will of God, and every degree
of Grace in it self and in others rejoice it; for we find the Apostles
rejoicing in the Graces which they found in others; but they grieve at sin
stirring in themselves and others. King Solomon was sufficiently accomplished
for his design, in the pursuit of finding out the thing that was profitable?
What would give rest? What would afford satisfaction? What delight he could
find in any thing? What improvement he could make of knowledge? But he did not,
nor could attain thereby with all his labor, and industry, any thing but to
find out the vanity of all things below; and so to fill himself with vexation,
restlesness, much grief, and increase of sorrow, Eccles. c. 1. If so, then we
must account him no wise Man, who takes any worldly thing for his contentment,
satisfaction, repose, profit, commodity, joy or delight; but he is truly wise,
who can both discern the madness, vanity, unprofitableness, restlesness,
vexation, nausiousness and trouble, with which these worldly things fill, vex,
and disquiet, and dissatisfie vain Man; and seeks his joy, comfort, pleasure,
fruition, content, satisfaction and happiness in things more certain, more
lasting, more excellent, more spiritual; Thus far also Philosophy went; and
has defined happiness to be the operation of the Soul according to perfect
virtue in a life that is perfect. And what those virtues are, Natures light
has showed, the knowledge of God, and the worshipping him accordingly, they
defined to be happiness, and virtue, for thither tend all moral virtues. (...),
etc.

But what Nature could not find out, God has revealed, viz. The Gospel of our
blessed Savior, which was first made known by Angels to the Shepherds: and by
this Gospel, or good tidings, we are taught, That happiness is,

To know God and Christ.

This is Life Eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. Now if these operations of the Soul according to perfect virtue
proceed from the knowledge of God and Christ Jesus our Savior, as they must:
if it be in the perfect life which is in Heaven, then the Philosophers
happiness is the same with a Christians, for their graces proceed from this
knowledge; as it is said by David, they that know thy Name, will put their
trust in thee; they that know God to be All-sufficient, will walk before him in
perfection; they that have tasted how gracious the Lord is, and that he is a
God hearing Prayer will come unto him, this life is begun here: from whence
this certain conclusion may be drawn, that there is happiness, joy,
satisfaction, and all sweetness of Life, and enjoyment in the Soul, that has
continual motions of Grace, and none of sin, or vanity, quod quaerimus.

The Immense greatness of this Joy is not to be expressed, Therefore the
Apostle calls it, Joy unspeakable, and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. but to prove the
immensity of it, we must consider the cause which is Infinite, Eternal, and
Almighty; such as the cause is, the effect must needs be. The assurance of
God's love and favor in Christ Jesus for our Eternal happiness hereafter; for
our security, and preservation here, for our deliverance from all the evils of
sin, and the punishments due to it which coming into the Soul, though but by a
little glimpse ravisheth the Soul with infinite joy; when God shows the light
of his countenance, and smiles, (if I may so express it) or looks pleasant upon
the Soul, that thirsts after him in this Land of barrenness; It is satisfied.
When God owns thee by hearing thy Prayers, and puts forth his Almighty Power at
thy request for thy succor, whereby thou know thou have an Almighty power
for thy assistance; great is thy joy. Especially because thou have earnest
thereby for the future; that he will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, so
that no time limits thy joy, nor no degree of enioyment, because the matter and
cause is the infinite power, and infinite goodness of God, and the duration of
it to Eternity; and this enjoyment does begin here, when we know our interest;
that Christ is ours, our Atonement, our Passover, slain for us as a sacrifice
for our sins, our Reconciliation and Peacemaker, our Redeemer who has bought
us.

Our Mediator, our High Priest, our King, our Food, our Bridegroom, our Head,
our Life, our Way, our Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption;
the Hymenaeans of these holy Nuptials, and the Song of the Lamb are
everlasting. When God does assure us by his Spirit, that we are reconciled to
him through Christ, and we are confident of his Almighty power, and goodness,
ready always to succor us as his Children, his Beloved, his People, his
Portion, and his Flock; and that all things are his, and whatever is his we
have an interest in it, as we have in him, by reason of our Relation to him in
Christ.

When we know Christ, and God in him, and are known by him, and behold as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory, being renewed after the Image of him that made us, and when the Spirit
of Grace and Glory rests upon us, 1 Pet. 4.14. When the glorious Majesty of the
Lord is upon us, when we can serve him in the beauty of Holiness; What do we
want but to see him Face to Face, whom now we see in a Glass? And to have that
in perfection which now is but in part, and to have our vile bodies like his
glorious body.

Of the Eating and Drinking the Body and Blood of Christ in the Eucharist.
When our blessed Savior plainly tells us, that the words which he speaks are
Spirit; Why should I not understand a Spiritual meaning in those of this
mystery; namely, a Spiritual eating of his body, and drinking his Blood? To as
many as received him, he gave Power and Privilege to become the Sons of God,
even to as many as believed in his Name, John 1.12. But he that eats not his
Body, and drinks not his Blood, has no fellowship in him; he that does eat and
drink them has Eternal Life. The receiving then of him, and believing in his
Name, being the qualification that makes us the Sons of God, and his Brethren;
and that Text excluding all from that privilege that do not eat and drink his
Body, and Blood, shows, that by receiving him, and believing in his Name,
they eat him, not by diminishing him by their Teeth, or digesting him in their
Stomach; but by drawing Life from his Death by Faith, and strengthening and
maintaining that new Life which it has from Christ, by believing his Body to
be crucified, and his Blood shed for them, and by the Bread and Wine is given
to them.

And if we should understand this eating, of Attrition, or diminishing with the
Teeth, and the Drinking; of taking by the Mouth into the Stomach by drops, and
digesting there; then God should suffer his Holy One to see corruption: For
although we should suppose it did not corrupt in our body so long as we live,
yet when these vile bodies turns to Earth, and rottenness, then all that is in
them must corrupt. And the Text that excludes all that eat not his Body and
drinks not his Blood, would exclude all Believers from Adam, until this
Sacrament was Instituted by our blessed Savior. But if this eating and
drinking, be believing; then Abraham, and the rest of the faithful might eat
and drink him, as well as they saw his day. For all of them eat the same
Spiritual meat, and drink the same Spiritual drink, and receive their Eternal
Life and Salvation, from the same Jesus Christ. And if we do by this eating
find our penitent Souls to revive, and live a new Immortal and Eternal Life,
from the belief of his Death and Passion for us; his Body Crucified; and his
Blood spilt for us, to give us Life; then we eat his body, and shall live for
ever. And thus the faithful people of God by eating the Passover under the
Law, did eat Christ the true Passover, by eating that which was the Type of
him, whom it represented, fide non ore, at it is said, all eat the same
Spiritual Bread.

Of the Eucharist.
Meditation.
I feel a hunger in my Soul, which neither Manna, nor all the World can
satisfy; though I have all the necessaries and conveniences of Life, yet I
hunger and thirst as for Rivers of Water in a dry place, Isa. 32. Do thou then
(O blessed Savior) give me of the Water of Life out of thy Fountain; The
living Water and Blood, that comes from that Fountain of Living Water, thy
side, upon the Cross, which still is open to the House of Judah and Jerusalem,
and seals unto us all the promises upon which we live; thou have Instituted
this Bread and Wine; to represent thy Holy, and blessed Body and Blood, shed
and broken upon the Cross; and thereby give them to the Soul, that thirsts
for Eternal Life in thee, Isa. 32.4. Though my weakness of Faith should be
such, that I am not able to discern, whether virtually or really, they become
such, or whether they be consubstantiated, transubstantiated, or
new-substantiated, in their Natures by the blessing and the Faith of the
Receiver, or neither: yet thus far thou have enlightened me to know that all the
promises are Yea and Amen in thee, that thou have Eternal Life; and give it,
and that by these Elements which signify and exhibit thy Body and Blood; to be
eaten and drank by Faith Spiritually: and for thy Body and Blood I eat and
drink them, but as separable, for I fear least I should through unbelief
receive but only the Bread and Wine, and not thy Body and Blood, which give
Eternal Life, which every one that has that, eats thy Body, and drinks thy
Blood: and if an unbeliever; or an unprepared impenitent person, the worst of
thy enemies, he that betrayed thee; or any other creature could but eat and
drink of them, they also would thereby have Eternal Life. But thou alone have
power to give it to whom thou please. To thee therefore I address my Prayer,
when the Priest reaches to me the Bread and Wine; that thou would reach to
me thy sacrificed Body, and Blood, that was shed upon the Cross; and make these
Natural Elements, to become those Eternal Aliments to me, not by Faith in them,
but by Faith in thee; who have made them to signify those, and represent them,
which though I cannot discern by my senses, I pray that I may by my Faith in
thy Word, which makes them operate as thy Body and Blood to me, through thy
benediction, though materially I discern them not, and give me thy holy Spirit
that I may discern them Spiritually, and eat panem Dominum; if by looking up to
thee we are saved, what other thing can I understand this Mystery to be, than
looking up to thee on the Cross, and shedding thy precious Blood for my sins,
which thou communicatest to us?

Of Holiness
Meditations.
Mot. Holiness to the Lord shall be writ upon the Bells of the Horses.

Med. All the graces are so linked together like a golden chain, that they
cannot be without each other. This is a collective word, and contains in it,
piety, charity, and humility, and all that the first, and second table of the
law of God contains, all the duty of man toward God, his neighbor and
himself; It is the fruit of faith, out of which Root this grace springs.

The necessity of this grace is laid down in this expression, that without it
no man shall see God, the same is implied, Psalm. 63.3. I have sought thee in
holiness that I might behold thy glory.

The precepts are many that command us to get it in general, and in the
particular branches of it, every commandment and precept in the Scripture are
to this end.

Not any one minute of a Christian life, nor any one action, be it natural
action of the body or civil gesture, or behavior, but it must have holiness
imprinted on it; for in the Temple the candlesticks, and the snuffers were of
pure Gold, and Christ came to perfect it, and advance it, therefore 'tls
prophesied of his Kingdom, that under it holiness to the Lord shall be written
upon the Bells of the Horses which inscription was on Arons miter. The rights,
and ceremonies of purification under the law typified as much.

Although it be said, that faith has this, and all other graces for its
fruits, yet there is a time when a child of God may not percieve in himself
much, nay scarce any life of Holiness, Humility, Patience, Zeal, Meekness,
Charity or other graces, as in the Winter the herbs, and Plants show no life at
all, usually they are excited again by some extraordinary providence of God,
either in afflicting us, or delivering us from some danger or affliction: or by
renewing some holy duties, which have been omitted, or else by some judgment
befallen to others, we are warned, and stirred up to do our first works, and
to quicken the holy graces which are dying, as by the return of the Sun in the
springtime the several Plants of the earth seem to revive, and send forth
their leaves and fruits again. The causes of this deadness of faith, holiness,
charity, hope, and other graces, are various, but may be found out, and in some
persons a wilful sin committed, and unrepented of is the cause, in some, sloth
in holy duties, in others worldlyness, in others pride, some too much relying
upon their own strength, and opinion of the grace they have gotten already, not
endeavoring after a fuller measure, every true Christian feels in himself,
some times these swoonings away of his graces, and diligently endeavors to get
more quickening, by prayer to God for it, and the use of Gods word, and
ordinances, reflecting upon the first motives that excited, and allured him to
the pursuit of those dying graces, and all such other motives as have since
confirmed him in the liking of them, and the rewards that he has obtained from
God, for the service he has done him, and the hope of the eternal recompenses.
The absolute necessity of it enforces his awakned affections reflecting upon
those texts which so absolutely press the necessity of it, as Romans 8.13. If ye
live after the flesh ye shall dye, but if ye by the Spirit do mortify the deeds
of the flesh ye shall live. And v. 29. Whom he did foreknow them he also did
predestinate to be comfortable to the image of his Son; and in the Canticles
chapter The Spouse is said to be all fair.

That holiness is attainable, is proved;

First, because it is the main end of Christ's passion, and he cannot be
frustrate of his ends, Luke 1.74, 75. That we being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies, might serve him without fear in holiness, and righteousness
before him all the days of our lives.

2d. Because he has redeemed us unto himself, that he might purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. That we should no more serve
sin, nor live the remainder of our days after the flesh. But that we should be
conformed to the image of him that made us. For whom he foreknew he did
predestinate, that they should be conformed to the image of his Son. Therefore
our old man is dead, and we are borne again of water and the Spirit; whosoever has
the hope of Heaven purifieth himself as God is pure; the man after Gods own
heart testifies that he had an eye to all Gods commandments: and Zachary and
Elizabeth walked unblamably.

And that this is the end of our blessed Savior in our redemption, is made out
by that which was the Type of the Isralites deliverance out of the Egyptian
bondage, Psalm. 105.42. And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen
with gladness, and gave them the lands of the heathen, and they took the
labors of the people in possession. 44. That they might keep his statutes, and
observe his laws. But expressly Luke 17.1. That we might serve him without fear
in holiness, etc.

The whole design, and scope of all the Scripture, is our holiness, and the
restoring the image of God in us; all the precepts command this, and the
promises encourage and invite us to this, and the promises of grace are for
making us thus; the threats, and cursings drive us to it, the rewards, and
punishments tend only to show us that God will be sanctified in us, and that
every transgression shall receive a due recompense of reward; all the history
of the Scripture proves it by examples of Gods wrath, and vengeance, upon the
wicked, and deliverances wrought wonderfully for them that feared and sought
God with an upright heart. Under one of these heads might be quoted every text
in the Scripture. The History of the Creation of the World, which shows forth
Gods infinite power and goodness working so great benefits for the use of
mankind, shows us our dependence on him, and the duty we owe to him for our
being, and well being. The fall of men, and Angels shows our frailty without
Gods supportation, and the miserable condition that attends sin, Gods dealings
with the two Sons of Adam, one he accepted for his sincerity in his worship,
the other he rejected because his heart was not upright: the deluge that swept
away all, save only Noah the Preacher of righteonsness, the rest that were
ungodly were drowned, the reason alleged, because they had corrupted their
ways. And Noah only God had espied upright, wherefore was Sodom and Gomorra
destroyed, and Lot saved? wherefore did God bless Abraham, and all the nations
of the earth in him? wherefore was profane Esau deprived of the blessing? and
Jacob preferred before him? what caused Sampson to lose his eyes? wherefore
were the murmuring Israeltes destroyed in the Wilderness, for what cause did
the Philistians hold them in bondage. why was the Kingdom taken from Saul, and
given to his neighbor that was more rightious than he? how did God deal by him
when he had sinned in the matter of Vriah, and for numbering the people? his
successors that were good Kings, how were they blessed? the bad, how did God
deal with them in judgment? when Israel sinned, their enemies oppressed them,
when they returned and sought the Lord, he saved them, and delivered them, when
the sins of the Amalakites were grown to the hight he destroyed them, and
planted the Israelites in their Country, and when the measure of their sins
were full, he distroyed them, and brought upon them all the curses threatened
against sinners. All the Prophets were sent of no other errand, but to press
them to forsake sin, and turn unto God; all the evil they foretold was
conditionally, unless they would repent, and forsake their sin. The promise of
the Messiah was to bring salvation unto his people he was to deliver them from
all their iniquities, to purify to himself a peculiar people, that might offer
a pure offering; to bring into the right way such as went astray, to bring the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just his preching proves the truth of these
prophesies for, Matthew. 4.17. Jesus began to preach and say, Repent for the
Kingdom of God is at hand. And Matthew. 5. The promises of giving the Holy Spirit
to them that ask it. And of writing his laws in their inward parts, of making
them a willing people, that all shall know God, etc. What other end have they
but to make us holy?

John the Baptist the forerunner of Christ taught repentance, and good works,
he practiced the same, in abstinence, humility, and piety. Our Blessed Lord and
Saviors Doctrine was the perfection of holiness, teaching charity to our
enemies, to sell all to buy this Pearl of exceeding value, and in Matthew. 5.22.
Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause shall be in danger of the
Judgment. ver. 28. Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her has
committed adultry, v. 33, 34. He tells them it is not sufficient not to forswear
themselves, but says, swear not at all; and ver. 39. bids them not to resist
wrongs; therefore we ought to be such persons; and that commanding word, that
made the world; can make us to be what he commands us to be; and he has
prayed, Sanctify them by thy truth, and his prayers were always heard, and it
is the office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify us.

It is the only end and design of the ministry as it is said by St. Paul, of
whom I travel in birth till Christ be formed in you. The Apostle writes to the
Disciples, do as you have us for an example, and Revel. 2.8. The Church of
Smyrna their graces wanted nothing, but God would try them whether they would
hold on to the end, and the Church of Philadelphia, God commends her and bids
her hold on.

That Holiness is the only true Interest.
2. Meditation.
Mot. A Good conscience is a continual feast.

The Authority of the Scriptures do prove it, generally, and particularly, and
do refel, and destroy, and baffle all other Interests, according to that saying
of the Apostle. Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is
to cemo.

Consider my soul, a while the interests of of the mistaken men of the world,
whose ends, designs, and restless endeavors is after the vain, and transitory
things of the world which they think to enjoy, and repose themselves in the
enjoyment thereof as in their happiness. Oh my Soul! thou have made some trials
in these vain sollacies, but have not found that satisfaction which thou
promisedst to thy self, and therefore have vexed thy self to see what thou have
ventured even thy soul, and body, and eternal happiness for a thing of naught
that could not satissie thee, and of thine own experience, thou can say that
in the acquiring and in the keeping and enjoying too, they are mere vanity,
and vexation of Spirit and so full of labor as man cannot utter it. Thus
Solomon found before thee. Thus Ammon having enjoyed his lusts, desired object,
in a moment loathed it. Thus Judas threw away the bate of his unsatisfied
covetousness; the like fruit attended all Sinners, whether they repented, or
not. So Naboths Vineyard yielded bitter grapes to Ahabs family, and David's
bitter sweets which he found by stolen pleasures are by himself sufficiently
deplored in, Psalm. 51. The sweet enjoyment of Noah's Wine brought shame to
himself, and a curse upon his Son, and his seed. Ambitious Haman fell by his
Ambition, just then when he expected the greatest height of honor; and Herod
assuming to himself divine honors, immediately was seized upon, and devoured by
vermin: the same cause procured Julius Caesar murder. Many like instances my
Soul thou have heard and read both sacred and civil writers testifying what sad
exits have attended pursuers of these sensual interests, of covetousness, lust,
gluttony, drunkenness, ambition, etc. Thou have seen in thine own time many of
these examples, chiefly of lust, drunkenness, pride and covetousness.

All Historians testify these, and the like vanities and vexations attending
the pursuers of these worldly Interests, though carried on with power and with
villainy. Sensual persons themselves, notwithstanding the beam in their own eye,
can see the vanity of one another Interest and design, and reproach them. And
do thou compare those vicious persons with the opposite virtuous. But for an
instance of that which most brave, heroic, valiant and eminent persons adorned
with many excellent virtues, stumble at, in the height of their honor, when to
extinguish all their happiness and enjoyment in a moment, some mean and
unworthy person, envious at their height and worth, because it is above
himself, endeavors to suppress and abase that worth which he dispairs himself
to attain to, reviles, calumniates, or otherwise puts an affront upon them: The
examples hereof abound. This they conceive they are bound to revenge, that they
may vindicate their honors which otherwise will be lost; but this by which
they pretend to assert their honor, taints it. The vanity of this mistaken
worldly interest, David's example toward his reviling enemies reproves,
because by the eyes of faith he believed that God was the Author of his
sufferings, and would reward his patience, therefore he submitted to it. And if
God be provoked by us poor dust and ashes every day, we may be contented, if he
causes our meaner Brethren, sometimes to provoke us or our Servant Eccles.
7.22. Nam lingua mali pars pessima servi. Juv. And it serves to humble us,
which is necessary, both to make us know our selves, and also to know God. And
consider that detraction always follows worth, as Scipio, Annibal, or rather
Jesus Christ and his Saints have felt: And as for anger, it rests in the
bosom of fools, Eccles. 7.10. Therefore he warns as the Apostle does to be
slow to it. It transporteth to lunacy, as it did Saul to the destruction of
Nob; as it did Caracalla to the destruction of the Alexandrians: the madness
and folly of anger sufficiently manifests it self in the countenance, speech,
habit, gesture, actions and effects, which is repentance, for that which cannot
be undone again; therefore brave and virtuous minds are not so much troubled
with this passion, as the base, weak, sick, and infirm are; for it shows
greatness of mind to be unmoved, and to disdain affronts, and to keep it self
serene, and clear, like the pure Heavens, when free from clouds. And become
like to God himself, and show the greatness of our mind by being merciful to
pardon injuries, by clemency, and slowness to anger; and this Princely quality
made the Emperor Titus so beloved and honored. And if we would have God so to
us, we should be so to our Brethren; but we suffer our selves to be deceived
with shadows, as Titus 3.3. We our selves were sometimes disobedient, deceived,
etc. So that this may suffice to convince that godliness is most profitable for
all things, in this life, and that which is to come.

But if thou will not be satisfied with this, do but examine thine own heart,
whether every holy action which thou do upon holy principles does not yield
present tranquillity, and satisfaction, and sweeten thy life ever after. And on
the contrary, whether every sinful action does not disquiet and disturb thy
mind and conscience with often flashes of horror, and imbitter thy life ever
after, viz. if not repented of, with horror; and if repented of with grief and
discontent with thy self for the unkindness done to so good a God for a thing
of naught.

Let thy examination be made: first in this particular, viz. for what injuries
received by thee, which thou have forgiven, or else revenged, and what joy or
sorrow thou have had thereof. And how little thou enjoyest thy self, or any
thing else, which thou possessest when thou art enraged with Anger.

Also examine thine own reason; whether it be not more honorable, and more
satisfying to thee, to show meekness, goodness of Nature, ingenious Education,
Courtesy, Generosity, Love, and Pity in forgiving affronts, and provocations,
than to show thy Pride, Malice, Boldness, Undaunted Spirit, and Courage in
revenging them, besides the timerity of hazarding thine own Life and Immortal
Soul.

Then examine thy self also in all other actions of Holiness and Unholiness,
viz. If thou have led thy Life in Temperance, Sobriety and Frugality; whether
have thou not found the benefit of it throughout thy Life in thy Mind, Body and
Estate. But if thou have otherwise lead thy Life; thy Health is impaired, thy
Estate wasted, thy Soul polluted, and the faculties of thy mind dulled and
crased. The like examination thou may make: if thou have kept thy Body in
Chastity; whether thou have not found this to be the best means to preserve thy
Life, Health and Estate, and to propagate the same benefits to thy Issue;
besides many other blessings, which this, and every other Grace has entailed
upon it. But if thou have on the contrary been addicted to thy lusts, thou will
feel the pains of it in thy bones, when age grows upon thee; and if thou have
not quite wasted thy Estate; yet either thou have no lawful Issue to inherit
it; or if any yet they are unsound, or such as thou have no comfort of, for
such persons who are thus addicted are generally thus punished with one of
these punishments; as we read of Solomon, and have seen in our own times. Have
thou fed the hungry, and clothed the naked with thy fleece, thou know that
thou have treasure in Heaven, if not, thy riches will make themselves wings.

But alas if thou could attain all secular ends and interests, Salva
Conscientia, what are they to him that carries on the design of an eternal
Interest, viz. For eternal happiness, how inconsiderable, how impertinent, how
vile?

But since holiness is the only means of attaining happiness; and lusts, and
unholiness are the obstacles, and impediments that hinder us, and deprive us of
it; then be constant in the way of holiness, and take this for thy design and
main business, according to that which the Poet Horrace directs thee by the
light of Nature. Lib. Epistolar. Primo. Ep. 6.

Si virtus hoc sola potest dare fortis Omissis,
Hoc age deliciis --
And, Hoc primus repetes opus hoc postremus omittas.

And make no Omisions of duty, for that puts thee back.

Twere endless labor, and needless to cite all authorities, Civil, Moral, and
Divine, that might be brought to prove holiness to be the way and means of
obtaining happiness for it is so inseparably joined to happiness, that it can
hardly be distinguished from eternal happiness, which I conceive is begun in
this life in holiness. I will only mention the Authority of the greatest of the
Sons of men, John the Baptist, who makes repentance and works meet for
repentance to be the way to bring us to Christ, who is the way the truth, and
the life eternal. In whom we have eternal life and happiness. And I conceive
all men will confess the same, though in works they deny it. All the precepts
which our blessed Savior taught, he propounded as the means to attain
happiness. And the doers of them he pronounces happy actually, in the present
tense; likewise all the Commandments which God enjoined the Israelites were
therefore given them to make them happy, and when they kept them, they did make
them happy, as they made them holy.

Whither tend all Divine and Moral precepts and Philosophical improvements of
the light of nature but to repress and mortiify the inordinate passion and
preturbations of the mind, and the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes,
and the pride of life; that by this means we might enjoy a sweet and happy
life, in all ease, rest, and peace, joy, quietness, holiness, and happiness.

But imagining that the sensual persons of this age will still oppose and say
that happiness is man's interest, but the holiness of man is Gods design and
interest.

I answer first; What profit shall the Lord have if thou do good?

2. Admitting it were Gods Interest, it follows, if he be greater than thou,
and thou can not attain thy end without him, then thou must of necessity
promote his design, and do nothing to cross it.

Holiness Described.
3. Meditation.
Though it be too great a task for me to undertake; nay for any creature, for
he has found folly in the Angels, and the Heavens are not clean in his sight,
therefore God himself teaches us by his word, and Spirit. And from that word
of truth, these few collections are drawn for my own help in this grace.

The Negative part that shows what is not true holiness, though by some it is
supposed to be holiness, is the first to be considered.

Our Savior describes the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and then
tells his Disciples, that Except their Righteousness exceeds theirs, they shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Their Righteousness is condemned
as insufficient, for they justified themselves, and condemned others, and did
their works of Piety, and Charity, to be seen of men, and were Hypocrites.
Therefore Jesus Christ pronounces several woes against them.

Again our Savior reproves the Jews ingeneral for relying upon the outward
privileges, without the inward Qualifications, saying unto them, Think not to
say within your selves, we have Abraham for our Father: This privilege, without
the life of Holiness, is like a dead body without a soul, which the Prophet
Jeremiah reproves thus, Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the
Lord, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord are these, Jeremiah 7.4.
They did frequent the Temple with their Sacrifices, but the Prophet says, you
trust in lying words.

Do you think to lie, steal, and come into my house? Matthew. 7.22. Christ shows
how that many will come at the day of Judgment with great confidence, saying,
we have prophesied in thy name, cast out Devils, and done many wonders. But he
will disown them, how little then will it avail the Papists to call themselves
the Church, and their Pope Peter's Successor?

Our Savior Christ does divide professors into 2 sorts, Matthew 25. Under the
term of wise, and foolish Virgins, some had Oil in their Lamps, and some none,
all had Lamps.

The causes why men rest in the form of Godliness without the power, are,
first because they see a necessity that their actions must be changed, but do
not see a necessity that their hearts must be changed.

The Apostle Paul in the 3d. of the Philip. Refutes the Righteousness which the
Jews imputed to their circumcision and outward privileges, and calls them the
concision, and verse. the 3d. We are the Circumcision which worship God in the
Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh. This is the real circumcision
whereby we have the foreskin of our heart taken away by mortification of all
the senses and affections, and is in all the parts of the body, the eyes, the
hands, the tongue, the ears, the palate, etc. This analogical circumcision
remains, that of Moses law is taken away; this is Spiritual and may be with
blood too, as is said, You have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against
Sin: That circumcision signified this mortification, but this is the more
difficult. His reasons of his assertion of this are couched in these characters
of Christians, viz. Which rejoice in Christ, and have no confidence in the
flesh. As if he should argue that they that rejoice, in any thing but Christ,
and his merits, and alsufficiency are not the heirs of Salvation. Nor they who
have confidence in any fleshly thing, as circumcision, and outward
performances, and privileges. Nor those who put off God with outword bodily
worship, and do not worship him with their hearts, and Spirits, Spiritually, as
it is said, they draw nigh with their lips, but their heart is far from me;
these things they may do that are in the flesh, but cannot please God, because
they do not justice, and love mercy, and walk humbly with God.

Holiness also of our own framing is not that which God accounts holiness, that
is to say, voluntary Humility, worshipping of Angels, etc.

These the Apostle says, Have only a show of Godliness.

They that trust in themselves, and despise others as the (Pharisees did) that
say they have works of supererogation. Nor they that say stand off, for I am
holier then thou, and think well of themselves, that they are profitable are
not Saints. The centurion had a meaner opinion of him self, when he said Lord I
am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, So had John the Baptist,
when he said he was not worthy to loofe the lachet of his Saviors shoe. And
wise Agar when he said he had not the understanding of a man, and was more
brutish then any, So St. Paul when he said he was the meanest of the Apostles,
and not worthy to be called an Apostle. And David professes the same humility,
Psalm. 131. saying. Lord I am not high minded, I have no proud looks, etc. And
Psalm. He says, Lord I am a worm and no man. The very scorn of men, and the
outcast of the people this comportment is that which becomes holiness, and is
acepted in the sight of God, for he resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble, and of Israel he says when thou were little in thine own eyes,
then thou were honorable, and our blessed Lord and Savior repressed the
contention of the Apostles for the superiority by inculcating this grace.

But to seek honor from one another, and to love the praise of men, and
salutation in the Market places, the uppermost seats in the Synagogues
pre-eminence, precedence, and be called Rabbi our blessed Lord and Savior
renders these for the charactars of those, who would seem to be righteous, and
are not.

He plucks of the masks and vizards of these Actors of holiness, and instances
in their over Actings, to prove that they do but personate what they are not,
they make broad their Phylacteries. Tith mint, Annis, and Comin, but neglect
the waitysr matters of the law.

He shows what they are within, in their hearts and affections, they washed but
the out side of their cups, their inward parts were foul still, he compares
their holiness to the painted Sepulcres, they flourished it with giveing their
alms publicly, praying publicly, fasting, and disviguring their faces, that
they may be seen to fast, and thus coming abroad among the people, they crave
veneration for this mask of holiness, and they had their rewards which they
sought. Our Savior tells them what course they should take to have a real
goodness, Math. 12.33. Either make the Tree good, and his fruit good, or make
the Tree corrupt, and his sruit corrupt. v. 35. A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good fruit, etc. That is a natural
production.

And when the principle, or cause is such, the effects will be answerable ^o do
worthy Acts, and not to seek praise and honor for them is true worth, for
hereby it is manifest that he who does so, does it for virtues sake, for the
love of worth, and virtue merely. Therefore Bafil's expression seems to me to
be unsound. Fugiamus inanem gloriam duleem Spiritualium operum spoliatricem,
tincam Virtutum. For how can it be called a Spiritutal work, when it is done
for vain glory, and not by the Spirit, and for the same reason, such a work can
not be called virtuous, because the glory and not the virtue is counted sweet,
but nevertheless we may take such admonitious in good part.

But it appears that these Pharisees principles were not good, because they had
such base, vain and vile ends whereby they neglected the weigher matters of the
law, and contented themselves with pairing off the external enormities, that
they might seem fair to men from whom they sought veneration, and reverence,
for their professions sake, affecting the honor and reward of virtue more than
virtue it self. But this evil leaven, our savior warned his Disciples of, and
in them as I conceive their successors. He shows what principles a good man
has, and practices and works by; for though none be good but God absolutely,
yet in some degrees they may be good, as Joseph of Arimathea was called a good
man. And the good ground was he that received the word in an upright heart; so
that God judges of a man according to his state, not according to some
particular actions, which may happen to be evil. Such principles, and such
works makes a good man that these principles do bring forth is proved from the
nature of them. They are given to that end that they should bring forth, for
God seeing the heart weak, and striving to bring forth such fruit, he gives
them such graces, by the working of his Spirit in their hearts, as may enble
them, Jer. 32.4. I will put my Spirit into their hearts. This is active. It Is
called the life, the fountain of living waters, the spirit of grace, and the
spirit of a sound mind, because these graces are the motions, and operations of
the Spirit, or the Spirit moving. And Secondly, because of the vigor and
strength of these principles, called the power of God and godliness. 3. From
their being. The being that Grace has in the Heart, is in its operation, so is
its well-being; therefore they are said to be ready to dye when they do not
operate. 4. For the Seat of it; being possessed of the Heart, which is the
chief part over all, and so gives Life to all. 5. The heart is supposed to be
the seat of the affections, which being made good by such principles, they
produce fruit answerable.

The real goodness in the Heart must be exerted in the action; and the work
that is produced must be good also, and must proceed from that good principle,
viz. Faith, without which it is impossible to please God; but these good fruits
are not proportionable to the goodness of his heart, for he is sorry that they
are no better, blushing ever at their imperfections, not boasting of them, nor
craving honor for them; the end also must be good. These qualifications the
good works have. They are described from their cause, Gal. 5.22. The fruits of
the Spirit are love, joy, peace, meekness, etc. Romans 6.22. described by their
end; these are fruits unto holiness. Another difference is, that some of those
works are secret, and invisible to Men, such as are terminated in the action
within, as the secret risings of the heart against corruptions, as was in St.
Paul, when he said, That which I would, I do not, and groans for deliverance;
saying, who shall deliver me from this bondage of corruption; also secret
longings after Christ, and God, and Holiness: also dependency upon Christ and
God, inward mournings for sin, etc. 2. Such works as have opus ad extra, as to
show forth a good Conversation.

True Holiness defined.
It is a grace supernatural, infused by the Holy Spirit, renewing us after the
Image of him that made us, whereby God is in us, Christ is in us, and the Holy
Spirit is in us, and we are in Christ by an inseparable Union and Communion of
Natures, 1 John 4.16. Gal. 2.20. and 4.19. 1 John 4.13. It Is infused, because
of our selves we are not able to think a good thought; and Christ says, That
without him we can do nothing. God works in us both to will, and to do;
though he commands us to work out our own Salvation; and the words following,
viz. (with fear and trembling) denote the weakness and disability of our
selves, and the ability which the command does suppose, is from Gods assistance
we doing our endeavor; our blessed Lord and Savior compares it to leaven; It
is an Universal change of the whole Man; If any one be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, old things are passed away, and all things become new. It renews us
after the Image of him that made us. Both the inward Man, and the outward are
changed, as Readiness heart was changed when he was anointed to be King; so is
every Saint changed by the Spirit of God that is in him, and the understanding;
desires and thirsts after no knowledge, but to know God and Jesus Christ and
him Crucified, because the understanding before was darkened, and alienated from
the Life of God through the Ignorance that was in it. But now it is enlightened
and the darkness is passed away, because the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, which is the Image of God, has shined into it; for the Gospel is
Light, and Jesus Christ is that Light that enlightens every one that comes
into the World: by this it comes to pass, that the Soul knowerh, that all Gods
Commandments, are True, Righteous, and Faithful; that they are tried to the
utmost. That it is Wisdom and Understanding to do thereafter. It now puts a
true estimate upon God, and Christ, Heaven and Grace, and Glory. This is that
wise Merchant spoken of in the Gospel, that having found a Pearl of exceeding
great value in a Field sold all to buy that Field, his knowledge is practical,
diligent, and not slothful, rests not in the inquisition, but proceeds to the
acquisition of its true everlasting interest, through the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, as he is revealed in the Gospel, Romans 12.2. Be ye transformed in the
renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what is the good, acceptable, and
perfest Will of God.

As the undestanding is changed so the affctions love, hatred, hope, fear, etc.
Are accordingly changed, he that before counted the Sabbath weariness, now he
calls it a delight.

He that before rejoiced in the increase of Corn, Wine, and Oil, and in
satisfying the senses, his joy now proceeds from higher, and nobler causes,
viz. The light of Gods countenance, communion with God in holy duties, reading
the word of God, praying, thanksgiveing, meditating, and the most severe duties
of fasting, humiliation, and repentance, and every means of begetting and
improving grace he preserreth before satisfying of the senses with pleasant
viands, which whilst they cherish, and delight the body, they deprave the
better part, possibly, not the intellect, and rational faculty of the soul, for
that may be improved too by God usage of the body, so it be not to excess. But
the new nature, the divine Image which is begotten in us by the word of truth,
is starved, stifled, and grieved: which image, and new nature, though it be in
the understanding, yet it does so far surpass the reason, as that does the
senses, and is no other thing but the holy Spirit of God, which every
regenerate person has received in some measure; for this is that which did
regenerate him, which if any man have not, it is certain he is none of his. It
is known to be the Spirit of God, because it works not as reason does, by
arguments deduced from things visible to sense, nor such as can be proved by
reasonable consequence, but it is oftentimes directly opposite, and repugnant
to reason, as in Abraham, and so in all that undergo any trialls, (and who does
not undergo them?)

This new soul, or new life of the regenerate is not somented, nourished, or
cherished by the elements of the natural, sensual, vegetative, or merely
rational soul, but by the word of God, and the dictates of the Spirit, for
which it pants, as the Heart pants after the water brooks, and breaks out
for the very fervent desire that it has always to Gods commandments, which it
esteems above Gold, and thirsts after as the body does for the necessarys
of life; and yet the most regegenerate, and renewed person has the flesh and
coruption always remaining in him; and must, and does pray sometimes with holy
David for renovation. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right
Spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy
Spirit from me. For we have this treasure but in earthen vessels, we are not
assured of the continuance of it, therefore we watch against our inbred
corruptions, and pray for divine supportations, knowing our slippery standing,
our own weakness, and the strength of our spiritual adversaries, which assails
us without intermission. And when we think our selves most strong, we may fall
as the great Apostle that denied his Master did, because in the best of Saints
the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and sometimes leads them captive, and
suffers not to do the good which they would, but draws them to the evil which
they would not, the law of the members warring against the law of the mind.
Were it otherwise, there would be no virtue nor occasion of resisting. The
sense of which corruption, and uncleanness makes them mourn, bewail, and
abhor themselves in the words of St. Paul. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of sin, and death? Who can say he has cleansed
himself? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? But yer St. John says,
that he that is born of God sins not, because his seed remains in him, and
the 1 Epst. c. 3. I have wrote unto you young men, because you have overcome
that wicked one. Love not the world, nor the things of the world. And v. 6.
Whosoever abides in him sins not. Whosever sins has not seen him, nor
known him, v. 7. Little children let no man deceive you; he that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous, v. 9. He cannot sin
because he is born of God, v. 8. He that commits sin is of the Devil. Which
Texts are not to be expounded in this sense, that a Saint of God may not be
overtaken, or be temped so above his strength, as to be overcome against his
will, as some suppose it is; for then to what purpose does the Apostle Paul
enjoyne it as a duty? if any one be overtaken with a fault, restore such a one
in the Spirit of meekness, considering that thou thy self also may be
tempted; unless a good man might be overtaken, and the argument too of the duty
is positive, that thou also who art to restore him may be tempted, and
overcome; therefore do this duty to another, and the promise of lifting up
those that fall would be needless, and those many exhortations of our Savior
and all the Apostles to watchfulness, and prayer, circumspection, and
carefulness, against temptations of the world, the flesh, and the Devil,
seducers, and deceivers, would little become so great teachers if there were no
need at all of those duties, and no danger in the neglect of them, nor no
possibility that the regenerate person could fall. Then he that stands needs
not to take such heed least he fall, and St. John himself also says in the
first Epistle, chap. 5.17. All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not
unto death. And in verse. 16. If any Man see his Brother sin a sin that is not
to death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death, and 1 Epist. chapter 1. v. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive; and chapter 2. v. 1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, etc.

But if we were absolutely free from sin, and the power of sinning; what need
had we of our Advocate? Therefore it seems by the opinion, and consent of most
Men, that when he says, He that is born of God sins not, he means the
same as St. Paul does express, saying, It is not I, but sin that dwells in
me. And again, so with my Spirit I serve the Law of God, but with my Flesh the
Law of sin, and the Law of his Members lead him Captive. By which it appears,
That the inclination of his mind was to serve God in all holiness of Life; and
he delighted in that in his inward Man. And if he chanced to do the contrary,
it was unwillingly, and he counted it his unhappiness, and bondage from which
he endeavored to get free. Whereas the unregenerate Man counts sin his
freedom, and every holy observance of Gods Commandments, his bondage. And when
his Conscience checks him, and forces him to any walking with God in religious
duties, it is thraldom and bondage to him. For his course of Life, and
Conversation is to serve the Flesh, and the World; to walk in the ways of his
own Heart, and the sight of his eyes, and is sorry that there is any
Commandment to restrain him, and desires not to know it (at least in the
strictness of it.) Again, if a regenerate person chance to be overcome by his
corruption, and strength of Temptation, he immediately not only loathes the sin,
but himself also, that he is no better; and would rather undergo all misery,
than fall into the same again. And would foregoe all the enjoyments that he
has, or hopes for in this World, if he could but undo, what he has misdone.
The unregenerate are not so: and as Solomon describes the Harlot, she wipeth
her mouth, and says, I have not sinned: so do others in the state of Nature,
unless their sins be very gross, say, they have not sinned; or if they confess
their sins to God, and pray for pardon, they think it is enough to embolden
them to sin afresh. And as the Regenerate walk with God, and premeditate, and
study, (not how they may commit a sin secretly, and undiscovered, so as to
avoid the shame and punishment) but how they may walk closely with God, and
avoid every Temptation and Snare of Satan: so the unregenerate study and
contrive to sin with advantage. And that place of St. John, that says, ye have
overcome the evil one, may be upon this ground, that they have overcome the
evil one many times, and persist in the conquest of their corruption every day:
though peradventure some time the Devil may prevail to overcome them, as it is
said, he shall bruise thy heel: And though God never leaves Man to be overcome,
when he endeavors his utmost, yet God may let him be overcome, as Peter was to
humble him in the sight of his own weakeness when he is confident of his
strength that he may depend, and rely more upon God, and seek to him more, and
not rely upon his own strength, but ascribe all to God, and his grace. And
though St. Paul confesses so much imperfection, and St. John so much
perfection, both of them will agree in this, that we are made perfect in Christ.

St. John further describes the perfections of the regenerate, 1 Ep. 5.4.
Whosoever is borne of God overcomes the world. And shows how, in the
following words, and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
says. He tells us the particulars which he means, namely, The lusts of the
flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, which all are overcome,
for chapter 3. v. 7. He says, That he that does righteousness is righteous. And 10.
Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God. And 1 Ep. c. 5.18. We know that
whosoever is borne of God sins not, for he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and the wicked one touches him not. Which touching certainly has
reference to the words before, of sinning a sin not unto death, and those
words, sins not, have the same reference, viz. He sins not. de industria
Pleno Animo. Else no man will be found that it can be said of him that he
sineth not. Noah whom God mentioned for one of the three persons most
acceptable to God, of whom it is testified in the holy scriptures that he only
was found righteous, yet he was overtaken by the sin of drunkenness, this sense
is made clear to be the meaning of the place by Psalm. 119. where in v. 166. He
says, Lord I have hoped for thy salvation, and done after thy Commandments.
167. My soul has kept thy testimonies, and I love them exceedingly, v. 168. I
have kept thy precepts, and thy testimonies, for all my ways are before thee.
He had an eye to all Gods Commandments. But it follows in the same Psalm. ver.
the last, I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, seek thy Servant. David
did not always keep Gods testimonies, if he had, he had not gone astray, nor
needed seeking, neither yet went he so far astray as to forget the way to
return, as the words imply which follow, Seek thy Servant, for I do not forget
thy Commandments. And Psalm. I have not forsaken thee, as the wicked does. For
when he did fall, as in the numbering of the people, and likewise in the matter
of Vriah, his heart soon smote him, and he humbled himself with weeping,
fasting, and prayer, and sacrificing, and renewing his vows of better
obedience, confessing his sins with grief, and shame, patiently enduring such
chastisements as God laid upon him. Neither sin nor the punishments which he
suffered for his sin could prevail to extinguish his love to God and holiness,
because he was regenerate, and borne again and his seed remained in him;
therefore he still retains good thoughts of God, and his ways, as he
expresleth in the Psalms, chiefly the 119. My soul breaks out for the desire
it has always to thy Commandments. His eyes prevented the morning watches
that he might be occupied in Gods word, which he says, he esteemed above Gold,
and had chosen for his heritage, because they were the very joy of his heart,
and this carried him forth to praise, and extol the excellency of Gods word and
Commandments, saying, Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul
love them. And again, they are tried to the utmost. They are exceeding
righteous, and true.

I have more understanding than my teachers, for thy Commandments are my study.
Except my delight had been in thy Commandments it had not failed, but I had
perished in my trouble. Thy word gives light, and understanding to the simple.
And in Psalm. 18. The law of the Lord is an undefiled law converting the soul,
the testimony of the Lord is sure and gives wisdom to the simple. The statutes
of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart. The Commandment of the Lord is
pure and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, and
endures for ever. The Judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether,
more to be desired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold, sweeter also
than the honey and the honey comb. Moreover by them is thy Servant taught, and in
keeping of them there is great reward. His hatred also was changed to hate that
which God hated (as he says) I hate them that hate thee. And I hate all false
ways, but thy Law do I love. This holy love makes the yoke of Christ not only
easy, but delightful. As Solomon expresses, Prove. 1. Her ways are ways of
peace, and all her paths are pleasantness. And those that walk in her paths
shall not stumble, for all her paths are right paths. And they know that these
paths are right, and lead to happiness, peace, rest, and life, for that
experience they have had already, and taste of those heavenly gifts and power
of the world to come, they retain with good liking, and they thirst for a
further enjoyment of them; albeit God suffers them sometimes to fall, that they
may know their own weakness, may learn humility, be more diligent in prayer and
watchfulness, live more by faith, and depend upon God, and ascribe all to
Christ Jesus, who is all, and in all; and that they may go out of themselves,
as St. Paul did, when he desired to be found in him, not having his own
Righteousness, for he saw the imperfection and insufficiency of his own
Righteousness, and therefore sought it in him; Who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; for he is the only
Righteousness on which we can trust for our Justification, Jehova Justitia
nostra, and omnis Justitia nostra pannis menstruata. God that has found folly
in the Angels, sees iniquity in our best duties I and that all have sined, and
come short of the glory of God, and are righteous by God's mercy only, not
imputing their sin. As Psalm. 32. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered. V. 2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
imputes no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile: That all flesh may be
silent, and all mouths may be stopped before him. But God overlooks the
frailties of those that are sincere before him, in whom there is no guile,
hypocrisy or dissimulation in their love to him: who eschew their own sin,
which their nature is most inclined to; As David, in Psalm. 18.23. says, I was
also incorrupt before him, and eschewed my own wickedness. They allow
themselves in no sin, nor in any degree of sinfulness. As Naaman the Syrian
would be excused in bowing to Ammon in the house of Rimmon. So many seeming
righteous, are holden captive by some one lust, which they like not to have
spoken against. But those whom Christ gave himself for, he has redeemed from
all iniquity, and purified them unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good
works. Albeit their best works are imperfect, for who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean thing? not any, yet are they who are Christ's redeemed ones,
zealous of all good works, and (with David) they can say they have an eye unto
all Gods Commandments, and have put off the old man and all his works.

And it is from a principle of love, and desire from the sense of Gods love to
them, and the desire of obeying him, who has so obliged them, together with a
love and liking they have to the ways of God, by reason of the new nature,
begotten by God in them, in the act of regeneration. This Divine love breathed,
lived, and moved in David when he said, What shall I render unto the Lord for
all his mercies toward me? And Oh how I love thy law. And in the same manner
the Servants of God find it to move, and it is the fulfilling of the law in
Gods account and acceptance.

As on the contrary disobedience proceeds from unthankfulness to God for his
mercies, and forgetfulness of them, whereby the love of God is extinct, as in
the rebellious Israelites. They remembered not his marvelous works that he had
done, but were disobedient at the Sea, even the Red Sea, Psalm. 106.13. Within a
while they forgot his works, and would not abide his counsel, but lust came
upon them in the Wilderness. That it is the way of Gods dealing with his people
thus to oblige them to his service by beneficence, and bounty, and wonderful
deliverances wherein his hand, and almighty power only could help us, appears
by Psalm. 10^. Which recites the wonders which God wrought for the Israelites in
Egypt. Whereby he delivered them from that thraldom, and afterward brought
them to the promised land that flowed with Milk and Honey. The end of all which,
is expressed in the last ver. That they might keep his statutes, and observe
his laws. When God bestows such great mercies upon us, as astonish our
understanding, as he did to them, they were like men that dream when they were
deliverd from Captivity, when he delivers us miraculously, just then when we
are at the very brink of destruction, when the knife is at our throats, or like
brands pulled out of the fire, so are we rescued, and sometimes we are so
rescued from the precipice of Hell before we are consumed, it is no cause that
may induce us to think that we are better than others, or that it is for our
own righteousness sake. God forwarneth the Israelites from such misconceptions,
and that caution seems to imply that we are prone of our selves to such
delusions, God commands them when they bring their offering to say, A Syrian
ready to perish was my Father, etc.

But the cause that moved God was from himself, because of his love, and favor
which he had to them; his goodness only was the efficient cause, and the final
cause his own glory; and so it is of all our deliverances, that we being
delivered should serve him in holiness, and righteousness before him, all the
days of our lives. Suitable thereto is the practice of Gods Servants, for they
ascribe them not to their own merit, but reflect upon their own unworthiness,
that they may ascribe the more to Gods free goodness, and mercy, saying with
David, What am I? and what is my Fathers house that thou should do such great
things for me? Psalm. 116.9. And Psalm. 8. Lord what is man that thou art mindful
of him? or the Son of man that thou visitest him. And St. Paul admiers Gods
mercy to him, who he says, Was the least of the Apostles, and not worthy to be
called an Apostle. Which humility of mind, and sense of our own unworthiness,
kindles the flame of our holy love to God for all his goodness, and excites our
Zeal to do all we can for God. And not only the mercies received, are improved
to inflame our affections to love God our great benefactor, but the mercies
also which we hope for, and expect hereafter, as in 2 of Sam. 7.19. David
speaks to God, Who am I O Lord, and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto! And this was yet a small thing in thy sight O Lord God, but thou have
spoken also of thy Servants house for a great while to come, and is this the
manner of men O Lord God! Though men, the more they have done, the less we can
expect from them, yet with God every mercy is an earnest of a greater,
therefore he argued well that said, The Lord delivered me from the Lion, and
Bear, and will deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistine. So did St. Paul,
saying, The Lord has delivered me, and will deliver me. And this assurance,
and hope alone in the want of all outward comforts by the strength of faith was
able to support holy Job, for therefore he was a conqueror over all these fiery
darts of Satan, and was able to do, and suffer the good will, and pleasure of
God, because he believed that his redeemer lived, and that he should see him at
the last day. A further improvement, the heavenly soul makes of mercies to
engage its love and affections to God in the consideration of the overplus
which God in his great goodness, and liberality bestows upon us above our
desires, and requests: as when Solomon asked wisdom, God bestowed upon him
riches, and honor; and when David asked life, God gave him a long life, even
for ever, and ever. So Abraham asked a child, and God gave him seed as the sand
of the Sea. And we know of our own experience, how God has exceeded our
requests, for many temporal blessings, which for the present when we had
received them seemed great to us, and to a thankful heart they will always
seem so, and have the same operation to affect the heart with burning love to
so great a benefactor. But much more that overplus of eternal happiness, which
the Saints believe they shall receive. For eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man, what the Lord has prepared for
them that love him. And as a Virgin beloved puts not an estimate upon the gifts
of her Lover according to their mere value, but according to the respect which
she has to his love, whereof they are pledges, so the heavenly soul also looks
more upon the love and favor of God showed in his mercies, than upon the
benefit it receives by them, as David expresses in the Psalms, Psalm. 63.
saying, Thy loving kindness is better than life it self. Therefore says the
Spouse in the Cant. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love
is better then Wine. Which holy love, the soul delights in, and by it all
duties in religion and works of piety, charity, and mortification are made
easy, delightful, and desirable, and not burdensome. And so love may be said
to be the fulfilling of the law, because God accepts the will of them that are
carried by this principle. And they likewise accept of all that comes from God
as from his love, whether it be affliction, or prosperity, because they believe
that God will bring good out of evils, and cause all things to work together
for their good, and will show his love and faithfulness in delivering them, and
will give them their hearts desire, if they delight themselves in the Lord. (
Psalm. 37.4.) And enjoy themselves in serving him, call the Sabbath a delight,
and as the Spouse in the Cant. chapter 1. Sit under his shadow with delight. If
they trust in him, hope in him, rely upon him, stay themselves upon him. All
which duties, and all others they can do in some degree through Christ that
strengthens them, from whom they have all their sufficiency, whose Grace is
sufficient for them, though of themselves they can do nothing, not think a good
thought, for his strength is perfected in their weakness, and his Spirit
helps their infirmity; for instance, in the duty of Prayer; they will
approach the Throne of Grace, to pray, and praise God, though they feel in
themselves dullness, and indisposition; because they have found assistance in
former duties, from Gods Spirit enabling them, when they were as much
indisposed as at present, therefore they do hope for, and expect the like
again; and therefore they go on assured (as Abraham was) that God will provide
himself a Sacrifice.

A parallel instance is that which St. Paul experienced, when the Stimulus in
carne, the provocation, or irritation in the Flesh buffeted him: First, he is
sensible of his own weakness and uses violence upon himself, and keeps under
his body; yet he did not trust in these means, because he knew their
insufficiency. Therefore he seeks help and assistance from him that is
All-sufficient, and besought God against it; that it might depart from him,
which God was not pleased to grant, as appears, because the Holy Man was
subject to be transported with Pride, because of the extraordinary privileges,
and abundance of Revelations, given unto him. Yet he obtained that which was
better for him, Grace sufficient, for when he was weak in himself, he was then
strong in Grace. And that Stimulus suffered to remain to prick the bladder of
his Pride, and probably for the same reasons God may suffer many of us to
undergo the like buffetings from our corruptions, and yet support, and sustain
us in the encounter, that we fall not. If we be careful as the Apostle was, to
make use of the same means, viz. subduing our body, and prayer. For we have all
the same promises, as these men had, and the same means to obtain Grace and
Life Eternal: To know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; and he that has
but the hope of Eternal Life purifyeth himself, even as he is pure, and this
purifying is by denying our selves, taking up our Cross, and following Christ,
which is the Act of Faith, and the Life of Faith. And by Faith too, it is
scarcely attainable, with great difficulty, as our Savior himself tells us,
Luke 3. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for narrow is the way; And the
righteous shall scarcely be saved, etc. And those who have both Faith whereby
they are able to overcome the World by Gods assistance, and the Spirit too to
assist them; yet these find that though the Spirit is willing, the flesh is
weak. That is, though thou subdue it never so much; yet, though it be subdued,
that it dare not much oppose, yet it will still be unable to keep Pace with the
motions of the Spirit. Yet I fear too, that it will never be so subdued, but I
shall be forced to bewail my self often with the words of the Apostle, Romans
8. The Law is Spiritual, but I am carnal, but as he disowned himself in this
person, saying, it is no more I, but sin that dwells in me. So may every child
of God whose will is as his was; and uses the means that he did. And so will
God own them for that which is his Image in them. By this the Apostle shows
the enemy with whom he had fought the good fight, and having fought it, he
assures himself, that God will give him the Crown. And having sowed the seed,
he expects to reap the same he sowed; for he sowed to the Spirit, and of the
Spirit hoped to reap life everlasting, which the Righteous Judge will give to
all that love his appearance, Rev. 22. Let him that is holy be holy still.

Meditation 5.
The means which the soul uses to attain its renovation, and to preserve and
persevere in it; Are fervent prayer to God for it, diligent reading,
meditation, mortification, and continual self denial, Zeal of God, an earnest
thirst after a greater degree of grace from the sense of its own weakness, and
failing, a forsaking the world, its hopes, and fears, and worldly interests,
profits, joys, and greifes. Faith, hope, and watchfulness against temptation,
to watch the mouth and the heart. Patience in suffering wrongfully, humility,
or to be little in his own eyes, for God gives his grease to the humble. To set
God always before us in his omniscience, omnipotence, infinitness of his
holiness, glory, and goodness. A timely and carely seeking it, and entertaining
it when it is offered to us without delays, else when we seek we may be
rejected, as in Prove. 1. Because when I called you answered not etc.
Unweariedness in their race. To have an eye to the recompense of reward and not
to fear them that can only hurt the body but be in the fear of God all the day.
To abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. Not only from known sins,
but from things that have but some complexion of evil, for such is the purity
of Gods nature that he hates every species, or show of evil. And such
perfection does he require in his Servants, as it is expressed by our Savior,
Math. 5. Strait is the gate, etc. Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is
perfect.

A holy appetite to the word of God, and communion with God in every ordinance,
as prayer, praise, the communion of the body, and blood of Christ Jesus in the
Lords supper, Mat. 5. Blessed are they that hunger, and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, Psalm. 42.2. My soul is thirst for
God, yea even for the living God. When shall I come to appear before the
presence of God. This shows how he practiced. Another means like unto this
is that of St. Paul not to account, that we have attained, but to press forward.

Also it is appointed as a necessary means to attain this end, by our Savior
himself, that we learn of him, and we are taught so to do by the holy Apostles.
That we should walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6. Hereby we know that we have
his nature, his image, his Spirit, and union with him we ought then to imitate
his humility, whereby he became man, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
in his meekness, Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed, and afflicted, but opened not his
mouth. He gave his back to the smiter, and his cheek to them that plucked off
the hair, and hid not his face from spitting. So ought we to bear injuries with
patience, and not render evil for evil.

3. In his willing and perfect obedience, Psalm. 40. I delight to do thy will,
thy law is in my heart. 4. In love, Ephe. 5.7. Walk in love as Christ loved us.
Let husbands love their wives as Christ loved the Church. 5. In perfect
charity, we must pray fer our enemies, as he did 6. In diligence in religious
duties, he prayed all night, he went constantly to the Synagogue on the Sabbath
day. 7. In our Reverence in holy Worship, he fell on his face, or kneeled, yet
he had the Spirit without measure. 8. In his contempt of the world; My Kingdom
(says he) is not of this world. 9. In heavenly-mindedness, his custom was to
instruct of Heaven out of ordinary conferences; as when the woman spoke to him
of water, he spoke of the water of life: So must we have our conversation in
Heaven. 10. In his faithfulness in his function, Heb. 3.2. Who was faithful to
him that appointed him, as Moses was faithful; He was daily in the Temple, and
went about doing good; and therefore in his last prayer said, It is finished.
11. In self-denial he said, I seek not my own will, but the will of him that
sent me. He would not suffer them to divulge his miracles, nor be made a King.
12. In his zeal: It Is said of him, The zeal of thy house has even eaten me up.
13. In his Truth, he says, To this end was I born, that I should bear witness
to the Truth. 14. In his obedience to his Parents. 15. In his public spirit,
he was born and died, and rose again upon a public account,

Sic oculus, sic ille manus, sic ora movebat.

Those that are otherwise, are not holy, as they ought to be, therefore let us
press forward, and pray, that we may receive of his fullness grace for grace.

The last means, but not the least, is Repentance; the same which was the
first, not a slight confession of our sins only, with sorrow for a day, as the
Prophet Isaiah expresses it, Isa. 58.5. To hang down our heads like a bulrush
for a day. Wicked Ahab did more than so. Thy stony heart will endure more
malliating than one days contrition, and not be broke. But such sorrow as may
work a change, as that of the Ninevites, Jonah 3.8, 10. They turned from their
evil way, clothed themselves in sackcloth, and cried mightily to God. And
since notwithstanding our repentance, our corruptions, and our spiritual
enemies do sometimes prevail against us, we must as often as we fall, rise again
by repentance, and mourn over the sinfulness of our nature, as David did, Psalm.
51. In sin has my Mother conceived me: And Paul, When I would do good, evil is
present. O wretched man that I am: And this we shall have cause to do as long
as we live; and this causes us to iterate our repentance which we first made
upon our conversion; as it did in holy David, and Job, calling to mind the sins
of their youth. For I conceive the method of the Argument of the penitent is,
that he believes that his sins were sharers in procuring those bitter
sufferings to his Savior, which he cannot think of without grief, and breaking
off those sins; and that grief leads him to believe that Christ in his
sufferings had respect to his sins; that affords comfort.

Meditations of Repentance.
Mot. The Sacrifices of the Lord are a troubled spirit, Psalm. 51.

When I have fallen into any sin, I immediately perceive my loss of my
innocence, as our first parents did, and the injury done to God. And then I
loath my self, and would give all I have to be restored to my guiltless state
again, if I could but undo that which I have done, and I resolve to spend all
my life in weeping, fasting, and prayer, if so be the Lord will have mercy upon
me, and pardon my sin, and not destroy me, then I see that nothing I can do or
suffer can make atonement to God for my sin: But my steadfast resolution is
that I will never sin more. O Lord give me the same mind now and ever, that my
sins may be ever in my sight to bewail the loss of my innocence and the injury
done to thee, to loath my sinful self, to endeavor night and day, to undo
those sinful acts by tears of repentance, mourning, humble, confession,
prayers, fasting, charity, and severe watchfulness against my corruptions the
duties of mortification, and selfdenial. And to renew my vows, and resolutions
never to sin more. And for the remainder of my days to abstain from the least
degree of every sin, and not to go as far as I think I may lawfully do in the
satisfying of my senses, and passions, least I be drawn in one degree too far.
That the Lord may behold my grievous sorrow and repentance, as he did Peter's
and David's, and may have mercy upon me, and pardon me, and not destroy me, and
take his holy Spirit utterly from me as he did from Saul.

O Lord, (Though my sins are as scarlet) do thou wash me thoroughly with the
blood of my Savior which only can purge my sins, and is the only propitiation
to atone thy wrath, and to reconcile me to thee, and restore me to everlasting
righteousness better than mine own which I lost, and makes me white as Snow,
and being so washed, and cleansed, I shall have communion again with my God,
and peace of conscience, and abhor those sins that caused my Saviors
sufferings.

Lord, thy mercy would have no object, if there were no misery. All that are
descended from Adam, have been prodigal Sons, as he was; and by their
prodigalities have forsaken thee days without number, and have sought out to
themselves many inventions. I find in my own heart, that I would stay from
thee, and never return to thee, if I could but find empty husks to satisfy the
thirst of my soul, which are only fit for the voluptuous Swines of the world,
and can never satisfy.

Thou sit upon a Throne of grace, to this can we come by Christ only;
through him we may come boldly, and find mercy in a time of need; and all that
come unto thee, come by this; and to this I desire to approach, that I may find
mercy in this time of need; receive me, I beseech thee, as a returning
Prodigal, desirous to break off my sins by repentance and a new life.

Lord give me that Repentance that I shall never repent of; that I may search
and try my ways, examine my own heart, and discuss all my actions, what I have
done, through the whole course of my life let me perform this duty by thy
assistance that I may not run on in wickedness without regret, as they did of
whom the Prophet Jeremiah speaks, Jer. 8.6. They said not, What have I done? I
will therefore make this reflection seriously, particularly, and constantly.

In this Examination I will consider the bate that cought me, and deceived me,
that I may abhor it as a mean, base, and vile thing to be put in the scales
against that communion with God, his favor and hopes which the soul had in
God, which it lost by that sin as to its present feeling, and if it should at
any time reinforce its allurements, I will reject them utterly, and not have to
do with them any more.

I consider also the present, and future evils brought upon my soul by this
sin, for though I must not despair of pardon through the alsufficient merits
of my Saviors sufferings, yet I find my self fearful, and ashamed to approach
the throne of grace, least I should find him a consuming fire. I am undisposed
for every holy duty, and deprived of the assistance of the Spirit. And not only
so, but I am as it were left to my self with the tempter, and see none to
succor me, and I know not what to take in hand with hopes of success, I am at a
loss what I should do, because I seem to have lost God who has withdrawn
himself for my sin, and hides his face. I am also made naked, and destitute,
for he was my defense, and shield, my strength, and refuge, my hope, and help
in trouble. I have wilfully opened a gap to let in a stream of corruptions, a
Breach is made in my spiritual Castle for all the enemies of my soul, to break
in at, and I am disposed to greater sins which by little and little creep in,
and get ground by degrees till at last it reigns uncontrolled, and brings us in
the end to a hardened heart, a seared conscience that cannot repent, and eternal
damnation.

I consider also what might, and ought to have drawn me from my sin to the
contrary virtue. What strength of humane reason, what moral precepts, natural
modesty, and shame, fear of being seen, examples of moral, serious, and
religious men to the contrary serenity, of mind, the public good, and my own
private good, contentation, and transquility, and happiness with many more
motives from the light of nature and good education ready to inform and
restrain a mind willing to be virtuous.

Besides innume^able, other restraints from the word of God, the instructing of
the Spirit. The life of faith, the fear of God, and his alseeing eye, the
terror of the curse upon the disobedient. Hope of Heaven, and eternal
recompenses to the obedient, the exceeding and eternal weight of glory which is
laid up for us, the exceeding precious promises, able not only to support the
soul of a believer in the greatest difficulties, but also to ravish it which
excess of joy under the greatest sufferings. Besides if I had no such light of
nature, no education, no knowledge of the scriptures, and humane precepts, no
knowledge of histories of Gods dealing in judgment with other sinners who have
felt the truth of all the threatenings denounced against sinners, as Josephus
and the scriptures, and other writings testify the Jews did, and all notorious
sinners have done, and daily do; if I had no promises to allure, no threatenings
to drive me, no conscience to testify unto me, no testimony of other men in all
ages both wicked, and righteous; yet this one argument were persuasive enough
to have deterred me from wickedness to the service of God, namely, my
dependence on him for the necessaries, and conveniences of life, my supplys,
my sustentation and preservation from imminent dangers, unexpectedly surprising
me. This might be sufficient to make me bewail my own improvidence, and folly
in casting away my succor, my hope, my sustentation, safeguard, and
preservation, for that which has not profited me. I therefore with grief of
heart bewail my self. But that which may cumulate more grief is to consider the
ungratitude of my sinful soul for so many mercies received which have
transported me with admiration. As when I received form the hands of the Lord
houses that I built not, and wealth that I labored not for, whereby I was
delivered from getting my bread with the sweat of my brow, and the labor of my
mind, and body, in pain, and sorrow, with continual carping, and caring, and
restlesness, the benefit whereof I continually enjoy with comfort, therefore my
duty of gratitude obliges me to consider what I shall render to God, and to
use these mercies to his honor and glory, and not to abuse them to his
dishonor in sinning against him. And when I have done the contrary, I have
dealt unworthily with so good a God; for if Hanna would needs retribute for one
mercy, what must I do for so many? The many deliverances that God has wrought
for me in bringing me out of troubles which I have sometimes brought upon my
self, sometimes my enemies have brought upon me, sometimes the hand of God has
brought upon me, and my relations, either for our sins, or for our trials, out
of all which the Lord delivered me; so that I can testify, and set to my seal,
that God is true, and has performed all his gracious promises to me, that he
has made to them that fear him. He has been with me in six troubles, and in
the seventh he has not forsaken me, his deliverances have exceeded both these
numbers, therefore I must confess that he has also verified his largest
promises to me, saying, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And also
when he says, No weapon formed against thee shall prosper. And when he says,
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. For his mercies have been greater than
my desires, and my tongue would fail me to recount them.

All which fly in my face, and testify against me when I sin, for how can I
recount all his benefits which I have received from him, upon which I live,
beginning with that of being born of virtuous parents. And all the deliverances
which he has wrought for me, in abundance of mercy, and chiefly that he has
delivered my soul from Hell. But I must reflect upon my sin with shame, and
confusion of face, with loathing, and abhorring my self in sackcloth and ashes,
with fasting, and depriving my self of all comforts, and enjoyments, with
humiliation, and abasing my self with earnest and humble supplications, sighs,
and tears, of a contrite heart; but when I consider the vows, promises, and
protestations which I have made to God in my time of trouble, when I sought to
God for my deliverance, and that he did pluck me as a brand out of the fire,
and did hear my prayers, and delivered me, and did grant my requests above my
desire, or hope, as he did Jacobs. These broken vows put me to shame, and cause
me to abhor my self, and with Ephraim to smite upon my breast, desiring in my
heart that I could do any thing whereby I might but undo one sinful action, or
that I could expiate the same by any sufferings, but my conscience tells me
that all I can do or suffer, through the whole course of my life, will not be
sufficient to expiate, or atone for one sin, so as to make me innocent again.
Therefore I have resolved, and vowed to sin no more. And I have wished my self
dead, that I might no more sin, and I have resolved to separate my self from
the world, that I may spend all my time in serving God, who has not dealt by
me after my sins.

Thy word (O Lord) has showed me, that if thy people repent them of their
sins, and forsake them, though they be as scarlet, thou will make them white as
snow, and thou will abundantly pardon them, and thou will repent thee of the
evil which thou bring upon them. If Ahab go mourning, thou will not bring
the evil in his days, and all thy threatinings are only conditional, unless we
repent. So the City of Ninivie diverted thy wrath by turning unto thee, and
seeking thee, with fastings, and prayers. This duty all the Prophets taught.
This St. John the Baptist preached, Saying, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. This our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles taught. Therefore let me
practice this so necessary a duty, but unless thou inablest me with thy grace,
and unless thou give me repentance, I cannot have it of my self, because my
heart is hard of it self and thou only do mollify it by the word, and thy
Spirit. I will therefore beseech thee for this grace, saying with Ephraim, Jer.
31.18. Turn thou me (O Lord) and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord, for
of my self, I am under thy Chastisements untamed, as a Bullock unaccustomed to
the yoke. But if thou turnest me, thou will open my ear by discipline, thou will open my eyes, and mollify my hard heart; I shall be instructed, convinced
of my errors, and smite upon my breast, and repent, and be ashamed. Thus
Ephraim did Jer. 31.19. Surely after I was turned I repented, after I was
instructed I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, and confunded, because I did
bear the reproach of my youth.

Lord we ascribe this, and all our graces unto thee, thou workest in us both to
will, and to do, as St. Paul said, That he labourd more abundantly than all,
yet not he, but the grace of God in him. It is not sufficient that thou
command all men to repent, but that godly sorrow which works repentance is
from thee also. By this we are sorrowful for our sins, for sins sake, and not
only for fear of the punishment, as Esau, when he sought repentance carefully
with tears because of his loss, as also Pharo repented of his sins, but the
plagues being removed, he returned to his sin again. And the Israelites when
God consumed their days in vanity, and their years in trouble, and when he
slew them they sought him, but within a while they forgot God. And God alone
can give this sorrow, because he alone can open the eyes to let us see our
selves, and know our selves, and let me ever seek my light in him ( Act. 26.8.)
For God is light, and all light is from him.

The Spirit shows us our selves in the glass of the law, which shows us our
sinfulness, and our lost undone condition by reason thereof, and that sin is
the worst of evils, because it is the cause of all other evils, and without
this conviction we cannot repent, because we are destitute of light in our
selves, to see our selves, for by sin our understanding is darkened. ( Ephesians.
4.18.) And 1 John 2.11. He that hates his Brother, walks in darkness, and
knows not whither he goes. He wants light, and sight too, Job 24.13. They
rebel against the light, and know not the ways thereof. Naturally we shut our
eyes against the light as the Jews, Joh. 12.37. Though Christ Jesus had done
many miracles among them, yet they believed not in him, though also he speak as
no man spoke, his enemies being judges. And because our natural estate is a
state of unbelief, therefore we in that estate oppose the light of Gods word as
is said, Luke 16.4. Though one should come out of Hell, they would not believe.

Again, I find I cannot repent of my self, without Gods grace inclining me:
Because naturally my heart is proud, and unhumbled, and sees no use of Christ.
And therefore it must be humbled by grace, for Christ came only to seek, and to
save that which was lost, and sensible of their lost condition; their Spiritual
sickness, and fly to Christ as the man slayer did to the Cities of refuge, or
the prodigal after he could not find relief in the husks, would then return to
his Fathers house. Again, I find in my self that my nature, when dejected, is
inclined to repentance too violently, as the Corinthians who sorrowed over
much, or rather like that of Judas, ready to make away my self, if Gods
supernatural grace did not help me, by applying some word of comfort out of the
Scripture. Then if my repentance cause not a dejection, I fear it is too cold,
like that of the Israelites, when God slew them, then they sought him, but
presently they forgot that God was their redeemer. Therefore I pray for Gods
grace so to convince me of sin, that I may be also convinced of righteousness
too, for he has said, That if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive them. That I may not sorrow as those who are without hope, nor hang
down my head like a bulrush, for a day, but that I may sorrow to amendment, and
better obedience, for unless it attain to that end, and proceed from these
causes, I must not account it a godly sorrow working to repentance. But a
worldly sorrow or a devilish sorrow, for they also fear, and tremble, but they
cannot turn unto God, with their affections, and endeavors, and bring forth
fruit meet for Repentance, nor be renewed in the Spirit of their mind, which is
the only true Repentance.

I find in my self sometimes motions of the flesh, suggesting that I have time
enough to repent. But I pray that whilst it is to day, I may lay hold on the
seasons of Grace, that I may remember my Creator in the time of my youth; least
sin grow to a habit, and by custom seem to be no sin, and becomes a second
Nature, that it cannot be parted withal. And in the first of Proverbs it is
said, Because when I called, ye answered not; therefore ye shall call and I
will not answer; which our Savior testifies that the Jews found true, when he
wept over Jerusalem, and he rejected those who made excuses when they were
invited.

I fear, and am jealous, that my Repentance is not so sound as it ought to be,
because I am not so sensible of the evil of sin as I ought: for though
immediately after the commission of sin, I apprehend great evil in it, in
making me liable to all Gods Judgments, here and hereafter; and that it
deprives me of all good. First, my hopes of Eternal happiness hereafter, and
the great and precious promises made to the obedient. And if not that, for
there remains hope of Repentance, yet there is great loss, and punishment to
all sinners though they repent. As David found when he numbered the people: When
God offered him his choice of the three Judgments. And when he denounced that
Judgment against his Family. That the Sword should never depart from it. And
Lot for his drunkenness, and lust, suffered shame, all the days of his life,
and the curse upon his Seed. Besides the outward losses, I cannot sufficiently
value the inward Spiritual loss; when I have no access to the Throne of Grace
with any confidence, but am afraid to approach to it: nor can have any comfort
in meditating of God's Word and Promises, as if I heard a voice, saying, Why
do thou take my Laws into thy Mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and
have cast my Commandments behind thy back; or, if I do meditate of Gods Word,
and his Promises, and his Goodness, I find not such sweetness and delight in my
Meditations as I did before I had sinned. On the contrary, I find these
Spiritual losses: First, Great advantage given to my Spiritual Adversary, to
insult over me, as if I were guilty of all sins, by this one sin, and the same
disobedience that lead me to this, would lead me into all sins; (which God
forbid.) And my own Conscience is ready to accuse me of all sins for this one.
Alleging to me that it was only Gods restraint by afflictions, that hindered me
from falling into all sins; and that now he is like to leave me, because I have
left him; and so I am like to be as guilty as any Man ever was. Next, that he
finds another advantage to tempt me to a further degree of sin; suggesting to
my mind, that I am so far engaged in Sin already, that I am lost, and God has
cast me off, and I can be no more undone, if I proceed further in sin, to which
suggestion if I am but once drawn to yield, he will easily draw me deeper and
deeper; but I pray that he may never draw me to the belief of this. A further
evil I find as great as any; that the guilt of all my sins, both of Omission
and Commission that ever I was guilty of in all my Lifetime, now flies in my
face with aggravation, as if they were unpardonable (so does my conscience
aggravate them) and my Spiritual adversary is ready to persuade me to despair,
because I lie under so much guilt; and God so just, that he punishes sin where
ever he finds it, as he did in our first Parents, and all Mankind for the
guilt of one sin. All which evils, and many more, which sin brings and has
brought upon others, I am sensible of with fear and grief in a great measure,
immediately after the commission of sin. Yet I find it hard to keep in my mind
a continual dread and fear of every sin, and watch against it so strictly as I
ought, though I have felt the bitterness of it. And though I can say with
David, my Iniquities are gone over my Head, and are a sore burden too heavy for
me to bear. I pray therefore, that they may ever be in my sight, that I may be
sensible of the burden of them, and of all the evil in them; and weep for them
day and night as he did for his, and may bring forth fruit meet for repentance.
That God seeing it, may turn his face from my sins, and may blot out all my
misdeeds, when he shall behold my heart broke, and beaten to pieces by the
burden and weight of my sins, which sacrifice the Lord does not despise. And
when he shall behold me abhorring my self, he may not abhor me. But when I
confess them, am sorry for them, and forsake them, he may blot them out, and my
soul may be assured that they are pardoned in Christ Jesus, that he has borne
them. And that he had an eye unto me in his sufferings, and has washed me
clean with his blood, and made me white as snow, that by his stripes I am
healed, and that my name is written in that free pardon that he has purchased.
And that I owe unto him all that I have or can do for this mercy. Though I have
forsaken God as an adulterous wife does her husband for other lovers, and given
my affections to others, and taken it off from God, whereby I must confess that
I have deserved that God should cast me off; yet because he has declared, that
though a man will not receive again such a wife, yet God will receive again
such people, and invites them to return unto him, therefore I return again
unto God, trusting in this his word of promise, that he will receive me again
into his love, and favor, with everlasting mercy, and kindness.

And I will henceforth resolve never more to entertain any thought that may
tend to seduce my affections from so good a God, or corrupt my love to him, but
will watch strictly against such as would allure me, and deceive me, and pray
to God to assist me, since these my spiritual enemies are too subtle, and too
strong for me alone to deal withal without his assistance, which he has
faithfully promised to lend me, when I heartily, and earnestly crave it in my
time of need, and distress. And then I shall be able to resist, and overcome
those that allure me to betray me, and perform and keep my vows which were
first made for me in my baptism, and often since that renewed by me in times
of trouble, and imminent dangers, and at the sacrament of the Eucharist,
especially when I first I enjoyed the happy privilege of those holy mysteries,
also when first I espoused my self, by my own choice, unto my Maker.

I am prone to look upon my own sins as little. Oh that I could have the same
apprehensions of my own sins, as I have had of other men's, for I have said, If
I had sined as they have, I would have spent all my life in weeping, fasting,
and praying, clothing my self in sackcloath, washing my bed with my tears. If
so be the Lord would hear me, and have mercy upon me, and pardon me. And how
near those very sins have I come.

Though I cannot attain the same degree of sorrow for my sins, as Peter did,
when immediately after he denied his Savior he went out, and wept bitterly,
and as it is written of his life, he wore channels in his eyes, by his frequent
tears for that sin. Though I cannot with David, Wash my bed, and water my couch
with my tears, and mingle my drink with weepings, because of my sin; yet will I
endeavor to supply what is lacking in the degree of my sorrow, by the
duration, and continuance of it. And make sin the only matter of my sorrow, and
thereby I shall be better enabled to avoid my falling into the same again, and
though I cannot wash my self clean from the guilt of my sins by mine own
repentance, because the blood of Christ only can cleanse us from our sins, yet
this is the condition necessary to make us subjects capable of being washed by
the blood of Christ, which is communicated to us in the Lords Supper to wash
and cleanse, and heal our penitent broken hearts. Therefore will I look unto
him hanging upon the Cross, and sheding his precious blood to make satisfaction
for my sins, and bearing the iniquities of us all, that we might have pardon of
sin, and peace of conscience in him. And those which he has invited to come
unto him that he may give them rest, are such only as are weary, and heavy
laden. And he only can give it, because the soul that receives it must come
empty handed, as it is intimated, Isa. 5.15. Come buy Wine and Milk without
money, and without price. Such whose consciences are weary, and labor under the
burden of sin, and go mourning by reason thereof, and are ready to sink, and
faint under Gods chastisements, such a one can find no rest in the creature,
nor in it self, till it come to Christ, then man's misery is Christ's
opportunity. They that are sick need a physician, not they that are hole.
Neminem venientem arcet a gracia sua. There are none excepted out of this free
pardon, therefore not I. All that will come may, all that did look up to the
Brazen Serpent were healed.

I thus being burdened with the weight of my sins, and weary of them, and
fainting under them, languishing for want of comfort, and easement, find this
invitation from him that is ready to relieve me, and all men freely, without
any merit of mine. Beseech him to take away this my burden, to give me a new
heart, and to heal my soul. That he would give me redemption through his blood,
even the forgiveness of my sins, Ephe. 1.2. And seal it to my conscience, that
he has borne my iniquities, and has taken them away, and cast them into the
bottom of the Sea, that he would give me this balm of Gillead (his precious
blood) to cleanse me from all my sins, and to heal my wounded conscience, and
by his word to heal my corrupt nature, I come unto him for faith in him, which
I have not of my self, it is the gift of God, Ephe. 2.8. I come and beg his
Spirit to quicken me with a new life, Ephe. 2.1. You has he quickened who were
dead in trespasses and sins. That he would take away the Spirit of bondage, and
give me the Spirit of Adoption, that I may call him Father, and obey him
cheerfully from the principle of love, which will make my services accepted,
and prove my repentance true, which will not, The hanging down of my head.

Jugum Christi.
Meditations of Faith.
THE excellency of this grace is such, that it makes all other things
excellent, and without it, it is impossible to please God; without it, charity
is no charity, piety and charity, and all other graces, and virtues, are no
graces without faith; it is the salt of all holy services, which makes them
acceptable sacrifices to God. It is excellent in its original. It is the gift
of God. It is so also in its fruit, which is holiness, and its final end is
equally excellent, viz. Salvation. There is no degree of it so little, but is
of infinite virtue, it makes us overcome all difficulties in doing and
suffering the good will and pleasure of Almighty God. The first degree of faith
is to believe that God is. The 2d. degree, to believe that he is a rewarder of
them that deligently seek him; but this does not save, for St. Paul had this
belief when he persecuted the Church. But to believe in Gods promises of
salvation through Christ Jesus is saving faith, as it is said by our Blessed
Savior, Ye believe in God, believe also in me. This is saving faith, and this
is the principal act of faith, because Jesus Christ is the principal object of
faith, and every act of grace, is a branch of this grace, hope, charity,
patience, humility; unless they are acted and set on work by faith in Christ,
viz. In obedience to God, believing his acceptance of our works through his
Son, they are nothing more than the moral virtues.

This grace is that which gives most glory to God, because it believes things
that are invisible to sense and reason assuredly as if they were visible. It is
called the evidence of things not seen, knowing that Gods bare word is the
greatest assurance, therefore the Scripture says of Abraham, That he believed,
and gave glory to God; and he staggered not, though the promise was against
reason and sense in regard of the age of himself and his wife Sarah. And though
Gods command of Sacrifising his Son Isaac seemed to be repugnant and contrary
to his promise, yet he believed steadfastly in the truth of God, though it
seemed repugnant; so God put his faith to it, to try it, and he denied his
sense and reason to believe God, and to obey him.

It consists not in one act, but it is a habit, and for that reason the life of
a believer is called the life of faith. Agreeable to which it is said of the
life of Abraham, That he lived in the land of promise as in a strange Country,
looking for a City which had foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And
this he did during his life, so that he never had the sight of that he
believed, but lived upon the promise only and upon God.

This life of faith is a mortifying, and selfdenying life, for Abraham lived in
the land of promise as a stranger, not as a home dweller, freely and boldly
enjoying it as his own. But using the world as if he used it not, not living
upon the world, nor by sense, though the promise was of worldly things. St.
Paul testifies of himself that he lived this life, Gal. 2.20. Not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I live, I live by the faith of the Son
of God. For faith working by love, by the Spirit of Christ unites us to Christ,
in all union as our Root, our Head, our Brother, our Beloved, then it persuades
us of the alsufficiency of God which supports the soul, wherefore God made it
the inducement to Abraham why he should walk before him in perfection, and
whatever is wanting in the creature, faith thus acted makes it up in God, as is
said Psalm. 90.12. Lord thou have been our dwelling place through all
generations. And 2 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing, yet possessing all things.
Because God is the delight of the soul Psalm. 1. Job. 27.10. But it is said of
the hypocrite, Will he always call upon the Lord, will he delight himself in
him? No he will not, for he loves not.

This St. Paul professes that he practiced saying, To me to live is Christ, to
dye is gain. He lived upon Christ, and he in him, Not only in the Apostles
esteem was Christ all to him. But Christ testifies of himself, Joh. 6.34. The
bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life to the world.
Therefore might Job esteem it more than his necessary food, if he be the
eternal food of the soul, which gives it a new eternal life, and maintains it,
satisfying and strengthening the principles of this life, and reparing the
decaies of it. There is nothing needful, or comfortable which gracious souls
have not enjoyed in God, and Christ, David Psalm. 5. Lord thou art my light and
my salvation, whom then shall I fear, thou art the strength of my life of whom
then shall I be afraid? Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my portion, O Lord, I have said
that I will keep thy word. If God be sufficient for himself he is sufficient
for us. All is yours, and ye are Christ's, all the things in the world can
afford little comfort to the rational soul, they can alitle divert it from its
grief, but are so far from yiedling true satisfaction, that the more it drinks,
the more it thirsts, but he that drinks of the water of life shall never thirst
more. He that eats of the true bread which came down from Heaven shall be
satisfied in all his desires and appetites, more than they whose Corn, Wine,
and Oil, is increased, and may say truly, my joy shall be in the Lord, as he
did, and every child of God is commanded this duty in this saying, Rejoice in
the Lord ye Righteous.

This excellent grace makes the soul happy wherein it is, because he that
possesses it possesses Christ and all the benefits and privileges that he
has purchased, that incomparable benefit of justification first, as it is Romans
4. and last v. and the 5th. and first v. Who was delivered for our offenses,
and raised again for our justification, Romans 3. Being justified freely by his
grace. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. This peace is a second benefit, or privilege which faith
derives from Christ, a third follows, by whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand, the favors of God wherein we stand, or the blessed
condition of justified, and sanctified persons to which we come by Christ
through faith, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God; both our present,
and future condition is made happy by faith, and it assures to us that
happiness. It follows, and not only so, but we glory in tribulations also,
knowing that tribulation works patience.

So that calamities are by faith made consolatory, through the sanctified use
which faith makes of them, they are not only made not formidable, as David his
fears vanished by relying upon God, which he expressed saying, What time I am
afraid, I will put my trust in thee, Psalm. 56.3. He made use of his faith in
the time of his fears, as he did also in the time of his wants, Psalm. 8. The
Lord is my shepherd, therefore I shall lack nothing. So that faith imboldens
the Servants of God against all evil. Christ gives and ensures them these
privileges, partly by the testimony of his Spirit, partly by faith in his
merit, Ephe. 3.12. In whom we boldness and access with confidence through faith
in him, Heb. 10.19. We have entrance into the holiest through the blood of
Jesus.

The Spirit assures us, that all the Privileges which Christ has purchased for
his people, are ours, and causes us to rejoice in them as ours.

That all the promises are ours, and causes us to rely upon them; because we
are assured that Christ is ours by Faith; when he is laid hold on as ours; all
things are ours: then it follows, that we have peace of Conscience, and
tranquillity in our Souls, for he is our Peace, Ephe. 2. And we acquiesce in him
because we have chosen him for our portion.

He is reconcilation between God and us, he satisfies our debts, makes God at
peace with us, and our conscences at peace in themselves, and our souls
satisfied as having nothing more that they can desire, but more communion with
God, as that which satisfies it. We know that God has no wrath at all toward
us, nor our consciences any dread, or fear of Gods wrath, or any terror, but
assurance of his favor, and love, and that our sins are washed away by the
blood of Christ, according to that in Colos. 1.20. Having made peace through
the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself. 21. And you
that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now
has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death to present you holy,
and unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight, if you continue in the faith.

Hence the soul assures it self that none of the works of Gods severity have
any wrath at all against it, for in the 24. v. St. Paul says, He rejoices in
his sufferings. But positively they are assured of their adoption, and of the
love and friendship of God, that he will preserve them, supply them, teach
them, heal them, guide and support them, visit them with spiritual
consolations, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and that all things shall work
together for their good, which makes them willing to submit to Gods
chastisements, as it is Psalm. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, yet
do we not forsake thee. This keeps them from murmuring, and from covetousness.
The nature of it is, that it can only be where the Son of peace is. This peace
is a league offensive, and defensive, whereby the soul hates sin, and all that
God hates, and loves holiness, and all that God loves. That salutation which
our blessed Lord perscribed to his Apostles must needs be the most excellent
and desirable, that says, Peace be to this house.

This peace makes all other things at peace with us, for he is said To make a
league with the fowls of the air and the beasts of the field, for us, in Job,
and Prove. 16.17. When a man's ways please God, he makes his enemies at peace
with him. Psalm. 91.10. The plague shall not come near his dwelling, or if it
do, it shall be no plague, Romans 8.31. If God be with us, who shall be against
us. That is, though they are against us, the sting is taken out.

The excellency of it is so great, that it passes human understanding.

It is an everlasting peace, it does not forsake us in the time of trouble, nor
in the hour of death, Isa. 55.3. His mercies are called everlasting.

It makes us peaceable with men to those we have offended; it makes us willing
to satisfy them, and willing to pardon those that have offended us, but the
wicked are like the rageing Sea always unquiet.

It quickens the soul to holy duties, the soul considers what it shall render
to the Lord for all his mercies toward it, Psalm. 103.3. Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thy sins.

The excellency of it must needs be great, because it is the legacy which
Christ dying left to his Church, not as the world gives, gave he it to them,
but more largely, liberally, and bountifully, and absolutely, without any
limitation of time, or condition. David calls it great peace which they have
which love Gods word, but yet he says that many are the troubles of the
righteous. That which follows makes amends. The Lord delivers them out of
all, and the Lord will stand by them, and deliver them, as we know he did the
three children out of the fiery furnace, and Daniel out of the Lions den, and
Job out of the fiery Trials. The fruits of righteousness are sown in peace, not
in discord; they which love peace sow them. And this shield of faith is both
an offensive and defensive weapon, whereby these holy warriors in their
spiritual warfare fought the Lords battles, under the bloody banner of the
Cross of Christ, who for the glory that was set before him, endured the Cross,
and despised the shame; these follow the lamb, and suffer with him, that they
may also reign with him, and take joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
knowing that they have a more enduring substance in Heaven. And willingly they
spend and are spent for God.

Faith is that which fixes the heart upon things eternal, and holds it as by
an anchor, when in the world there can be no fixation, but because of the
raribility of the objects thereof, and the instability of the subject, viz. The
mind of the natural man, all is fast and loose, and nothing can be trusted in.
But faith trusts in the Lord, because it knows the faithfulness of his
promises, Isa. 7.9. Except you believe you can not be established.

Faith is that which inables us to walk with God, because it believes in, and
trusts to his alsufficiency, bounty, and goodness, and depends upon them,
casting its care upon God, so that it makes the conversation of a believer to
be without covetousness, Heb. 13.5. Because he has said, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee.

This holy dependancy upon God, David expresses, Psalm. 63. With the benefits
he received thereby in these words, My soul hangs on thee, thy right hand
also shall uphold me. They that seek the hurt of my soul, they shall go under
the earth, but he would rejoice in God.

Faith is that which gives the soul an interest in God, and in Christ Jesus
from whence flows all true comfort that the soul can desire, and reciprocally
it gives God an interest in us, that we should be wholly his, both soul and
body living, and dying. As to the interest of God in us, it is said Psalm.
119.94. I am thine, and in diverse other Psalms, O save thy Servant, and by the
Apostle, Whether we live therefore or dye we are the Lords. David makes use of
this interest of God in him as an argument for him to hear his prayers, and
deliver and succor him in his need, but they seem more doubtful when they make
use of Gods interest in them, than when they make use of their interest in God,
for then they are high in their confidence, and faith in God, Psalm. 35. I
trusted in thee, for I said, thou art my God. And Psalm. 18. I will love thee O
Lord my strength. The Lord is my stony rock, and my defense, my Savior, my
God, and my might in whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn also of my
salvation, and my refuge, 2. v. I will call upon the Lord which is worthy to be
praised, so shall I be safe from my enemies. 3. v. The sorrows of death
compassed me, and the overflowings of ungodliness made me afraid, 4. v. The
pains of hell came about me, the snares of death overtook me. In my trouble I
will call upon the Lord, and complain unto my God, so shall he hear my voice,
etc. Psalm. 63. I will rejoice in God my strength.

The assurance of our interest in God, inables us to lay hold on every promise,
and every privilege of the Servants of God, and to challenge God upon his word,
with confidence, as it is expressed in Psalm. 119.59. Remember thy word unto thy
Servant wherein thou have caused me to put my trust. He looks upon his faith in
the promise as that which obliged God to the performance, and God looks upon it
so too, as it is said Psalm. 91.14. Because he has set his love upon me I will
deliver him, etc. Dan. 6. No hurt was found upon Daniel because he believed in
God, 2 Chronicles. 1.13, 18. The children of Israel prevailed because they trusted
and relied upon the Lord, Psalm 37.40. He shall deliver them from the ungodly,
because they put their trust in him.

Therefore our Blessed Savior prayed for his Disciples faith that it might not
fail, when Satan desired to Winow them, as wheat is Winnowed. Could Satan's
fiery darts have been quenched, and he baffled by this reply, I believe as the
Church believes as some pretend this had been easy for them to have said, and
so quitted themselves of all his winnowing, or had they not so much faith, as
to say so, or not so much cunning as they that teach us that; but if it did not
profit the Jews, to say that they were Abraham's children and not bastards, no
more will it profit us to say we believe as the Church believe, or as Abraham
believed; unless we do the works of Abraham, and can show our faith by our
works, for they are of the Devil that do his works.

And which of all the promises do they mean, or which threatenings, which
precept, or which commandment, or word of the Gospel of eternal life? and if
they mean all these, yet by referring to another belief, they confess there
own ignorance, and imply that they are not able to give an account of their
faith, nor know what it is that they believe, and how then can they believe,
for they cannot believe in him of whom they have not heard, therefore their
belief is a lie and they infidels, but he to whom they make this answer must be
supposed to know the belief of the Church, and their pretended belief better
than they, and so it is because they are not permitted the reading of that
Gospel whereof they pretend belief.

This saying of these deceivers came from the same Minerva, as that saying of
Claudius Caesar did, and is the parallel of it, speaking of a certain business
he pronounced gravely as if he had read it in a book. That he was of the same
opinion with them who had offered true things. The words in the Author are
Secundum eos se sentire qui vera proposuissent. Suetonius. It follows (ibid.)
Propter quae usque eo eviluit ut passim ut propalam contemptui esset, etc. And
I can see no reason why the asserters and upholders of this silly saying (which
they so magnify and affect) should not fall into a parity of contempt for so
doing

But that sandy foundation of theirs; That ignorance is the Mother of Devotion,
(and it is true of their devotion) can bear no other superstructure, than
ignorance of the faith, and ignorance of the Scripture, nor can it otherwise be
supported, but life eternal consists in knowledge, and Prove. 13.16. Every
prudent man deals in knowledge.

But whenever subtilty and craft is requisite, there they use it; and where
ignorance is helpful to their designs, there that is appiled. I can compare
them to nothing more fitly than to briars which take root and grow at both
their ends, and wherever they lay hold of the silly sheep, they tear off the
fleece.

But that faith which makes us the Sons of God, and gives life eternal, must be
more knowing, and be able to give an account of it self, viz. To know God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, according to the promises of illumination, They
shall all know etc. And knowing him must receive him, and believe in his name,
as in John 1.12. To as many as received him, to them he gave power to become
the Sons of God, to them that believe in his name.

The object of faith which is said to be the evidence of things not seen
generally, is God, and the truth of God, 2 These. 2.12. which is his word; we
must believe the truth of his threatenings, as well as the truth of his
promises, Jer. 32.19. This belief saved Noah, and his family from the
destruction of the deluge, and this was commanded in him, for a worthy act of
faith, and by this Lot escaped when Sodom was destroyed, and his doubting wife
made a perpetual monument or spectacle for her infidelity, the chief and
special object is Christ, Act. 16.37. If we must leve Christ, then is Christ
the principle, the cause, efficient and final, the matter, and the form of
that life. His example our pattern, and his will ours; to me to live is Christ
is meant in some or in all these senses, for faith verifies it in them all.

He is the end of our conversation, because we can desire no more, nor can we
need any more, if we have him; he is the matter and form of it, because the
natural life is drowned in this, and is made spiritual, as it is said, If we
have known Christ in the flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more.

The holy soul does not enjoy its life, if it does not feel Christ living in it
by his Spirit quickening its graces, it cries, O miserable man that I am, etc.

As faith tells the instrument, and means whereby we attain the greatest good,
so it is the Armor that defends us from the greatest evils, therefore said the
Apostle, Ephe. 6.16. Above all take the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Whereby he commends faith
above all the spiritual Armor, showing the cause of his commendation from the
exceeding virtue of it, that it inables them to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked, the virtue of it is universal against the worst of evils, if it be
taken, that is, if it be used. It must be used in the relying act, and in the
aplying act, staying our selves upon the Lord, Psalm. 37.5. Commit our way unto
the Lord.

The Applying act is when the soul can say his righteousness is mine to justify
me, his blood which he shed upon the Cross, an atonement for my sins, his
Spirit mine to quicken me. The fiery darts which Satan shoots are first the
guilt of sin, then afflictions, inward and out ward; those who were stung by
the fiery Serpents could not be cursed, unless they looked up to the brazen
Serpent. Faith sees that the blood which Christ shed for sinners was shed for
my sin, that he had an eye unto me in his sufferings. A 2 Way faith quenches
the fiery darts of Satan by seeing that sin is condemned, if so then it can
have no power to condem the soul. A 3 Way is to see afflictions to be a means
of grace, that they sanctify us, and work for us a more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. And to see God in the afflictions working for our good, and
keeping us from the hurt which men intended to us; I will be with thee in the
fire, and in the water, that the fire shall not burn thee, nor the water hurt
thee, Isa. 43.2. I will keep him secretly from the strife of tongues.

This made the suffering Martyrs more than conquerors through Christ that loved
us, and gave his life for us, therefore they were wiling to suffer for him, and
lay down their lives for the testimony of the Gospel, to take joyfully the
spoiling of their goods, and to think all too little for God, for whom they
suffered it; therefore let us set before us our blessed Saviors suffering, who
endured for us such bitter pains, mocking, and contradiction of sinners, lest
we faint in our minds, and are weary of the Cross of Christ. Let us also set
before us the examples of the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, and the examples
of our own memory. Our late King whose head was anointed with holy oil, yet
his Majesty trampled upon with the greatest indignities, and when the meanest
of his subjects, a common Soldier spit in his face, used no reproof, and he
that was Gods vicegerent of the Crown was humbled, to be Christ's vicegerent of
his Cross, a rare and wonderful example of suffering patiently the good will
and pleasure of God.

Our imitation of his virtues shall be a lasting monument of his Glory.

Aere ceu vacuo pendentia Mausolaea. Mart. Holy David went far in this, as when
one abject fellow cursed him, and threw dirt at him, he let him alone saying
Who can tell whether God will requite good for his railing. And God did not
fail him, because his faith did not fail though it was tried to the uttermost,
this faith carried him through all. When the people talked of stoning him, by
this he encouraged himself in the Lord, and was not dismayed and if it became
the Captain of our salvation to be made perfect by sufferings, why should it be
thought strange, if all that fight under the same banner be made perfect
Soulders by the same discipline.

Oh that we could all follow him, not only in drinking of the Cup which he
drunk off, viz. The bitter Cup of the Cross, but also do it with the same
charity to our enemies as he had, when he prayed, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. whose steps the Proto Martyr St. Stephen also followed,
and for his reward he saw the Heavens opened, and his Savior standing at the
right hand of God; by this we are sure that the same Spirit is in us as was in
Christ. It Was impossible for Job to have undergone so many of Satan's fiery darts
upon his estate, his relations, and bodily sufferings, but that he believed
that his redeemer lived, and that he should see him with his eyes at the last
day, though worms consumed his flesh. And St. Paul having fought the good
fight of faith, had the like assurance as he testifies, henceforth is laid up
for me a Crown of glory, this enabled him to undergo the fight with victory,
and this took away the sting of death, so that death it self was not formidable
to him; nor to the holy Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, who willingly underwent
it for a good conscience, not accepting deliverance.

Those great temptations which Satan most relieth upon are those of sins guilt
accusing the conscience, and bloody persecutions, though all manner of
temptations, as the vanities of the world, the cares of the world, the lusts of
the flesh, the pride of life, are all of them by the arts of our Spiritual
adversary so suited, and managed, according to several complexions, that
without this grace they are unresistable, therefore the Scripture testifies
that this is the victory whereby we overcome the world, and if morality, could
be sufficient to mortify our lusts, and good education as some pretend, how
came it to pass that those moral Philosophers who writ so many things against
lust, covetousness, and other vices, were yet themselves overcome of them? but
through faith in Christ, the world is crucified to us, and we unto the world,
that is as well the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of
life, which contains all that is in the world, all which the faithful soul
counts but dross, and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus,
whom as the Spouse in the Canticles, she esteems fairer than ten thousand. And
esteems sin the most ugly, vile, eformed, and abominable thing in the world,
pulling off its mask and vizard whereby it deceives the men of the world, as it
is said, Romans 7.10. Sin deceived me, and thereby slew me. The understanding
thus enlightened ingageth all it can against sin, as its enemy, and sometimes
by vigilance it prevails against all assaults of temptations, whereby sin is
quite excluded from entering; and sometimes by flying the occasions of sin, as
Joseph fled from his Mistress, and by the Spirit assistance we mortify the
flesh, God and Christ susporting. Sometimes by prayer, faith prevails against
the tempter, the soul fearing its own weakness, seeks for help of him who is
able to succor, and has succored it. The last refuge which faith has, is
repentance early, and hearty sorrow for the sin committed; as Peter when he had
denied his Lord and Master, immediately he went forth and wept bitterly. By
these means faith quenches all the fiery darts of the wicked. The light of
nature teaches, that the soul is borne to more noble things than to wait upon
the pleasure of the senses. But the supernatural life, which the Apostle lived
when he said, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Shows another
inabling principle of life in the regenerate proceeding from that union which
is betwixt Christ and his members, because Christ and they are one Spirit, 1
Cor. 6.10. Therefore he says (Not I) because he is not the same man he was
before; that man is Crucified with Christ and buried with him, he has derived
a new life from Christ, as he expresses, I labored more abundantly than all,
yet not I, but Christ. Christ is the spring of it, the matter of it, and end of
it. Consider the end of your conversation Jesus Christ, and if Christ live in
us we shall do, think, and speak as he did.

As all other graces of Gods children are sometimes weaker than they are at
other times, so is faith. But the decay of this grace is the cause of decay of
many others, and sometime the decay of others may cause a decay of this, the
Psalm. 51. Entitled a Psalm of David when Nathan the Prophet came unto him
after he had gone in to Bathsheba; the Title and the Psalm it self show what
sins, and what punishments he lay under; and because his sins were the cause of
the loss of Gods Spirit, or of the danger of it, and of the loss of the joy of
his salvation, viz. His assurance, he confesses his sins first, and prays for
pardon through the multitude of Gods tender mercys, then prays for washing
healing, cleansing, and renovation. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew
a right Spirit within me. It follows, Restore unto me the joy of thy
Salvation, and support me with thy free Spirit. This implies, that before he
had it, but now he had lost it, and was deprived of it, which was the cause of
so great grief to him, that he expresses it to be the breaking of his bones.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. And the like does every penitent broken soul feel in himself; when he
fears the loss of Gods holy Spirit, and feels himself deprived of the joy of
his salvation, and this joy when it is restored is so great, that it will make
the broken bones rejoice; he apprehended the greatness of the joy now in the
loss of it, Psalm. I have roared for the very disquietness of my heart. God
deprives us of it for our sins, that we may be the more careful to preserve it,
and fearful by sin to loose it, or hazard it, and to work out our Salvation
with fear and trembling; for though Gods lays not upon his children all that
they deserve, yet they shall not go unpunished: Judgment shall begin at the
house of God, Jer. 22.24. Though Coniah the Son of Jehojakim King of Juda were
the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence.

Now for as much as the motions and workings of the holy Spirit in the faithful
people of God by inlightning them in the understanding of heavenly truths,
bringing to mind and applying the word of God to their comfort, inabling them
to converse and walk with God in holy Meditation, contemplation, prayer and
thanksgiving, making melody in their hearts to the Lord, delighting them, and
rejoicing them in the want of all things, as the Prophet Habakkuk expresses,
chap. 3. Though the Fig Tree should not blossom, nor fruits be in the vines,
etc. And making them to abound with inward joy, when their afflictions do most
abound, slighting and contemning alike both worldly joy, and sorrow, for the
joy which they have in the Lord, these are the study, employment and business,
of a regenerate person, wherein he desires to be always exercised, because he
cannot find satisfaction, nor delight in any thing else; hence he may be more
truly, and properly said to live by faith and by the Spirit, than to live the
life natural, as St. Paul argues he did, when he says, I am crucified with
Christ, yet I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I
now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given
himself for me. Therefore they are as it were out of their lives, and void of
all enjoyment, and comfort, when they want the comforts, and assistance of the
Holy Spirit, as Holy David did greatly resent the absence of it, and fear lest
it should be taken from him, and that he should be cast away, so do most of
Gods people, Isa. 49.14. Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has
forgotten me; Though God had graven her in the palms of his hands. When God
hides his face, and withdraws himself, they are cast down, as Psalm. I said in
my prosperity I should never be cast down, but thou hidest thy face, and I was
troubled. This withdrawing of God was the very bitterest of our Saviors
sufferings. If this should be our condition, let us not be weary of well doing,
but wait on the Lord, for God has said Isa. 49. That he that waits on the Lord
shall be like an Eagle. And consider that Christ Jesus suffered the like, and
therefore has a fellow feeling of our suffering, that he might succor us who
are tempted. But if Christ does not succor us, our heart cannot endure, our
hands cannot be strong in the days that God shall thus deal with us, as it is
Ezekiel. 22. v. 14. But he has bid us to call upon him in the time of our
trouble, and promised that he will deliver us.

But how can they now pray when they want the assistance of the Spirit? it may
be answered. That God sometimes takes away the comfort of the holy Spirit, and
yet the other effects of it remain, Isa. 63.15, 16. Look down from Heaven and
behold from the habitation of thy holiness where is thy Zeal, and thy strength,
and the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? are they
restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, thou O Lord art our Redeemer, etc.
Some encouragement the Church found for prayer, and if it should be so with us
that we cannot call God Father, yet the duty of prayer is not to be neglected,
Luke 11.8. Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet
because of his importunity he will, etc. Though we think our selves unworthy to
call God Father, like the prodigal Son which desired to be but as one of the
hired Servants, this humility is the way to obtain our requests.

Another way whereby we may come to him in prayer is, to pray to him as the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus, for Christ is not ashamed to call us his
Brethren, therefore God will not be ashamed to be our Father. And with fervent
prayer let us use reading, and meditating in the word of God, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give
all deligence to make your calling, and electtion sure. Assurance differs from
security in this, that Assurance fills the soul with admiration of the grace of
God and his unspeakable love. Behold what manner of love the Father has showed
us, that we should be called the Sons of God, but security never urges the
soul to thankfulness. Another difference that assurance urges the soul to free
obedience but security not when the soul knows that what ever her
infirmities, failings, and wants are, she shall receive of his fullness grace
for grace.

When the Spirit bears witness with our Spirit that we are the Sons of God.

When we have received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things which are freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. When the Heavenly
Bridegroom brings his Spouse into his Banqueting House, and his banner over her
is love, Cant. 2.4. He treats her with flagons, and comforts her with apples,
then she is sick of love to him, and then is the season when he will give her
his loves, his left hand under her head, and his right hand embracing her; and
as he charesses her, so she does the like to him as lovers vie with one another
in love. If she finds him without, she promises to kiss him, Chap. 8. And to
lead him, and bring him into her Mothers house, and Chap. 3. She finds him, and
holds him, and will not let him go until she brings him into the Chamber of her
that conceived her, Chap. 1.13. She calls him a bundle of myrrh, and lays him
all night between her breasts, namely in her heart by love to him, and she
gives him the pledges of her love.

Thus the soul at times does enjoy her beloved, then she is sure of him, and of
his love. But he knocks, when she is in bed, and she makes excuses for not
rising to him, though her bowels were moved for him as soon as he put in his
hand at the door, but her love was too slow, and did not keep pace with his
love, for this unkindness he withdraws himself when she opens to him; she
called him, and he gave her no answer, she sought him, and she could not find
him, but while she seeks him, she is taken by the Watch stripped, smitten, and
wounded, and her vail taken from her.

So also may a true believer loose in part the knowledge and sense of his
assurance which he has sometimes enjoyed; though they continue in the faith
rooted, and grounded therein, so as they never waver nor fall away, yet they
may slumber so as to be awakened by the motions of the holy Spirit, though
possibly not so soon but that he may have withdrawn himself, as it is there
described, in those words, I sleep, but my heart waketh. -- The voice of my
beloved that knocks -- Open unto me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled.

But yet when her beloved has withdrawn himself, he does leave behind him such
a sweet perfume upon the handles of the locks, as may inflame the well disposed
soul to seek him with such eager, and restless pursuit, as to retrive her
beloved again, and then she will hold him fast, and will not let him go, until
she has brought him into the Chamber of her that conceived her; that is, she
will go to those ordinances and those opportunities of grace where she first
tasted the prelibations of glory, the first kisses of his mouth, and pledges of
his love; and when she does again taste them, and these pledges of his love are
again renewed, and she again sits under his shadow with delight. What other
thing can I esteem this but the enjoy meant of Heaven in the first fruits; for
where Christ is, there is Heaven, he makes it so; he gives all as is desirable,
here then must needs be assurance for the posture of fitting, and the manner of
the posture with delight, both do imply it. As also that other expression does
imply, viz. Her bringing him into the Chambers of her that conceived her. And
that also, chapter 2. his left hand was under me, and his right hand embraced me,
for if she be in the arms of Jesus her Savior, she can not be safer, no not
in Heaven.

And faith thus acted, and acting, lives in and by her beloved, and breaks out
into these and like expressions with the heavenly spouse in the Canticles. And
makes her boast of God all the day. And by him is able to do mighty acts and to
suffer any thing for the love of him.

Meditations.
Art thou dejected (O my soul) in the apprehension of thy meanness or vileness,
as Jacob was when he seemed but as a worm? look upon the goodness of God to
such persons. He does not abhor thee. Levit. 26.11. Nor despise thee. Job 36.5.
He will love thee freely. Hose. 14.4. And Deuteronomy. 7.13. He says, I will love
thee. And our Blessed Savior, Jo. 14.21.23. Says, He that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him. And
Hos. 2.19.20. God says, I will betroath thee unto me for even, yea I will
betroath thee unto me in righteousness, and judgment, and in loving kindness,
and in mercys, and I will betroath thee unto me in faithfulness.

He will not forsake thee, 1 Kings 6.13. He will be with thee, and will not
fail thee. Deuteronomy. 31.8. Though thou fall, thou shall not be cast down utterly,
for the Lord upholdeth thee with his hand, for the Lord loves Judgment, and
forsakes not his Saints, but preserves them for ever. And Matthew. 1.21. He
shall save them from their sins. Do thou (O my soul) apprehend that these are
only the peculiar privileges and enjoyments of the Saints, and fear thy
self to be none of those, but fain thou would be such, thou may sue to the
Lord to perform those and the like promises of free grace, Jer. 32.40. I will
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. I will give
them a new heart; And that Micha 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities; And that
Isa. 3.4. The heart of the rash shall understand. And that Isa. 11.6. The Wolf
shall lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid. And
that Hosa. 14.15. I will heal their backslidings. And that Romans 16.20. The God
of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. And that Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them. Luke 11.13. How much more shall your
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. And Isa. 35.5. The
ear of the deaf shall be unstopped; And that Deuteronomy. 30.9. I will circumcise
thine heart, That thou may love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, etc.
And that in Isa. 40. v. 31. They shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk,
and not faint.

Since then God has promised to give thee his Spirit if thou ask it of him,
and prooved it with an argument a fortiori, that he will, and has promised to
do all this for thee, and work all these works in thee, and thou find in thy
self desires, pantings, and longing for them, and thereupon do ask him in his
Sons name, and for his mercies sake, his truths sake, and his names sake, to
perform these promises, and give him no rest till he does it; doubt not but
he will.

Meditation of the Love of God.
Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long suffering and of
great goodness, etc.

Those sweet compellations which almighty God uses to his poor creature man,
if they do but sink into our hearts, they must needs make such impressions as
will cause reciprocal love to him. Is Ephraim a dear Son? is he a pleasent
Child? what can endear thee more than this, Oh my soul? what love can thou
desire more? he counts thee, and calls thee in this Relation, Son, looks upon
thee with compassion as his child, and pittieth thee as a Father pittieth his
Child, delights in thee as a Father delights in a Child whom he loves and
helps thee as his Child. Behold what manner of love God has showed thee,
that thou should be called the Son of God, Joh. 1.4. If a Son, then an heir,
and joint heir with Christ his only begotten Son, for Christ is not ashamed to
call us Brethren, in this relation to God, and Christ, what can thou want or
fear, or what more can thou desire? in the 3d. Chap. of Mal. He calls them
his Jewels, and Rev. 1. Kings, and Priests, and Isa. 62. a Crown of glory. His
portion; he called Abraham his friend. What can thou fear? a Master may be
severe; if his work be done he will pay wages, if not, stripes, but a Father is
indulgent, and will spare his Child, and require no more of him than he can
perform with comfort, and delight; if then thou can find in thy self the
disposition of a Child, be sure thou may find in him the disposition of a
Father, Mat. 3. Our Blessed Savior has owned them in these relations, viz.
His Brethren, his members, his Spouse, his betroathed, his Sister and Mother,
his Garden, his Church, his beloved, his branches, his Servants, his flock, his
lambs, his friends, and Revel. 1.6. He has loved us, and washed us from our
sins, and made us Kings and Priests to God.

Could the Canaanitish Woman find encouragement for faith to lay hold from that
of Dog, who needs to despair? sure not a prodigal Son.

And every thing that is excellent, beautiful, and desirable, beloved and
endeared, he compares his people to it, and sees all those perfections in them,
as he expresses in the Cant. O then my soul admire, and be inamoured of him
and find all excellencies, perfections, and desirable good things in him from
whom thine excellency comes, and is derived, thine head, thy Husband, thine
elder Brother, thy Father, thy Maker, thy Governor, thy Redeemer; for so does
the heavenly Spouse see and admire in Christ Jesus her Beloved: If so thou
do, then thou know, that he is they Beloved, thy Savior, thy Head, thy
Brother, thy Portion, thy Delight, thou love him in all that he did or said;
his teaching, his sufferings, his miracles, thy love to him is but the
reflection of the beam of his.

Meditations of Mercy.
Med. 1. Psalm. 103.11. As high as the Heaven is above the earth, so great is
his Mercy, etc. WOrthy of our meditation are all the works of God, and every
word of his to be studied by us, that we may thereby improve our graces, but
his works of mercy, and that part of his word which holds forth mercy, and
offers it, and sets forth God in the Glory, and excellency of his mercy, is
most necessary for sinful man, and most comfortable to be considered. All that
are saved, are saved by meditating of this; all that are lost, are lost, and
perish for lack of the knowledge of this this is life eternal to know thee, the
only true God and Jesus Christ.

The freeness then, and largeness of it, is to be our chief study; free it is.
What motive found he in us to move him, when enemies, to give his Son up for us
all, and to beseech us, but only from his own goodness, because he delights in
mercy.

The man that seeks his lost sheep may get the profit of it, and so may the
woman that seeks her lost groat; but what profit can the Lord get by us, for
which he may seek us? for when we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants.

The largeness of his mercy is without limits, for if he has commanded us to
forgive seventy times seven times, will not he frankly forgive us what we are
not able to satisfy, since he makes his forgiving of us many talents, the
argument why we should forgive petty debts: can we imaging that he will take
the first forfeiture, since he has commanded us not only to forgive our
enemies, but to love them, bless them, pray for them, to do good for evil, will
not he forgive us, love us, and bless us as freely for Christ's sake, though
there be no motive in us for it? would he make love to be the fulfilling of the
law? charity the covering of transgression? prefer charity before piety, by
commanding us to leave our gift at the Altar, to be reconciled to our Brother,
prefer it before faith, and all gifts, and graces, making it as it were, the
ligament and sinews of all, and that if we want that, all other graces are but
empty sounds, make a noise in the ear, without any profit? would God require
such love from us, but that he is Love, Gracious, Merciful, and full of
compassion, slow to anger, hates nothing that he has made; what can he say
more free to thee, though thou art as an adulterous Spouse to him, yet thou
may return, and he will receive thee again, though thou bring no merit,
but demerit to provoke. He has excluded none from his mercy unless they be
such as will show no mercy, or else those that sin of malicious wickedness, and
sin in despite of the Spirit wilfully against light. The entail of his mercy
is to thousands of them that love him.

2 Meditation on Gods Mercy.
Lord if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who may abide
it? but there is Mercy with thee, etc.

LORD be merciful to me a sinner, we have all sinned, and hope in thy Mercy
only, through the merits of our Savior. If we were not, sinners thy mercy
would be of no use toward us. And our Blessed Lord and Savior would be of no
use to us, nor faith nor hope would be of any use, nor prayer, nor praises. But
because I am a sinner, I pray for thy mercies, I praise thee for thy mercies, I
hope for thy mercies, I trust in thy mercy revealed to sinners, I believe in
the merits of my Savior, and renounce all merit in my self, therefore Lord
cast me not off because I am a sinner, shut not out my prayers for this. I will
not sin, that grace may abound, but though I have sinned, I am an object of
Mercy, and thy grace that abounded to Mary Magdalen, to Paul, to Publicans and
sinners, may also extend to me. Thou have sent thy Son to call, not the
Righteous, but Sinners. To the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to seek, and
also to save that which was lost, to quicken them who were dead in trespasses
and sins; To preach the glad tidings of the Gospel of our Salvation though thy
Mercy in giving up thy Son to dye for us, that by his death we might escape
death, and live, because he bore the iniquities of us all, and by his stripes
we are healed; That precious blood that he shed upon the ground when the spear
was thrust into his body, was a sufficient ransom for the lives of all
mankind. And as my sins had a concurrent demer it procuring his death, so I
hope they are joined in the effect, the atonement, and expiation. That his
righteousness may be imputed to me also, as my sins were to him, 2 Cor. 5. That
I may be made the righteousness of God in him. Therefore we have need that he
should be made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
because we were foolish, disobedient, and deceived, serving diverse lusts, and
therefore have thou proclaimed thy self abundantly pardoning because our sins
abound, Isa. 55. As our Blessed Savior is the chiefest and greatest of all
mercies, because he is of more value than all, so is he also to be esteemed,
because in him as in the Fountain are all others contained; for by him, and
faith in his merits only we pray for all others which we need, therefore above
all we praise thee for him, and in him, and by him we praise thee for all

3. Meditation.
All our spiritual mercies as well grace here, as glory, and eternal happiness
hereafter, are free, without any merit of ours, of mere gift and mercy, Tit.
3.3, 5. We our selves were sometimes disobedent, etc. But after the kindness,
and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly
through Jesus Christ, etc. He is the medium, by whom they are derived to us,
and not our own merit; of his fullness we have received grace for grace; as the
members derive their vital Spirits from the head. The converting grace, and the
confirming graces are both free, Ephe. 1.13. In whom after ye believed, ye were
sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance. He works in us both the will, and deed that is good, when of our
selves we cannot think a good thought. Therefore above all we pray, that thou
would give us thy Son whom thou have given for us all freely, and then with
him thou give us all things; and as a Father pittieth his own Children, so
does the Lord pity them that fear him. Thy bowels cannot see them want any
thing. Let him live in us by his word, by his Spirit, by his image in us, by
his graces which we receive from his fullness, let him be formed in us, and by
him, dwelling in our hearts, let us be crucified to the world, and dye daily,
and be buried with him, and yet live but so that we may be said not to live our
selves, but Christ in us. Thus let the word and the Sacraments convey him to us.

Since thou hate nothing that thou have made, and thy delight is among the
Sons of men ( Pro. 1.) Certainly thou do not afflict nor grieve willingly the
Sons of men. Therefore when we cry unto the Lord in our trouble he delivers us
out of distress, Psalm. 104. He cannot forbear to kiss, and embrace his prodigal
Son.

O let thy revelation of thy love to man recall man's straying affections to
God. If we believe this our faith will work love to him again, and we shall be
as willing to be reconciled to him, as he to be reconciled to us, 2 Cor. 5.20.
If while we were enemies Christ died for us, whom has he not died for? who is
excluded from his mercy? much more being justified by his blood will he save
us, seeing he has done so much for us when we were worse: now that we are put
in a better relation by the blood of Christ, and are reconciled to him, and
made just persons, much more now will he do the rest, which is but the
consequence of the justification, to save us. All this is free mercy. Not of
works which we have done, but of his own good will he begot us, and
accordingly we are justified freely by his grace.

4. Meditation.
I find no condition annexed to be precedent to make a subject capable of
mercy, but only want, and desire of mercy; want I have without my own act or
endeavor, desire of relief too arises spontaneously without my endeavor, and
largeness of desire proceeds from a covetous mind, an eye unsatisfied, yet such
is the ocean of mercy that it requires but only that we open our mouth wide,
and he will fill it, as he promises. As long as the widow brought empty
vessels, the Oil ran; he gives liberally and upbraideth not; he gives more
then we are able to ask, or think, the debtor does but desire forbearance, but
the Lord forgives him the debt.

Jacob only desired food, and raiment, and God increased him to two bands.
Abraham desired but a Son, and God increases his seed as the sand of the Sea.
The prodigal desires to be but as a Servant, and the Father entertaineth him
with embracings and feastings. But as for his people that trust in him, mercy
imbraseth them on every side. God satisfies their mouth with good things, they
shall want no manner of thing that is good. He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him; if he does not give the thing desired, he will take away the
desire of it, Psalm. 32.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give the
thy hearts desire.

We starve our souls for want of asking. Joash struck three times on the ground
and the Prophet was angry and said to him Thou should have stricken six or
seven times. Paul to the Corinthians says, you are not straightened in us, but in
your own bowels. And it is said of Christ, that he could not do many works,
because of their infidelety, to be often upon our knees shows our faith in him,
believing his goodness and Fatherly care of us. Infidelity does as it were bind
the hands of God, who is not wanting in his bowels of mercy.

Be sensible then (O my soul) of thy wants, know where to go for thy supply,
namely, to him that inviteth thee; give way to thy most enlarged desires, when
thou go to an infinite supply, be not straightened in thine own bowels, open
thy mouth wide, come boldly as he bids thee. And ask the things that are
pleasing in his sight, since thou know thou shall receive them, if they be
such things as the word of God teaches thee to ask; fear not, because thou art
sensible of thine own unworthiness, since such are invited, and the best are
unprofitable Servants. And when they have done all, they may and must
acknowledge themselves such; and, stand in need of the merits of their Savior,
and are justified freely by grace, if so, much more must such sinners as I, and
such as Mary Magdalen see our own unprofitableness. But Oh that I could love as
much as she did, because much is forgiven me, and I believe that he will
forgive me, because he has given me many things, and it is easier, and lesser
in the esteem of men, to forgive a debt than to give.

I shall undoubtedly believe his love to me, If I can feel in my heart such
love to him.

5. Meditation.
When I find the Lord reckoning up the grievous sins of his ancient people the
Jews, that they were a rebellious people, lying Children that would not hearken
to the law of the Lord, which say to the seers, see not, and to the Prophets,
prophesy not unto us right things, but deceits, cause the holy one of Israel to
cease from before us, for which iniquity he threatens them, v. 13. And v. 15.
Promises them salvation if they return, but finding them obstinate they would
not, whereby they procure their own ruin. Therefore he says, Isa. 15.18. He
will wait to be gracious unto them. He will be exalted that he may show mercy
unto them, as if he had said, though their sins were never so great, yet his
mercy should not be overcome, his mercy is infinite as he is; their sins are
the sins of men, his mercies the mercies of God, that where iniquity does
abound, grace does superabound; his mercy is free without any merit in us, or
any motive, unless it be our misery, the motive of his patience, and mercy is
only from himself, but that he waited to be gracious implies that though his
mercy were never so free, yet he could not find a season to show it then when
they were so averse from him.

Since then the motive of mercy is only in God himself, we may infer that there
is nothing in him to discourage faith, and recumbency upon him; so that
although we have been guilty of such sins as these are, or the same, though we
have been rebellious, lying, averse, and would not hearken unto his voice, nor
to his Prophets, and have hindered them from speaking right things, yet let us
remember our selves, and return unto him as the Ninevites did when they were
warned, who knows but he may wait to be gracious to us also, but let us not
presume upon his mercy, and make that which should be our Physic, our Poison.

We know that he has given us a High Priest, who does not only know our
insirmities, and impotencies, but therefore knew them that he might have
compassion upon us. Blessed Jesus thou know that no man can come after thee,
unless the Father draw him, help thou our weak nature by thy Holy Spirits
assistance, draw us, we will run after thee. Quicken us who by nature are dead
in trespasses and sins; take away our heart of stone, and give us hearts of
flesh for thy promise sake.

A Prayer.
LORD, when I am tempted to revenge, pride, Emulation, Abition, wrath, or any
other sinful action to satisfy my sensual, carnal appetite, to maintain my
honor, to repress my adversary, to Correct his insolency, inlighten me with
thy Heavenly grace, thy word, and thy Spirit, that I may pull off the Mask of
these sensual carnal ways of the men of the world (which shall perish) and see
their vanity, and deformity, and anoint thou my eyes that I may clearly see the
beauty of every virtue and grace, meekness, charity, humility, patience,
longanimity, that I may view them in themselves, and in those who excelled
therein and esteem them more honorable than to be accounted brave, gallant,
bold, valiant, and heroic, as sometimes I have esteemed, when I have seen,
heard and read of any exemplar, and rare act of the graces, as to instance, the
patience of Job, when he had lost his estate, children, and bodily health,
murmured not, but blessed God, and Eli; It Is the Lord, let him do what seems
good in his eyes. Hanna, when she was reproved for drunkenness, answered
without anger, nay, but in the bitterness of my soul I prayed.

Forgive us our trepasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

1. Meditation.
If our forgiving the trespasses of others be the pattern of Gods forgiveness
to us, how few can be saved, for none ever forgave every injury that has been
done to him, some they have revenged. But if God does not pardon every sin to
us, we are damned. Lord give us thy grace to be as free in the pardoning of all
trespasses without exception, though never so many as we would have thee
forgive us, for we cannot have so many committed against us, as we have
committed against thee, therefore we have need of a larger pardon from God to
us than we can have occasion to give others.

If God would take account of us, we shall have need of forgiveness for a
thousand talents, Mat. 18.24. More than we are able to satisfy; yet when we
fall down before him, beseeching his pardon, he freely forgives us all. But if
we for a hundred pence or less, which our fellow Servant owes us, and is not
able to pay, will not forbear him till he is able, but use all violence against
him, we shall make our selves unworthy and incapable of the mercy and pardon of
the most just God; and least we should seem to curse our selves, we rather
pray, (...), as also we forgive others that trespass against us, Mat. 6.12. We
assert our own mercy, and compassion to our debtors, as if our clemency, and
kindness to others did oblige God to the like: so the Centurion desired Christ
Jesus but to speak the word, as he himself used to do in his authority.

Lord, since thou have given us a law to forgive our enemies, to bless them
that curse us, to pray for them that dispitefully use us; will thou not observe
it thy self, and forgive us all our trespasses; certainly thou will freely
forgive give us; forgive us the rather, because thou know that we have
nothing to pay; forgive us first, because thou art the fountain of all
goodness, and if we have any goodness, it comes from this fountain, and unless
thou give the grace of love and compassion by first obliging us by thy
pardoning mercy and compassion, whereof thou have declared thy self to be full;
how should we learn compassion to others? how can thou require such goodness
from poor, weak, miserable men, unless thou who art goodness and love wilt do
the like to us, in pardoning and forgiving our trespasses? assure us therefore
that thou have pardoned us all our sins, and blotted out all our iniquities for
thy name sake, and that the blood of Christ has cleansed us from all our sins,
and then we shall be without excuse if we from our hearts forgive not every man
his trespasses. We live by the knowledge of thee in thine attributes, by the
knowledge of thee as a God alsufficient. Abraham lived in the land of promise as
in a strange country: by this Daniel lived in the Lions den, and in the fiery
furnace. But we have need to know thee too as a God pardoning sin. Thou
pardonest Aaron when he caused Israel to commit Idolatry and gave him the
Priesthood and the blessing.

Since the world by wisdom knew not God, and he has revealed himself unto
babes, no marvil if we cannot find out the mystery of godliness in the writings
of the learned, but entangle our selves in doubts and intricacies by reading
their learned treatises of predestination and reprobation, of election and Gods
fore-knowledg of free will and the controversies thereupon arising, as whether
a justified person may fall away, and the like. And whether that faith werereal
which fell away. It may suffice us that the word of God is very. plain in those
scriptures which teach us our duty which we should do that we may inherit
eternal life, Psalm. 18. The law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul,
etc. Let us therefore meditate of that day and night, and let our study be in
that. Et in lumine tuo Domine videbimus lumen.

(...).
Vive, vale, si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti si non his utere mecum.
Horat.
Corollarium.
A man whose soul is not fraught with holy Meditations, is like a Ship which
puts out to Sea without ballast, it rolls about a while in the calm, but the
very first gale of wind that fills the sales overturns it.

So he that is empty and void of holy Meditations, whilst no temptations come
upon him, he walks unsteadily, and lies open to dangers, and the very first
temptation that befalls him overwhelmes him.

FINIS.

