THE LIFE OF Count ULFELD, GREAT MASTER of DENMARK, And of the Countess
Eleonora his Wife: Done out of French.

WITH A Supplement thereunto, and to the Account of Denmark formerly published.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCV.

TO THE Duke of MONT AVSIER Governor to the DAUPHIN.
My LORD,
SO many Books have already been dedicated to you, and their Authors have so
far engrossed all manner of Thoughts, in endeavoring to give us a perfect Idea
of your Virtues, that I want words to add new Praises to those they have
already given you. And indeed, my Lord, where should I find proper words to
express the Confidence and Esteem which the greatest and wisest of our Kings
has reposed in and demonstrated toward you, in committing the Care of the
Dauphin's Education to you? This great Choice, puts your Merit so far above
Praise and Envy, that there needs no other Elogy to satisfy Posterity that you
are a Man without Defects. Therefore, my Lord, I am persuaded that a respectful
Silence will prove more eloquent, than all what I could say, and that in
dedicating my Book to you, I shall offer you nothing that is worthy of you.

If after this sincere Avowsal, you will be pleased to honor it with your
Protection, it will be free from the Censure of those Critics who never like
any thing; and I will think my self very happy, to have found this occasion, to
let the World know, that I am with all the Zeal and all the Respect imaginable,

My LORD, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Rousseau de la Valette.

TO THE READER.
THERE are still so many Persons at Court who have known Count Ulfeld, and his
Retreat into Sweden made so much noise in the World, that every body will be
pleased to hear the History of his Life, and to know the motives which induced
him to make War against his Country.

But notwithstanding you may find very surprising things in this Story, I can
assure you that whatever is contained in it is certainly true; and that I have
vritten nothing but what I have found in the Memoirs which were sent to me out
of Denmark, by unbiased knowing Persons, without whom I could not have related
many singular things, which were never written before.

But whereas the matter I am treating of is considerable enough of it self to
be received kindly by the Public; I will not trouble you with a long Preface:
provided only you will be pleased to excuse my want of Capacity, I will think
my self sufficiently rewarded for the pains I have taken in writing this
History, the reading of which is as curious as it may be useful.

The LIFE of CORNIFIX, COUNT of ULFELD, Great Master of DENMARK: And of the
Countess Eleonora his Wife.
THE Persons whose Lives I undertake to write, have shown so much Magnanimity
in the different Turns of their Fortune, that it is difficult to judge which
they are most to be praised for, the Moderation they have used in their
Prosperity, or the Constancy they have expressed in their Distresses: but
whatever State we consider them in, their Elevation and their Fall are equally
Instructive; to learn never to rely on the Luster of a great Favor, and to
suffer the utmost Rigors of Fortune, without betraying the least Weakness.

Cornifix, Count of Vlfeld, was the Tenth Son of Count Vlfeld Lord Chancellor
of Denmark; who in the Reign of King Christian the Fourth made himself as
Illustrious by his Merit, as he was by his high Birth; his Family being one of
the First and most Ancient of the Kingdom, and the only One that was honored
with the Dignity of Count, by Concession from the Emperor. Besides the
Advantages which Cornifix derived from the Luster of his Family, and from his
Father's Favor, who ruled the State, Nature proved very favorable to him, for
he was the finest Gentleman of his Time; he had a Noble easy Shape, and a
Majestic Air; his Mind was great and capable of all Things, his Eloquence was
beyond the reach of most Men of his Quality; his Judgment was solid; he had an
undaunted Courage without Ostentation; a great deal of Sweetness mixed with
Gravity, which procured him Respect and Good Will from all Men; he was Faithful
and Moderate, very Sober, Generous and Vigilant: In a Word, he would have been
perfect, had he not been Ambitious.

Before he was ten Years of Age, the great Vivacity of his Mind made him commit
so many youthful Frolicks, that his Father was obliged to send him to Paris,
under the Tuition of a Governor; in order, if possible, to curb him by a
Change of Clime: but on the contrary, his Malice increasing with his Years, he
became so rebellious toward his Governor, that after having endeavored in
vain, for five Years together, to alter his Temper, he was forced at last to
acquaint his Father the Chancellor with it; who was so angry thereat, that he
ordered him to forsake him absolutely, and to allow him nothing. Cornifix
finding himself thus at Liberty, tho he was but fifteen Years of Age, went into
Germany, where he applied himself to the Count of Oldenburgh, to whom he had
the Honor to be Related, and discovered the Cause of his Disgrace to him. As
he was incomparably well shaped, and had a great deal of Wit, he soon became
his Favorite. And during the three Years abode he made at his Court, he became
so accomplished, that many Husbands became jealous of him. But his Martial
Temper inspiring him with a desire of War above all other Things; Count
Oldenburg could not hinder him from engaging himself in King Christian's Army,
who was in actual War with some of the Princes of Germany: The said Count
having given him a magnificent Equipage, with Letters of Recommendation to
General Fowlk, one of the greatest Captains of his Time, he took his leave of
him, with as much Regret as Tenderness. No Man ever began the Trade of War
better than young Count Vlfeld; he always appeared the first on all Occasions,
tho never so dangerous: and whereas Fortune was resolved to be prodigal toward
him, (as it will appear in the Sequel) she proved so favorable to him, that
his Reputation was perfectly settled in a short space of Time: He went through
all Military Degrees; and tho he received no manner of Assistance from Home, he
always appeared with so much Splendour, and made so great an Expense, that he
equaled the Chief Officers of the Army. He falling sick of the Plague, his
Gentleman of the Horse, thinking he would never recover, sold his Equipage: You
may easily imagine his Surprise, when being cured, at a time every one expected
his Death, his said Gentleman of the Horse acquainted him with what he had
done; he would certainly have punished him severely for it, had he been strong
enough to attempt it. But hearing that he had not as yet disposed of the best
part of his Money, he wisely dissembled his Displeasure: Insomuch that the said
Gentleman, who was one of those Persons who subsist every where, and who knew
his Master's Humor, made up another Equipage again, in a short time, very
little inferior to the First; which the Count was so well pleased with, that he
pardoned him, and made use of him as before.

The War which had now lasted five Years, ending in a Peace, Count Vlfeld, who
hated a sedate Life, returned into France, and from thence went into Italy,
where getting acquainted with Seignor Cremoniny a Noble Venetian, in the City
of Padua, he contracted so strict a Friendship with him, that in a Year's time
he profited so well by his Conversation, that he has often owned since, he was
indebted to him for the best part of what he knew. After having seen all Italy,
he went back into Germany, where he made a pretty long stay; and finally, the
desire of returning into his Native Country, growing the most predominant of
all his Passions, he put himself in the Retinue of an Ambassador who was going
for the Court of Denmark, only to honor his Embassy: And by the Charms of his
Person, as well as of his Wit, he made so great a Progress in the said
Ambassador's Favor, that he concealed nothing from him; insomuch that when
they came to Copenhagen, he was present at all the Conferences he had with the
Chancellor his Father: That Great Man, who thought he had lost one of his Sons,
in the Person of Cornifix, from whom he had never heard any News in ten Years
time, being taken with his Wit, and admiring the Solidity of his Judgment in
Affairs of State, in an Age in which most Men only mind their Pleasures;
whether it were by Simpathy of Blood, or out of desire to engage Cornifix in
King Christian's Court, he conceived so great an Esteem for him, that after a
long Conference he had with the Ambassador, in which the Count was not present,
he could not forbear acquainting him with the Sentiments he had for the Count,
and to entreat him to let him know, how he came to engage himself in his
Retinue. The Ambassador who loved him tenderly, told the Chancellor that he was
a Danish Gentleman, whose Name was not very different from his, adding a great
deal to the Praises he had already given him. But whereas the Chancellor, who
knew all the Nobility of the Kingdom, could find no Family that had any
Relation to the Name which the Ambassador told him the Count went by; he
desired him to grant him the Favor to discourse him the next Day in private
himself.

It would be difficult to express the young Count's Joy, when he heard the good
Opinion his Father had of him, and to think what an agreeable Surprise it would
prove to him, to hear that he was that Son, whose ill Nature had obliged him to
forsake. It is much easier to imagine than to describe it; and we may easily
conceive that it is impossible for two Persons to have a greater. Cornifix
waiting on the Chancellor the next Day, according to his Desire, he received
him with all the Civility he could expect from a Man of his Character; and
after having discoursed of several Things in general, the Chancellor asking him
what Family he was of, with an obliging Concern, which confirmed what the
Ambassador had told him, he excused himself for a long while, telling him that
perhaps he would not be pleased at it, and that he was afraid he would lose the
good Opinion he had of him, when he knew him. But whereas this Mystery did only
serve to increase the Chancellor's earnestness to know it; the Count told him
at last, that he was that Cornifix, the Tenth of his Sons, whom he had forsake
at his Governor's Solicitation. Thunder does not surprise those who see it
fall near them, more than this Confession did the Chancellor. He held his Eyes
fixed on the Count a long while before he could utter one Word: He examined all
his Features one after another, endeavoring to find out some of his own; and
could hardly persuade himself, that a forsaken Child could have made himself so
perfect. Joy and Shame struggled so much in his Heart, that he was quite at a
loss: but in conclusion, Nature made him sensible that he was really his Son; a
Torrent of Tears gushed out from his Eyes, and Embraces succeeded Civilities.
As this Adventure was very Extraordinary, and as the Chancellor thought himself
very happy, to have recovered a Son whose Merit was already known at Court, he
immediately acquainted King Christian and the Prince his Son therewith; who
thereupon doubled the Favors they had already expressed toward Cornifix. The
Ambassador was not displeased at this Discovery, tho it hindered him from
enjoying the agreeable Conversation of the Count as before. And I may affirm,
that all those who were Reasonable, expressed the Share they took in his Joy.

Merit undoubtedly can produce much of it self, and we have many Examples of
Men who have raised their Fortune to the highest Degree by it alone. Young
Count Vlfeld had reason to expect all things from his, without being thought
presumptuous: But yet we must needs acknowledge, that the Favor of his Father,
who governed the State, did contribute considerably toward his becoming a
Favorite to the King and to the Prince, who could do nothing without
communicating it first to him. Nevertheless tho it is natural for young Men to
be dazzled with Greatness, he lived with more Modesty than before; and being
sensible that the Favor of Kings is as dangerous as pleasing, he resolved to
leave the Court to go into Spain. His Equipage was ready, and his Father
approving his Reasons, he only tarried for the King's Leave to go on Board; but
that great Prince who loved him tenderly, laid such absolute Commands on him
not to go, that at last he resolved to stay, and to use his utmost Endeavors
to preserve his Favor. Soon after this the King honored him with the Place of
Lord-Chamberlain, which engaged him still the more particularly near his
Person; and he discharged the said Trust so worthily, and showed so much
Courage in the Naval Wars which the King had against the King of Sweden, in
which two of his Brothers were killed, that Christian could not forbear
expressing his Satisfaction to all those of his Court, for having so
accomplished a Subject.

As there were no Degrees at that time among the Danes, to distinguish the
Nobles from one another, the Kingdom of Denmark being then Elective, the King's
Children were the only Persons who were above the Nobility. Among the Rivals of
Glory young Cornifix had to deal with, Hannibal Seested was one of those who
gave him most Emulation: He was a very fine Gentleman, and had a great deal of
Wit; so that being both partly of the same Age, and equally Ambitious, they
were commonly opposite in all Things. The King after the Queen's Death, being
fallen in Love with a very beautiful Lady, of the Ancient Family of Monch,
called Christina, who had all the Qualifications of a Great Princess, had she
been born one, not being able to obtain any Favors from her, had married her
with all the Formalities required in a Lawful Marriage, in the presence of the
whole Court, and of the Senate, with this Clause in the Contract, That the
Children he should get by that Marriage, should not be Princes, and should be
contented with the Title of Earls of Sleswick and Holstein, of which they
should have the Name and Arms, to distinguish them from other Gentlemen: The
Reason of which was, that the King having Children by his first Marriage, and
there bring no Principality in the Kingdom; had those he might get by the
Second been acknowledged Princes, they would have proved too great a Burden to
the Commonwealth, because they could not have married with the Nobles of the
Country. The Countess Eleonora derived her Birth from this Marriage. Young
Cornifix, who till then had been a Stranger to the Power of Love, meeting in
that Beautiful Lady all he could wish to raise his Fortune to the highest
Degree, and to become the happiest of Men, fell passionately in Love with her,
at a Time when Hannibal was moved with the same Passion. Love among Persons of
Quality, is like a Beacon, which is no sooner kindled, but it is perceived at a
great Distance; therefore the Count coming oftener to the Queen's Apartment than
he used to do, it was thought he had an Inclination for the young Countess; and
whereas the King's Favor, and his own Merit, gave him a great Advantage over
his Rival, he soon effaced those Impressions which Hannibal had made in the
young Countesses Mind: But whereas she had a Prudence far above those of her
Age, she did them Justice, without seeming to incline more toward the one than
the other; and had it not been for the natural Jealousy they had of each other,
they would have had no reason to be jealous of the Favors they received: They
were a long while before they could discover in favor of which the Countess
would declare her self, tho they omitted nothing to show their Passion for her.
This made the Count so melancholy and so sad, that chancing one Day to be alone
with the Countess, he looked on her a considerable while, without being able to
utter one Word: Which she desiring to know the Reason of, after he had excused
himself awhile, he declared his Passion to her. The Countess being surpised,
blushed at this Declaration, and looking on the Count, with a Severity capable
to make the boldest of Men tremble, he repented his having said too much; but
however there was no Remedy, and the Occasion had seemed too favorable to him
not to say a thing which he could no longer conceal: Therefore he threw himself
at the Countess's Feet, humbly craving her Pardon for his Presumption, in words
so moving and so tender, that the most cruel of Women would have pitied him.
But this word Love did sound so harsh in the Countess's Ears, and she had
conceived so frightful an Idea of it, that she could not bear it. The Count, on
the contrary, said a thousand soft Things to her, to persuade her that that
Passion could never be banished from the World, without making it as wild and
savage as Deserts, since it was the only thing which supported Gallantry, and
maintained Union even among the most Barbarous: And he had certainly removed
that great Aversion, had not the Queen come in, which obliged him to quit that
Subject. The Count went away between Fear and Hope; and whereas it behooved him
to justify Love, before the Countess, the first time he saw her again, having
an Opportunity to speak to her; after a pretty long Conversation, the Countess
told him, that if he did not exceed the Bounds he had prescribed to himself, he
might hope to be hearkened to in time: so that he went away extremely
satisfied. Some time after this, having been engaged in a Combat, in which he
gave Proofs of his great Valor, he had the pleasure to hear the Countess
praise him in his Rival's Presence, with such Elogies, that he no longer
doubted but she had some Kindness for him. And indeed he richly deserved the
Praises the Countess gave him, having done an Action which would pass for a
Fable, had not his King been a Witness of it, as well as most of the greatest
Men of the Kingdom. It is most certain, that the City of Hamburgh being built
upon the King of Denmark's Territories, they are obliged to pay him Homage for
the same; and that according as they have increased their Power, they have
endeavored to free themselves; so that most of the Kings have been obliged to
take Arms, either to assert their Right, or to repel those Rebellions: Which
obliged King Christian, one of the bravest Princes that ever reigned in the
North, to build the City of Glucstad, upon the River Elbe, with a Fort capable
to oppose the Efforts of that little Commonwealth, and to keep them in Awe;
that the said Prince having been forced to take Arms, upon the Account of some
Things he demanded of the Hamburgers; he being at Glucstad with his Forces,
they set out a Fleet of several Ships, designing to make a Descent, to make
themselves Masters of that Place; which they would have done, being superior
in Number, had not the extreme Valor that generous Prince, Count Vlfeld, and a
French Gentleman who belonged to him, showed on that Occasion, prevented them,
they never abandoning a Battery of some Pieces of Ordnance, which commanded the
Port, notwithstanding all the Gunners were killed or wounded, and that the
Forces that kept it retired into the Town, upon the continual Fire from on
Board the Ships: But those three Heroes chose rather to die, than to suffer the
taking of the Town, or to fly. And whereas nothing is impossible to those who
are capable of great Resolutions, they made so great a Resistance for an Hour
together, that the Garrison of the Town taking Heart again by their Example, the
Fleet being half disabled, was obliged to retire, with as much Shame as
Admiration; and none of them were wounded, tho the Bullets which were shot at
them, had covered their Faces so thick with Dirt, that they were hardly to be
known again. Therefore this Action justly deserved the Praises of the Countess
Eleonora, and she could not refuse this Justice to the Merit of the Count,
seeing that immediately upon this Expedition, the King had given him the
Government of the Isle of Funen, to honor his Virtue; and that his very
Enemies were forced to own, that he deserved the Favor and Kindness of his
Master. And indeed from that time forward, the Countess had a particular
Respect for him, and received his Addresses in such a manner, as satisfied him
that she was not insensible: But that which made an end of winning her Heart,
and of ruining Hannibal, was another Action performed by the Count; which being
very uncommon, especially among Courtiers, will discover the Character of his
Noble Soul, as well as the Violence of his Passion for the Countess.

Jealousy, which would not be blameable, if it did not often mistake
Appearances for Realities and Truths, having taken possession of the Queen's
Heart, upon a bare suspicion that the King her Husband was passionately in love
with one of her Maids of Honor, forced that Princess, whose Beauty was
somewhat lessened by Years, to do such extraordinary things, in order to
preserve a Conquest which she had lawfully won, and which she esteemed above
her Life, that the King was reduced to the dismal Extremity of suing a Divorce.
In order thereunto he assembled the Senate, to propose Means about it, lest he
might be taxed with Injustice. The Countess Eleonora's Tears, whom he loved
above all his other Children, could not prevail with him to alter his
Resolution; and all those who were at Court, forsook that unfortunate Queen, to
indulge the King's Anger. Finally, Count Vlfeld proved the only Man, who,
contrary to every one's Expectation, undertook her Defense; he chose rather to
venture the loss of his Favor, than to possess it, at a time when his dear
Countess was in Affliction: and whereas he had no prospect of Happiness without
her, after having endeavored in vain to appease the King, Love prevailed over
Fortune; and he had the Assurance to tell the King, that he was in hopes to
justify the Queen publicly. Hannibal, who fancied that the Count would
infallibly ruin himself in taking that Party, and who was no less jealous of
his Master's Favor than of his Mistress, improved that Occasion to take his
Post, and to destroy him in the King's Opinion: He omitted no Means to succeed
therein, and to the End that all the World might know it, he also took upon him
to acquaint the Senate with the King's Reasons. The Day appointed to plead this
famous Cause being come, the King repaired to the Senate House, with all the
Senators: The Queen and all her Children likewise repaired thither, with no
body but Count Vlfeld, who was to defend them: And every body being seated
according to their Rank, Hannibal stood up, and urged the King's Reasons with
so much Eloquence and Brillant, that most of those who heard him, supposed the
Queen absolutely ruined: But they soon altered their Minds, for Count Vlfeld
whose Noble Air moved all those who saw him, showed with so much Grace and
Solidity the Queen's Innocence, who had only sinned through an Excess of Love,
which can never be blamed, since Excess alone justifies that Passion; that
finally the King could not forbear mixing his Tears with the Queen's, as well
as all the Senators; and coming down from his Throne, he embraced her, and
restored her the same Place she possessed in his Heart before that Misfortune.
It is impossible to express the Applauses Count Vlfeld received for this noble
Action, nor the Shame Hannibal was covered with, when coming out of the Senate,
the Earl drew his Sword, to show that Rival he knew how to use it as well as
his Tongue: he had not the Courage to encounter him, but fled in great Disorder
and Confusion. Nevertheless as they were the two most considerable Men of the
Kingdom, the King made them Friends again; but notwithstanding the said
Reconciliation, Hannibal ever since preserved a Desire of Revenge against the
Earl, and never could forgive him that Affront.

The whole Court went to congratulate the Queen, upon her being more in the
King's Favor than ever; the Earl did not fail to express his Joy to her about
it. You may easily imagine that she omitted nothing to show her Gratitude to
him for the great Service he had done her; and that she used him with all the
Kindness he had reason to expect. But that did not move him, comparably to what
the Countess said to him after the Queen was gone, and the Company had left
them out of respect. That charming Creature, after having repeated all, and
even the least Circumstances of what had passed in the Senate, assured him,
that she would never forget it; and that in case the King did approve his
Sentiments, he would soon be sensible that she preferred him to all the World.
As I relate nothing but what is actually true, I will not puzzle my self to
find out fine Expressions to describe the Earl's Answer, I will only tell you,
that it was as witty as passionate; that at his coming away from the Countess
he was the happiest of Men; and that soon after it he was so fortunate, that
the King himself proposed his Marriage with the Countess, and that he married
her, notwithstanding all the Brigues of Hannibal: neither will I give you an
Account of the Magnificencies which were made to honor the Wedding of those
Illustrious Lovers, since you may easily imagine that they were not Mean;
besides that, having many things to say, I might prove tiresome should I
particularize every Circumstance.

The King who (as I have already declared) loved Count Vlfeld passionately,
being desirous to raise his Fortune to the utmost Degree, made him Constable of
the Kingdom, and soon after it Great Master; whose Power being equal to that
which the Ancient Maires du Palais had, under the first Race of the Kings of
France, made the Earl the Second Person of the Kingdom, since he did exert the
King's Power in his Absence: Therefore as he had nothing more to wish for, he
found himself the happiest of Men, during the Life of King Christian his
Father-in-Law. He was sent Ambassador Extraordinary into France and Germany,
where he made himself more considerable by his Merit than by his Quality: and
at his return to Christian's Court, he officiated his Place with so much
Sweetness and Modesty, that every body blessed his Government. But those were
much in the right, who have said, that in order to maintain a great Fortune, a
second is required.

For K. Christian was no sooner dead, but the Earl's Enemies, or rather the
Rivals of his Glory, used their utmost Endeavor to destroy him. But whereas
they were sensible that his Fortune was upheld, by the Honor he had of being
allied to the Royal Family, tho the Danes had, for the space of Two hundred
Years and upwards, all along raised their last King's Eldest Son to the Throne,
they endeavored to abolish that laudable Custom, and in order thereunto formed
so powerful a Cabal, that they had the boldness to maintain in a Council,
composed of the Deputies assembled to make the Election, that Prince Frederick
could not be elected, without causing the absolute Ruin of the Kingdom: But
Count Vlfeld who was President of the Council, being sensible of their Design,
asserted the Interest of the Prince his Brother-in-Law, with so much Courage
and Eloquence, that the Elector who had proposed the Exclusion, desisted as
well as all the rest; insomuch that the Earl did not break up the Assembly
until the Prince was elected King. It is true, that in order to appease those
who seemed to be most dissatisfied, he engaged, by virtue of his Office of
Great Master, he being the Head and Protector of the Nobility, that the Prince
would preserve all their Privileges, and that their Grievances should be
redressed. The Election was made on this Condition, as it had been done time
out of mind. In the mean time, Count Vlfeld being satisfied with his having
performed his Duty, without valuing himself upon it, by publishing the same,
not having acquainted the Prince before nor after the Election, with all the
Brigues that had been made to exclude him from the Crown, his Enemies made use
of his Modesty to ruin him; for having persuaded the King that he himself had
aspired to the Crown, because some Votes had been given for him, and that not
being able to obtain his Ends, he had, in order to make himself the more
recommendable, caused the Election to be made on the Conditions I have
mentioned.

This wrought so powerfully on the King's Mind, that he was thereby excluded
from his Favor in a Moment, without knowing the Reason of it; and the said
Coldness made so much noise, that the Earl's Enemies finding the King disposed
to believe all their Calumnies, had the Malice to seduce a Woman, called Dina,
who had an access in the Royal Family, to accuse the Count and the Countess his
Wife, of having made Solicitations to her to poison the King, the Queen, and
all the Royal Family.

This Monarch giving too much credit to the said Accusation, without staying
for any farther Informations, wrote to the Queen of Sweden, to some Princes of
the Empire, and to the P. of Orange, to give them an Account of the said
Conspiracy, and to desire their Advice how to proceed against those Traitors
(for so he called the Count and the Countess) who were in his Power; desiring
them to rejoice at Heaven's having preserved him from that Treason. But whereas
the Quality of the Persons accused, obliged him to observe some Formalities; he
allowed them to make their Defense before the Council, lest the World should
think he designed to oppress them.

It was on this Occasion this Great Man discovered an undaunted Courage and
Firmness of Mind; for without discovering the least Trouble in his Countenance,
he made his Defense with so much Judgment, that the said Woman, and Captain
Walter who had introduced her, not being able to resist the Force of the Earl's
Reasons, were fully convicted of Perjury: Dina was condemned to lose her Head,
and Walter to a perpetual Exile; which was accordingly put in execution.

The Earl finding by this Proceeding that his Ruin was resolved upon, and being
sensible by the King's Easiness to believe so strange an Accusation against a
Person of his Quality, that he would be easily disposed to give Credit to all
the Calumnies of his Enemies, he resolved to provide for his own Sasety, and
that of all his Family.

In order thereunto, he resolved to retire into Poland, hoping to be safe
there; and having proposed his Design to the Countess Eleonora, that generous
Lady would needs follow him, notwithstanding all the Reasons he could urge to
the contrary, which could never prevail over her Affection for him.

All things being disposed for their departure, the Countess put on Men's
Clothes as well as one of her Women, the only One she took along with her; and
going on board one of their own Ships, after having been some Days at Sea, they
were surpised by so dreadful a Storm, that they thought themselves lost: But
after having suffered all the Hardships imaginable for two or three Days time,
they came to an Anchor in the Road of Dantzick, where they landed. The Earl
being thus safely got on Shore, dispatched one of his Gentlemen to the Court of
Poland, to entreat the King to allow him a Retreat in his Kingdom, and to
protect him against his Enemies. He remained at Dantzick in expectation of his
Return, where the Countess Eleonora still keeping on her Men's Clothes, in order
to divert her Sorrows, made some Addresses to a Woman of Quality, who did not
want Charms, and whose Conversation was very agreeable; and her Courtship made
so strong an Impression on the Lady's Heart, that she could no longer live
without her.

Moreover, the thing proceeded so far, that the Lady's Husband being grown
jealous, the Countess would certainly have brought her self into Trouble, but
that the Gentleman whom Count Vlfeld had sent to the Court, being returned with
a Refusal, they resolved to repair to the Queen of Sweden. The Countess having
acquainted the said Lady therewith, she was so strangely moved at her
departure, that after having said the most tender Things to her, to oblige her
to tarry, she was resolved to follow her, had not the Countess discovered her
Sex to her. You may easily guess her Surprise at this unexpected Confession,
and what different Passions her Soul was agitated with: Shame, Spite and Rage,
tormented her by turns, and the Countess stood in need of all her Wit to
appease this abused Woman; but in the end, her Love being turned to Friendship,
they parted with a thousand Protestations, of loving each other to the Grave.

The Earl, whose Courage was undaunted, was overjoyed to see the Countess
divert her self thus: So that those Illustrious Persons, did bear their
Disgrace with as much Constancy, as they had shown Modesty in their Prosperity.

The Queen of Sweden, who knew their Merit, and did pity their Misfortune,
having assured the Earl's Envoy that she would grant them her Protection, they
repaired to Stockholm, where that great Princess kept her Court at that time.

She received them with all the Kindness they could expect from her Generosity;
particularly the Countess Eleonora, who not having quitted her Man's Clothes, a
Dress in which the Queen often delighted her self: She was so much taken with
her Air, that she omitted nothing to express her Joy to her, for being able to
assist her. After the Earl had paid his first Respects to the Queen, he told
her that he only begged her Protection on this Condition, that he would submit
to her Justice, and that he would answer, before her Majesty, to whatever
Accusations should be made against him.

She granted his Desires, so that they remained two Years at Stockholm in
quiet: but when they thought their Enemies had no longer any thoughts to
persecute them, the Danish Ambassador received an Order to accuse the Earl of
several Crimes, the least of which would have cost him his Head had he
committed it: but tho the Ambassador delivered a Letter to the Queen, written
and signed by the King's own Hand, in which he conjured her to punish Count
Vlfeld; She allowed him to make his Defense before the Council: and having sent
him a Copy of the Heads of the Accusation, on the Day appointed by her Majesty
to plead the Cause, the Earl discovered his Innocence by such convincing
Proofs, that the Queen, and all the Senators, were satisfied of it; and the
Ambassador was so much confounded, that not being able to make a positive Reply
to the Earl's Defense, it turned his Brains; and he left the Council in that
Distraction, without taking his Leave of the Queen, and without showing the
least Civility to the Lords of the Assembly.

So public a Justification, put the Earl's Enemies into so great a Confusion,
that their Persecution lay dormant for several Years, during which he retired
with his Family into Pomerania, where he had a considerable Estate, enjoying
the Sweetness and Tranquillity which a Country-Life can afford a Man who is
tired with the Fatigues of the Court; and whereas he fancied that the Cause of
so long a Silence could only proceed from the King his Brother-in-Law's being
convinced of his Innocence, he advised the Countess to go to Copenhagen, there
to make her Court assiduously, and to endeavor to put her self perfectly into
the King's Favor again.

But tho the Earl had written several Letters full of Submission and Respect,
that unfortunate Lady was no sooner come to the Frontiers of the Kingdom, but
she was informed that her Enemies had sent Forces to the first Village through
which she was to pass, to secure her.

However, whereas such an Attempt had no Precedent, and that the Countess could
not imagine, that they could treat a Person of her Quality with so much
Cruelty, she continued her Journey, whatever her Servants could say to the
contrary. But as soon as she was got into a little Plain, one of her Gentlemen
acquainted her, that a Company of Foot was coming toward them with great
speed: Whereupon the Countess no longer doubting but that the Advice she had
received was true, ordered her Coach to turn about, and she stood in need of
the utmost Vigor of her Horses to rejoin the Bridge which separates the
Territories of Denmark from those of Holstein, where the said Soldiers, who
came within Musket Shot of her, remained full of Confusion at their not having
been able to execute their Design.

The Earl being equally surpised and troubled at this new Disgrace, writ to
the Court again to know the Reason of it; but he received no Answer, which made
him sensible that it was an Effect of the Cruelty of his Enemies, who were
resolved, at any Rate, to keep him for ever out of the Kingdom, in order to
possess his Places, and to enjoy the great Estates they had made themselves
Masters of: Which unworthy Treatment made him resolve to take Arms under
Charles King of Sweden, whose Protection he had also taken after the Queen's
Abdication, in hopes thereby to be restored to the Possession of part of his
Estate. It was not without a great deal of Grief he found himself reduced to
the Necessity of employing his Courage and his Wit against his Prince and
Brother-in-Law; those two Qualities did long oppose within his Soul the
Resolution he had taken, and they did not want Reasons to break it; but finding
no other way for his Restoration, he was obliged to embrace it.

Therefore the Earl being forced by all manner of Reasons to behave himself
thus, made use of his Courage and Prudence, to satisfy Charles that he did act
Sincerely. The first Proof he gave him of it, was the Reduction of the Isle of
Funen, which did submit to him in so little time, that the News of it came to
Copenhagen, before they knew that Charles designed to conquer it.

Moreover, as if Heaven had joined with the Earl to revenge the Injustices he
had received, the Sea freezing to that degree, that the Artillery could safely
be drawn over it, he persuaded the King of Sweden to march against Copenhagen
with Three thousand Horse, and Six pieces of Ordinance, not doubting but the
boldness of the Enterprise would cause a strange Consternation.

And indeed Frederick was so much surprised, to see an Army before the Gates of
his Capital City, that his Courage failed him; and in that Disorder, the most
effectual way he could think on, to prevent the Ruin of his State, was to
oblige Count Vlfeld's Agents to let him know, that in case he could mediate a
Peace, he would restore him to the Possession of all his Places and Estate.
Whereas Necessity only had obliged him to take Arms against his Country, his
Friends found him so well disposed to forget all the Injuries he had received,
that tho he was sensible that nothing but the present State of Affairs obliged
Frederick to behave himself thus, he made so good a Use of the Credit he had
acquired with Charles, that he obliged him to make a Peace, which was signed at
Rosschild. By the said Peace, the King of Denmark yielded the Province of
Schonen to the King of Sweden, together with the Fortresses of Gabub, Hallen,
Blechin, the Town of Drontem, and some others; and granted Count Vlfeld, and
all those who had followed him, a General Pardon, and restored him to the
Possession of all his Places, Dignities and Estates. After which, the two Kings
embraced, with great Demonstrations of Friendship. Frederick also expressed his
good Will to the Earl, in such a manner as made every body believe that he did
it sincerely; and at Night the two Kings supped together at Frederixburg, one
of the King of Denmark's Pleasure-Houses, with the Queen and the Chief Officers
of the two Armies.

The following Day the King of Sweden, after having conferred some Hours with
Frederick, went for Gottemburg* and the Earl remaining with the King of
Denmark, every body did conclude, that he was as much in the King's Favor as
ever.

But whereas Frederick was susceptible to all sorts of Impressions, and that
the Earl's Enemies did dread the Loss of their Credit, by the Restoration of
his Authority, they cast new Suspicions into the King's Mind, which obliged the
Earl to retire upon the Estate he had in the Province of Schonen. The King of
Sweden being desirous to show the Earl (who was become his Subject) the Esteem
he had for him, gave him the County of Sylburg, for him and his Heirs Male for
ever.

But the Earl who was in hopes, by this voluntary Retreat, to make the King of
Denmark sensible of the Injustice of his Persecutors, and of the Innocence of
his Conduct, was strangely mistaken in his Conjectures; for he had hardly
enjoyed for some Months, the sweetness which a Country Life affords to those
who are desirous of it, before the King of Sweden being resolved to renew the
War, proposed to him to take Arms again, with such advantageous Conditions,
that any Man but the Earl would certainly have accepted them. Nevertheless he
refused them generously, and made Charles so sensible, that having no new Cause
to complain of the King, his Brother-in-Law, he could not serve against him,
without wounding his Honor, that that Great Prince, who knew the Merit of the
Earl, would not oblige him to do it by Force: But whereas his admirable
Qualifications had raised Envy against him among the greatest Lords of Sweden,
especially in those who were Pensionaries to Frederick, they made use of that
Occasion to ruin him in the Opinion of Charles: And they put so malicious a
Gloss upon the Earl's good Intentions, that having represented them to him, in
a different manner from what he had conceived when he approved them; and no
body having made an Answer to justify the Count, they raised such suspicions
against him, for having refused the great Advantages he had offered him, that
Charles was almost persuaded that he designed by his Credit, to cause those new
Conquests, not fully settled as yet, to revolt, in order to regain the King of
Denmark's Favor. The Earl's Enemies went further yet; for having, by surprise,
got an Order from Charles to the Governor of Malmo, he secured the Earl and all
his Family; and upon this bare Surmise, the County of Sylburg was taken from
him again, which Charles had given him not long before. Moreover, they did
confiscate three other considerable Estates, with all his Goods, which were of
an inestimable Value; and Count Vlfeld falling dangerously ill at the same
time, some disaffected Historians did publish, that he had poisoned himself for
Grief, and that he was dead, or had locked himself up in some uninhabited
Place: But it was nothing but a Continuation of the Malice of his Enemies, for
he had no reason to put himself to death, nor to abridg so noble a Life.

Charles having allowed him to make his Defense publicly, he received this new
Disgrace without the least astonishment; and I can affirm, that neither
Eleonora nor himself did ever look upon it otherwise than as the least of those
they had received. Soon after their being secured in their own House, the Earl
was cited to appear before the Senate of Malmo; but not being able to repair
thither, by reason of his Indisposition, the Countess Eleonora undertook his
Defense; and whereas she had an Eloquence which is not common among those of
her Sex, and as much Judgment as Wit, she made the Senate so sensible of the
Malice of their Enemies, and of the Earl's Innocence, that he was publicly
absolved of the Crimes which were laid to his Charge; and the Senators were so
much charmed with what she had said, that they sent her Speech to the King,
together with their Judgment, to be confirmed.

A Copy of it is fallen into my Hands, which is as follows.

The Countess ELEONORA's Speech, to the Senate of Malmo.
Most Illustrious Lords,
WERE Count Vlfeld, my Husband, to make his Defense before Judges less famous
for their Capacity and Justice, or were he guilty of the Crimes he is accused
of, his Health not permitting him to appear to justify himself, he would
certainly have employed some Orator to answer the Eloquence wherewith his
Enemies have endeavored to fully his Reputation: But whereas he is conscious
of no Crime, I come here, most Illustrious Lords, to discover his Innocence to
you, and to entreat you, by a natural and plain Discourse, to restore his
Liberty.

My Husband is accused of Ingratitude toward the King, because he refuses to
accept the advantageous Offers that are made to him by that Great Prince, to
oblige him to take Arms again for his Service; and because the Chief of the
Nobility of Scandinavia often come to visit him, his Enemies pretend that he
designs to engage them to a Revolt, in favor of the King my Brother, in order
to put himself into Favor again; and on pretense of the pretended
Intelligences, which, they say, they hold together, to succeed in the said
Enterprise, of which there are no Proofs, he has been seized in his own House.
Truly, most Illustrious Lords, were this true, I own that Count Vlfeld would be
very guilty, and that he would deserve a rigorous Punishment: But if I can make
it appear to you, that it is a mere Calumny, has he not reason to expect an
entire Absolution from your Justice, which may discover his Innocence to all
the World? Yes, I am confident of it, since I observe it already in your Eyes;
and the Noble Impatience you discover to do him Justice, is a certain proof
thereof.

I am obliged in this Place, in order to justify my Husband, to renew all my
Afflictions, and to tell you things which, without doubt, you are but too well
acquainted with, I mean the greatest Persecution that ever was. Be pleased
therefore, most Illustrious Lords, to give me leave to tell you, that Count
Vlfeld's extraordinary Qualifications, having procured him the Esteem and
Good Will of the late King Christian, my Father, at a time when I was
marriageable, that Great Prince would needs inspire the same Sentiments into
me, by designing him for my Husband; and in order to enable him to support the
high Honor to which he raised him by his Alliance, he made him Great Master of
his Kingdom, which was the most considerable Dignity next to Royalty. Tho the
Earl used that great Fortune with all the Moderation of a wise Man, he could
not hinder Envy from raising many Enemies against him; that cruel Envy which
will not suffer true Merit to live in Prosperity, omitted no Means to overthrow
our Happiness; his most innocent Actions were censured, and had not the King,
my Father, been persuaded of his Fidelity, our Persecutors would have inspired
the same Suspicions into him, which, after his Death, they have put into the
King my Brother's Mind.

That Prince was no sooner raised to the Throne, but he gave too much Credit to
the envenomed Speeches of those Barbarians; he lost all the Esteem and
Affection he had for my Husband and for me, without our knowing the Cause of
it; and upon the bare Deposition of a corrupted Witness, he was so fully
persuaded that we did design to poison him, and all the Royal Family, that
without considering that we had the Honor to be related to him, and that those
sort of Crimes require very Circumstantial Proofs, he caused us shamefully to
be seized, and ordered the Senate to proceed against us. But Count Vlfeld
having proved our Innocence, and that far from harboring any such abominable
Thought, he was partly the Cause of the King's being Elected, having
courageously opposed the Brigues which were made to exclude him from the Crown:
He was publicly absolved of that Calumny, and the Woman condemned to lose her
Head; which was accordingly executed.

Nevertheless tho this ought to have opened the King's Eyes, to see that these
things were only done with a Design to embroil the Royal Family, and to create
Disorders in the State; instead, I say, that such a Justification ought to have
restored us to his Favor, it only served to exclude us from it for ever:
Moreover, it proved a new Pretense to persecute us; all our Cares proved vain,
to show that we did no-wise resent that Injury, and that we were satisfied that
our Innocence was known. This was looked upon as a piece of Dissimulation; our
Submissions were rejected, as Snares which were laid on purpose to execute our
Revenge in time; and we were reduced, in order to avoid the continual
Conspiracies of our Enemies, who required our Blood, to retire under the
Protection of the Queen of Sweden, which the Laws of the Country allowed us to
do, in hopes that the said Retreat would evidence the Moderation of our
Sentiments.

But, most Illustrious Lords, this was so far from producing the Effects which
we did expect from it, that, on the contrary, it increased the boldness of
those who desired our Ruin; and they found such Dispositions in the King's Mind
for their Malice to work upon, that they obliged him to send Orders to his
Ambassador at Court, to accuse my Husband of several Crimes, the very
remembrance of which strikes me with Horror: but having again cleared himself
of this new Calumny, his Innocence only served to make him the more unhappy;
for his Enemies despairing of his Ruin by the Way of Justice, prevailed with
the King to dispose of his Places, and to seize upon our Estate. This last
Misfortune depriving us of Means to subsist, obliged C. Vlfeld, after the
Queen's Abdication, to engage himself in the Service of the King her Successor,
in hopes by his Arms to recover part of our Lands.

He performed (and it is not without Grief I am forced to speak it) Actions of
Conduct and of Valor, which did not a little contribute toward the obtaining
of the Victory over his Countrymen, and to make the King's Arms triumphant: He
thereby gained his Esteem and Goodwill. And, finally, I may say, that it was by
his Means a Peace was made between the two Crowns, with so much Advantage for
his Majesty. I own at the same time, that my Husband was rewarded for his
Services, and that a General Pardon was granted for him and all his Followers;
with a particular Clause, That all his Estate should be restored to him; which
has been performed since by the King my Brother.

The King your Master added to that Act of his Justice, a new Favor, which was
the Gift of the County of Sylburg, to my Husband and his Male Issue for ever:
And soon after that, the King gave us leave to retire upon the Estate we have
in this Province of Schonen, which remained to him by the Peace. I own that
these are Favors which did exceed our Hopes, and which show the King's
Magnanimity; but at the same time I affirm, that no body can put us in mind of
them to convince us of Ingratitude.

His Majesty is willing to renew the War, and offers my Husband considerable
Advantages to take up Arms again against a King, to whom he has the Honor of
being Brother-in-Law; he humbly craves his Majesty would be pleased to excuse
him, because the Articles of the General Pardon have been punctually performed.
Whereupon Count Vlfeld's Enemies make use of the said Refusal to ruin him, and
make a Capital Crime of a thing, which of all things in the World is the most
praiseworthy.

And indeed, Illustrious Lords, is not the Moderation which my Husband shows on
this Occasion, worthy of Praise, since that notwithstanding the Reasons he has
to complain, he refuses the Means to resent the Offenses he has received, and
does not accept Advantages which are so great, that they might dazzle the most
Ambitious, and make them attempt any thing to deserve them? Necessity only
obliged my Husband to take Arms, in hopes that by the Means of a Peace, which
ought always to be the principal End of a War, he might recover his Estate for
the Subsistence of his Family. That Peace has been made by his Mediation; his
Estate has been restored to him; why then should he be obliged to take up Arms
again, since the main Reason he had to do it subsists no longer? Advantages,
they say, are offered to him, which he refuses; and that is a certain Sign he
designs to take the King of Denmark's part again, and therefore it behooves the
King to secure his Person, and to use him as an ungrateful Man. Ah! most
Illustrious Lords, can such ill Consequences be drawn from so good a Reason?
Can a Virtue be accounted a Crime? and must my Husband be punished beforehand,
as if he were already convicted? No, it is impossible, without overthrowing all
the Rules of Equity and of Justice; and I have reason to believe, that you will
judge more favorably, than those who have surprised his Majesty, in giving him
such unjust Suspicions.

My Husband's Enemies prevail with the King of Denmark, to take his Employments
and his Estate from him, without having convicted him of any Crime; he desires
the Restitution of the same for his Subsistence: he is refused, whereupon he
joins with the King, who is in War against him; no body can blame him, since it
is very natural to seek out Means to preserve one's Estate and Life.

He mediates a Peace; in that we may say he is deserving, and that his Country
is obliged to him. Finally, by means of this Peace, he obtains what he did
propose in taking Arms. There is not the least Crime in all this: But, most
Illustrious Lords, could any one excuse him at present, should he engage anew
under pretense of the Advantages that are offered to him?

Would not that Ambition which alone could induce him to it, be blameworthy?
and would not his Country, which pities his Misfortunes, have reason to alter
their Wishes for his Welfare, and to lose the good Opinion they have of his
Virtue? Would not the King, my Brother, have a just Cause to seize our Estate
anew, and to turn all the Suspicions he has received against my Husband into
Certainty? And, finally, would not Count Vlfeld make a Breach to his Honor,
never to be repaired again? I own that he has perhaps reason to believe that a
general Pardon has only been granted to him by Force, and that the same Hatred
is preserved against him as before: but though he were certain of it, that ill
Example would not excuse him, and the sensibility we naturally have for those
of our Blood would upbraid him eternally for having violated it. Suppose he had
it not, could he without Horror contribute toward the absolute Destruction of
his Country, the Preservation and Glory of which has been so dear to so many
great Men, that History is full of a thousand Famous Examples, which inform us
that they have preferred it to their own Lives?

What better Party could Count Vlfeld take on this Occasion, than a Retreat and
a Country Life? Certainly, most Illustrious Lords, it is impossible for him to
choose another, and if I may say so, he can form no wishes but for a Peace.

If his Country and his Blood, inspire him with Love on one Side; the Favors
he has received from the King, and the Kindness he has expressed to him on so
many Occasions, oblige him to remain in the Condition he is in. Count Vlfeld is
not ignorant, that Benefits (being Acts of good Will, which create Pleasure and
Joy in the Person who gives, as well as in him who receives) remain so deeply
engraven in the Heart of both, that they can never perish: he is sensible that
this agreeable Commerce of giving, and of receiving, produces a Kindness which
is the stronger, by reason that being Voluntary, it surpasses that in some
Measure which we are obliged to have for our Relations.

Finally, he is persuaded that Ingratitude is a Crime so heinous, that all
Nations have been seized with Horror at the thoughts of making Laws to punish
it. Not but that it is detested by all Mankind, or that by that want of Laws
they designed to approve it; but because Benefits can never be sufficiently
esteemed, by reason that the Value of them only consists in the Will of him who
gives, and not in that which is the Object of it.

That Crime has been condemned by a public Hatred, and it has been placed
among those things which are to be punished by Divine Justice. How is it likely
then, that Count Vlfeld having such reasonable Sentiments, and such a perfect
Knowledge of the King's Favors, should form Cabals to make Provinces revolt,
which esteem themselves too happy to be under his Dominion? Can he hinder the
Nobility, whose Head he was formerly, from coming to comfort him in his
Disgrace, and to pity his Misfortunes? Must their Civilities be imputed to him
as Crimes, and without the least Proof being given of the Correspondence that
is supposed between the King my Brother and him, without any Body's justifying
that he has excited any Assemblies, or proving that he has given his Majesty
any prejudicial Counsels, Must he be so unhappy as to lose his Majesty's
Favor? No, Illustrious Lords, I cannot believe it, since Words, though never
so fine or agreeable in the Mouth of an Orator, are not sufficient to convict
my Husband, nor to persuade that he is Guilty. On the contrary, I have reason
to hope that you will approve his Design of remaining in his Solitude, and of
wishing a good Peace between the two Crowns, since it is the only thing he can
do with Justice, in the deplorable Condition to which he is reduced: Therefore
I expect his Justification from you, most Illustrious Lords, to the End that
the same being confirmed by his Majesty, we may be restored to our Liberty, and
to the Enjoyment of our Estate, as well as put in possession again of the
County of Sylburg: that all the World may be sensible that that great Prince
still esteems Count Vlfeld, and that he does not think him unworthy of the
Continuation of his Favors.

The K. of Sweden was at Gottenburgh when he received the News of C. Vlfeld's
Absolution; and after having read the Letter which the Senate did write to him,
and the Countess's Speech, whose Wit he admired as well as her Affection for
her Husband; he immediately ordered one of his Secretaries of State to write
the Confirmation of it, and expressed so much Joy to all his Court for his
being found Innocent, that those who had devised that Calumny remained in the
highest Consternation.

But the Artifice which Hannibal Seested made use of to be revenged of the
Earl, and to render the King's Favor ineffectual to him, must needs move the
Indignation of all the World against him: This Barbarian, who was become his
Brother-in-Law, having married one of the Countess Eleonora's Sisters; and who
notwithstanding their Reconciliation, and the Ties of Blood, preserved in his
Heart a mortal Hatred against Count Vlfeld, since the Time he drew upon him, as
I have said before: This Hannibal, I say, who under pretense of a supposed
Discontent, was at the K. of Sweden's Court at that Time to give Frederick an
account of his Designs, feigning an extreme Joy at the Success of the Earl's
Affair, though he was one of the chief Authors of it; entreated Charles, with
all the earnestness imaginable, to put the Letters of Confirmation into his
Hands, that he might be the first to acquaint Count Vlfeld with this agreeable
News. The King thinking he was in earnest, granted him the Favor he desired;
but he instead of performing what he had promised, writ to the Earl, that
though he had proved his Innocence, the King was still so incensed against him,
that without any one's being able to discover the Cause of it, he had resolved
to remove him from the place where he was kept, to put him into some Prison
distant from all sort of Correspondence: and coloring this Perfidiousness with
a studied Tenderness, he conjured him to endeavor his Escape by all the Means
he could possibly think on, to avoid the Storm which threatened him so near, and
to secure his Family, since it was impossible he should not make his Peace,
since the Senate had absolved him.

The Earl receiving this Letter before his Friends had given him an account of
the Truth (because Hannibal had sent it by an Express) not having the least
Suspicion that a Brother-in-Law could be unfaithful to that degree, easily gave
Credit to it.

Upon the receipt of this News, the Countess and he looking on the Danger to be
pressing, without expecting any farther confirmation of it, only thought how to
deceive their Keepers, to make their Escape.

As the thing was pretty difficult, upon the Account of the great Number of
Soldiers which guarded them, this Illustrious Unfortunate Couple, having
communicated their Design to the Earl's Gentleman of the Horse, named Daranda,
they did consult a long while for some Expedient, without being able to find a
good One.

But at last Daranda calling to mind that he had formerly observed, that the
House had a secret Outlet in a by-Street, they resolved that he should try
whether they could make use of it, while they did employ themselves on their
side to secure their Papers and their Money. All things being disposed thus,
the first thing Daranda did was to hire a Sloop, to go out of the Port at any
Hour: and having discovered by his Search in the House, that going down into
the Cellar, there was a Door of Communication with another Cellar, and from
that Cellar into another Place, out of which they might set out without being
seen by the Guards, he immediately acquainted the Earl therewith.

But whereas there was a Centry at his Door, and that the Countess was in a
different Apartment from his, the Difficulty was to deceive that Centry, which
changed hourly, which made the thing almost impossible, they not daring to
confide in him.

The End of the First Volume.
The LIFE of CORNIFIX, COUNT of ULFELD, Great Master of DENMARK: And of the
Countess Eleonora his Wife.
The Second Part.
THE Count and his Gentleman of the Horse, dexterously loosn'd some of the
Boards which made the Partition of his Chamber, and having made a sufficient
Overture, dreading Visits might break his Measures, he sent to his Guards to
desire them not to admit any Body into his Chamber because he was very much
indisposed: Insomuch that being safely got out about Six in the Morning, they
went into the Cellar, where the Earl having put on the Habit of a Priest, which
Daranda had provided for him, they crossed the Town and reached the Key without
any opposition; and the Earl being got on board the Sloop which the said
Daranda had hired, which kept at a distance from the rest, he went back to the
Countess, in order also to facilitate her Escape.

But whereas it was Day before he came back, he met with great difficulties,
being obliged to lead her through the great Gate, her Apartment being too
distant from the Cellars: Nevertheless as Necessity is the Mother of Invention,
the Countess who has a great deal of Wit, immediately found out an Expedient
which did surprise Daranda, as much as he found it fit for his design. The
Habits worn by the Towns-Women being absolutely different from those of Women
of Quality, insomuch that they would deceive the most clearsighted, the
Countess resolved to put on one of those Habits, in order to get out.

Having in order thereunto sent for one of the said Women who lived hard by
her, under pretense of diverting her self with her, and whose Shape was very
like her own; the Countess changed Clothes with her, notwithstanding all the
resistance she could make, and her Servants found her so well disguised, that
they judged their Enterprise infallible: And indeed tho they had upwards of
thirty Soldiers to deceive, the Countess having a Set of very unruly Horses,
which Daranda had set loose on purpose, they made such a terrible noise in the
Yard, that all the Soldiers ran out to help the Grooms to retake them, so that
there only remained a Centry to deceive, who stood at the Countess's
Chamber Door: but one of the Countess's Chamber-Maids seigning to have lost a
Diamond of great value, which she was looking after with great affliction, the
said Soldier was so much moved at it, that he would needs help her to seek for
it; which opportunity the Countess and Daranda took to get out without the
least hindrance: And their Escape was managed with so much Art, that the
Soldiers never perceived it till the next day, when they were got to
Copenhaguen.

It was very reasonable to believe, both upon the account of the General
Pardon, as well as because the Earl had refused to engage himself anew with the
King of Sweden, that his retreat to Copenhagen would be attended with no ill
Consequences, and that Frederic would keep his Word and let them live in Peace.

Nevertheless it proved quite otherwise: for within three days after their
Arrival, without knowing what new Crime they had committed, they were seized in
their own House, and carried into the Isle of Bornholm, situated in the Baltic
Sea, between the Province of Schonen and Livonia. It was in that Island the
Count and Countess were delivered into the hands of the most barbarous of Men,
called Fowlk, who was Governor thereof. They were no sooner in his power, but
this Barbarian, without the least regard to their Birth, took all their Jewels
and Money from them, and then locked them up in a Dungeon in which they were
hardly able to breathe. This strange way of proceeding made them sensible that
the Sequel could never prove favorable, and indeed they were not deceived in
their opinion of this Governor's Cruelty: For after having deprived them of the
Nourishment which he was ordered to give them, he took all their Linen from
them, and only left them that which they had on, which being rotten in a short
space of time by reason of the dampness of the Dungeon, they were reduced to a
new torture, and finally not to have Bread enough to sustain a Life, which they
would have put a period to, had not the Laws of Christianity forbad them so to
do.

But his Barbarity proceeded further yet; he refused to allow the Earl a
Servant, and the Countess a Maid to wait upon them, and he abused his Power
with so much Insolence, as to add ill Words and Reproaches to his ill
Treatment. Moreover, the Patience which those Illustrious Captives expressed
during the eleven Months they remained together, enraged this Cruel Governor to
that degree, that after having exerted his Tyranny over their Bodies, he
resolved to torture their Minds: He parted them because they did suffer with
too much Constancy, and removed them into two Dungeons which were one over
another; but because they had Windows on the same side, and that loving each
other tenderly, they could speak together, in order to deprive them of that
only remaining satisfaction, he caused their little Windows to be damm'd up,
depriving them at once of Light, and of the pleasure of conversing together.
The Countess being no longer able to bear this Treatment, fell sick, and her
Illness increased to that degree that she concluded her Death to be at hand,
and even then he had much ado to allow her a Woman to take care of her.

But tho the Countess earnestly entreated this Tyrant to send her a Priest to
administer the Sacrament to her, neither her Tears nor Entreaties could prevail
with him; and tho she offered to make her Confession aloud before him, he
refused her that only Comfort. Heavens designing her for greater Sufferings
yet, restored her Health at a time when she did least expect it. About that
time the Woman whom the Governor had sent to take care of her in her Illness,
told the Countess, that she was so much concerned to see the Earl and her self
reduced to such a miserable state, that she was resolved to facilitate their
Escape.

But whereas the thing was almost impossible, by reason of their separation,
and of the danger of coming down to the Sea, which beats against the foot of
the Tower in which they were locked up; the Countess rejected the first
Proposition she made to her about it, whether it were that she feared she had a
mind to surprise her, or that she really thought the thing impossible.

But the Woman persisting to assure her that she was sincere, the Countess
found an Expedient to acquaint the Earl therewith; and he to let her know that
he would neglect nothing on his side to improve this favorable Occasion,
insomuch that the Countess having made Sails with her Sheets, while the Earl
made Oars with some of the Wooden-Bars of his Dungeon, with so much Industry,
that he could conceal them in his Clothes, and yet make as good a use of them
as if they had been larger; and having also made a kind of Ladder with the
remainder of his Sheets and some old Ropes, they employed it so well that with
the assistance of the said Woman who lay in the Countess's Dungeon, they got
down to the foot of the Tower, and going along the Strand they found a little
Boat, in which they entered; and having fixed their Sails and Oars, they did
commit themselves with Joy to an Element, which seemed to them less barbarous
than the Governor.

But whether the aforesaid Woman thought them safe, or that the fear of being
punished by the Governor made an impression upon her mind, she acquainted him
with the Evasion of the Count and Countess.

The day was half spent, and they were already got upwards of four Miles from
the place whence they put out to Sea, without having met with the least
Accident, when the Governor, who could not imagine how they had made their
Escape, getting on board a Sloop, with some Soldiers, made so much haste that
the Earl and the Countess were retaken by that Barbarian, who had so much
Brutality in his first Transport, as to give the Earl, nay even the Countess,
several Bastinado's; and after having fettered them like Slaves, he carried
them back to their Dungeons, and immediately dispatched an Express to the King
of Denmark to acquaint him therewith.

Soon after this the King sent Count Rantzaw to visit them, who was their
Capital Enemy, and did at that time enjoy Count Vlfeld's Place; but when he
came into his Dungeon, he did not know him, by reason of the Alteration which
the ill treatment he had received during fifteen Months had occasioned in him,
and the ill Clothes which he was covered with. Insomuch that inquiring of him
where Count Vlfeld was, whereupon the Earl answering that he was the Person,
tho he was his Enemy, he could not forbear weeping, and to appear sensibly
concerned: But when this first motion, which Horror and Pity had excited in his
Soul, was over, Hatred resuming the place it had held there so long, he told
Count Vlfeld with an imperious Tone, That he came from the King to tell him
that he should petition his Majesty to obtain his Liberty; and that of the
Countess his Wife. The Earl having desired Pen, Ink and Paper in order
thereunto, which was granted him; after he had written the said Petition he
delivered it to Count Rantzaw; but he pretending that it was not submissive
enough, because he would force Count Vlfeld to write another, the draught of
which he had brought from Copenhaguen, he told him disdainfully, giving him the
said Draught, That the only way to obtain his Liberty, was to write thus.

The Earl observing that they obliged him, in the said Draught, to beg pardon
for several Crimes which he had never thought on, far from having committed
them, told Count Rantzaw, That he could never resolve to sign it, especially
because the Countess his Wife was included in it, who was only a Prisoner
because she loved him with too much Tenderness: but tho this would have
prevailed with a Generous Mind to desist from such an Unjust Prosecution; he
persever'd during six Weeks time he tarried in Bornholm in the resolution of
obliging the Count to sign it by Force or good Will.

But at last being tired with Count Vlfeld's resistance, he told him haughtily,
That unless he signed it, he should lose his Head, as well as the Countess,
without any Trial. Count Vlfeld who had never known what it was to fear Death,
would freely have submitted to it, rather than to sign, had not the Love he had
for the Countess withheld him: But this great Man finding that his resistance
put her Life in danger, suffered far greater Torments in the Conflict he had
within himself, than those which are endured by Death; for his great Courage
having forsaken him, he remained long speechless, and it was with a great deal
of trouble and grief he asked Count Rantzaw at last, what Crimes he had
committed to be punished thus, and why they were not brought to their Trial
according to the Laws of the Kingdom?

Count Rantzaw, who was no great Politician, being surprised at this Question,
made no other Answer to Count Vlfeld, but that he ought to remember that he had
been engaged under the King of Sweden, and that notwithstanding the General
Pardon, he should be punished: To which he answered, That it was a Violation of
the Law of Nations; at which Count Rantzaw flew into such a Passion, that after
having said many things to him which he durst not have thought at another time,
he left Count Vlfeld in his Dungeon, and went back to Court.

The only advantage they received by Count Rantzaw's Visit was, that at his
return their Governor was changed, in whose room the King sent Colonel Skroder,
whose Moderation and good Nature allayed their Affliction so much, that
notwithstanding they did still remain in the same Dungeons, they did not suffer
near so much by it, because he took care to visit them, and to allow them
whatever they stood in need of Some Months being spent thus, Skroder received
Orders from Court, to put his Prisoners at Liberty, provided they would sign a
Paper which was sent to him: he thinking that this would be^ very welcome piece
of News to the Earl, immediately repaired to him, and told him with great
Civility, That i^ would be his own fault if he was not soon at Liberty, since a
Ship was se (...) from Copenhaguen for them. The Ea^^ desiring time to read the
Paper which he had brought him, and to answer it, the Governor withdrew and
told him, That he did allow him the remainder of the Day to think seriously
upon it. But whereas the Title of the said Paper was a Reversion, the Count was
seized with dread and horror at it, and indeed it was not without reason, since
it was indeed the most Cruel Reversion that Fortune could ever cause; it did
not only oblige him to renounce the Propriety of several Estates, to the value
of upwards of Three Millions; to abandon his Places, his Goods, his Debts, and
his best Jewels; but that which was more cruel than all this, it did oblige the
Countess to renounce the Title and Arms of Countess of Sleswick, and of
Holstein, which the late King Christian her Father had given her; and finally
it made the General Pardon contained in the Treaties of Peace void, in relation
to Count Vlfeld and his Successors. The next Day, whilst the Earl was reading
this strange Reversion, the Governor came in without being seen by him, who
observing that he still remained in the same posture, said to him, Well, Sir,
what are you resolved to do? To die, said the Earl, turning briskly about,
rather than sign a thing which is far more cruel than Death; neither indeed can
I live much longer, considering the ill Treatments I have received from your
Predecessor; and I should purchase a Liberty which I cannot enjoy with Honor,
at too dear a rate.

But whereas the Countess Eleonora is as much concerned in this business as my
self, be pleased to carry this Paper to her, and to tell her, That I find the
Conditions of it so harsh and so crew that I will never sign it unless it be
considerably softened.

This honest Gentleman, who was very much concerned at the unjust Sufferings of
those Illustrious Persons, went strait to the Countess, to whom he related the
Earl's Resolution. After she had examined the said Writing very seriously for
some hours, she told the Governor, returning it to him, That she was very much
troubled at it; but that she would approve whatever the Ear did in such a
dismal Conjuncture. The following Day Skroder went to the Ear again, and having
entreated him, with Tears in his Eyes, speedily to take his Resolution, because
he could tarry n^ longer: The Earl answered, That he found that Writing so
shameful for al^ his Family, that he had rather expect the utmost Effects of
his Enemy's Cruelty in his Dungeon, than resolve to sign so Infamous a thing:
And adding to all this, what he had already said to Count Rantzaw, That he
wondered they did not bring him to his Trial, in order to seize all his Estate
by a lawful Confiscation; the Governor told him, That he had Orders to send
back the Ship and the Writing, in case he made the least difficulty to sign it,
and therefore that he had no more time to lose. But whereas the Count alleged
still new Reasons for which he could not do it; the Governor told him, That
unless both he and the Countess did sign it, he was afraid the Court would
finally resolve to put them to Death.

This Discourse reminding the Earl of what Count Rantzaw chanced one Day to say
to him in the heat of their Contestations, That the Court had been ready more
than once to send a Warrant for their Execution in Prison; it made him reflect
more seriously upon it, and he desired the Governor to allow him a little time
more to confer with the Countess about it, which was granted him.

It was then about Noon, and the Weather was so calm, that the Earl coming
close to the Grate of his Window, he called the Countess, who heard him
instantly, because they never failed to speak to one another when the Winds,
which are high in that Country, allowed them so to do.

The Countess desiring to know his Pleasure, and the Earl saying, Must we die,
or sign what you have read? The Countess who understands, and speaks several
Languages, replied immediately in these Latin Verses, Rebus in adversis sacile
est contemnere mortem,
Fortius ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
It is easy to despise Death in Adversity, but he shows most Courage who can
suffer Misery.

The Earl who admired the force and presence of her Mind, and who was sensible
that had not the Maxims of Christianity withheld her, she would undoubtedly
have done, what the Roman Aria did under the like Misfortune, asking her again,
Whether this was all she had to say? the Countess added this other Verse,
Accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in anno. That may happen in a moment which
we could not expect in a Year: And told the Count that this was her Opinion.
But the Earl not being able to apprehend whence she could have this glimmering,
or this point of hope, as she called it, in so evident a despair of their
Fortune, they being locked up in Dungeons, their Family dispersed and
wandering, from whom all manner of Subsistence was taken away; he remained long
speechless, without resolving on what he was to do. But at last he fancied
there was something supernatinal in this, and according to that beam of Hopes,
which the Countess darted out like a Flambeau to light him, he w^it and signed
this Reversion, which he gave to the Governor, for the Countess to do the same,
which she did accordingly.

It is difficult to express the Joy those Illustrious Captives felt, to see
themselves out of their Dungeons, and the Tenderness they expressed to each
other on this occasion: I shall only say, that after having been long without
being able to utter one word by reason of the Agitation which Grief and Love
had excited in their Hearts; the Tears which they shed for their Misfortune,
succeeded their Silence: And finally after having embraced each other tenderly,
they did exhort one another to bear their Disgrace in such moving words, that
the bystanders seemed no less afflicted than themselves.

Night being come, they were embarked in the Ship I have mentioned, where they
were strictly guarded by twenty Musketeers, until their Arrival at
Copenhaguen, where they were conducted to Count Rantzaw's House, in an
Apartment prepared on purpose for them. The following Day about Ten at Night,
the Count did visit them, and told them from the King, That his Majesty having
thought fit to change something in the Reversion they had signed; he did
command them to make another, to seal it with their Seals; and to date it from
Copenhaguen, which they did, tho they were sensible that it was only done to
persuade the Public, that they had done it without being forced to it.

But after this, Count Rantzaw having again proposed an Oath of Fidelity to be
signed by them, which was conceived in strange terms; Count Vlfeld could not
forbear telling him, It was a very useless thing, since that considering the
Condition to which his Ill Fortune had reduced him, he might more reasonably be
reckoned among the Dead than the Living.

Count Rantzaw who was pleased to insult over him, putting himself in a
Passion, told him disdainfully, That unless they did sign it, they should be
carried back to Bornholm, where they should perish in their old Dungeons;
insomuch that the Earl not daring to make the least Reply to that cruel
Threatening, signed whatever he pleased.

But notwithstanding the Earl and the Countess had bought their Liberty at the
rate I have mentioned, they could not enjoy it, and they were confined in the
Isle of Funen until new Orders.

The only Favor that was granted them, was to carry their Family along with
them, and to dispose of the Income of the Estate of Ellensburg, which was worth
about Twelve Thousand Livers per Annum, which the King allowed them for their
Subsistence.

This Violation of Faith will undoubtedly seem strange to every body, and
indeed it shocks Divine and Humane Laws: Nevertheless considering the then
state of Affairs, the King was obliged in Policy to behave himself thus, and I
should freely excuse all the other Persecutions Count Vlfeld has met with, if
they had had as reasonable a foundation according to the Maxims of State. The
King had a mind to make his Kingdom Hereditary: Count Vlfeld by his Merit, and
by his Resentment, was the only Man capable to oppose it, had he been at
liberty; because he had abundance of Relations and Friends who durst not
express their good Will toward him, but who would certainly have sided with
him at that time, as well as most of the Nobles. Therefore it was the King's
Interest not to release Count Vlfeld in order to prosecute his design, which I
will now give you a short account of. All the World knows that the last Wars
between Sweden and Denmark had exhausted the last in all Respects to that
degree, that the People was reduced to the utmost extremity of Misery;
especially the third Estate, the Nobles being excused from all manner of
Impositions, which excited a mortal hatred in the Commons against them: The
Nobles were also very much humbled for want of a Head to lead them, and to
assert their Privileges, by which the Kings were kept in awe, and the Peasants
like Slaves.

John Nansen, first Burguemaster of Copenhaguen, a Man of sense, very rich and
daring, and who did absolutely govern the Citizens, conceived the generous
Design to free the People from Slavery, by making the Kingdom Hereditary. But
whereas the said Design required a great deal of Prudence and of Speed, and
that he could not manage it alone, he discovered it to John Swaning Bishop of
Copenhaguen, his Friend, who by his Merit and his Eloquence had acquired as
much Credit over the Clergy, as he had over the Third Estate.

These two Men acting with great Secrecy on their respective sides, disposed
all things so well, that they secured the Votes of the Chief of the Clergy and
of the Citizens, to whom they promised Rewards suitable to the Services they
should receive from them: But whereas they had not a sufficient access to the
King, they discovered their Secret to Christopher Gabel, a Man whom Fortune had
raised above the Common, and made him Favorite to Frederick, who undertook
nothing without his Advice. Gabel was over joy'd to find so favorable an
Occasion to signalize his Zeal toward the King, and to be revenged of the
Imperious Humor of the Nobles, who often upbraided him with his Extraction.

Therefore having confirmed Nansen and Swaning in their Resolution, they held
several secret Conferences together about this Affair; and whereas the
Necessities of the State obliged the King shortly to convene the Assembly of
the Estates of the Kingdom; notwithstanding that according to the ancient
Custom of the Kingdom, the said Assembly was to be held in the Isle of Funen;
Gabel told the King, that for several important Reasons, which his Majesty
would approve of, it was necessary to hold it at Copenhaguen, which was
resolved upon notwithstanding the Resistance of the Nobles.

The Overture thereof being made, Nansen and Swaning repaired to the Castle,
where Gabel tarried for them: As soon as they came into the King's Chamber,
Gabel told his Majesty, that they had a Business of great consequence to impart
to him, and that in order thereunto it was necessary to give him a secret
Audience: whereupon every body was ordered to retire, and Nansen, Swaning and
Gabel, being by themselves with the King, Nansen told his Majesty in few words,
That the great Authority of the Nobles was the only cause of all the Disorders
of the State, because the Counsels which depend on many commonly prove useless,
either by reason of their delays, or because they are seldom kept secret.

Moreover that the Citizens and the Country People being no longer able to
maintain all the Expenses of the State alone, without having the least share in
the Administration of Affairs, they were resolved for the Common Good to make
the Kingdom Hereditary, to the end that all the Authority being invested in one
Person, which is the most perfect Form of Government, every Man might hope to
be advanced by his Majesty according to his Merit.

The King being extremely surprised at this Proposition, told Nansen that he
looked upon it as a thing impossible, and that in case they did undertake it,
it would cost them their Heads, without his being able to hinder it: That he
did not think fit to venture any thing, by reason of the fatal Consequences
that Affair might be attended with. Nansen replied boldly, That things were
brought to that pass, that they must either go through; or resolve to die; that
they were certain of the good Will of the Clergy, and of the People, and that
they only begged his Majesty's Approbation, and would take all the rest upon
themselves. The King between Fear and Hope, having told them that he abandoned
all to their Conduct, retired into his Closet, in expectation of that
Revolution, which did astonish all Europe, and secure two Crowns to his
Posterity.

Nansen and Swaning, being persuaded that they should be well rewarded, retired
very well satisfied, to give Orders for the execution of their Design. As they
were crossing the Bridge of the Castle to go to the Chancery, they met Otho
Krag, Knight of the Order of the Elephant, and Minister of State, who observing
something extraordinary in their Looks, stopped them haughtily, saying, Whence
come you? I see that you are caballing; but take heed, and so showed them the
blue Tower with his hand, as if he designed to give them to understand that
they should be locked up there: To which Nansen and Swaning barely answered, we
shall see, and continued their way.

That very Afternoon the Estates being assembled, the King desired them to
consider of some Means to sustain the extraordinary Expenses of the State. The
Nobles excused themselves from contributing toward it, alleging their
Privileges, which freed them from all sorts of Impositions: The Clergy also
alleging theirs, and the Commons declaring that they would no longer pay any
Duties unless the others also contributed toward them, they broke up, so much
exasperated against each other, that Nansen and Swaning, who had promoted these
Disputes, seeing their Friends very well disposed, Nansen put the Citizens
under Arms, and Swaning having assembled the Deputies of the Clergy, they
prevailed with these two Estates to offer the King the Hereditary Sovereignty
of the Kingdom; and without losing time they besieged the Nobles in their
Houses, threatening to destroy them unless they gave their consent thereunto.

The Nobles being surpised at this bold Proposition, which destroyed their
Authority, endeavored to make some resistance; but the Citizens persisting in
their Resolution in a manner which made them sensible that they would get
nothing by force, they desired time until the next Day, which was granted them.

The People kept to their Arms all the Night, and Nansen shut the Gates of the
City, and placed Guards in the chief parts thereof, so that by break of Day the
Nobles were summoned to give in their Declaration.

Accordingly Fourteen of the Chief among them gave it in the form desired by
the two Estates, and having sealed it with their Seals, Nansen and Swaning with
the other Deputies carried it to the King, who did not expect so favorable an
Event.

But the said Declaration not being thought full enough, the Nobles were
summoned in the King's Name to make it more positive: The City-Gates remained
close all the while, and finally the Nobles finding that there was no Medium,
and that unless they did grant the King's desire, they would be exposed to the
fury of the People, whose hatred they were not ignorant of, in that extremity
they did consent to grant the King, and his Successors the Hereditary
Sovereignty of his Kingdoms; and the Three Estates having signed the Act, they
went together to present it to Frederic, and did submit all their Privileges to
him, to dispose of them at his pleasure.

The King received them very graciously, and having promised to use them
kindly, he made them hope for a happier Reign than they had enjoyed till then:
After which the Royal Family repaired to the Cathedral Church there to sing Te
Deum, where Swaning complemented them at the Door, with an Eloquence which
procured him the Esteem of all his Auditors.

The Public Ceremony was deferred for two days longer; a Theater was erected,
on which the King, the Queen, the Princes and Princesses their Children being
conducted, the King being seated on a Throne under a rich Canopy, the
Chancellor made a Speech to the People about the Behavior they were to observe
under this new form of Government, and about the Oath they were to take to the
King and his Children.

After which the Nobles, the Ecclesiastics, and the People, having taken the
Oath of Allegiance, the whole City expressed a world of Joy, insomuch that the
Danes seemed to have lost the remembrance of their past Miseries; which shows
what power Novelty has over Men's Minds, who always hope by Revolutions, either
to ease their Afflictions, or to satisfy their Ambition.

The King would also needs make a Public Feast for every body; but, whereas
the Nobles were at the charge of it, it was observed that most of them did not
come to it, and that among those that did, some refused to eat, so that the
Clergy and the Citizens only expressed their Joy and Satisfaction at it: It
lasted some Days, after which the City-Gates were opened to every body.

Thus the whole State was altered in less than a Fortnight by the Conduct and
Resolution of Nansen, Swaning and Gabel. The King in order to reward them for
that great Service, erected the Church of Copenhaguen into an Archbishopric in
favor of Swaning, and augmented the Revenue thereof proportionably.

His Majesty made Nansen first President of the Senate and Bourgrafe, which
signifies Earl or Chief of the Burghers, and gave him as well as to Gabel
several considerable things. And whereas the Burger-masters had also
contributed considerably toward this great Revolution, the King gave them the
Enjoyment of the Territory of Rotskild, which is worth upwards of a hundred
thousand Livers per Annum, and granted the Inhabitants of Copenhaguen several
great Privileges, and among the rest the power of possessing Fiefs; which till
then had only been allowed to the Nobility.

During these Transactions, Count Vlfeld and all his Family were at Ellensburg
in Funen, where he endeavored to recover his Health, which was strangely
impaired by the Ill Treatment he had received at Bornholm; no longer concerning
himself with the Affairs of the World. Neither was he moved in the least when
he heard this Overthrow of all the Ancient Privileges of the Nobility, for the
preservation of which, at Frederick's Election he had incurred his hatred, and
had since been exposed to all his Misfortunes: And in order not to leave the
King the least suspicion of his preserving any Resentment, he begged his leave
to go to Spaw, there to take the Waters, which was granted him.

Accordingly Count Vlfeld and the Countess Eleonora, with all his Family left
Ellensburg, to go into the Low Countries, where after having seen several
Towns, the Earl finding that the Air at Bruges did agree better with him than
any other, he resolved to stop there. The Earl had not been there above six
Months, when he was informed that Colonel Fowlk (that Cruel Governor who had
used him so barbarously in his Prison at Bornholm) was come there to visit his
Relations; but whereas his Indisposition did not permit him to call him to an
account, the Earl acquainted his Eldest Son therewith, who was at the Academy
at Paris, who taking Post immediately, being fired with a generous desire to
revenge his Father's Wrongs, made so much haste, that he reached Bruges on the
very day Fowlk was to go away from thence; so that meeting him in his Coach, he
attacked him alone amidst all his Servants, and killed him, without being
wounded.

This ought to teach those who have Employments, not to abuse their Authority;
and above all to keep within the bounds of respect toward Persons of Quality
in Affliction; this bold Action met almost with a general Approbation at
Copenhaguen: The most Judicious and those who were not influenced by Count
Vlfeld's Enemies, praised the Son's Courage for having undertaken it. But
whereas the King was still afraid of the Earl, his Enemies improved that
occasion to raise a new Crime against him, and persuaded his Majesty
maliciously, that he would never have ventured to revenge himself thus, had he
not been sure of the Protection of some Potent Prince. The King's Natural
Timorousness, being joined to the Discontents of several Noblemen who had a
mind to take Arms, made Frederick resolve to ruin Count Vlfeld absolutely; and
the better to color the said Resolution, they accused him of having made
Offers to the Elector of Brandenburg, to dethrone the King, and to invest him
with his Crowns; which was a thing he had not so much as thought on, and yet
this was the last pretense of his Persecutions, as it will appear by the Sequel.

Some Months after Fowlk's Death, Count Vlfeld desired the Countess Eleonora to
go into England, there to demand a considerable Sum which was due to him. This
Generous Lady, who had no stronger application in the World, than to share all
her Husband's Misfortunes, seeing him overwhelmed with Sickness, made no
difficulty of undertaking that Journey, and without considering whether the
consequences of it would prove favorable to her or not, she set out toward
London. The King who was gloriously restored at that time in his Kingdoms, and
who had gone through many Misfortunes himself, being thereby the more inclined
to pity others, received the Countess with all the Civility and Respect
imaginable; and his Majesty being informed of the Subject of her Journey,
ordered his Ministers to give the Countess speedy satisfaction, in such an
obliging manner, that she had reason to believe, she should not tarry long for
her Payment.

But finding, after a Month's stay, that the Ministers still put her off from
day to day, and not being able to appear at Court with all the Grandeur due to
her Birth, she thought she could tarry there no longer without shame, insomuch
that she resolved to return to the Earl her Husband, and so took her leave of
the King, who used her as civilly at her Departure, as he had done at her
Arrival, expressing a great deal of concern at her not being paid.

The Countess went back for Dover again, where she arrived the second day, in
hopes of going back for Flanders, but she was strangely surprised when being
got on Board to continue her Voyage, she was seized by a Danish Captain, who
carried her to Copenhaguen. As the Countess did not expect this Usage, that new
Misfortune affected her more sensibly than all the rest had done; for tho she
had ever appeared Invincible, she then abandoned her self so much to her Grief,
that all those who saw her were moved with Compassion. But whereas her Tears
were useless, she desired Pen, Ink and Paper, and making a Generous Effort over
her Grief, she writ the following Letter to the Earl.

The Countess ELEONORA, to Count ULFELD.
THE Misfortune which is befallen me, not having been foreseen by either of us:
I do not doubt, Sir, but it will afflict you more sensibly than all those we
have already undergone, since you are not to share it with me, and that our
Separation was the only thing that could exhaust our Constancy. Yes, my dear
Husband, I ever thought my self above Grief and Fortune, while I suffered with
you, because your Courage supported my Weakness, and that I found wherewith to
comfort my self in your Conversation. But since I am now forced away for
Denmark, contrary to the Law of Nations, and all that is most sacred in the
World, I find that I am no longer Invincible, and that our Enemies have found
my Foible. It is neither the fear of a Dungeon, nor the sight of our Enemies
that makes me tremble; I am too much used to the unjust Effects of their Rigor
to dread them. But when I think that I shall never see you more, that Cruel
Thought creates such Violent Transports in me, that I should willingly resign
my Languishing Life to have the pleasure of taking my last leave of you. Alas!
Sir, how weak is Reason, when Love opposes it? And how useless is Wisdom, when
Tenderness possesses a Heart? It Is vain to say, That we ought to arm our selves
against the worst Events; That we must bear them patiently, and put our selves
above the reach of Fortune: those Precepts make no impression upon a tender
Soul, when it loses what it loves, and when it has much knowledge, it only
serves to authorize our Tears instead of stopping them. However tho I now
confess to you, that that Constancy which you have so often commended in me,
has left me on a sudden; and that in losing you, I condemn my self to weep the
remainder of my Days, for the only Loss that could afflict me: It is not
reasonable that you should imitate me, and that you should shed continual
Tears, to the remembrance of my Misfortune. Great Men are not forbidden to shed
Tears, but they must be sparing of them, or rather they must stifle them to
preserve the Opinion the World has of their Courage. Every body knows that you
have born your Misfortunes without showing the least alteration of Mind, and
that you looked upon them rather as a Subject to exert your Virtue, than as a
Subject to grieve. Why then, Sir, should you forfeit such a Noble Reputation,
because I am fallen into my former Chains again? No, no, Sir, I love you too
well to suffer you to make such a breach to your Glory; and provided you lock
up all your Grief for my Misfortune within your Heart, it is all I desire.
Therefore do not sigh at the News of my Captivity, all our Children are with
you; and if it be true that nothing on Earth is more capable to persuade than
Example, teach them betimes to bear their Ill Fortune patiently, since it is
the only Good you can do them in your present Circumstances: Embrace them all
for my sake, lest a long Absence should blot me out of their Memory; use them
to name me often, that they may remember I am their Mother: But above all
things be persuaded that I will never do any thing unworthy of my Birth, nor of
our Friendship; and that tho our Enemies have found the way to part us for
ever, they cannot hinder me from Dying your Faithful Partner.

ELEONORA.


The Countess had hardly made an end of her Letter, when the Captain came to
tell her that it was time to go; so that losing all hopes of Deliverance, she
called for Daranda that faithful Squire, and after having shed many Tears, she
took a Bracelet of Diamonds from her Arm, and gave it him with the Letter: Here
said she, deliver this to my Husband, and desire him to remember me, and to
take care not to fall into the hands of our Enemies like me; and above all
things to bear this new Misfortune with the same Courage he has born all the
rest. Ending these Words she went into the other Ship, and Daranda who dreaded
the like Misfortune for his Master, went back to him with as much speed as if
he had had good News to carry to him.

At his Arrival at Bruges, he found this Illustrious Unfortunate in his Closet
reading some Letters he had received from Copenhaguen, where in notice was
given him that being anew accused of several Crimes, especially for the Death
of Colonel Fowlk, and of keeping Correspondence with the Elector of
Brandenburgh, he had been condemned that very day to suffer exquisite Torments,
and that Mon were in search of him to execute the same on his Person, as they
had done on his Effigies.

As soon as the Count saw Daranda, he imagined by the trouble which appeared in
his Countenance, that he brought him some Tidings yet more vexatious than those
he had already received: Therefore as king him where the Countess was, instead
of answering he only showed him the Letter and the Bracelet, not being able to
utter one word: After the Earl had read the Letter, he only said, Good God,
when will you cease to afflict me? Then sunk down in a Chair, where he remained
upwards of half an hour without any motion.

Nevertheless as soon as he recovered out of this Swoon, he read the Countess's
Letter over again with great Attention, and having ordered Daranda to prepare
his Equippage to go away the next day, he applied himself with great
Tranquillity on his side to order his Affairs.

The following day all things being ready, he went away toward Basle in
Switzerland, where he remained four or five Months almost always sick, without
discovering himself.

As for the Countess she was conducted to Copenhaguen with Civility enough,
which put her in hopes that they had better Sentiments toward her at Court
than before; but she was no sooner landed, but Colonel Allefeld came to receive
her, and carried her to the Tower of the Castle, where she was locked up with a
poor Woman to wait upon her.

That which is most surprising is, that some Persons having told her, in order
to discover her thoughts concerning her Husband, that he was also secured, she
looked into her left Hand, and answered, that it was not true, but that he
would not live long.

And indeed as the King was still afraid that Count Vlfeld should disturb him
about the new Revolution of his State, which had disobliged all the Nobility,
Frederick omitted no means to secure him: And several Persons were in search of
him, wherever they thought they could hear from him.

So that upon a false Report which was spread at Basle, that there were Persons
in search of the Count, tho he was very ill, he put himself at Night in a small
Vessel on the Rhine, in order to repair to Brisac where he thought he should be
safe.

But that Unfortunate Earl had hardly traveled ten Leagues, before the great
Cold penetrated his dying Body, which was deprived of Natural Heat: and thus he
ended that Languishing Life, which his Enemies had so often endeavored to
snatch from him by their Injustices, without being assisted by his Children,
and by his ancient Servants, whom he had sent away in the Morning by different
Roads.

Thus died Cornifix Count of Vlfeld, about threescore Years of Age, leaving
three Sons Successors of his great Virtues, of whom the Eldest who turned Roman
Catholic, has applied himself to the Queen of Sweden's Service. The second is
Knight of Maltha, and the third lives in England, who is one of the most
Accomplished and most Learned Gentlemen in Europe.

All those who have known Count Vlfeld grant, that he was one of the greatest
Men of his Time, and that had it not been for his Ambition to make himself
King, after the Death of Christian his Father-in-law, he would have been the
happiest Lord of the North: But tho some Historians that are ill informed, or
have been bribed by his Enemies, have accused him of Treason, and of being
guilty of all the ill Successes which his Brother-in-Law Frederick has met with
in his last Wars, I hope the World will judge more equitably, since he has done
nothing but what the Laws of the Country allowed him to do. And finally let no
body accuse me of having made a Panegyric instead of writing an History. I
grant, that the late King Christian having publicly expressed the small Value
he had for Prince Frederick his Son, and that the Nobles not being able to
accustom themselves to the Imperious Humor of the Princess his Wife of the
House of Lunenburg, perhaps by reason of their Antipathy with the Germans,
Count Vlfeld being persuaded by the Countess Eleonora, (who had had some
particular falling out with the Princess her Sister-in-Law) had some thoughts
of making himself King, instead of Prince Frederick, and took some measures in
order thereunto: But besides that that was very excusable in a Man like him,
some Nobles having proposed the Exclusion of Prince Erederick, Count Vlfeld who
was an admirable Politician, finding his measures broken, and being sensible
that he was not powerful enough to maintain a Civil War alone, wisely turned
the Scales, and caused Prince Frederick to be elected on conditions which made
him share his Authority, under pretense of preserving the Privileges of the
Nobility, of which he was the Head, by virtue of his Place of Great Master. But
if Frederick had reason to complain of Count Vlfeld on this Account, he also
failed on his side, by giving too much Credit to the Calumny of Dina and of
Walter, which he should have examined better before he undertook to seize Count
Vlfeld and the Countess Eleonora, since in Prudence and true Policy he ought to
have destroyed them quite, or to have dissembled all.

So that we may affirm that Frederick committed a great fault against his own
Interest, and that Count Vlfeld showed, by taking the King of Sweden's part,
that he knew how to resent the Injuries he had received like a Man of Sense and
Courage.

But whereas the Queen was at the Head of Count Vlfeld's Enemies, and that she
absolutely governed Frederick, who was easy and timorous, she followed the
first motions of her Passion. In fine the Earl was too Rich, and had too many
Friends, which are Crimes hard to be justified: And indeed that was the real
cause of all his Misfortunes, and of those of the Countess Eleonora, who is
still a Prisoner.

FINIS.
A SUPPLEMENT TO Count ULFELD'S LIFE,
The Preface.
Courteous Reader,
THO I was acquainted many Years since with the Truths contained in the
foregoing curious and useful Treatise, especially in what relates to the
violent and unjust Persecutions and Calumnies raised against those Heroical
Persons, Count Ulfeld and his Lady, mentioned in the same, I never put Pen to
Paper before, to give the World an account thereof, and perhaps had not done it
now, had not the said Treatise accidentally and unexpectedly fallen into my
hands, by the means of a Person with whom I was privately discoursing about
these Tragedies, which made me sensible that the World was already better
acquainted therewith than I imagined. Whereupon banishing all Fears, and not
valuing the hatred which I am sonsible Truth creates against those who are
zealous for it, who are lovers of Justice, and who are concerned for those who
are unjustly oppressed, defamed and persecuted; I thought, fit both for the
Glory of God, and for the instruction of others, to put the said Treatise into
English, it being very scarce in French, as also to induce the English Nation,
by making a due reflection on the Transactions of remote Countries, as well as
their own, to be the more grateful toward God, and to bless him for the
happiness of living now under a King who is a zealous promoter of Piety and
Justice, abhorring Oppression and Violence, discountenancing Vice and Baseness,
lest they should provoke God to give them such Rulers as they have already
partly experienced, and such as are mentioned in the foregoing Treatise.

The Additions I now design to make to the same, will consist in these three
Heads.

First, An Extract of some of the main Points of Count Ulfeld's Apology against
the last Calumnies raised against him, written in French by himself a little
before his Death, a Copy whereof is come to my hands.

Secondly, The Relation of the treacherous Proceedings against Doctor Otho
Sperling a dear Friend of the said Count Ulfeld.

Thirdly, A short Account of the Countess of Ulfeld's being put out of the
Prison of Copenhaguen: All which I entreat you to accept as kindly as I offer
it to you, and to excuse the plainness of my Style, which I look upon to be
most suitable to Truth.

A SUPPLEMENT TO Count ULFELD's LIFE.
FIRST, As to the Count's Apology written in French by himself a little before
his Death, and sent to a particular Friend of his to be perused by him, in
order to the publishing thereof, which doubtless would speedily have been
performed, had it not been deferred by his sudden Death mentioned in the
foregoing Treatise, as well as upon the account of some particular
Considerations relating to the imprisoned Countess and Doctor Sperling. The
main Heads whereof I shall here insert with all the candor and sincerity
imaginable, and in as few words as possible.

First, He complains of the illegal Proceedings of his Enemies, contrary to the
usual behavior of Christians, in condemning him upon pretended Accusations,
without summoning, or admitting him to make his defense; nay, which is worst,
for their passing a Sentence of Condemnation upon him, before his being
acquainted with the said Accusation: From which he infers as a main argument of
his Innocence, that it was a mere contrivance and invention of his Enemies,
absolutely to ruin him and his Family, and as great a Calumny as those
mentioned in the foregoing Treatise, of which he was absolved by his Judges;
and therefore that his said Enemies foreseeing the like success, and confusion
to themselves, in case he should be allowed to make his Defense, resolved to go
another way to work by force and violence, but still under pretense of some
groundiess Accusations in order as aforesaid absolutely to ruin him,
concluding that he and his Lady being once destroyed, their Malice and
Wickedness would be buried in Oblivion, and they freed from the public
Censures they now lay privately under, and are ashamed of.

He shows withal that their insatiable Covetousness, and desire to possess his
and his Lady's vast Estates, under some lawful pretense, had no small share in
their said Contrivances and Calumnies.

To which Reasons we may add that which is alleged by the Author of the
foregoing Treatise, viz. Their Apprehension of Count Vlfeld's just Resentment
and Revenge for all their unjust and violent Proceedings against him; to
prevent which they judged it necessary, to forge the said Calumny, in order to
destroy him under a specious pretense to blind the World.

Secondly, The Count proceeds further to put down and examine the grounds of so
cruel a Septence, given against him and his Family, viz. He to be put to a most
ignominious Death as a Traitor and a Rebel, to forfeit all his Titles, Honors
and Estate, his Children to be deprived of. Honor and Estate, banished out of
all the King's Dominions, with other Cruelties mentioned in the said Sentence.

They ground their said Sentence upon the following Articles.
1. Upon their having Informations, Advices and original Papers from Persons of
a high Degree and Quality, not to be disputed.

2. Upon the Count's having acknowledged his past Faults under his own Hand, in
order to obtain a Pardon and his Freedom, and his having since despised the
King's Mercy by committing new Crimes.

3. Upon the Count's having given a Reversion under his own Hand and Seal,
promising never to attempt any thing against his Majesty, or Royal Family, or
against his State, or to do any thing to his Prejudice.

4. Upon the Count's taking an Oath of Fealty to the King, which he had also
given under his own Hand.

This is all they have alleged against him to prove their Accusation; which
was that he had conspired against the King of Denmark and his Royal Family,
designing to introduce a new Government in his Kingdoms, by stirring up his
Subjects to Rebellion, by the alsistance of Foreign Princes which they do not
name.

In conclusion they declare, That they did not summon the Count to answer to
the said Accusations, because it was a Case in which no other form of Process
was required, which way of proceeding was customary in many Parts.

The Count answers the aforesaid Articles as follows.
First, That Informations and Writings from any Persons of whatever Degree or
Quality are not sufficient prooss to conclude a Person guilty without farther
Examination; witness the two former Accusations formerly made by the King of
Denmark himself against the said Count, mentioned in the foregoing Treatise,
viz. of designing to poison the King, and the several Crimes laid to his charge
at the Court of Sweden: which Accusations tho absolutely affirmed to be true by
the said King, and Count Vlfeld and his Lady's being declared Traitors to
several Princes, yet neither the Council in Denmark, nor the Queen of Sweden
did take for granted, but allowed them a fair Trial, in both which the Count
and his Lady were found and declared Innocent. All which notwithstanding, the
said King causes the same Person anew to be condemned by his own Servants and
Creatures upon the like weak ground of pretended Informations, without hearing
him in his own defense, and without any probable or apparent Circumstances to
confirm the matter: Therefore he desires to know the necessity there was, to
precipitate a Sentence in this manner, without allowing him the little time
which was necessary to make his Defense, and to hear his Reasons? Were there
any Soldiers in the Field at his Devotion? Were any Levies made, even of one
Man, against him or the State? Can they show or name the least Officer employed
in his Service, or under his Pay to serve against them or the State? Can they
prove the least Correspondence held in the Country, which might really and
truly prove the least thing concerning what he is accused of? Where are his
Accomplices? For it is impossible to form such an Enterprise as he is accused
of, without the assistance of those of the Country. He is very certain that
they can never produce real proofs of a thing that never entered in his Mind,
which is but a sequel of the Contrivances and Inventions of the same Cabal
which had raised the former Calumnies against him, which Persons conceal
themselves under diverse shapes for fear of being known. But if Reason, Justice
and a good Cause might plead in his defense, he would not fear to appear before
the severest Judges.

He inlarges more than the Author of the foregoing Treatise upon several
particulars, relating to the first Calumny about poisoning the King (of which
Trial a particular Treatise has been published in Latin, and in several other
Languages.) Whereby it may appear from several Passages and Circumstances,
which (says the Count) Lomit to relate in this last Apology, that some very
great Persons have had a hand in it, who may be compared to certain Herbs
called Noli me tangere, having only used Dina and Walter as Instruments; which
(says he) are the same Persons who have maliciously invented this last Calumny,
tho they have endeavored to mask themselves under the general denomination of
other Persons.

This is in short what the Count answers to the first Article of the ground of
his Condemnation, with many Inlargements worth the reading; but I am of opinion
that what has been said already is sufficient to convince the impartial Reader
of the slightness of the first and main ground of Condemnation in a matter of
such moment; which way of proceeding without summoning or admitting the Parties
to make their defense, was never practiced or approved of before among
Christians as they seem to insinuate, tho it has been used among the Turks,
especially against the richer sort.

Secondly, As to their second Article grounded upon the Count's Confession, he
answers, That it was forced from him by violence, and threatenings of Death
against him and his Lady, with such Circumstances as are mentioned in the
foregoing Treatise, and that Count Rantzaw at first only desired him to write a
Petition to demand their Freedom, which the Count wrote willingly in such terms
as were most proper; but that he refused for several Weeks, as appears by the
said Treatise, to write any thing like a Confession of Crimes he knew himself
to be innocent of.

In consideration of which Force and Violence the Count declares the said
Ground to be vain and of no force, since it is notoriously evident, that no
Judge is allowed to receive or make use in any Cause or Trial, of Writings or
Declarations extorted from any Person whatever by any Force or Violence, Fear
or Imprisonment, to corroborate or color any Sentence, but such Declarations
and Writings are always rejected as of no force at least among Christians.

Thirdly, As to their third Article grounded upon a Reversion, as they call it,
of the Count; he declares likewise that it is of no Validity, since it was also
exacted from him before; at least that part of it which they do not mention, to
conceal their wicked Ends in forcing him to make the said Reversion, viz. That
the Count should transfer his whole Estate to them, consisting of Lands, Jewels
and Money, amounting to a very considerable Sum. Item, That the Countess should
renounce her just Titles conferred on her by her Father King Christian of
Blessed Memory, viz. Of Countess of Sleswick and Holstein. Item, To renounce
whatever was inserted to his advantage in the Treaty of Peace. For as to that
part which they mention, he answers that it has not been proved, nor ever will,
that he ever attempted any thing against his Majesty or the Royal Family, since
the Treaty of Peace concluded between the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark, in
which he was included; and a particular Article was inserted relating to his
Person and Family, his Friends and Servants, his Goods Movables and
Immoveables, and that the King of Denmark should restore him to the possession
of all his Estate, and make reparation for all Damages; and that both himself
and those belonging to him, as aforesaid, should have leave to live in any part
of the Kingdom of Denmark, where they should think fit, in all security,
without the least let, hinderance, or molestation: And the said Treaty was
ratified anew, and confirmed by the second and last Peace concluded between the
two Crowns, so that they had no reason to use him ill, for having formerly been
forced by their Injustices and Violences, after five Years patience and
solicitation, to engage himself against them, which was the only thing Count
Rantzaw could lay to his charge, when he asked him the Reasons of his and his
Lady's Imprisonment; which Question the said Rantzaw accounted a new Crime,
threatening him with Death in case he did persist in disputing this matter.

He does further alledg as an Argument of the nullity of the said Reversion,
that the Promise made to him in the same had not been performed, viz.

First, That all his Papers and Writings which they had seized, should be
restored to him without Exception, which was not performed; but on the
contrary, after they were released out of their Prison at Bornholm, and still
carefully guarded by Soldiers, and after their having written and signed the
said Reversion, the King caused a Trunk full of Letters and Papers of
consequence to be taken from him, out of which he picked all those which were
of most consequence to them and their Family, which he has never restored,
according to his promise inserted in the said Reversion.

Secondly, The said Reversion did contain, that immediately upon the writing
and signing of the same, they should be put at Liberty, but private Orders were
given to the Governor to the contrary, for they were still kept under a strong
guard of Musketeers after it as well as before: Moreover after their arrival at
Copenhaguen they remained under the same Confinement until they had also forced
them to sign whatever they pleased about the alteration of the Date and Place
of the said Reversion, as also about the Oath of Fealty. It is evident that
pacta sunt reciproca, and that the Covenants being broken on one side, in
Equity the other is no longer obliged.

He thinks it very preposterous, that they could persuade themselves that a
private Person as he was could change or alter the least thing contained in a
public Treaty of Peace between two Kings. Item, That he or his Lady could
alienate that which Nature had produced and ordered, viz. The Titles of Counts
and Countesses of Sleswick and Holstein, belonging to his Lady and her
Posterity by her Birth, as Daughter to a great King by a lawful Marriage, as
the Author of the said Treatise declares, and the Count relates more at large
in this Apology; and that hers as well as the King's Father had granted to all
his Children of this Marriage, the said Titles and Arms, as it appears by
diverse Letters from his Chancery, which he caused to be written to them on
several occasions, which Settlements no Monarchs on Earth can reasonably alter
or annul.

The Count insists largely on the force that has been used to compel him to
sign the said Reversion. As,

1. The Resolution the Court had taken to put him and his Lady to Death in case
of a refusal, which Count Rantzaw had formerly openly declared unto him, and
that in a Passion too, at a time in which Men commonly speak the truth, which
design was also clearly enough intimated to him by the Governor.

2. The unheard of Cruelties the first Governor had used toward them, which
the Count relates in the same manner, as has been declared by the Author of the
foregoing Treatise, but more at large; and he reflects particularly upon that
Barbarous and Unchristian-like Passage, in refusing to send a Minister to the
Countess who was dangerously ill, to administer the Sacraments to her, and to
comfort her. Which Inhumanity Count Vlfeld complaining of to Count Rantzaw,
when he was sent to them, thinking it proceeded barely from the Governor's
Natural Cruelty, he assured him that it was done by a particular Order from the
Court.

He inlarges very much upon the illegality of the said Reversion, and concludes
at last, That no Judges hearing the Character of Christians or of honest Men,
could justly ground any Sentence upon such forced Writings, all the Laws of
Christianity being repugnant thereunto, because it is very easy for those who
have the power and force in hand, to imprison any Person, and afterward to
compel him by Violence, Rigor and ill Usage to sign any Writing whatever, and
to give it the Title of Reversion, or any other they think most proper for
their purpose.

He also reflects upon their Baseness and Trick to blind the World, by forcing
them to change the date and place of the said Reversion when they were brought
to Copenhaguen, and to acknowledge that they were at Liberty, and several other
things which they thought fit to insert therein: Whereas they were forced the
first time to write it in their hard Prison at Burnholm, and afterward to
write it over again at Copenhaguen, being still Prisoners under a strong Guard
in Count Rantzaw's House, who often pointing to them used to tell him, Behold
your ancient Keepers, who are ready to carry you back to Bornholm if you make
the least scruple to write and sign what is required of you. All which he does
protest before the Eternal God to be true.

Fourthly, As to the fourth Article on which the Judges ground their Sentence,
alleging that since he had taken an Oath of Fealty to his Majesty and to his
Royal Family, notwithstanding which he has since conspired both against him and
his Crown, the said Crime made him guilty of High Treason both before God and
Men.

To this he answers as before, That they can prove no such thing against him,
and that it is a mere fiction, in order to ruin him.

Secondly, He alleges the Invalidity of the said Writing as well as of the two
former, because they were all forced from him, when he was a close Prisoner
under a strong Guard, Count Rantzaw threatening him as aforesaid, in case he
made any scruple to sign; adding and protesting further before God, That he
signed the said Papers absolutely against his Will, and without being at
liberty, which if he had been, and free to dispose of himself, he would never
have sworn Allegiance to Frederick, since he had already taken the said Oath to
serve the Crown of Sweden, from which he could not depart to pay Homage to any
other Prince; which alone would have been sufficient to hinder him from so
doing, besides that he had no reason to serve a Prince who had kept and used
him like a Slave, tho he was born Free, and of free Parents. Moreover that
Oaths extorted from any Persons can never be pleasing to, nor binding before
God, but are void of themselves; neither Divine nor human Laws allowing Oaths,
Reversions, Bonds, or other obligatory Writings procured by force and violence
from any Persons, being under Confinement, or forced thereunto against their
Wills. And if at any tiem any Judge be so wicked, and has so little Conscience
as to receive and admit such Proofs, and to ground a Sentence thereupon, it is
evident that he does it either out of Passion or Interest.

He does acknowledge himself a Subject to the Crown of Sweden, and therefore
hopes that Crown will protect him as a Vassal, and upon the account of the
Article inserted in the Treaty of Peace in favor of him, which cannot be
annihilated by violence, and by forcing him to renounce the same in writing,
especially since these hardships are put upon him, as his Enemies pretend, in
private, tho not publicly for his having served the said Crown.

This is an Abstract of what the Count alleges in his own defense against
their unjust and ill-grounded Sentence, which he inlarges with many
considerable things which perhaps might give the Reader more satisfaction; but
considering the brevity to which we confine our selves, this much may suffice
to show his Innocence and the illegality of the said Sentence.

Toward the Conclusion he examines and bewails the Hardships and Grievances
put upon his dear Lady, without being any ways guilty, and how ill she was used
and rewarded in England by a Party whom out of Tenderness and Compassion they
had assisted with Money and Jewels in the time of their Distress and Necessity.
When Count Vifeld was solicitous with Count Rantzaw in his Prison, to know the
reason why they were robbed and treated so barbarously, desiring to be brought
to a public Trial to be judged according to the Laws of the Kingdom, he only
answered with another Question, asking him whether he did not remember that he
had served the Crown of Sweden in the last Wars? To which he gave him an
immediate Answer which would have satisfied an impartial Man. But when he
desired to know what his Lady had done to be treated with the same rigor, and
robbed of all her Jewels, Money, Goods, etc. the said Rantzaw being at a loss,
replied in great Passion, that in case he did continue to criticize and to
dispute thus, he would assure them that his business would be soon done,
threatening him again with Death: By which it appears that they could lay
nothing to her Charge, and that she only suffered upon her Husband's account;
how justly let others judge. He proceeds further to satisfy the World, how ill
he is rewarded for the great Service he did the King in causing him to be
elected, which Election he relates at large in the same manner as it is
mentioned in his Life; how he alone stood up for him against a powerful Party,
and maintained that they ought to elect him, notwithstanding all the reasons
they urged for his Exclusion, insomuch that he was the chief instrument to
raise him to the Throne; moreover that he was the first Person that brought him
the public News thereof in the Name of the two Kingdoms, and gave him the
Titles of King and Majesty, as also that he placed the Crown upon his Head with
the Bishops before the Altar of the Cathedral Church at Copenhaguen. He adds
that he may freely and safely affirm, That had it not been for him, Frederick
had never been King, which he can prove with such manifest Evidence, that were
the King acquainted therewith, he would be amazed at what passed at his
Election, and that it wanted but little that another was not elected in his
Place.

Before I make an end of what relates to Count Vlfeld's Person, it will be
proper to instance one Passage, by which it will appear that his Enemies hatred
and animosities against him, were not extinguished even by his Death. They sent
several Persons in search of his Grave, in order to unbury him and to triumph
over his Body, as they had already done over his Effigies at Copenhaguen: But
their Emissaries were so narrowly watched by the poor Count's Sons, that few of
them came back to give an account of their Commission, insomuch that at last
they were discouraged from sending any more, besides that they found it was
impossible to find him out; for as soon as he died upon the Rhine, as the
Author of his Life relates, the Persons to whom he did commit the care of his
Body, buried him in the nearest landing Place, which his Sons being acquainted
with, they repaired thither with speed, foreseeing their Enemies would send in
search of him, and desired the Bishop of the place to cause him to be removed,
by reason that being a Protestant it was not fit he should lie among Roman
Catholics, that place being only appointed for such; upon which account this
request was granted, and they together with their Father's ancient and faithful
Servants, being armed, removed him on Horseback, and buried him in a place not
publicly known, and thereby deceived the expectation of their Enemies. They
also expected to have found their Father's remaining Treasure consisting of
Jewels sewed up in his Buff-Coat, but he was rifl'd before their Arrival, and
they could never receive the least satisfaction about it, but were obliged to
content themselves with the bare Buff-Coat, and with the loss of the Jewels, as
well as of their paternal Estate. Some Papers were found about him written in
Ciphers, which one of his Sons thought might be about some Secret he had often
told him he would communicate to him before his Death; which he fancied might
be relating to the Philosopher's Stone about the transmutation or rather
separation of Metals, the rather because he found he had a Furnace in a private
Chamber, where no Body was admitted, and that notwithstanding the vast Sums his
Enemies had taken from him, he never was in want, but provided very handsomely
for his Children abroad.

Secondly, As to the second part of this Supplement relating to Doctor Otho
Sperling, who descended from a good Family at Hamburg, famed particularly for
Men of Parts and extraordinary Learning:

He married a Lady of the Noble Family of the Schwendys, descended from the
great General and Statesman, Lazarus Schwendy, so much celebrated in History,
especially in that of Hungary, in whom it may be said that Mars and the Muses
had made a strict alliance, he being besides his Martial Accomplishments a
person of eminent Learning, as it partly appears by his writings as yet extant,
and particularly by his Epistles ad Cam^^ (...) and others.

This great Virtue and Learning of his Ancestors on both sides, Dr. Sperling
did endeavor to imitate, in which he proved very successful, and was one of
the most learned Men of his Age, particularly in Physic and the study of
Nature, about which he held Correspondencies in several parts. Moreover he was
a Man of extraordinary Integrity and Virtue, of admirable Morals, sweet and
agreeable in Conversation, which Qualities gained him the hearts of all
virtuous Persons, and particularly that of Count Vlfeld, whom he became
acquainted with in his Travels, (which were very considerable in several parts)
and by degrees did contract the strictest Friendship with him that could be
expected from two Hearts equally addicted to Virtue and Knowledge. The Count was
so much taken with his eminent Qualities and great Understanding, that he took
him for his Companion in several Embassies, and particularly into England, in
King Charles the I's time, to whom the said Count brought Ammunition, etc. on
the behalf of the King his Master; at which time these two Persons were brought
into an eminent danger and had an extraordinary Deliverance, being taken and
imprisoned by the Parliamentarians, who passed a Sentence of Death upon them as
Friends to their Enemy, for which they had prepared themselves with great
Courage against the next Morning, when unexpectedly and by a singular
Providence the King's Party attacked them in the Night, took the House in which
they were kept Prisoners and rescued them.

This great familiarity and friendship between the Count and Dr. Sperling,
involved the last in the unjust Persecutions of the other; being tormented by
wicked Men, who naturally have an antipathy to Virtue; such as Fortune by God's
permission raises against his Children to try their Constancy. This these two
worthy Persons, together with the Countess Eleonora, did sufficiently
experience, and therefore the Count's Enemies never failed to involve Dr.
Sperling in all his Concerns, and in all the Calumnies they raised against him.
So that in the first Calumny about poisoning the King, they accused him of
having provided the Poison, as being then the King's Physician, of which
Calumny he was then as well as the Count publicly cleared, and the Accusers
punished, as it is related in the foregoing Treatise. And tho he was not
mentioned in the last Calumny and Sentence of Treason published against the
Count, yet his Enemies in order to justify their Treachery and Baseness,
prevailed with the King of Denmark in a Letter to the King of Sweden, to accuse
him of having kept a Correspondence with the Count. In fine, after they were
firmly resolved utterly to destroy the Count, and had imprisoned the innocent
Countess, the only remaining Person they were jealous of, and whom they thought
capable to oppose their wicked Designs, by assisting the Count with his Advice,
and to discover their Villainy, was Dr. Sperling. For which reason, they put
their Heads together to consider how to secure and ruin him and his Family;
but whereas they were sensible that they could not obtain their End by the
means of Justice, they were obliged to have recourse to Tricks and Treachery,
the same means they had used before toward the Count and Countess, his Friends.

In order hereunto they suborned a Villain and Traitor, one Hagedorn, who put
their Project in execution Judas like, in the manner following. He came to the
Doctor as a Stranger, pretending to have a singular Respect and Esteem for his
great skill in Physic, and desired him to visit and give his Advice to a
certain Friend of his, whom he pretended to be ill of a secret Disease. This
good Man dreading no Surprise went along with him in a Coach to visit his said
Patient: On their return, coming by a certain place where the said Hagedorn had
placed another Ruffian like himself, pretending to meet him accidentally, he
told the Doctor pointing to him, That that Gentleman had been a great Traveller
in the Indies and other remote Parts, and that he had an extraordinary knowledge
of many curious things, asking him, Whether he would allow him to take him into
the Coach. Dr. Sperling, who he knew delighted to discourse with Persons of
that Character, easily consented thereunto. Soon after his coming into the
Coach they drew up the Glasses, the Weather being very rainy and windy;
whereupon he perceived that he was betrayed and a Prisoner, and he endeavoring
to call People to his assistance, tho in vain, by reason of the swiftness of
the motion and the great noise the Coach and the Wind made, they gagged him, in
so much that he was half choked, and in this manner carried him to Gluckstat,
and from thence to Copenhaguen. In the mean time the good City of Hamburg where
Dr. Sperling was very much beloved, to show their abhorrence of this Villainous
Action, caused the Bell of Infamy to be rung, to give all the People notice
thereof, and to register the said Hagedorn in their City-Book as a Traitor.
After this the Doctor's Effects in Denmark (which were very considerable) were
all confiscated without any cause, and part thereof given to the said Hagedorn
as a Reward for his Treachery.

The King of Sweden was graciously pleased to take Dr. Sperling's part, he
being his Subject and under his Protection, as a Member of the Chapter of
Hamburg, and did highly resent and complain of this illegal Action, as well to
the King of Denmark, as to other Princes, and particularly to the King of
England who was Guarantee of the Treaty of Peace between the two Northern
Crowns: And in answer to the King of Denmark's Letter to him, did resute the
weak grounds on which the said King endeavored to justify the said Action; one
of which was, That Doctor Sperling had formerly been in his Service as his
Physician, and pretending that he still was so, because he had not delivered up
his Commission; answering, That his Letter of Demission (which he had obtained
on honorable Terms, at his Request, after the Trial of the poisoning business)
was a sufficient Discharge from any farther obligation or subjection to the
King of Denmark; so that the case was not what he had been, but under whose
Sovereignty, Jurisdiction and Protection he was when he was carried away from
Hamburg, which is a free Imperial City: in which case the King of Denmark was
obliged to act according to Jus Gentium, to the end that the Sovereignty of the
Empire, and the Jus Superioritatis of the Duchy of Bremen, to which the
Chapter of Hamburg does belong, might not be violated. And that since he found
by the King of Denmark's Letter that the greatest and only Crime laid to Doctor
Sperling's Charge, was his having kept a secret Correspondence above all others
with Count Vlfeld, he desired on that account to have a particular and exact
relation of all the particulars of the Crimes imputed to both, without which he
could not pass a true Judgment on the nature of this dangerous Correspondence
laid to Doctor Sperling's Charge. He concludes with this considence, that the
King of Denmark will be pleased to suspend all farther Proceedings against the
said Doctor, and to consider his Majesty's Reasons in both his Letters, and to
put the Doctor at Liberty again, and send him back into that part of the Empire
from whence he was taken, his Majesty promising upon his Royal Word, That in
case any one has any thing to urge against the said Doctor, and shall propose
it in competenti foro, he will cause Justice to be administered without any
regard to any Person whatever.

The King of Sweden received no satisfaction to this Letter (of which I have a
Copy by me, from which I have taken this Abstract.) Doctor Sperling remained
still a close Prisoner, neither was the matter of Fact, of the pretended Crimes
alleged against him and Count Vlfeld, clearly and circumstantially
communicated to him, that his Majesty might be able to judge of it; the Danes
dreading the same confusion they had formerly drawn upon themselves, when they
accused the said Count at the Court of Sweden, as it is related in the
foregoing Treatise: which way of proceeding may chance at some time or other to
kindle a War between the two Crowns, when his Majesty of Sweden (who was then a
Minor, and who is a pious Prince, loving Justice and hating Oppression) comes
to inspect into the said Matter, not only because Doctor Sperling as well as
Count Vlfeld were under his Protection, but also because, as I am credibly
informed, a particular Agreement was made between the two Crowns, That in case
any Nobleman of Denmark has a just Exception to make to the said King's
Sentence against him, he may appeal to the King of Sweden.

Doctor Sperling's Children finding no Redress by their Applications in Sweden
and in England, by reason of the secret Intrigues of the Court of Denmark,
presented most humble Petitions to Frederick, and after his Death to the
present King Christian, and also made use of the Intercession of several other
Persons of Note: but nothing could prevail while the late Queen Mother to the
present King was alive, as probably it might have done for him as well as for
the Countess of Vlfeld, who was released soon after her Death, which affords no
small scope of Contemplation, which I leave to the ingenious Reader's
Consideration.

Thus this good and innocent Gentleman was forced to end his Days in a Prison,
after Seventeen Years imprisonment, which he bore with great Courage and
Patience like a Christian Soldier triumphing over his Enemies, when they
thought they had vanquished him. He died in the Eightieth Year of his Age,
having spent the time of his Confinement as well as his former Days in Study
and Contemplation; and he told a Friend of his in a Letter, That he had
received greater Illuminations in Natural things, during his said Confinement,
than while he lived in the World: I have also seen a Manuscript of his written
in Ciphers, which he left to his said Friend, which I partly know to be a piece
of great moment.

During all the time of his Imprisonment, and many Years after it, his eldest
Son, who is a Doctor in Law, and a Man of universal Learning, lived with his
Sisters at Hamburg, very handsomely upon the Means that were left them, (which
their Enemies had not been able to reach) even beyond what could be expected
from Persons under their Circumstances and Affliction, having suffered so great
a Loss, and being deprived of a Head so capable to improve their Estate, till
at last some difference occurring between him and the Senate of Hamburg, on the
account of some words he had uttered out of zeal to a Client of his abroad, in
a Cause he had depending before the said Senate; which being displeased
thereat, confined and fined him: which Affront being highly resented by him, he
resolved to secure himself from receiving the like for the future; in order
whereunto he thought fit to implore the Protection of some Prince, able to keep
them in awe, and not having the same interest or acquaintance in Sweden (to
which King it seemed most reasonable he should make his application as being
his Father's Sovereign) as he had in Denmark, where he had been formerly about
his Father's Affairs, he applied himself to that Court, where by the means and
interest of an old Acquaintance of his, a Danish Minister, and a great
Politician, he obtained the Commission and Character of Counselor to this
present King of Denmark, under which Character he continued some Years at
Hamburg without any disturbance, till at last having made greater interest yet
with the said King, he resolved to live at Copenhaguen, where he is also
Professor of Greek, and of History, in which he does excel and has few Equals,
as well as in Antiquities, and in the knowledge of Medals.

Thus much in relation to Dr. Sperling may suffice at present.

Thirdly, As to the third intended part of this Treatise relating to the
imprisoned Countess of Vlfeld, I shall acquaint you in few words, that soon
after the late Queen Mother's Death she was released out of her Prison at
Copenhaguen, but is still confined in the Isle of Laland, where she must be
contented to live upon a small Revenue, instead of the vast Estate that has
been violently taken from her and hers.

This great Heroin, Daughter of a great King, by a lawful Marriage, may justly
be admired, and serve as an Example to the World for her Courage and Constancy
amidst the greatest of Afflictions and Persecutions, having besides her first
barbarous Imprisonment of seventeen Months undergone another at least of twenty
four Years continuance at Copenhaguen: which may move the Compassion of all
good Christians, and particularly of Christian Princes, to assist her and the
Posterity of Dr. Sperling, some of which have never engaged themselves in
Denmark. The Countess has outlived her greatest Enemies, which she could never
have done had she not had a Spirit above the common reach, and a knowledge
superior to most of her Sex. I have spoken with some, who have seen her since
her being put at liberty, who do strangely admire her great Understanding and
Contempt of the World. Sic Stat virtus repulsae nescia sordidae
Intaminatis fulget honoribus.
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae.


FINIS.

