THE Royal Progress; OR, A DIARY OF THE King's Journey, From His MAJESTY's
setting out from Kensington, till His return.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON: Printed, and sold by J. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. 1695.

THE Royal Progress, etc.
THE Royal Progress being resolved on, and Preparations made accordingly, and
the Gaurds sent away before to lie on the Road, the King left Kensington on
Thursday the Seventeenth of October, 1695. and arrived at Newmarket the same
Evening; where the Eighteenth at Night happened a Fire, which began in a
Stable, but was soon extinguished, and the Damage it did was very
inconsiderable. Several Gentlemen of these Parts came to wait on his Majesty,
and to welcome him Home and to this Place, and then took occasion to
Congratulate his Majesty on his taking the City and strong Castle of Namur: The
next Day was spent in Hunting, with which his Majesty was extremely diverted.
On Sunday, being the Twentieth, the principal Members of the University of
Cambridge attended his Majesty here, viz. at Newmarket, and the Vice Chancellor
made a short Congratulatory Speech upon his Majesty's happy Success Abroad, and
his safe Return: And his Majesty, in answer to it, was graciously pleased to
give them great Assurances of his Royal Favor and Protection; after which they
all had the honor to kiss his Majesty's Hand.

The next Moning, being the Twenty first, the King parted from hence, and
arrived the same Evening at Althrop, in Northamptonshire, being attended by
diverse of the Nobility, and the principal Persons of the Country. This is a
noble Seat belonging to the Earl of Sunderland, an ancient Family, the Spencers
having long possessed it; here his Majesty staid a whole Week: The concourse of
Nobility, and Gentry, and chief Inhabitants of Northampton (which is near this
Place) is very great. The King took the Diversion of the Rural Sports two or
three of the first Days, and on Thursday the 24th. his Majesty dined with the
Earl of Northampton at Castle-Ashby, a very fine House in the same County; and
the next, being the 25th. the King did the Earl of Montague the Honor to dine
with him at Boughton, a stately and magnificent Pile of Building: Here his
Majesty was splendidly Entertained, and was attended with a great Number of the
Nobility and Gentry of this County, whom his Majesty received very kindly, and
told them, Their County was, in his Opinion, the finest in England, and,
perhaps, in the whole World; that nothing made a Gentleman look like a
Gentleman, but living like one. His Majesty thanked them for their good
Company; and, indeed, he had a great deal, for there was hardly any Body of
Note that did not come upon this Occasion; and as my Lord Montague was showing
his Majesty his House, Painting, Carving, etc. the King told my Lord, 'Twas not
good for One to set One's Heart on any of them, for neither He nor his Lordship
should be there Forty Years hence to see them.

The 28th. his Majesty left Althorp, and came in the Evening to Stamford; but
went (though out of his way) to see Burghly House, the Seat and constant
Residence of the Earl of Exeter, who was come away to London; which his Majesty
being informed of, was pleased to ask, if he had carried his House with him?
answer was made no; Then, says the King, I Will go and see it; which his Majesty
did twice, that night and the next morning, being extremely satisfied with it:
It Is a noble Pile of Stone Building, built indeed about a hundred Years since
by William Lord Burghley, but mightily adorned and beautified by the present
Earl of Exeter, who lives very Great and Nobly when there, like himself, and
like an English Nobleman; for loftiness of Rooms, great variety of Pictures,
and fine Painting and Carving, done by the greatest Masters of Italy, brought
thence by his Lordship, maintained and liberally rewarded, for Terrasses,
Conduits, Fish Ponds, Fountains, etc. It may vie with, nay, is thought the best
in England. The Painting and Carving are so curious, that some very great
Travelers, and Men of exquisite Judgment, have affirmed they have met with
nothing either in Italy or in France that exceeds them. The Park is improved,
by planting a multitude of Walks of Ash, Elm, Chestnut, and several other sorts
of Trees. Through this Park passes the old Roman Way, mentioned by many
Authors, and so on to Walcote, above Berneck. At Wothorpe, a little distance
from this the Earl of Exeter has another handsome Seat, with a little Park
walled about: It was built by Thomas Cecil, Earl of Exeter, and though not very
small (for it was large enough to hold the late Duke of Buckingham and his
Family for some Years) yet so mean did it seem, in comparison with the former,
that its Pounder pleasantly said, He built it only to retire to out of the
Dust, while his great House of Burghley was a sweeping.

At Stamford the Mayor and Aldermen, attended with their two Burgesses, waited
on the King, and had the honor to kiss his Majesty's Hand, and of welcoming
him into those Parts, with all possible Demonstrations of Joy, by ringing of
Bells, making of Bonfires, and setting up of Illuminations throughout the whole
Town.

The 29th. the King dined at Sir John Brownlow's at Bilton near Grantham, and
came that Night to Lincoln, being attended by a mighty concourse of People.

The 30th. in the Morning his Majesty left this Town, and went to Welbeck,
having been met by the Duke of Newcastle Seven Miles off, at Dunham-Ferry, the
Entrance into this County. The 31st. being the last Day of October, the King
dined with his Grace the Duke of Newcastle at Welbeck, after having received
the Diversion of Hunting in the Forest of Shirewood, where are an infinite
Number of Deer, and Branchy-headed Stags; his Majesty gave order for the
filling up the Saw-Pits there, which are dangerous to Huntsmen. Welbeck-Abbey
lies on the North-West side of this County of Nottingham, about a Mile and a
half from Workensop, a Town famous for the abundance of Liquorice planted and
cultivated there. Welbeck Abbey is a very noble Building, seated in the lowest
part of a fine Park, surrounded with Trees of excellent Timber, and was the
Seat of William and Henry, late (and also is of the present) Duke of Newcastle.

November 1st. his Majesty dined at the Earl of Kingston's, and was nobly
entertained.

November 2d. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of York, in their Formalities, waited
on the King that Morning at Welbeck Abbey, being introduced by the Duke of
Newcastle; the Recorder made a Speech to his Majesty, who was pleased to confer
the Honor of Knighthood upon the Lord Mayor, Gilbert Metcalf Esquire. In the
Evening the Lord-Archbishop of York, with his Clergy, attended his Majesty, and
congratulated his happy Success and safe Return, expressed their Gratitude for
his Majesty's Care of the Church, who had showed himself truly the Defender of
the Faith; gave his Majesty great Assurance of their Zeal, and Loyalty to his
Interests, and Government; prayed for all Blessings to attend his Royal Person,
and recommended Themselves to his Royal Protection; which his Majesty was
pleased to assure them of, as also of his good Grace, and Favor.

The Corporations of Newark and East-Retford attended the King, and kissed his
Majesty's Hand: The Recorder of each Place congratulated his Majesty's glorious
Success at Namur, and safe Return to England, and gave the King a most hearty
Welcome in these Parts; all which his Majesty took very kindly from them.

November 3d. The King left Welbeck in the Afternoon, and came in the Evening
to the Earl of Stamford's House at Brodgate, where his Majesty lay that Night.

November 4th. About Nine this Night the King came to Warwick Castle to my Lord
Brooks, being received with great Acclamations, ringing of Bells,
Illuminations, Fireworks, and other Expressions of Joy and Respect.

The Mayor and Aldermen of Warwick met his Majesty at the Towns-end, and
attended his Coach to the Castle, where the King was met Splendidly, and
manificently Entertained by my Noble Lord Brooks; who also provided a Bowl of
Punch for the Towns-People, of One hundred and twenty Gallons, made in a Vessel
called Guy Earl of Warwick's Pot. Great were the Acclamations of the People
here; Godsave King William; and, long live King William, etc.

November 5th. The King left Warwick in the morning, being attended by my Lord
Brook, several Gentlemen of the County, and the Magistrates, out of the Town,
and some part of the way. The King dined with my Lord Duke of Shrewsbury at
Eyfort, and in the Evening came to Burford, where his Majesty staid till the
Eighth; when the King left that Place, and arrived in the Evening at Woodstock,
having in his way seen Cornbury-House.

And on the 9th. in the Morning his Majesty came to Oxford, being met at some
distance from thence by his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Chancellor of the
University, and the Vice Chancellor and the Doctors in their Habits: As also by
the Magistrates of the City in their Formalities; and the Complements of both
being made to his Majesty, by the Vice Chancellor for the one, and by the
Recorder for the other, they proceeded on Horseback before his Majesty's Coach
to the Theater, where a splendid Entertainment was provided, with great variety
of excellent Music; The Conduit of the City running all the while with Wine.
The Thanks of the University were returned to his Majesty, for this Royal
Favor and Honor, in a very Elegant Latin Oration; And the Duke of Ormond,
Chancellor of this University, presented the King, on his Knees, a large Bible
in English, a large Common Prayer Book, and the Cuts of the University, all
richly Bound, and Printed in Folio, at the Theater; with a Pair of Gold-Fringe
Gloves.

After Dinner the Vice Chancellor, Noble Men, and Gentlemen present, had the
Honor to kiss his Majesty's Hand, and attended the King to his Coach, who was
pleased to tell them, That this was a Visit of Kindness, not Curiosity; And
therefore He did not go to see the Colleges, having seen the whole University
before.

And so, after a short stay, his Majesty went on, and arrived at Windsor about
Seven in the Evening, on the Ninth Instant.

The King dined with my Lord Godolphin at Cranborn-House on Sunday the Tenth
Instant, and held a Council at Windsor in the Evening.

His Majesty honored Sir Stephen Fox with his Royal Company at Dinner on the
Eleventh, being Monday, at Chiswick, and returned in the Evening to his Royal
Residence at Kensington.

Having completed his Royal Progress in Six and twenty Days, to his entire
Satisfaction, having been blessed with extraordinary Weather, with a
Continuation beyond what was to be expected from the Season; and was received
every where, either as his Majesty passed, or staid, with hearty English
Demonstrations of Respect, Zeal, Affection, and Fidelity.

The Four Elements conspired to make the King's Journey Pleasant and
Prosperous; and never did his Majesty see so much real English Greatness,
visible in the Magnificent Entertainments every where provided for Him, far
exceeding what our Neighbour-Nations ever did, when ever their Monarchs
vouchsafed them the Honor of a Visit; and, indeed, thus much may be said now,
and without the the least Tincture of Flattery, That this Progress will have
happy and glorious Effects, by engaging the Hearts of all those of His
Majesty's Subjects, who before had only heard what great Things the King had
done for them, and all Europe, but now had the Honor and Happiness to see that
excellent Prince, that was destined by Heaven to make this Renow'd Kingdom of
England flourish, beyond what it ever did in ancient Times; and to retrieve her
Reputation, and make her Fame as lasting as Time it self; and, to crown all, to
establish Us in an Honorable and Durable Peace.

FINIS.
There is lately Published,
ANgliae Tutamen: Or, the Safety Engand. Being an Account of the Banks,
Lotteries. Mines, Diving, Draining, Lifting, and other Engines, and many
pernicious Projects now on foot; tending to the Destruction of Trade and
Commerce, and the Impoverishing this Realm. With Reflections thereon.

Solon Secundus: Or, some Defects in the English Laws; with their proper
Remedies.

Both sold by J. Whitlocck, near Sationers-Hall.
