Heavenly - mindedness, AND Earthly-mindedness.

In Two PARTS.

With an APPENDIX Concerning Laying hold on Eternal life.

By JOHN ROW.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. MDCLXXII.

To the READER.
IT is the chief point of Wisdom, to know what is true happiness: If we place
happiness in that which is not happiness, we shall be deceived so much the more
at last. The things of this world cannot be happiness to us, because the soul
must live beyond them: when the soul is gone out of the body, it sees it self
incircled with broad and vast ^^ternity: and when it is in its separate state,
it meets with none of those sensible Objects, which it endavoured to suck
contentment from, whilst it lived in the body: at what a loss then must that
soul be for happiness, who knew no other happiness, but what was to be taken in
from sensible things?

The design of this small Tract is to put us upon the contemplation of that
which must be happiness to us at last. It is no difficult thing for us to come
in our thoughts, to the end of all those things which now we take comfort in:
Life it self, and all the comforts of it, must shortly have an end. Now since
all these things must have an end, a short and speedy end, it may not seem
unreasonable for us to consider what the next state of things is like to be,
and what it is that must make us happy at last. 2 Cor. 4.18.
The things that are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal. The mind of man is not quieted (neither indeed can it be) until it
meets with something that will be happiness to it; and it never meets with
happiness, until it sindes all the good it would have, and also knows it shall
have that good always, without diminution, intermission or cessation. God alone
is an infinite and an eternal good. Nothing can be happiness to the reasonable
creature, but to enjoy him as the chief good, and to acquiesce in him as its
last and; and then is the mind quieted, when it comes to six and rest in him.
The scope of the whole Discourse is, to gather in our souls from sensible
things unto God, and to six them in the contemplation of that which must be our
happiness at last. That which was mainly designed in the first Part, which
concerns Heavenly-mindedness, was to make some Essay how we might be brought to
some suitableness and conformity to the life of Heaven, and to show (so far as
we could) how we might be led into the beginnings of that life here on earth:
And that is the true reason, why that which concerns that Matter is more
insisted on, and drawn out to a greater enlargement then might seem
preportionable to the rest of the Discourse. The other Part, which concerns
Earthly-mindedness, was not to be omitted, because it lies so full in the Text;
and too sad experience teaches, that we need not more to be stirred up to the
desire and love of eternal things, then we do need to be warned against the
love of this World, which is the great Rock upon which many Professors split
their Profession; and indeed, the great obstacle which keeps them off from the
pursuit of eternal things. All that I shall add more, is, that if Divine Grace
help us to get up a little into the Spirit of the future life, I am persuaded
we shall find it the sweetest frame of spirit whilst we live, and to be sure,
most comfortable to us when we come to dye. I doubt not, but upon experience
this will be found true, that the firm and steadfast belief, the desire and
expectation of eternal things, is much more sweet then the highest enjoyment of
temporal things: And it will be no grief of heart to us when we come to dye,
that we have been a little acquainted with, and in some sort accustomed unto
that life here on earth, which must be our life when we enter into the other
world, and must continue to be so unto Eternity.

THere is newly printed a Book, entitled, The worm that dies not: Or,
Hell Torments in the certainty and eternity of them; plainly discovered in
several Sermons preached on Mark 9.48. by that painful and laborious Minister
of the Gospel, William Strong: published by Dr. Thomas Manton, and Mr. Jo.
Row. Sold by Fran. Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet.

The first part, Concerning Heavenly-Mindedness.
Colos. Chap. 3. Verse. 1, 2. Verse. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God.

Verse. 2. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth.


THe scope of the Apostle in the whole context, is to press us to the great
Duty of Heavenly-mindedness. Hic Paulus Colossenses hortatur ad meditationem
caelestis vitae. Calv. in Loc.
Calvin observes, the Apostle does here exhort us to the meditation on of the
Heavenly life. We find it very difficult for us to get up our hearts into
Heaven: we are most prone to stick in this earth, and to rise no higher in our
thoughts and affections then visible things; and therefore there is great need
that this duty of Heavenly-mindedness should be pressed upon us. Now the
Apostle propounds his exhortation, whereby he presses us to the Duty of
Heavenly-mindedness two manner of ways.

1. Affirmatively. 2. Negatively.
I. Affirmatively, in two expressions.

1. Seek those things which are above, in the first Verse.

2. Set your affections on things that are above, Verbum cogitandi magis
exprimit assiduitatem studii, and vehementiam, ac si diceret, sit haec tota
vestra meditatio, huc ingenuum, huc animum applicate. Calvin.
in the second Verse. The Apostle aims at one and the same thing in both
expressions. Seek those things that are above: Set your affections on things
that are above: All that the Apostle aims at in both is this, that he would
have us to be Heavenly-minded; only to enforce the exhortation the more, he
repeats and doubles it; and the variation of the phrase adds some more weight
to the exhortation: we must not only seek, but set our affections upon the
things which are above. It is not enough for us to seek the things that are
above in any manner, or after any sort, in a careless indifferent way; but we
must set our affections upon these things; that is, our hearts must be taken up
in them, these must be the great things that must take up our souls.

II. The Apostle having propounded this exhortation affirmatively, he comes to
propound it negatively, at the latter end of the second Verse: Not on things
which are upon the earth: Set your affections on things above, not on things on
the earth. So that as the Apostles scope is to press us to Heavenly-mindedness,
so his design also is to press us to a holy contempt of this world, and to
take us off from an inordinate minding of earthly things. The Spirit of God
foresaw how prone our hearts were to be taken up with this world, and with
earthly things; and therefore he is not content to press us to the duty of
Heavenly-mindedness in general, but gives us an express and particular caution
against the love of the things of this world: Set your affections on things
above, not on things on the earth. Now then this being the Apostles scope to
press us to Heavenly-mindedness; and to take us from earthly-mindedness; there
are several Motives he uses in the context, to enforce these things upon us.

The first Motive or Argument the Apostle uses to press this duty of
Heavenly-mindedness, is taken from the consideration of our fellowship or
communition with Christ: If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above. A Believer is risen with Christ, and therefore he ought to
seek the things which are above. Although Believers have not as yet attained to
glory in their own persons, yet they have attained it in the person of their
Head: A Believer is risen in Christ, ascended in Christ, glorified in Christ
his Head. Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, Glorification, is a pledge and an
earnest of his Resurrection, of his Ascension, of his Glorification: Therefore
eternal life and glory being secure to us in Christ, and we having a right and
title to it in our Head, it becomes us to set our hearts on that which is our
proper inheritance. We are risen with Christ, that is, in Christ our Head; we
have a right and title to Heaven and Glory: therefore Heaven and Glory being
secure to us in Christ our Head, who has taken possession of it in our name
and stead, we ought to set our hearts upon that which is our great and proper
inheritance. That is the first Motive, the consideration of our fellowship and
communion with Christ; we are risen with Christ. A Believer has glory already
given him in his Head, he is destinated unto glory, and this his Head has
already taken possession of in his Name and stead.

The second Motive to press us to Heavenly-mindedness, and to take us off from
earthly-mindedness, is taken from the consideration of our present state. A
Believer's present state is a dead state: Ye are dead, says he, verse the
third. Seek the things that are above, set your affections on things that are
above; for ye are dead. Ye are dead; that is, dead to the world, dead as to any
earthly happiness: Your happiness lies not in the rode of this world. Ye are
dead; that is, ye are like to dead men: though you have a life in this world,
yet the life you have in this world as men (not to speak of your life as you
are Saints) it is but a dead kind of life; though you may have some comforts
and enjoyments in this world as other men, yet they are all as dead comforts
and enjoyments in comparison of what is your true happiness; your true
happiness is to live with God and Christ. The Apostle hints so much, that true
happiness is to live with God and Christ, as he says afterward; Your life is
hid with Christ in God; therefore your present life and comforts are all dead
things in comparison of what is your true life and happiness. Now if a Believer
be dead to the world, if all his happiness in this world be but the picture and
shadow of true happiness, then it is all the reason that his heart should be
taken off from earthly things, and set upon that which is indeed his happiness.

The third consideration to press us to Heavenly-mindedness, is, that a
Believers life is a hidden life: You are dead, your life is hid with Christ in
God. A Believers true life, his true happiness, lies not within sight, within
view, it is hid with Christ in God. If we will find out true happiness, we
must not look for it in the rode of present sensible things, but we must look
for it with Christ in God: Your life is hid with Christ in God. Mark it, if we
would find out true happiness, we must consider what it is that Christ as man,
and as the Head of the Church, injoys in the presence of the Father. A
Believers happiness lies in communion with his Head, in enjoying blessedness in
communion with the Father, like unto that which Christ as man injoys now in the
presence of the Father. Our life is hid with Christ in God; as much as if the
Apostle had said, Your happiness lies not in any thing in this world, but your
happiness is of the same kind as Christ's happiness is: look what happiness
Christ as man injoys in the presence of the Father, that is your happiness, and
nothing else. Now this being a Believers true happiness, it concerns him to
clevate his thoughts and affections unto the things that are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God.

The fourth and last Motive the Apostle uses to press us to the duty of
Heavenly-mindedness, is the consideration of the certainty that is given to a
Believer of future glory. A Believer has already a title to glory in Christ
his Head; yea, after a sort, he has an inchoate possession of it, forasmuch as
Christ is possessed of Glory in his name and stead; but at last a Believer
shall be brought to a full, perfect, complete possession of glory in his own
person, as now he has it inchoatively in the person of his Head. This the
Apostle intimates in the fourth verse: When Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory; that is, we shall actually
appear with him in glory; that is, as another Apostle expresses it, We shall
be like him, 1 John 3.2. We know when he shall appear, we shall be like him.
Look what glory is given to Christ the Head of the Church, the same glory in a
proportion shall be given to the Members. Now then the future happiness of the
Saints being so sure, it being as certain that they shall have it, as if they
had it in hand; the glory and happiness of Heaven being no notion, no fiction,
but as sure as Christ is glorified, so shall all his Members be glorified; then
certainly it becomes Believers to set their hearts upon these things. These are
the Motives the Apostle makes use of to press the great duty of
Heavenly-mindedness upon us.

The Observations that arise from the Text are these two.

It is the duty of Christians to seek after, and to set their affections on the
things that are above.

That Christians ought to have their hearts taken off from the world, and from
earthly things, and to have their hearts carried forth to an holy contempt of
this world. Set your affections on things that are above, not on things on the
earth.

That it is the duty of Christians to seek after, and to set their affections
on the things that are above.

For the Explication of this Doctrine, two things are to be spoken unto.

1. To show what these things above are, that we are to seek after, and to set
our affections upon.

2. What it is to seek after, and to set our affections on things that are
above.

1. What are these things above that we are to seek after, and to set our
affections upon?

This shall be opened in four Particulars.

I. By the things above, we are to understand God and Christ: we ought to seek
the things that are above; that is, we ought to converse much in our thoughts
with God and Christ. That these are the things above here intended, is clear
from the Context: If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which are above:
What follows? where Christ sits at the right hand of God; it is as much as if
the Apostle had said, Christ is above, and God is above; now let your hearts be
upon these things: Seek the things which are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God; that is, let your thoughts dwell much upon God and Christ.
So at the third verse, Your life is hid with Christ in God: If our happiness
lie hid in God and Christ, then we do seek the things which are above, when our
hearts are mainly and principally carried out after God and Christ, in whom
only our true happiness is to be found, 1 John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. When may our fellowship be said
to be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ? Certainly one way whereby
we have fellowship with the Father and Jesus Christ, is this; when we converse
much in our thoughts with God and Christ; that is, when God and Christ have
more of our thoughts then any earthly thing. My meditation of him shall be
sweet, says David; then do we seek the things above, when our Meditation is
taken up about God and Christ. Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: The perfect knowledge
of God and of Christ, is our perfect happiness in Heaven; and so much as we do
know of God and Christ here on earth, so much happiness do we enjoy here on
earth: there is more sweetness, more comfort, more satisfaction to be taken in
from the knowledge of God and of Christ here on earth, then from all earthly
enjoyments whatsoever: might it not seem too much for me to speak, I might
adventure to say, Though it be but a little of God and Christ that I know, yet
I would not exchange or part with the thoughts of God and Christ, which are to
be had in this world, for all the Kingdoms upon earth. Now if the thoughts of
God and Christ, and the little knowledge that may be had of God on earth, have
so much sweetness in it; what will the vision of him in heaven? and what will
the perfect knowledge of him there be? When the Apostle Paul desires the
highest thing he could do for the Saints, it is this, that they might have a
greater measure of the knowledge of God and Christ: let us consider the Text,
for it is a great Text, Col. 2.1, 2. For I would that ye knew what great
conflicts I have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not
seen my face in the flesh; that their hearts might be comforted, being knit
together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding,
to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.
See with what a magnificent Preface the Apostle ushers in this desire. 1. He
tells them he had a great conflict for them: the word in the original signifies
an agony; (...).
the Apostle was in an agony of desire for these Saints. 2. He tells them he
would have their hearts comforted; he longs after their comfort, the highest
measure of consolation for them. And what is all this Preface for? only to
usher in this, to tell them he would fain have them come to all riches of the
full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God,
and of the Father, and of Christ: that which put him into such an agony of
desire was, that they might come to a fuller measure of the knowledge of Go^
and Christ, and that because he knew this was the only way for their comfort;
That their hearts might (...) comforted, being knit together in lov^ and unto
all riches of the full ass^rance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of
the mystery of Go^ and of the Father, and of Christ: h^ knew there was no
better way for their comfort, then to come to (...) clear knowledge of the
Mystery o^ God and Christ. Observe how the Apostle expresses this he would
have them come to the riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of God and of the Father, and of Christ. Then
are several things of great moment to be considered in these words (...) 1. The
Apostle teaches us here, that the knowledge of God is a Mystery to the riches
of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery
of God: There is a great Mystery in the knowledge of God (...) poor creatures
that we are, we are apt to think we know enough of God at first; but there is a
Mystery in the knowledge of God; and what this Mystery is, the Apostle tells
us, it is the mystery of the Father, and of Christ: And what is this Mystery?
what is this mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ? So far as we can
conceive of it, it lies in this, to know God in the unity and simplicity of the
Divine Essence, to know God in the Trinity of Persons, to know Christ as
Mediator, and to be able to apprehend the Father in Christ: it is the mystery
of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, to be able to apprehend the Father in
Christ, as Christ says, He that has seen me has seen the Father; that is, to
apprehend the Divinity to be so in Christ, as that we see, that by having the
Son we have the Father, and in possessing Christ we possess whole God. This is
the Mystery of God the Apostle here speaks of, and we have reason every day to
be more and more diving into it, to labor to come to a clear knowledge of it.
That is the first thing; there is a Mystery in the knowledge of God. 2. The
Apostle would have them to come to the acknowledgement of this Mystery; to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of God; that is, he would have them to come to a
clear and distinct knowledge of all the Principles concerning God and Christ:
the word signifies an accurate, (...). Phavorinus.
or more exact consideration of a thing: after the first perception of it, we
have some knowledge of God and Christ at first; but we must labor to come to a
more accurate exact knowledge of God and Christ. 3. The Apostle would have them
come to the riches of the full assurance of understanding. 1. Here is riches,
that sets forth copiousness and abundance: The Apostle would not have them have
some slender tastes of God and Christ only, but he would have them enriched
with the knowledge of God and Christ, Phil. 1.9. This I pray, that your love
may abound yet more and more, in knowledge, and in all judgment. 2. He would
have them labor to attain unto the greatest certainty and assurance in their
knowledge; he would have them come to the riches of the full assurance of
understanding. This full assurance of understanding, I take to be opposed to
wavering and to doubting: The Apostle would have us to come to a certainty in
our knowledge: A Christian should not be fluctuating and hesitating in his
thoughts concerning God and Christ; but he should endeavor to come to this,
that he may be able to say, Upon this bottom I can live and dye; that which I
know concerning God and Christ is such a bottom, that I can venture my hope, my
happiness, my all upon. This I take to be the meaning of that expression, the
full assurance of understanding. Now these are the things above that we are to
seek, and to set our affections upon, viz. God and Christ; our thoughts are to
be conversant about these things; we ought to be taken up in the study of the
mystery of God and Christ: and then do we seek the things that are above, when
we converse much in our thoughts with God and Christ.

2. By the things above, we are to understand the glory and blessedness of
heaven; by the things above (says a Learned man) we are to understand the
kingdom of heaven, Davenant.
the beatifical vision of God; those joys which the saints shall one day
partake of with Christ their head, and the holy angels: We ought to seek the
things which are above, as much as if he should say, we ought to mind the
glory and blessedness of the future state. This is also to be gathered from the
context; If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God; as much as if the Apostle should say,
When I speak of the things above, I intend nothing else but such things as are
in Heaven, such things as Christ injoys in the presence of the Father. Seek the
things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God: It is as
much as if the Apostle had said, consider what it is Christ now injoys in the
presence of the Father; consider what glory Christ is possessed of: Christ is
above sorrow, above pain, above misery, above death: Christ enjoys perfect
happiness in the presence of the Father; now consider what Christ injoys, and
these are the things which are above. This is manifest to be the Apostles
scope, from the fourth verse, When Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall we also appear with him in glory: It is as much as if it had been said,
Christ is now in glory, and we shall one day be made like our Head, we also
shall appear with him in glory. The Apostle would have us to mind this, to
think what that glory is, that Christ our head is possessed of, and what the
glory is we shall be brought unto, in conformity to Christ our Head: the Head
and Members must be like one another; if Christ be now in glory, the same glory
is prepared for all that are Christ's; and this appears from our Saviors last
prayer, The glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be
one, even as we are one, Joh. 17.22. Therefore look what glory Christ as man
and Head of the Church injoys, we in our measure shall have a share in, if we
be Christ's, and Members of his Body. This then we are to understand by the
things above, the glory and blessedness of the future state. I have often
thought there is nothing we are more wanting and defective in then this, viz.
in studying and contemplating what the glory and blessedness of the future
state is; we stick in present sensible things, and do not elevate our hearts to
the future glory: but we ought to be of another frame; 2 Cor. 4.
Paul tells us, He looks to the things which are not seen; that is, unto the
things of the invisible world, to the glory of heaven, and the blessedness of
the Saints there: elsewhere he says, He reckons that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us, Romans 8.18. that was an argument he had his heart taken up with
the glory of that state.

3. By the things above, we may understand, the life and employment of the
saints in heaven, and our communion with God in heaven: we ought to seek the
things above; that is, we ought to think much of our future life, and consider
what our life and employment in eternity is like to be: though this be of near
affinity with the former, because our happiness in heaven, and the glory and
blessedness of that estate consists in the life we shall live there; yet we may
consider this under a distinct head; and the distinct consideration of this
will help to illustrate the former particular: The Apostle tells us, when we
are absent from the body, we shall be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. From
this Scripture we may argue, If when we are absent from the body, we are
present with the Lord, then there is a life in which the soul shall live with
God, when it is in a separate state from the body, a life that we shall live in
the Divine Presence. Now this is to seek the things that are above, to consider
what the life is that we shall live in the presence of God and the holy Angels,
when we have laid down this burden of flesh, and are discharged from the body
of death, and shall be made free among the heavenly Society, and admitted into
the number of the Spirits of just men made perfect; to know what our life and
employment shall be in that state, this is to seek the things which are above.
Though we cannot comprehend fully and perfectly what this life will be, yet we
may understand a little of it, as the Scripture does reveal it: the Scripture
teaches us thus much, that hereafter we shall walk by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. Now
we walk by faith, not by sight: That intimates, when the life of faith ends,
then the life of sight and vision begins. Here indeed we live the life of
faith, hereafter we shall live the life of sight and vision; Matthew. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. The Scripture teaches
us, when we shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. So that our life in
heaven is so far revealed in the Scriptures, that it is to see God, to be like
him; that is, that we shall live a life like to his life, so far as the
Creature is capable. These are the things above that we should seek. Phil.
3.20. Our conversation is in heaven. (...).
Our converse is in heaven. If Paul's converse was in Heaven, then we must
suppose he did contemplate in his mind what the life of Heaven was; and his
aim was to walk as the Saints in Heaven did, to walk as one free of that
corporation. Our conversation is in heaven: his endeavor was, that his
behavior, carryage, and deportment might be such, as if he were in Heaven
among the Saints there: This is to seek the things which are above, to study
what the life of Heaven will be, what our employment and converse there is like
to be.

4. Lastly, By the things above, we are to understand such things as have a
tendencie to the future life, and the future state. It is the observation of a
Learned man, Davenant.
As by the things above we ought to understand the glory and blessedness of
heaven primarily, so secondarily and consequentially, by the things above we
are to understand those gifts of Grace, which are as the seeds of this desired
Glory; as Faith, Love, Holiness, and the rest of the Graces of the Spirit, by
which we are brought to eternal Glory. The Graces of the Spirit may well be
called the things that are above, because (as Anstine expresses it) in respect
of their excellency they do excel all earthly things. So then as we ought to
seek the things above in this sense, that is, seek after the glory and
blessedness of Heaven; so we ought to seek that Grace that has a tendencie in
it to bring us to this glory. Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be
perfect be thus minded. How would the Apostle have us minded? he would have us
minded like himself: and what was Paul's frame? read the former verse; I press
toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; that
is, I press toward the mark of perfection: Why so? for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. As if he had said, I would get as high in grace
here, as is possible, that I might be fit for glory hereafter: I press toward
perfection in Grace, as that which is the way to bring me to that Glory. As
many as be perfect be thus minded: The meaning is, If you would approve your
selves to be grown Christians, excellent Christians, Christians of the highest
rank and form, aim at perfection; look at the highest seize in Grace
here, that so you may be fitted for glory hereafter. So that to seek the things
which are above, is to seek for a suitableness and a meetness for the future
life and state. It is a great expression which we have, 2 Cor. 5.3. If so be
that being clothed, we shall not be found naked. The Apostle is speaking of the
glory of Heaven, and of the Saints entering into that glory in their souls, when
their body is dissolved. Now the Apostle's jealousy is this, If so be that
being clothed, we shall not be found naked; that is, lest he should be
destitute and void of those graces, ornaments, and spiritual affections, that
might render him in some measure suitable to that state. The Apostle Peter
exhorts the Saints to furnish themselves with variety of grace, all sorts of
grace, 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your faith virtue; and so one grace to another: And
what is the end? that they might be brought to a greater suitableness to the
future life; so we have it at the eleventh verse: For so an entrance shall be
administered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. As much as if he should say, If you add grace to grace,
and grow to a greater excellency in every grace; So there shall be an abundant
entrance administered to you into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; so that, this is to seek the things which are above, when
we mind and intend the acquiring and getting of grace above any earthly thing;
when by the strength of Christ, and the grace of Christ in us, we are still
polishing and refining our souls, growing up to more spirituality, and aspiring
to get higher and higher in grace, that so we may be more and more fitted for
the coming of the Bridegroom, and that we may be found ready, as it is said of
the Bride the Lamb's Wife, she had made her self ready. Rev. 19.7.
So that when we are trimming, and refining, and polishing our graces in the
strength of Christ, and endeavoring to attain to a greater suitableness to the
heavenly life, then do we seek the things which are above.

2. I come now to the second Inquiry, to show what it is to seek after, and to
set our affections upon these things.

This we shall open in a few Propositions briefly.

I. To set our affections on things above, it is to think much of these things:
If we would set our affections upon the things above, our thoughts must be much
employed about these things: (...).
This word translated set your affections, elsewhere is translated to mind,
Romans 8.5. Those that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh. So
here, we are exhorted to mind the things which are above: the meaning is, we
should cause out minds and thoughts to be occupied and taken up about these
things.

1. We ought to think of the reality of invisible things; we ought to think
that the the things which are above are real things, substantial things: many
do not think them to be so: a great many think, whatever is spoken of the other
world, and of the blessedness of the Saints above, it is but a fiction and a
fancy: this is the temper of the Atheistical age in which we live; but we
ought to think of these things as realities, as the greatest realities: Faith
is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb.
11.1. Faith ought to make that present and real to us, which is remote from
sense.

2. We ought to think of these things, so as to study the nature and
excellency of these things.

3. We ought to think of them; that is, our thoughts ought to dwell upon them:
we should not be content to have transient thoughts of these things, but we
should dwell much in the Meditation of these things. This is one thing employed
in that expression, set your affections; that is, set your thoughts on things
above, let your mind dwell on these things.

II. To set our affections on things above, is to value and esteem these things
above all other things. The Critics in the Greek tongue observe, that the word
((...)) signifies to value and esteem a thing, as ((...)) signifies to
under-value and despise a thing; and this appears by the Text it self: Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. The Antithesis and
opposition that is between these two, shows what we are to understand by
setting our affections on things above. Set your affections on things above,
not on things on the earth; as much as if he should have said, Have the highest
value for spiritual things; set the highest price upon spiritual things; esteem
spiritual things above all earthly things. This value and estimation of
spiritual things Paul had, when he said, Phil. 3.8.
I count all things but loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord. Spiritual things bught to bear the greatest weight in our
thoughts; we ought to approve them as the best things, and see a far greater
excellency in them, then in all temporal things. Davenant.
There is a Learned man that observes upon this Text; this word translated to
set our affections, comprehends two acts in it: 1. It notes the act of the
mind or understanding, when it thinks of any thing. 2. It notes the act of the
will or affections, approving or loving a thing: so that to set our affections
on things above, is to approve of them in our estimation as the be^ things,
Phil. 1.10. That you may approve the things which are excellent.

III. To seek the things which are above, it is to intend these things as our
principal aim and scope, Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the kingdom of God; that is,
let your principal aim and scope be to get an interest in the kingdom of God:
So here, Seek the things which are above; that is; let your principal aim and
scope be to acquire and get these things: let the main bent and tendencie of
your souls lie toward these things. Every rational Agent that acts out of
reason and understanding, intends some end; now that which the Apostle would
press us to, is this, to intend and design spiritual and eternal things as our
great end. There is no man but he has some last end that he prosecutes; now
that which the Apostle would press us to, is, to make eternal things (the
things of the other world) our great and last end: as much as if he should say,
Whereas others are sursuing after other things, Riches, Honor, Pleasures, and
making them their uttermost end; do you intend another end; do you make God and
Christ, and the things of other world, your principal aim and scope. Seek the
things that are above: Two are employed in it.

1. Make this your end, to make sure your interest in these things.

2. Get a holy meetness and preparedness of Spirit to enjoy these things.

1. Make this your end, to make sure your interest in these things, 2 Pet.
1.10. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Phil. 3.^4. I
press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Paul pressed toward the mark of eternal Glory; Paul's great ambition was
to win the price of eternal Glory.

2. As we should make sure our interest in these things, so we should make this
our end, to get a holy meetness and preparedness of spirit to enjoy these
things. Seek the things which are above; that is, labor as much as may be to
get up into the Spirit of heaven here on earth; labor to get a suitableness to
the future life: Others converse with present sensible things, but do you
converse with the things of the other world: see how you may get up into a
spirit and temper; that is, fit for the life which is above, Phil. 3.20. Our
conversation is in heaven; that is, we labor to converse as men in heaven, and
to get our spirits suited and adapted to that life.

IV. To seek the things which are above, it is to see that our affections b^
mainly carried out after these things; to see that our desire, love and delight
do run out after these things, and lie in these things: where the treasure is,
there the heart will he: If we judge and esteem these things as the best
things, if we intend them as our principal aim and scope, then these things
ought to draw our affections after them; our desire, love and delight should be
carried out after these things; God and Christ should have more of ^ur hearts
then the creatures have; we should solace and delight our selves in the
thoughts of the future life, and ^e more pleased in the thoughts of what we
shall enjoy hereafter in ^he future state, then in any thing we ^njoy at
present here on earth. To ^et our affections on things above, is to have our
affections so fixed on these things, as that nothing here on earth should be
able to loosen, unhinge, unsettle, or take off our affection from these things.
To set our affections on things which are above, it is to cleave to God as our
chief good, to embrace God as our only portion, with the full bent of our
affections. Scis occultorum cognitor Deus, quod non solum terra and omnibus
quae in ea sunt mihi cariores, sed etiam coelo and omnibus quae in ca sunt mihi
acceptabilior es.
They are rare strains of affection which Austin has: O God (says he) the
knower of all secrets, thou know that thou art not only dearer to me then
the earth, and all things that are in it; but thou art more acceptable to me
then heaven it self, and all things that are in it. God is the sum of all good
things to us, God is our chief good. O how happy were it for us, if we could
get such strains of love to God, and appeal to God as he did, and say; O God,
the knower of all secrets, thou know that thou art not only dearer to me
then the earth, and all things that are in it; but thou art more acceptable to
me then heaven it self, and all things that are in it. This is to seek the
things which are above, when our souls cleave more to God then to any created
thing.

V. Lastly, To seek the things which are above, it is to use our uttermost
care, study, diligence and endeavor to get an interest in these things, and to
be fitted for the enjoyment of these things. It is observed by a Learned man,
Quaerendum vocabulum indicat laborem and conatum, atque excludit otiosam
velleitatem. Davenant.
This expression of seeking notes labor and industry, and it is opposed to an
idle velleity; we may not content our selves with general desires and faint
wishes after the things which are above, but we must strive to enter in at the
straight gate, as our Savior's expression is: to seek after a thing, Quaerere,
est cum studio ferri and tendere ad res habendas vel fruendas.
is to be carried out with study, care, and endeavor for the having and
enjoying of that thing which we so seek after: Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently,
lest any man fail of the grace of God: The word in the original is an
emphatical word, (...), using diligent care and inspection over your selves,
lest any fail of the grace of God: If we would therefore seek the things which
are above, we ought to use the uttermost care and diligence for the acquiring
of these things.

Thus we have the Doctrine opened: We come now to the Application.

Heavenly-mindedness; let us labor to get our hearts out of this world, above
this earth, and to get up our hearts into Heaven, where our true happiness and
felicity lies. It was a familiar expression used by the ancient Church, Let us
lift up our hearts: Sursum corda.
let our hearts be above: our hearts should be above; they should be above this
lower world, they should be conversant in the upper world, where God and
Christ, the Saints and Angels are, and where our true rest, happiness and
felicity is to he expected. In the prosecution of this Use, there are three
things to be done.

1. Give a few Motives briefly to quicken, and to press us to the great duty of
Heavenly-mindedness.

2. Lay down some Directions for the putting in practice this duty.

3. Show what the great Impediments of Heavenly-mindedness are.

For Motives to quicken us to Heavenly-mindedness, consider,

Regeneration, and the life which we live as Christians, calls u^ to Heavenly
mindedness: If ye be rise^ with Christ, seek those things which ar^ above. A
Christian is one risen from the dead, he is risen from the death of sin, to the
life of grace. Now a man that is risen from the dead, does not live like other
men; we ought to live as those who are risen from the dead: what an unsuitable
thing were it, to see a man risen from the dead, to be much concerned about the
affair of this world? he is called to another state, to another life: a
Christian is a man risen from the dead, and therefore he ought not to converse
as other men do: our vocation and calling, as we are Christians, calls us off
from sin, from the world, from sublunary vanities, and calls us up to God, to
seek for our happiness and satisfaction in God. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by
whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: A
Christian is called unto fellowship with God and Christ, to have his happiness
in God and Christ. This is life eternal, Joh. 17.3.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: A
Christians happiness is to know God, and enjoy God in Christ; and therefore his
heart should be where his happiness lies. Before conversion, the soul seeks for
happiness in the creature, and in sensible things; the work of conversion
brings the soul off from the creature unto God in Christ. Now then, God and
Christ being in Heaven, our hearts should be where the center lies: the end of
our vocation or effectual calling, was to bring us unto God in Christ, as the
point and center of our rest; we do not understand the end of our calling,
unless we know this, that our calling was intended to bring us to God in
Christ, and to take up our rest in God by Christ: it is the end of our
vocation, that we should seek the things which are above.

Heavenly-mindedness, consider, our country is above: men's hearts do naturally
lie in their own Country; now all the Saints of God may say, Coelum nobis
Patria.
heaven is our country. It is said of the ancient Saints expressly, They seek an
heavenly country, Heb. 11. That is a man's Country, which is the place where he
was born, the place where he lives, and where his inheritance lies: the Saints
are born from above; it is our Savior's expression, John 3.
unless a man be born from above: the Saints are born from above; their
original is from the Spirit of God, who comes from above: and their inheritance
is above, and they must live for ever above, and therefore their hearts ought
to be above; whence their original was, where their inheritance lies, and where
they must live for ever.

Christ our Head is in Heaven, and that is Motive sufficient to press us to
Heavenly-mindedness. Paul thought it so here in the Text, Seek those things
which are above: Why so? where Christ sits at the right hand of God. As much
as if he had said, Christ our Head is in Heaven, he is possessed of happiness,
and our hearts should be where our Head is: look what happiness Christ as Man
and Head of the Church injoys, the same blessedness is destinated and appointed
for us in our measure: what happiness Christ as man is brought unto, is but an
instance what all the Saints in their measure shall be brought to. Does Christ
as he is man live in the sight of God? we also at last shall be brought to that
sight: Is Christ, as he is man, above misery, above pain, above death? Is
Christ's humane body clothed with glory and immortality? unto the same
condition shall we be brought at last: So the Apostle tells us in Phil. 3.21.
Who shall change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body.
Now we ought to think what happiness Christ our Head enjoys, and to consider
that the same happiness in a degree and proportion is prepared for us: Christ
is entered into Heaven as our forerunner, Heb. 6.20.
and all the members shall follow the Head: If Christ be in Heaven possessed of
glory for us and have given us an earnest in wha^ he possesses, what we shall
be brough^ unto; it is an unworthy thing for (...) to mind this earth, and
forge^ what our Head is possessed of for us and will bring us unto.

You ar^ dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. As much as if he should
say. You will never be happy, you will never come to true happiness, till yo^
come to be where Christ is, till you come to enjoy what Christ enjoys: your
life is hid with Christ in God; that is, your happiness is to live as Christ
lives, to enjoy what Christ injoys; and till you come to possess what Christ
possesses, you are never happy. Now then, if our happiness consists in what
Christ enjoys, then it becomes us to study and meditate much what the happiness
and glory of Christ is, and what our happiness will be in conformity to what
our Head enjoys; we shall never be happy till we are arrived to that happiness
Christ is possessed of. Aquinas in his Book Contra Gentes, lays down this as
one position, That man's last happiness cannot be in this life; and there are
many arguments he gives to prove it, among which these are some.

1. One reason why our last happiness cannot be in this life, is, because we
cannot see God as he is; we cannot see God in his Essence (as his expression
is) here on earth: Per essentiam.
No man can see my face and live, says God to Moses: Our mortality will not
bear the sight of God face to face. Now without the clear sight and vision of
God, there cannot be perfect happiness; for this is life eternal, John 17.3.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

2. Another Argument that happiness cannot be attained in this life, is, True
happiness can never be attained, unless the natural desire and appetite which
is in man, be satisfied: then is a man happy, when he enjoys all the good he
would have: if there be any good wanting to a man he would have, such a man
cannot be happy, because his desire and mind is not quiet: Happiness consists
in this, when the mind has all it would have: Now there is no man knows or
injoys so much here on earth, but he still desires to know and enjoy more: now
until the natural appetite, which is in man, be filled up, there cannot be
perfect happiness.

A third Argument is this: Man's natural desire is carried out after stability
in happiness; as every man desires happiness, so he desires a stable happiness:
if a man have that which he accounts happiness, unless it be stable and
constant to him, such a man has not attained to true happiness; for it is of
the nature of happiness to be unchangeable: that which is possible to be lost
or interrupted, is not worth the name of happiness. Now there are many
accidents that may occur, that may interrupt the best happiness we can have
here on earth; and whilst there is a possibility that a man's happiness may be
interrupted, the midne cannot be quieted, as to the enjoyment of what it
apprehends as its chief good. Now if a man's last happiness cannot possibly be
attained in this life, it concerns us to have our thoughts elevated to the
other world, and to mind that state where true happiness is indeed to be found.

seek the things which are above, consider, the things which are above, are the
most durable and permanent things. What folly is it to set our hearts upon
things which will not last always? riches, pleasures, earthly delights, life it
self, will not last always; but the things of the other world last always: God
and Christ are always the same; the life which we shall live above, is a
perpetual constant life; 2 Thessalonians. 4.17.
we shall ever be with the Lord. Certainly this is true wisdom, to fix our
hearts upon eternal things, to keep our hearts upon those things which will
always abide by us. The things of this world are transient things, and pass
away: we may have them so long, and n^ longer; there is an end of them ove^ a
few days: but the things which are above are permanent, stable, always the
same. A man shall never be deceived in his hope of happiness, if he fix his
heart upon eternal things; and thereason is, because these things do always
remain, and the object of his happiness is still the same: therefore it is a
good speech of Austin, Junge cor tuum aeternitati, and ^ternus eris.
Join thy heart to eternity, and th^^ thy self shall be eternal: The way to
have an unchangeable happiness, is to love unchangeable things; it is not
possible a man's happiness should last any longer then the things he places his
happiness in: if he love changeable things, then a man will have but a
changeable happiness; if he love unchangeable things, then he will enjoy an
unchangeable happiness: if we love the unchangeable God, we shall then never be
to seek of happiness, our happiness shall still be the same. These be the
Motives.

II. We come now to the Directions, to show how we ought to put in practice the
great duty of Heavenly-mindedness.

1. If we would put in practice this great Duty of Heavenly-mindedness, let us
contemplate and meditate much of the future life; we should transfer and carry
our selves in our thoughts out of this world, and by holy contemplation set our
selves down (as it were) in the other world: it were good for us, if now and
then we could leave this earth behind us, and climb up to heaven in our
thoughts, and consider a little, so far as we may, what the state and condition
of the other world is; we should study what God is, and what Christ is; we
should contemplate how it is that God communicates himself to the souls of his
people in the other world; we should contemplate what the actings of the soul
upon God the chief good are, and what the delights and satisfactions of the
soul are like to be: this is to meditate on the future life: the more we
contemplate the future life, and make the things of the other world present and
familiar to us, the greater alienation of spirit shall we find from this
world, and the more will our minds and hearts be carried forth to the future
state.

2. Let us labor as much as may be to get up into the spirit and life o^
Heaven: labor for an Heaven-like frame; that is, such a frame as is most
suitable to the life and spirit of the Saints in Heaven. It is the observation
of a Learned Divine, when the Apostle exhorts the Saints to seek the things
which are above, his intention is, we should be daily conforming our life to
the example and pattern of that heavenly life: Ad exemplar illius vitae
coelestis. Zanch.
we ought to study what the life of Heaven is, what the frame and disposition
of the Saints in Heaven are, and to get a frame and spirit as suitable to their
frame and spirit as is possible. It is a great expression of the Apostle, Paul
in 2 Cor. 5.9. We labor, that whether present or absent we may be accepted of
him. He had said in the verse before, We are confident, and willing rather to
be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. Paul was confident,
that when his body was dissolved, he should immediately be with God in his
spirit, that his soul should be taken into glory: this was his confidence; Now,
says he, we labor, that whether present or absent we may be accepted of him;
as much as if it had been said, Although we cannot be so happy as yet to get
into Heaven, although we cannot be present there in person, yet we would fain
have an Heavenlike frame, we would have such a frame of heart here on earth, as
should bear proportion to that frame and temper we hope to be of in Heaven: We
labor, that whether present or absent we may be accepted of him; we would be
such to the Lord in the frame and disposition of our spirit, whilst we are on
earth, as we hope to be to him hereafter; whether present or absent, we would
be acceptable to him. But here the great Inquiry will be,

Quest. How may we get more up into the spirit and life of Heaven? since a
great part of our seeking the things above, consists in a conformity to the
Heavenly life; how may we do to get more up into the spirit and frame of the
Saints in Heaven? This is a noble Inquiry, and deserves to be the matter of our
study and contemplation all our days. What is the great concernment of a
Christian, but (after he has gotten into Christ, and has gotten some
assurance he is in the state of Salvation) to be working up his heart into the
spirit of the future life? A Christian has two great Works to intend in this
world: first, to make sure his title to Salvation, to pray for a more clear and
distinct understanding of his union with Christ, that he may see he has a
sound title to eternal life and glory. Secondly, to pray for Grace, that God
would work up his heart into the Spirit of the future life, that so he may be
adapted and suited to that life, and brought to as great a conformity to it, as
may be here on earth. Now what Directions may be given us as to this, to bring
us more up to the spirit and life of heaven here on earth, before we come to be
taken thither in person? This being the main thing intended in the whole
Discourse, I shall take liberty to be a little large here; and there are many
particulars that must be spoken unto.

Answ. 1. If we would get up into he life and spirit of Heaven, let us begin by
degrees to withdraw our hearts and affections from present sensible things.
What is the life of Heaven but this? God shall be all in all: hereafter we
shall live upon God purely, and immediately, without all creatures; therefore
by degrees we should labor to have our hearts more taken out of the creature,
and gathered into God. Mistake me not, whilst we are here on earth, we must use
the creatures, and it is the will of God we should use them; and not to use
them to those ends God has appointed them, were to tempt God, and make our
selves wiser then God: But here lies the skill of a Christian, while we do use
the creature, converse with sensible things, still to labor to see God in
every creature, and to pass from every creature to God: not to stick in the
creature, but to pass from the creature to God, and then, to think of such a
time when we shall live upon God without these things. Non te pr^hibet Deus
amare ista, sed diligere ad beatit^dinem.
It is a good speech of Austin: God does not forbid thee to love these things
(speaking of created things) but he forbids thee to love them as thy happiness.
We ought to keep our hearts free and reserved for God in the use and presence
of all creature enjoyments: we ought to love nothing as our happiness but God:
I should be all one with us as to this, whether we have the creature, or have
not the creature; whether we are full or empty; whether we want or abound: we
should still be at the same point of rest in God, as in the center; we should
cleave to him as our chief good, and embrace him as our only portion: If God
gives us creature^ comforts and enjoyments, we should labor to see God in
them, and find out God in them: and when we taste any sweetness, any delight
in the creature; when we find any suitableness or conveniencie in the
creature, we should say, Here is God: This sweetness, this suitableness, this
convenience is but a drop of the Occan; all this is to elevate me to the
Fountain: There is nothing more in any creature-comfort or enjoyment, then what
God has put into it; therefore must my soul say, I look at God in all these
things; I stick not in the creature, but I look at God; the creatures are made
to show me God. This should be our frame in the presence and enjoyment of the
creatures, and then we should think much of that time, when God will
communicate himself to us immediately. There is a time when I shall drink no
more from the Cistern, but shall take in all from the wellhead: There is a
time when I shall have no more need or use of these things, which are now as so
many organs or pipes to convey comfort to me by: God shall be all himself, and
shall supply all by himself: God shall be instead of Sun and Moon to me,
instead of meat and drink to me, instead of all relations; God himself shall be
all things: We should think much of that time and state, when God shall be thus
to us. This is one way to get up into the spirit of the future life, by degrees
to begin to withdraw our hearts and affections from present sensible things.

2. If we would get up into the life and spirit of Heaven, let us mind a
spiritual happiness, seek after a spiritual happiness, and be taken up in the
thoughts and desire of a spiritual happiness: The happiness of Heaven is mainly
and principally a spiritual and an intellectual happiness: the happiness of God
himself is a spiritual, an intellectual happiness: The Being of God is a
spiritual being, and the happiness of God is a spiritual happiness suitable to
his Being: God has no other happiness, then to know himself, and understand
himself. The happiness of the Saints and Angels is a spiritual intellectual
happiness. The Angels and Souls of glorified Saints are spiritual substances,
and therefore their happiness must needs be a spiritual happiness: The Angels
and glorified Saints have no gross material objects to live upon, they have no
other happiness then what they take in by their understandings and wills. O
consider it, true happiness consists mainly and principally in what the soul
injoys: not but that the body shall at last participate of happiness with the
soul: when the body shall be raised, the body shall participate in its kind
with the happiness of the soul: but the Essence of true happiness lies mainly
and principally in what the soul enjoys; and that appears from those words of
our Savior: John 17.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God. It is the soul that is
capable of knowing and enjoying God; and therefore true happiness and eternal
life consists properly in what the soul injoys. Sensual minded men are apt to
think there is no happiness but what the body enjoys, and is taken in by the
senses; but true happiness is an inward thing, and it consists in what the
mind injoys: There is more true happiness which the mind takes in, in one
single thought of God, th^^ the body and outward senses can take in by all the
variety of objects that are most pleasing to them: look as the understanding or
mind in man is a higher principle then sense is in a brute; and as the objects
of the mind are higher and more excellent then those of sense; by so much the
more is the mind or understanding capable of taking in a greater happiness
then sense can do. Sense in a brute is capable only of taking in present
mutable things; the understanding is capable of conversing with eternal and
immutable things: therefore that which quiets the mind most, which is of the
greatest capacity, that must needs be the greatest happiness. The mind of man
covets eternal things, and is satisfied with nothing but eternal things;
therefore to know that a man is in the love and favor of God, whose love or
hatred is eternal; to know that a man shall be freed from everlasting misery
and condemnation; to know that a man shall be happy in living with God for
ever: these are eternal things, and such things as will quiet the mind of man.
Divines observe, that eternal life in the beginning of it, consists in
Justificatien and Sanctification: and this is truly asserted; for what is
happiness, but the inward quiet of the mind? Now when the soul is in a
justified state, when it apprehends it self reconciled to God, this brings in
inward quiet, the peace of God that passes all understanding. So in
Sanctification, when the work of Sanctification is begun, we are in some
measure brought to a conformity and likeness unto God, and there is an harmony
and an agreement between our wills and the Divine Will. Now from this
conformity unto God, and the agreement and harmony that is between our wills
and the Divine Will, there arises peace: This is certain, so much holiness, so
much peace: we should therefore look after a spiritual happiness, an happiness
consisting in peace of conscience, in the apprehension of the savor of God, an
happiness consisting in holiness: so much true peace of conscience, so much
holiness, so much true happiness: This is the beginning of eternal life: The
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost. The happiness of Heaven consists in this, that we shall be
filled with Grace, and the Spirit of God: In Heaven the Spirit of God shall act
us perfectly and universally; therefore the more Grace, and the more of the
actings of the Spirit of God we feel in our selves here on earth, the more we
have of the beginning of heaven, of the beginning of eternal life. The
happiness of heaven is a spiritual happiness, because it consist^ in the
spiritual actings and operatitions of the soul upon God: when the soul is full
of Grace, and of the Spirit of God, then it knows God perfectly (so far as the
creature is capable) it loves him and delights in him perfectly, and then it is
most happy: I say, when Grace is perfected and consummated, and the operations
of the soul are carried highest in the exercise of Grace, then is happiness
most completed. This should cause us to covet Grace and the Spirit of God in
the highest manner; we should covet Grace and the Spirit of God more then any
temporal thing: Certainly so much of Grace, and of the Spirit of God as we feel
working in our selves, so much may we perceive of the dawnings of heaven and
eternal life in our souls: He that feels much of the presence of the Spirit of
God in his soul, and feels the lively sensible actings of Grace in his soul,
may know he has the beginning of heaven in himself. Let us covet a spiritual
happiness, a happiness consisting in the exercise of Grace, and in the
spiritual actings of the soul upon God: we should often think with our selves,
What is it that must satisfy the soul to eternity? suppose I had the greatest
enjoyment of sensible things, would these things satisfy me? what is it that
my soul can rest in ultimately? what is it the mind can be quieted with? If I
know I am beloved of God, if I know I shall one day certainly enjoy God, and
live with him for ever; here is some stay and quiet for the mind; this will
quiet the mind more then all sensible things can do. Happiness consists in the
highest operations of the mind; therefore when the mind is most carried out
after eternal things, which are most suitable to the mind, then it injoys most
happiness: A great part of the happiness of heaven consists in this, that the
Saints know, what happiness they do now enjoy, they shall always enjoy: If it
were possible that such a thought could be let into their minds, that what
they now enjoy, they should not always enjoy; this would rende^ their happiness
imperfect: true happiness consists in the highest operations of the mind, when
the mind^ is most carried out after eternal things; let us mind this happiness
and be taken up in the thoughts o^ this happiness.

3. If we would come more up into the spirit and life of heaven, let (...)
think much of the beatifi^^il vision, and breath much after it. The great
^rappiness of heaven is this, that we shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Says Austin, Ibi videbis faciem Dei
tui.
There shall thou see the face of thy God. What greater happiness to the
creature, then to see the face of the Creator, to see him who made heaven and
earth? to behold the Glory and Majesty of the first and most excellent Being?
Deus cum sit simpliciter perfectus, sua persectione omnes rerum perfectiones
comprebendit. Aquinas.
God being simply and absolutely perfect, in his perfection comprehends all the
perfections of things. In the sight of God we behold all perfection at once. If
all the beauties in the world were contracted into one beauty, what a rare
sight would that be? in the sight (...) God we see all beauty, all perfection
at once: In the sight of God we see the Center from whence all ^he lines are
drawn; whatever is sweet, ^miable, pleasant, delectable in the ^reature, it all
issued from this Foun^ain: how sweet, how pleasant, how ^electable then must
the Fountain it self be? God is the rule and measure of all good, Deus est
omnis boni bonum.
God is the good of every good: nothing is good but as it participates of God,
and as it has some similitude and resemblance of the Divine goodness; how
sweet then will it be, to see the first original independent good, who is a sea
and an abyss of good, who has all good in himself without stint and limit?
Those several delights we have from the variety of creatures, God has all in
himself, and much more abundantly: all the creatures are too narrow and too
short to exhibit and represent to us the immensity and infiniteness of the
Divine perfection: God is not only all that perfection that is in the
creature, but he is infinitely more; and the reason is, because if all the
perfections of the creature were summed up into on^ it is but finite
perfection: it is (...) contradiction, to suppose an infini^ creature; but
God's perfection is i^finite perfection; what happine^^ then must it be, to be
admitted t^ see him, who has all this perfection in him! This should make us,
1. To think much of the beatifical vision; ou^ thoughts should be much upon it.
2. We should have great and admiring thoughts of it. O let us not thin^ it is a
light thing to be admitted into the Divine presence; the more you think of it,
the more will you find your hearts swallowed up in the thoughts of it: I say,
let us not think that it is a light thing to be admitted into the Divine
presence, and to stand before him, who made heaven and earth: We ought to think
this is the highest dignity and honor that can be cast upon us: if the Queen
of Sheba was so much taken with the admiration of Solomon's wisdom, as that she
said, Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy wisdom; well may we say to our Maker, Happy Lord
are they that may be admitted into thy presence, and may stand continually
before thee, to behold the glory and beauty of thy Majesty: let us have great
and admiring thoughts of the beatifical vision: Do not think it a light thing
to be admitted to the fight of God. 3. We should pray much that we may be
accounted worthy to be admitted to this sight: It is that which deserves to be
made the great request of our souls all our days, that we may be accounted
worthy to be admitted into the Divine presence, and live in the sight and
presence of God to eternity. And as ever we hope to come to the sight of God,
to the beatifical vision, be sure to remember this, that Christ must be our
way: I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man comes to the Father but by
me, Joh. 14.6. It is Christ that must bring us to the Father whilst we are here
on earth, and it is he that must make way for our admission to the sight of God
in heaven: It is Christ as Mediator must bring us to this sight, and let us
into the sight; his humanity opens the (...) to the Divinity. Christ as man, by
^^tue of the Hypostatical or personal ^^nion, has a right to the sight of God
and Divines commonly say, The Christ as man, from the moment (...) his
conception, had the sight of Go^ Our nature was alienated from Go^ and deprived
of communion wi^ God by our sin in Adam: But the Son of God, the second person
i^ the Trinity, by assuming our nature and taking of it into Unity of person
with himself, has brought our nature near to God; and our nature, (...) it
stands in Union with Christ the Head of the Church, has recovered (...) right
to communion with God; and Christ by the merit of his obedience, has purchased
a right for us to the sight of God: so that when we have thoughts of the
beatifical vision, and have breathings in our souls after it, we must keep our
eye upon Christ, and remember it is by him we must be admitted into the
presence of God: ^ever think of seeing God without Christ; never think of being
admitted into the Divine presence, without Christ's being your way and door.

4. If we would get up into the spirit and life of heaven, We must labor to
adhere to God, and to cleave to him as the chief good. In heaven, as there will
be the clear sight of God, so there will be the most perfect adherence of the
soul to him: The glorified soul must needs see God to be its life, its
strength, its happiness, and all good to it, and therefore it must needs cleave
perfectly to him. Now if we would come up into the spirit of heaven, we should
labor to have our souls cleaving to God here on earth: we should rest in God
as in our Center: we should labor to cleave to God more then to any created
thing: in a strict and proper sense, our selves should cleave to nothing but
God; though we may and ought to love the creature in its place, yet we may not
love it as we love God: Our souls must cleave and adhere to nothing as our
chief good, as the matter and object of our happiness, but God: of God only it
is that we must say, He is my life, my strength, my salvation, my happiness:
this was the Church's Song, The Lord Jehovah is my strength and my salvation:
Isa^. 12.
We ought to cleave intimately and inseparably unto God. God ought to be the
stay and rest of our souls: so much as our souls come to stay and rest
themselves upon God as our chief good and only happiness, so near do we come
to the life of Heaven. It is a proper and an apposite expression to help us to
understand this, that which we have in Isa. 26.3. Thou shall keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee. This expression shows us what the
carriage of the soul ought to be toward God the chief good; the soul ought to
cleave to God most intimately, and to stay it self upon him. The Saints in
heaven do thus stay themselves upon God, God is the great basis they lean upon:
they have no sensible comforts to live upon, as we have, but they see all in
God, and therefore he is their stay: it is upon him they lean for happiness:
the more we can adhere to God, and eleave to him, and stay our souls upon him
as our chief good, the more do we come up to the life and spirit of heaven.

5. If we would get up into the life and spirit of heaven, Let us labor to
take complacencie in the glory and blessedness of God: Here ly^s the
quintessence and perfection of the heavenly life, so far as we are able to
conceive of it here on earth. The glorified Saints look off themselves, and out
of themselves, and take complacencie in the glory and happiness of God, who is
the first and most perfect Being. It is matter of delight and joy to them, to
see God so holy and so happy as he is. The Schoolmen rightly observe, that to
love God for himself, V^lle Deum esse Deum.
it is to will that God should be God: Then do we love God for himself, when we
take complacencie in the glory and blessedness of God; when we are well pleased
to see God to be what he is; that is, to see him to be the most excellent and
most perfect being. Our happiness (as it is in us) it is but a finite thing,
the happiness of smite creatures: but God's happiness is the happiness of the
first infinite and eternal Being. Now it becomes us to be more pleased to see
God happy, then that we are so; and to see him great and glorious, then that we
are so. Here lies the prefection of a created will, to take complacencie in the
Divine perfection, as being the highest and uttermost object that it can
acquiesce in. The highest strains of grace lie in these two things: 1. To
desire the glory of God above all things: 2. To take complacencie in the glory
of God above all things. The more we can attain to these here on earth, the
nearer do we come to the life and spirit of heaven.

6. If we would come more up into the life and spirit of heaven, Let us labor
to have the most immediate dependence upon God, and to expect all from God. The
Saints in heaven have the most immediate dependence upon God for every thing;
they see all comes from God, and they depend upon him for all. The Saints in
heaven do not receive their happiness, comfort, and satisfaction from the
organs and pipes of the creature, as we do; but they receive all from God
immediately: and as they receive all from God immediately, so they know they
receive all from God immediately; and they depend upon God fo^^ll, and expect
all from God: therefore the more immediate our dependence is upon God, and the
more we expect all from God, the nearer do we come to their life. Psalm. 62.5.
My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him. The time is
coming, when we must depend upon God for all: when we come to dye, none can
help us but God; friends cannot help us, no creature can help us, and life it
self will fail us; all our expectation then must be from God; if he fails us,
all fails us: when this life fails and cease, we must depend on God to give
us eternal life; no creature can give us eternal life; no friends, no not the
nearest Relations can help us when we come to extremity, God then must be our
only friend: it is good therefore to have all our dependence upon him, and
expectation from him now: If we expect no good, no happiness, no comfort but
what comes through the conduit-pipes of the creature, when they fail, all our
happiness must fail; therefore it is good to expect that God should give us
that which no creature can; that God should communicate himself to us, when all
creatures fail: When we have all creatures round about, they can afford us
little help or relief in a time of extremity; therefore it is good to have our
expectation raised above all creatures, and to expect all from God immediately:
And this is to be brought nearest to the life of the Saints above. Only let us
take this Caution: When we say that we should depend on God immediately, and
expect all from God immediately, the meaning is not, as if we might not make
use of the creatures as helps appointed by God in their proper places: we may
and ought to use the creatures, in that way, and for those ends unto which God
has appointed them; but take heed you expect not too much from the creature:
our expectation ought to be raised above the creature; we ought to consider, no
creature can do us good, but as God puts virtue into it, makes use of it for
our good, and as God acts it and communicates himself by it; our great
dependence therefore ought to be upon God himself above all creatures.

7. If we would come more up into the life and spirit of the Saints in heaven,
we should labor to take up our rest and satisfaction in God. The Saints in
heaven are perfectly satisfied with God, and in God, Psalm. 17.15. When I awake,
I shall be satisfied with thy likeness: that is, when I awake in the morning of
the resurrection, I shall be satisfied with the vision of thy face. The sight
of God is the most satisfying sight, and that will appear from these three
considerations. 1. Because the Saints in seeing God, see all things in God;
there is nothing in the effect, but what is in the cause; the Saints by seeing
God, must necessarily see the perfection of all things in him. 2. The Saints in
seeing God, are arrived to the uttermost perfection, beyond which there is no
perfection. That which causes unquietness in the mind of man here in this
world, it is, because when he has found one good, still he thinks yet there is
a higher good; and when he has found that, still he thinks there is a higher
to be enjoyed: but when the soul once comes to the highest good, which is
truly so, and knows there is no higher, then it rests and quiets it self here.
Now the Saints that are come to the sight of God, know there is no higher good
then God, therefore their minds are satisfied in God. 3. The Saints in
beholding God, behold infinite perfection; they see that in God, that will fill
their capacity brim-full; now then the Saints having their uttermost capacity
filled, this is that which must needs breed perfect satisfaction. So then, if
the Saints in heaven are perfectly satisfied in God, and desire nothing more
then what they have in God, we should labor to come up to this spirit, to be
satisfied in God, and with God: We should rest in God as in our Center, Psalm.
116. Return O my soul unto thy rest. Though we desire many things for our
necessity, as food, raiment, outward conveniencie, and the like; yet we should
covet nothing as our rest but God: Here is my rest, whether I have much or
little, want or abound, God is my rest; we should labor to say so inwardly,
sensibly and experimentally, that God is my rest, I need nothing as my
happiness but God.

8. If we would get more up into the spirit and life of heaven, Let us look
down upon all the things of this world as poor and mean things. The Saints in
heaven, who live with God, and have the sight of him, see that in him, and have
that before their eyes, which makes all the things of this world seem poor and
mean to them. Most true is that saying; Q^i parum de luce Creatur^s aspexerit,
breve ei e^i (...) quo^ cr^atum est.
He that has seen a little of the Creators light, every thing that is created
seems little to such a one. When the Sun appears, the Stars vanish and
disappear; a greater glory buries and swallows up a less: We should labor to
have such great thoughts of God, as that the creatures may seem but little to
us. That which causes admiration, is some surpassing excellency in the
object: when we find something to parallel, or to go beyond that which we did
admire, we shall cease to admire that which at some times we did admire. Now we
shall never find any thing here below that will parallel that glory that is
above: we ought therefore to have our hearts fixed in the admiration of eternal
things, and look down with a holy contempt upon temporal things: This made Paul
say, 2 Cor. 4.18.
We look not to the things which are seen, but to the things which are not
seen: the things which are seen are temporal, the things which are not seen are
eternal.

9. If we would come up more into the spirit and life of heaven, Let us labor
for the most perfect acquiescence in the Divine Will. The Saints in heaven do
think that is always best which God does; their wills fall in with Gods Will,
and they have a perfect acquiescence in the Divine Will. The Saints in heaven
do know that what God wills is always best; therefore there is not any hard
thought, any contradicting thought, the least reluctancie in them against the
Divine Will; but their will does presently fall in with the Divine Will. Hence
is that of our Savior, Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. In
heaven there is a perfect compliance with and satisfaction in the Divine Will,
now we should labor after this frame here on earth, that our wills might
perfectly fall in with the Divine Will. It was an expression I once heard from
a holy man: I have obtained that grace from God, to acquiesce in the Will of
God, when once it is manifested. This is the very spirit of heaven, to
acquiesce and take complacencie in the Will of God, when once it is mafested:
there is not any the least murmuring thought in the hearts of any of the Saints
or Angels in heaven against that which God does, but they think all is well
done that God does, and their wills rest in his. This is a great piece of
heaven, when we make the Will of God the ground of our acquiescence and
satisfaction: God has willed it, and therefore we acquiesce. It is one thing
to be satisfied with a man's condition from some moral considerations, and
another thing to make the Will of God the ground of our satisfaction and
acquiescence: the ground of our satisfaction ought to be, God has willed such
a thing, therefore I acquiesce: the perfection of a created will, is to follow
the Divine and increated Will.

10. If we would get up into the life and spirit of heaven, Let us lahour to be
more deeply sensible of the infinite distance that is between God and us. In
heaven, the Saints and Angels are most sensible of the distance between God and
them: the more perfect our knowledge of God is, the more clearly shall we
discern the distance that is between God and us: the more clearly we understand
the Divine perfection, the more clearly shall we see our infinite distance from
God. This is certain, The clearer our knowledge of God is, the greater
foundation there is for humility: Never so humble a creature as the humane soul
of Jesus Christ; and the reason is, because Christ as man had the most perfect
knowledge of God; and Christ knowing God most perfectly, he understood the
distance that was between his Humanity and the Divinity: therefore this is
certain, The clearer our knowledge is of God, the more humble-shall we be. When
the Lord sat upon the Throne, the Seraphims covered their faces, Isai. 6.1, 2.
and what did that speak, but the deep sense that they had of the infinite
distance that was between God and them? The most perfect creature in its kind,
a glorified creature, is but a creature: now between the creature and the
Creator, there is an infinite distance: the more we are reduced and sunk down
into nothingness in our selves, in the apprehension of the infinite distance
that is between God and us, the nearer do we come to the spirit of heaven. In
heaven we shall most perfectly understand our dependence upon God, that the
creature is a mere dependent thing; and if God abstract and withdraw from the
creature what he has given to the creature, the creature vanishes into
nothing: the creature is nothing, has nothing, but what it has received; if
God abstract what he has given, the creature returns to nothing. O labor to
keep up a deep sense of the infinite distance that is between God and us.

11. If we would come more up into the spirit of heaven, Let us labor to hate
sin, not only because of the effects and consequents of it (as that it is
damning, and the like) but because it is an uncomely thing in its self, and
because it is contrary to the purity and perfection of God, who is the first
and most perfect being, and the rule and measure of all good. This is certainly
the spirit of heaven; the Saints in heaven having the sight of God, must needs
see and know how contrary sin is to God; they see clearly that sin is contrary
to the being of God, to the purity of God, to the life of God, to the will of
God, and to the glory of God: and therefore they must needs hate it as such.
The Saints also in heaven see how contrary sin is to their own beings, and to
that rectitude that is put upon them, they being made of God to be such
creatures as they are; the principles of their own being, as they are made and
framed of God to be new creatures, being set in a direct contrariety unto sin,
and therefore they hate it upon that account, so that the bent and poize of
their wills is set against sin, as it is sin, as it is contrary to the Divine
Being, Purity, Life and Glory; and as it is contrary to that rectitude which
God by the work of the new creature has put upon them. Now we should labor
and pray that we may come up as much as may be into this spirit; we should
labor to hate sin as it is an uncomely thing in it self, as it is most
contrary to God, contrary to the Divine purity and perfection, and contrary to
the Divine stamp, make, and frame of the new creature in us; and the more we
can hate sin upon this account, and under this notion, the nearer do we come to
the life and spirit of heaven.

12. If we would come up more to the life and spirit of heaven, Let us value
and prize the knowledge of God and Christ above all earthly things. You know
what our Savior says, This is life eternal to know thee: John 17.
Eternal life, the happiness of heaven, consists in this, to know God; the
perfection and consummation of eternal life consists in this, to know God in a
way of vision: and the beginning of eternal life, it is to know God in a way of
faith; that is, to know God as he has revealed himself to us here in the way
of his Word. It has been showed before, how we ought to breath after the
beatifical vision: that which now we are speaking of, is to show that we ought
to covet after the knowledge of God in a way of Faith; we should covet after
the knowledge of God, which is to be had from the Word, and is possible to be
attained unto here on earth. Here we walk by faith, not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.17.
although we cannot know God in a way of vision, as we shall know him hereafter,
yet we may know him in a way of Faith: Now we should covet to know God in a way
of Faith, as he has revealed himself in his Word; we ought to prize and covet
after the knowledge of every truth of God, but especially we ought to covet
after the knowledge of God himself, who is prima Veritas, the first original
Truth. The Scripture does every where commend to us the knowledge of God: Col.
1.10. Increasing in the knowledge of God. 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then shall we know the Lord, if we
follow on to know the Lord, Hosea 6.3. Jer. 9.23, 24
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his
strength; but let him that glories glory in this, that he knows me, says
the Lord. I have often thought that it is the great sin of Professors, that
they do no more press after the knowledge of God and Christ here on earth, and
that they are no more taken with the discoveries of God and Christ that are
made to them: we hear often of the great things of God and of Christ; but alas,
these things are little valued and esteemed by us: but it ought not to be thus
with us. Certainly, if our ultimate and last happiness be to know God in the
way of the beatisical vision, the next happiness to this, it is to know God as
he may be known here on earth: and this will be found in experience to be true,
that there is more true sweetness to be taken in from the knowledge of God that
is attainable here on earth, then there is from the enjoyment of any temporal
thing: And therefore holy souls are wont to bless God more, for revealing
himself and his Son to them, then for the greatest temporal thing he ever gave
them. God is the highest and most Supreme Object that the mind of man can
converse with: and the more the mind of man is taken up in the contemplation
of this Supreme Object, the greater amplitude, liberty and enlargement will it
find in it self. Inferior things do but limit, narrow, and confine the soul:
for this is certain, that the soul it takes in liberty, amplitude, enlargement,
greatness; I say, the soul takes in amplitude or confinement according to the
nature of the objects it does converse withal: Lower and inferior objects do
but narrow and confine the soul, because they are beneath the capacity of the
soul: but if the soul did rise up to the knowledge and contemplation of God,
who is the first eternal Truth, then it would find liberty, amplitude and
enlargement; then it would see it had a broad and spacious field to walk in.
Certainly, if the greatest happiness of heaven be to know God, so far as we are
capable to know him, our greatest happiness here on earth is to attain as great
a measure of the knowledge of God as it is possible.

13. If we would come up into the spirit and life of heaven, Let us keep the
eye of the mind, as much as may be, fixed upon God. It is said of the holy
Angels, that they always behold the face of their Father which is in heaven.
The Saints and Angels are never weary of beholding the face of God. The Saints
in heaven, as they do see God, so they do always see him, and they are never
weary of seeing of him: Nihil quod cum admiratione consideratur potest^esse
sassidiosum. Aquin.
when we have beheld God never so long, we may still see that in God which may
draw forth our admiration. It is a true observation, Nothing which is beheld
with admiration can be nauseous and wearisome to us: and the reason is,
because, as long as we are under the admiration of a thing, so long our desire
remains to that thing. Now the Saints in heaven do always behold God with
admiration, and therefore they are never weary of the sight of him. God is an
infinite object, and therefore cannot be comprehended by a finite
understanding; therefore the Saints in heaven when they behold God, being never
able to come to the bottom of his perfections, are still detained in the
admiration of him; as they always see him, so they always desire to see him.
The Saints in heaven are never weary of their happiness; as they see God, so
they always desire to see him. Now in imitation of the Saints above, we should
keep the eye of our minds, as much as may be, fixed upon God: When the eye of
the soul is off from God, it is off from its center; and when things are off
from their center, they are never quiet and at rest: if we consider it well, we
shall find that the cause of all our trouble and disquietment is, when our
hearts are unhinged, and when they are taken off from God: when the eye of the
mind is turned upon God, then the soul is in its proper place, and there it
finds rest: we should therefore keep our mind as much as may be at a point of
rest in God: if we keep the eye of the soul fixed and intent upon God, we shall
always find that in God which will give rest and contentment to the soul. It
is said of Moses, That he saw him who was invisible, Heb. 11.27. Moses kept the
eye of his mind fixed and intent upon God. And David says, Mine eyes are ever
toward thee, Psalm. 25.15. So much as the Divine excellency draws the eye of
the soul toward it with admiration, so much do we come up to the spirit of
heaven: an heavenlyminded soul thinks it much to have its eye taken off from
God, not but that there will be many things that will interpose to divert us
while we are in our present state: but then we ought to remember, so far as we
are grown up to Heavenly-mindedness, we shall never think it well with us, till
we are returned and brought back again to the admiration of God. The sense that
is of God's excellency in holy souls, makes them thus to pray: O, that our
souls may be eternally ravished with thine eternal excellencies.

14. If we would get up into the spirit of heaven, Let us desire nothing so
much as God. Isai. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early. This is the language of the
Church: the Church needed many things, and she desired many things; she needed
liberty and deliverance, and she desired liberty and deliverance, (for this
Song, as is conceived by judicious Divines, is penned with relation to the
Church in Babylon) yea, but when the Church was in the greatest trouble and
distress, she desired nothing so much as God himself: With my soul have I
desired thee in the night: as much as if the Church should say, Though I need
many things, yet it is thee that I desire, thyself, Lord, thy self, rather then
liberty and temporal deliverance, Psalm. 73.27. Whom have I in heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. It is the property of
the Saints to desire nothing so much as God. Whom have I in heaven but thee?
The Saints look at nothing greater or more excellent in heaven it self then
God: All the glory, blessedness, joy and delight that is in heaven, is nothing
in comparison of God himself; nay, all the joy, happiness, and felicity that
they have in heaven, it is from what God is to them: This is certainly the
spirit of heaven; as the Saints in heaven have all their happiness in God, so
they desire to have it no where else but in God. It is truly so, says Austin,
that God himself would not satisfy me, unless he promised me himself:
Whatsoever God promises thee, is worth nothing besides God himself: Ipsum
fontom vitae sitio esu^io.
It is the Fountain of Life that I thirst after. I take it, that a great part
of the holiness of heaven lies in this, that the Saints in heaven would not
have their happiness in any thing but God: they are so pleased with God, as
that they would not exchange their happiness in him for any thing else: so
sweet shall the face of God be to them, so beautiful, that his face being once
seen, nothing else can delight them: If we would come up into the spirit and
life of heaven, we should labor to be of this frame and temper, not to be
willing to exchange our happiness in God for any thing else that can be
presented to us. Now this ought to be understood aright, when it is said that
the Saints should desire nothing so much as God, the meaning is not but we may
desire other things in their place, and in subordination to God the chief good:
but when God and the creatures come in competition, when God and the creatures
are compared together, then should we say, Thy self, Lord, and no created
thing, thy self, Lord, without all things, rather then all things without thy
self. It is a speech of Bernard; Ipse per se placet.
God is pleasing by himself; and we should say, his gifts are not so pleasing,
but that himself is more pleasing: We should not defire so much any thing that
God can give us, as himself: God himself should be more pleasing to us then all
his gifts.

15. If we would come up into the life and spirit of heaven, Let us labor for
affections and dispositions most like to God: The happiness of heaven is
described by th^^;* That we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. We shall be like
him; that is, we shall be like him in holiness, like him in happiness; we shall
be holy as he is holy, happy as he is happy, according to the capacity of
creatures: It is the greatest happiness of the creature, to be assimilated to
the Creator: It is the greatest happiness of the creature, to have his life
brought as much as may be to an agreement and similitude to the Divine Life.
The Saints in heaven have the same judgment and estimation of things that God
has; they will what God wills, they love what he loves, they delight in what
God delights, they a in at the same ends that God aims at. The Divine
understanding is the measure of Truth, and the Divine will is the measure of
Good: what God judges to be best, the Saints in heaven judge to be so; what God
wills to be best, the Saints will it as such. God values holiness and spiritual
excellencies above external things, Psalm. 147.10. He delights not in the
strength of the horse, he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. God
values grace and spiritual excellencies above all external things, and
therefore the Saints in heaven do so. God knows that he does most for a man,
bestows most favor upon him, when he gives him most grace, and not when he
gives him any temporal thing; and therefore holy souls think so too. God wills
holiness, loves holiness, and delights in holiness; and therefore the Saints in
heaven must needs will it, love it, and delight in it. The Life of God is to
know himself, to behold his own excellencies, and to refer all things to
himself; and the life of the Saints in heaven is to contemplate God, and to
refer themselves wholly to God: we should labor and pray to be brought to as
great a conformity to God here on earth, as it is possible. Be ye holy, for I
the Lord your God am holy: be ye perfect as your heavenly father is perfect. We
would labor to have the same thoughts and apprehensions of things as God has:
we should have the same value and estimation of holiness as God has: we should
labor to have the same hatred of sin as God, the same love and delight as God
has. God loves himself, and delights in himself above all things; and we
should love God, and delight in God above all things. God wills his own glory
infinitely, and we should will it to the uttermost of our possibility. This is
to come up to the life and spirit of heaven, when we labor for affections and
dispositions most like to God, when we are brought up to as near a similitude
to the Divine life, as it is possible.

16. If we would come up to the spirit and life of heaven, Let us value all our
comforts by what we see of God in them: the state of heaven is described by
this; That God shall be all in all. What is that? among other things, this is
certainly one thing comprehended in that expression: the Saints in heaven see
God in all things, and all things in God; and every thing is amiable to them,
as they see God in it, and no farther. It is a memorable passage of a Modern
Divine; We shall, says he, in heaven see God, and embrace him in our selves,
out of our selves, and in all things; so that though we shall see all the holy
Prophets, Patriarchs, Martyrs, also our own kindred and acquaintance, yet all
our affections shall rest in one God by Christ. Nothing is sweet to the Saints
in heaven, but as they see God in it; and nothing should be sweet to us, but as
we see God in it: we should labor to see God in every thing, find out God in
every thing, and pass from every thing to God: The best enjoyments, the best
comforts, the best conditions in this world are pitiful things, poor, dry,
sapless things, any further then we see God in them. God is the good of every
good; and if God be the good of every good, then nothing is truly good but as
we see God in it. Abstract and take God out of any creature, any condition, any
enjoyment; that creature, that condition, that enjoyment, is but a dry husk, a
shell without substance. Our great misery and infelicity in this world, is,
that we stick in the creature, and forget God; we do not rise up in our
thoughts to God: all particular and inferior goods, are subordinate to the
universal and supreme good; and they were given us on purpose to lead us by the
hand to the chief good, and when we stick and rest in any lower and inferior
good, we forget the true end for which these things were given us by him, and
that was to bring us to the chief good. They are memorable passages which
Austin has: Unhappy man is he, which knows all these things, (meaning created
things) and knows not thee; but blessed is he that knows thee, although he
knows not those things: and he that knows thee and them too, is not the happier
because of them, but it is by thee only that he is happy. And it is a
memorable comparison which that holy man uses: If (says he) the bridegroom
should make a ring for his spouse, and she when she had received that ring,
should love the ring more then her husband who had made her that ring; would
there not an adulterous mind appear in her, toward the gift of her husband,
although she loved nothing but what her husband had giver her? For this
certainly did the bridegroom bestow that pledge of his love upon her, that he
himself might be beloved in his own love-token: Therefore has God given thee
all those things, that thou might love him, who gave thee those things: It
is more that he would give thee, to wit, himself, who gave thee those things.
This is Austin's comparison. O let us not stick in the gifts of God, but let us
labor to see God in his gifts, and pass from the gifts to the Giver.

17. If we would come up into the life and spirit of heaven, Let us be much in
acts of praise and adoration. That which we call praise, is nothing else but
the declaring and setting forth of another excellency; and adoration is the
giving of honor, reverence, and respect to another, suitable to the
excellency that is in him: Praise may be given to the creature, but Adoration
is to be given to God only: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Adoration is due to God only; and the reason is, because in
God only is the Supreme Excellency: and the most Supreme Honor is due to the
Supreme Excellency. Now the life of heaven is the life of praise and
adoration: the Seraphims say, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts, Isai. 6.
and the heavenly host, Luke 2. cry, Glory to God in the highest. Praise and
adoration is the proper work of heaven. In heaven there will be no room for
prayer, because in heaven there will be no wants, no imperfection, and there is
no good the Saints can desire, but they will be sure to have; but praise will
still remain. The Divine Excellency is still the same; and whilst the
excellency of God remains to be the same, there will be still matter for
praise and adoration: It will be matter of wonder to Saints and Angels, to
behold the glory of the Divine Majesty. Saints and Angels will wonder at the
infinite perfection of the Divine being: they will not wonder at the being of
God simply considered; that is, they will not wonder that there should be such
a one as God; for then they will know and understand most clearly, that the
being of God is most necessary; that God always was, is, and shall be; and that
he could not but be: but that which they will wonder at is this, they will
wonder at the greatness of Gods Majesty, when they see the divine excellency
to be so much above their comprehension; they will wonder to see so glorious a
being as God; and they will wonder at the divine goodness, that he should make
such creatures as they are, to behold his perfections. We should therefore
inure our selves to acts of praise and adoration here on earth: let us be much
in admiring and adoring the divine perfection; this will bring us nearest the
life of heaven.

Lastly, If we would come up to the life and spirit of heaven, Let us labor
for the most perfect love one to another. The Saints in heaven, as they have
the most perfect love to God, so they have the most perfect love each to other:
the Saints in heaven do not grudge one at another; they do not envy each
others happiness: the Saints in heaven take complacencie in the good and
happiness of each other, as well as in their own good and happiness. It was an
Expression I once heard from an holy man; I am (says he) come to that piece of
heaven, that I do not envy any one that is above me. Certainly it is a great
piece of heaven, that we shall not envy the gifts and graces of others: nay,
if we are come into the spirit of heaven, we shall heartily rejoice in the
gifts and graces of others. A spirit of envy is most contrary to the spirit of
heaven: for, in heaven we shall rejoice in what God has done for others, as
well as in what he has done for our selves: and the reason is, because in
heaven we shall not look so much at our own private happiness, but we shall
look at the glory of God. Now because God is glorified in doing good to others,
as well as to our selves; therefore we shall rejoice that God is glorified in
what he has done for others, as well as in what he has done for us.

Thus have I showed, according to the measure that I have attained, how we may
get a little up into the life and spirit of heaven. I am very sensible how far
short the best of the Saints come, as to the full attaining unto these things:
yet these are the things we should be aspiring and reaching after; and so far
as we can in any measure and degree attain to these things, so far shall we
feel the buddings, and perceive the dawnings of eternal life in our own souls:
and how sweet is it to have experience of such a life began in our souls here
on earth, as shall never expire or have an end? This natural life which now we
live, is but a poor dying thing at best; O but this spiritual life which has
been discoursed of, if so be we can but feel the beginning of it in our souls,
O then we have that life set up in us that shall never end. So far as we find
these holy dispositions growing up in us, we shall evidently perceive the
dawnings of eternal life in our own souls: wherefore let us make it our study
and business all our days, to be growing up more into the spirit of heaven: the
more we study these things, and meditate on them, the more reason shall we see,
why we should prize such a life, and labor to get up into it.

It remains only now, that I should show you what the principal Impediments of
Heavenly-mindedness are, and so I shall put an end to this Doctrine. There are
several Impediments of Heavenly-mindedness.

1. The first grand impediment of Heavenly-mindedness is Unbelief. Faith is the
substance of things not seen, the evidence of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. It
is the property of faith, to make absent things present; to give things that
are absent to sense, a subsistence by faith in the soul. Now if a man want that
faith that should realize future things, and give them a subsistence in his
mind; it is no wonder that his heart is not carried forth in desire after
them. The affections follow the apprehensions of the mind: if a man do not
apprehend future things to be real or certain, it is no wonder if he do not
affect them. Now the greatest part of men look upon nothing as real or certain,
but what is obvious and present to sense: they doubt and suspect the truth of
all that which is spoken concerning a future life, and a future state: a man
will never part with or forgo a certain good for an uncertain: Riches, honors,
pleasures, the comforts of this life, men look upon as present and certain; but
the joys of heaven, the blessedness that is above, the pleasures that are at
Gods right hand, they look upon as things at a distance, and uncertain; and
therefore they will not quit their interest in present things, for the hope of
future things. This evil heart of unbelief in men, is that which causes them
to depart from the living God: and this unbelief is too prevalent in the hearts
of the godly themselves. The holiest men, and those that have most grace, are
most sensible of the buddings and puttings forth of unbelief within them:
although they do not question the truth of the future life, and of the future
state, as other men do; yet they complain that they do too often find secret
doubts arising in their hearts about these things: and although there be a seed
of faith, yet it is not so actuated as it ought to be: for if we had such a
firm and deep belief about future things as we ought, it is not possible that
we should be so much captivated by present things as we are. Certainly, the
deep, rooted, steadfast belief of eternal things, would produce other effects,
and another kind of change then what is found in the most of our hearts. It
were not possible we should live as we do, had we a clear prospect by faith of
eternal things. Therefore as ever we desire to be heavenly-minded, we must pray
that this evil root of unbelief might be eradicated and taken out of us: and we
should pray, 1. That God would clear up the eye of our faith, that we may more
clearly discern and apprehend the things contained in the promises. 2. We
should pray that we may give a more firm assent to the truth of the promises
concerning future things, and may not stagger at the promises through unbelief.
3. We should pray that we may live much in the hope and expectation of the
accomplishment of the things contained in the promises. It is a proper
Scripture to illustrate this, Romans 8.25. We are saved by hope. The meaning of
that Scripture I take to be, The grace of hope does gradually bring us into the
possession of Salvation: Therefore does the Apostle say, If we hope for that we
see not, then we do with patience wait for it: It is as much as if it had been
said, By a patient expectation of the things God has promised to us, we are
gradually brought into the possession of the things we hope for: If our hope do
not slack or fail, but we are still kept up in the expectation of what God has
promised, our hope shall at last be turned into fruition and possession.

2. A second impediment of Heavenly-mindedness, is want of more experience in
divine and heavenly consolations. He that has tasted of the sweetness of Gods
presence here on earth, cannot but be meditating and longing after the full
enjoyment of that presence hereafter. It is reported of Austin in his life,
That his desire was not so much of any thing here on earth, not of gold, or
silver, or precious stones; not of honors, or dignities, or of the pleasures
of the flesh; nay, not so much of those things as were necessary to the present
life: but all his desire it was of the Lord himself, whose name was a
refreshment to him, and the memory of whom was his consolation: They are
expressions that he himself uses: Lord (says he) since I have learned thee,
thou abidest in my memory, there do I find thee; when I remember thee, I am
delighted in thee; these are the delights which thou have given me. The
sweetness which the Saints find in God, keeps their hearts fixed and intent in
the thoughts of him; and the more they taste of the sweetness of his presence
here on earth, the more sweet is it to them to think what God will be to them
hereafter. How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee? Psalm. 31.19. The Saints taste a little here, but they know there is much
more laid up then ever yet they took in, or can take in here on earth: It is
but a sip, a taste they have here, but the full draughts are reserved till
hereafter. Now want of more experience of the sweetness of God's love and
presence here on earth, is one cause why we are no more taken up in the
meditation of what we shall enjoy hereafter: we think there are no higner
delights then what are to be enjoyed in sensible things; but we ought to
remember, that his loving kindeness is better then life, and one day in his
house is better then a thousand. It is an expression that Austin has, So great
is the blessedness that is to be found in Gods presence, that if we could abide
no longer in it then one days space, innumerable days in this life, filled up
with the confluence of all earthly goods, were to be despised in comparison of
it: for, says he, this was not spoken out of mistaken affection, when that
holy man said, One day in thy house is better then a thousand. Now we taste but
little of this presence here on earth, and therefore we desire and long no
more, and are looking no more into what we shall enjoy hereafter. The Apostle
prays for the Philippians, that they might abound more and more in knowledge
and in all judgment, Phil. 1.9. In all judgment, (...).
or in all sense, or in all experience, we ought to abound in spiritual sense
and experience, as well as in knowledge: we content our selves with a notional
knowledge of God and of Christ, but we should pray for spiritual sense and
experience, as well as knowledge. O taste and see that the Lord is gracious:
the more experimental sense we have of the sweetness of God and Christ in our
own souls here on earth, the more ardent will our defires be after the full
enjoyment of him in heaven; and the more shall our hearts be fixed and set upon
the contemplation of what we shall there enjoy.

3. Another great impediment of Heavenly-mindedness is sensuality, and too much
addictedness to present things: It is the property of sensuality to be
conversant about present things. The Schools observe, the motions of sensuality
do tend to such things only as are delectable to the outward senses;
sensuality minds nothing but the delights of the body. Now this principle of
sensuality pulls us down so much to these inferior things which are present,
and occur to sense, that we cannot rise up in our thoughts to things that are
absent, and out of sight: Sensuality is like a plummet of lead that hangs upon
the soul, and presses it down, and hinders it from rising up unto its proper
object: it hinders the soul from ascending unto the contemplation of God and
eternal things. Austin.
If the mind have that from whence it may be delighted from without, it will
remain without delight from within. Sensuality is a strong and forcible
principle; it carries us with a great force and violence, and with a great
impetuousness, to those things that delight the senses; and so strong is the
power of sensuality, that it oftentimes captivates the will and understanding,
and draws those superior faculties of the soul after it: so strongly is sense
bent and set upon its object, that it violently hurries the understanding and
will, and causes the mind to think of nothing else, and the will to pursue
nothing else, but what sense is inclined unto. When the soul is in this hurry,
it cannot be free for the contemplation of heavenly things: holy contemplation
requires a free, sedate, serene, and wellcomposed soul. When the soul is bent
downward to temporal and earthly things, it cannot rise up to the contemplation
of eternal things.

4. Another impediment of Heavenly-mindedness is unmortified lust. When the
Apostle had exhorted us here in the Text, To seek the things which are above,
he bids us in the next place, to mortify our members which are upon the earth:
Intimating this, that without the mortification of our lusts, we shall never be
fit to practice the great duty of Heavenly-mindedness. Mortify your members
which are upon the earth. Why members on the earth? because corrupt lusts, they
do always tend to earthly things, and they do detain and keep the mind to
earthly things only. Now these fleshly lusts, they are said to war against the
soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. One unmortified lust draws the strength of the soul after
it, and therefore they are said to war against the soul. Fleshly lusts hinder
the soul in the pursuit of its great interest: the great interest of the soul
is to enjoy God, and maintain communion with God: Now unmortified lust carries
the strength of the soul another way, and so it hinders the soul in its ascent
to the chief good.

5. Another impediment of Heavenly - mindedness is multiplicity of worldly
business, and immoderate cares about the things of this life, Luke 21.34. Take
heed lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
Here are two impediments of Heavenly-mindedness, spoken of by our Savior: The
first is sensuality, comprehended in those words: Take heed lest your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. A man that is given up to those
lusts, surfeiting and drunkenness, is a sensual-minded man, he is drowned in
sensuality. The other impediment is the cares of this life. When a man is
oppressed with worldly care, this hinders him in his preparation for death and
judgment. A man that is involved in multiplicity of worldly business, and
oppressed with earthly cares, has no time or leisure to think of his soul, to
meditate on eternity, and to contemplate the things of the other world: His
head and heart is so full of other things, that he has no time or leisure to
mind eternal things: It is the wisdom of a man that would keep his spirit free
for God, not to thrust himself into more worldly encumbrances then needs he
must. It is true, if God call a man to more then ordinary work or business, if
his call be clear, he may expect so much the more grace and assistance; for God
is not wont to be wanting to us, when he gives us a call: but when a man out of
a covetous humor grasps at more then he is able to manage without prejudice to
his spiritual state and calling as a Christian; this oftentimes proves a great
snare, and a great impediment to Heavenlymindedness. It is true, there is a
double extreme, Too much business, or too little: it is the will of God we
should walk in a particular Calling, and be diligent in it: Christianity is no
patron to idleness. But then as the neglect of a lawful Calling is one extreme,
so too much worldly business, too much encumbrance about earthly things more
then we are called to, is another extreme, and oftentimes proves a great
impediment to Heavenly-mindedness. How is it possible a man should be free for
God, and heavenly things, that is wholly drunk up and immersed in the cares of
the world?

6. Another impediment of heavenly-mindedness, is inordinate affection to
lawful things. When a man loves lawful things inordinately, and too much, this
is a great impediment to heavenly-mindedness. If any thing have more of the
heart then God and Christ, that must needs hinder the ascent of the soul to its
proper object. Where a man's treasure is, there will his beart be: if a man's
treasure be above, if he account it his great happiness to live with God, and
to enjoy him for ever; such a man will keep his heart free for God. A man who
is heavenlyminded, whose treasure and happiness is in heaven, is most careful
to keep his heart free for God: he is most curious and jealous over his
affections, fearing lest any thing should have that room and place in his
affection, that should be reserved for God and Christ. When we let out our
affection inordinately, beyond due bounds and measure; when we over-love the
creature, and over-delight in the creature; this is a great impediment to
heavenly-mindedness. Nothing can be that to us, which God and Christ is;
nothing ought to be that to us, which God and Christ is. Holy and experienced
souls are wont to say as Austin does, There is no reward more sweet to be had
from God, then God himself: whatever God gives thee beside himself, is less
then himself. Now when we set up the creature in the place of God, and give
that to the creature which is due to God only; this must needs be a great
impediment to heavenly-mindedness. A man that would be heavenly-minded whilst
he is using lawful things, ought to think with himself, These things are good
for present use, these things are suitable to my present state, these things
are good so far as I see God in them; but these things are not my happiness; my
happiness is a superior happiness; my happiness is to live with God and Christ
in the other world: therefore though I use these things, I ought not to think
them to be my chief good, nor to take up my rest in them.

7. Another impediment of heavenly-mindedness, is too much addictedness to the
love of this life. We are exceeding loath to think of going hence; we would fain
live a little longer here on earth, that we might solace our selves in outward
comforts and enjoyments. This addictedness to the present life, is a great
impediment to heavenly mindedness. He that would be heavenly minded, ought to
sit loose from this world, and the present life: he should be able to think
with contentment of going hence, and entering into the future state: the
thoughts of the divine presence into which we are to enter, should wean us from
this world, and the love of this present life. We should labor to have such
great thoughts of the Divine presence into which we are to enter, that it
should not be grievous to us to part with this world, and all creatures, and to
part with this life to go into that presence: 2 Cor. 5.8. Absent from the body,
and present with the Lord. No sooner do we leave the body, but presently and
immediately (if we be the Lords) we enter into the Divine presence. Now the
thoughts of that presence should so overpower our souls, that we should be
willing to quit our station here, to enter into that presence. It is a speech
which one of the Ancients has: There are some, says he, Solo leternitatis
amore p^^cuntur.
that are fed only with the love of eternity. O these are blessed souls
indeed! but how few such souls as these are there to be found? We are so much
wedded to the present life, so much addicted to present things, that we cannot
rise up to the contemplation of eternal things: we cannot be willing to forgo
this life, and present things, to go to God, and live with him in his eternity.
This fondness of the present life, is a great impediment to Heavenly-mindedness.

8. Another impediment of heavenly-mindedness, is presumption of long life. The
generality of men are apt to think it is soon enough to think of eternity and
the future life when they are grown old, or brought into some great sickness,
so that they have no hope of a longer life: and we are apt to think of a long
life here on earth: we are too apt to presume there are some more years we may
live, and this inclines us to think how we may make the best of this world
while we live in it; and so we put off the thoughts of the future state. But we
ought to be of another frame and temper; we ought to pray as Moses did, Psalm.
90.
Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. And
what is it so to number our days, as to apply our hearts to wisdom? but this;
So to consider that our present life is short and uncertain here on earth, as
to think of another life and state that is more lasting and permanent, and to
prepare for it. Death may surprise us before we are aware; and to be sure, we
cannot live long, much less always here on earth: this therefore is true
wisdom, to consider how we are like to spend the days of eternity, and what the
life is we are like to live in the other world. A wise man will consider the
end of things; he will consider how things are like to be with him at last.
True wisdom respects the longest state and duration of things. To presume of a
long life here on earth, which if it were the longest, is not so much as a
moment to eternity, and to forget the future state, which is everlasting, this
is the greatest folly.

9. Another impediment of heavenly mindedness, is a false opinion of the world,
and of earthly things. Men think there is more good, more happiness, more
satisfaction in the world, then indeed there is to be found in it. No man will
mind and look after an absent and an unseen happiness, when there is an
happiness, as he imagines, that is present, and lies before him. The world lies
before men as a fair and a pleasant field, and there are variety of flowers
appear in it, this and the other pleasure, this and the other contentment, that
presents it self: Surely, think men, if I am in such a condition, I shall find
something there; if I have this enjoyment, I shall find happiness there: but
the world is not that which men take it for: when they have tried the variety
of pleasures and conditions they expected happiness in, they do not find that
happiness and satisfaction in them they expected. All earthly pleasures have an
emptiness in them, and leave the soul under a greater thirst after the
enjoyment of them then it was in before. It was the speech of a Philosopher
that Plutarch mentions: What gluttonous person is there that says, (...).
Now I have eaten, and it is enough? and what amorous person says, Now I have
loved, (...)
and it is enough? Carnal pleasures are so far from quenching the thirst of the
soul, that they do increase it; and though it commonly falls out that sensual
men are soon surfeited and cloyed with one pleasure, yet not finding that which
they expect in one pleasure, that does beget in them a thirst after some new
pleasures. These golden dreams of finding happiness in earthly delights, makes
men forget the true pleasures, the pleasures that are at Gods right hand. This
imaginary happiness which men please themselves with, in earthly things, takes
them off from minding that which is solid, substantial happiness indeed.

10. Another impediment of Heavenly-mindedness, is want of a due consideration
of the glory and eternity of the future state. The reason why men desire no
more, and long no more, after future things, it is because they do not duly
consider the glory and eternity of future things. The Scripture tells us, Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive the things which God has prepared for them that love him. In his
presence there is fullness of joy, at his right hand there are pleasures for
evermore: and they shall drink abundantly of the river of his pleasure. The
glory which thou have given to me, I have given to them. All these things, and
much more, does the Scripture speak concerning the future state. Now want of a
due consideration of these things, is the cause that men are no more
heavenly-minded. Things that are not known, are not desired, are not loved, are
not longed after: Had we a due consideration of the glory and eternity of the
future state, we should be more affected with it. If we consider the glory of
the future state, either as to the privative, or positive part of it, we shall
find it a glorious and blessed state indeed. 1. If we consider it as to the
privative part, to live in a state without sin, without sorrow, without grief
or perturbation: to live in such a state, where there shall be no more wants,
no more infirmities, no more imperfections: to live in such a state, where we
shall be under no more temptations, where we shall be free from death, yea,
from the fear or possibility of death or misery: to live in such a state, where
there shall be no more eclipses of the Light of Gods countenance, where we
shall be no more in danger of loosing the sight and sense of Gods love: This is
a glorious state, if you consider it as to the privative part of it. But then,
2. If we consider the positive part of this state, to live in such a state,
when we shall see God always; when we shall always love him, always delight in
him; to live in such a state, where there shall be a full and perfect
communication of God to the soul, where there shall be perfect rest, perfect
satisfaction; this is a blessed state indeed: and then to think that there
shall be no cessation, no not the least interruption of this peace, this joy,
this solace, this satisfaction; this must needs be a blessed and glorious state
indeed. Now want of the due consideration of these things, is the cause why we
are no more heavenly-minded. Fools and slow of heart that we are, we think
there is no happiness, no joy, no comfort, no life to be had, but what is in
this world, and to be found within the confines of time: whereas, if we could
get our hearts a little out of this world, and get them up into the other
world; we should see, there is the true life, there is the true happiness,
there is the true consolation to be found, there and there only are these
things to be found. What are all the pleasures, and delights, and enjoyments of
this world, in comparison of what the glorified Saints enjoy in the presence of
God, in the sight of him, and in the communication of him to their souls? want
of a deep, solemn consideration of what is to be had and enjoyed in the future
life and state, is a great cause why we have our hearts no more taken up with
this life and state.

11. Lastly, the last impediment of Heavenly-mindedness, that we shall mention,
is want of a due consideration what is our ultimate and last end. We were not
born to live always here on earth, neither to enjoy our last happiness here on
earth; but we were created to a blessed immortality, to live in the presence of
God and the holy Angels, and to converse with God to all eternity. Now want of
a due consideration of this, is that which makes us so little heavenly-minded.
Every wise man will mind his last end; the acquiring and attaining of his last
end, is his uttermost perfection. If man were not capable of an higher
happiness, nor destinated to a higher happiness then what the brutes and
sensitive creatures are capable of, and are destinated unto, then it were his
interest to mind sensible things only: but man's last end is higher then so,
man's last end is to attain the uttermost perfection his being is capable of.
Now man is endowed with an intellectual and an immortal principle which God
has put within him; therefore man's last and ultimate end is to have a
happiness suitable to this intellectual and immortal principle which God has
put within him. Now want of a due consideration what that is by which our
beings are perfected, and in which we enjoy our last happiness and perfection,
is one cause that we are no more heavenly-minded. O, do we think that there is
no other happiness then what is to be taken in from sensible things, and what
is to be enjoyed in this life? This is a thought beneath the dignity and
excellency of our own souls: this is to forget the principles of our own
being, and the great end we were created for. Certainly our ultimate perfection
is to enjoy a blessed state of immortality, an unchangeable state of happiness;
and if we observe the pulse of our own souls, which way they beat, and what we
do naturally long for, we shall find, that which we do most long for is
immortality, and an unchangeable state of happiness: It is to be happy, and
unchangeably happy, we naturally desire. Now it is a vain thing to expect
either of these in this world: whilst we are here on earth, neither is
immortality, nor an unchangeable state of happiness to be expected: No, this is
reserved for the other world; therefore there should our thoughts and desires
lie. If we would be heavenly-minded, we should say within our selves, We never
expect happiness till we come into our own Country, where we must spend the
days of eternity: we never expect happiness till we come where God and Christ
is, until we come to see him, be with him, and enjoy him to eternity. This is
the last happiness God has destinated his elect unto: And this is the great
happiness our souls should be suspiring and breathing after.

The Second Part, Concerning Earthly-mindedness.
Col. 3.2. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth.


THere are two Observations that have been propounded out of these words. The
first was this:

That it is the duty of Christians to seek after, and to set their affections
upon the things which are above. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above.

That Christians ought to have their hearts taken off from the world, and from
earthly things, and to have their hearts carried forth to an holy contempt of
this world. Set your affections on things above, not on things upon the earth.

Having spoken to the main things which we intended from the former Point, we
come to the second:

That Christians ought to have their hearts taken off from the world, and from
earthly things, etc. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the
earth.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, we have three things to speak unto.

1. To show what we are to understand by earthly things.

2. To show what it is to have our hearts taken off from the world, and from
earthly things.

3. To show what is that holy contempt of the world that Christians should be
aspiring after: we ought to have our hearts taken off from the world, and to be
carried forth unto an holy contempt of this world.

I. What are we to understand by earthly things?

I shall very briefly touch upon this: By earthly things we are to understand
all things on this side God, all things short of God and Christ. In the first
verse it is said, Seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God: And at the third verse it is said, Your life is hid with
Christ in God. So that the things here on the earth seem to be opposed to God
and Christ; whatsoever is not God and Christ, is not to be the great and
supreme object of our affection. By the things therefore here upon the earth,
we are to understand these lower things, created things, temporal things.
Another Apostle explains this at large to us, what we are to understand by the
things on the earth: 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of the
world.

So that by things on the earth we are to understand temporal things, all
things that are found within the compass of this lower world, riches, honors,
earthly delights and pleasures, long life it self. Long life, though it be a
blessing in it self, yet it is possible we may love it inordinately, as we do
other things. Now these are the things we should not set our affections upon,
viz. all things short of God and Christ; created things, temporal things, we
ought not so to set our hearts upon any of these things, so as to make them the
great and supreme object of our affections.

II. But the second thing is that which will take us up a little more
consideration.

What is it to have our hearts taken off from the world, and from earthly
things? How is the Text to be understood, when it is said, Set your affections
on things above, not on things on the earth? Not on things on the earth. This
we shall open two ways, Negatively and Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, by showing what is not here meant, when we are bid not to set
our affections on things on the earth.

2. Affirmatively, what is here meant, when we are commanded not to set our
affections on things on the earth?

1. Negatively, what is not here meant, when we are bid not to set our
affections on things on the earth.

Negatively, we may take it in three Propositions.

1. The meaning is not, as if we may not think of earthly things at all: we may
think of earthly things as they are the works and gifts of God. The creature
was given us as a glass to contemplate God in, and therefore we may and ought
to think of these things, so as by them to rise up to the contemplation of God:
Every creature is a spectacle, Creatura omnis spectaculum est, ut in omnibus
Creatorem Artificem quaras. Augustinus.
that in it we may seek for the Creator, who is the former and maker of it:
that is a holy and a blessed use of the creature, when by the creature we are
led to the Creator; therefore that is not the meaning, when it is said that it
is our duty to have our hearts taken off from the world and earthly things,
that we may not think of earthly things at all: We may think of them as the
gifts of God, and as things to lead us unto him.

2. The meaning is not, as if we may not care for these things in a moderate
and subordinate way. The Apostle tells us, He that cares not for his own is
worse then an insidel. There is a moderate and a regular care for these things,
which is lawful. The Scripture commands men to work with their hands the thing
that is good, that they may give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

Therefore there is a moderate and a subordinate care about temporal things
which is lawful.

3. The meaning is not, that we may not use earthly things. When it is said a
Christian ought to have his heart taken off from the world, the meaning is not,
as if a Christian may not at all intermeddle with and use earthly things. It is
the observation of a Learned man upon the text: Davenant.
The Apostle bids us not to seek or to set our affections upon earthly things,
but he does not forbid us to use earthly things. The Spirit of God makes it a
piece of Antichristian superstition, that Antichrist commands to abstain from
meats which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which
believe and know the truth, 1 Timothy 4.3. It is a part of Antichristianism, to
forbid men to use the creatures of God which are lawful in themselves. And in
the same place he says, Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. It is true, we must only use
the creatures, but we must enjoy God: the creatures are not so to be used, as
that we should stick in them, and go no farther; but we must use the creature
to a farther end: we must use the creatures so, as by them to be led to God the
chief good: yet use them we may in their place, and to bring us to the last end.

So much is to be spoken Negatively, what we must not understand by this, when
it is said a Christian must have his heart taken off from the world and earthly
things.

But then Affirmatively, what is it that is here intended, when it is said we
must not set our affections upon things on the earth? What is it to have our
affections taken off from the world, and from earthly things?

I shall open this in four Particulars.

1. Not to set our affections on things on the earth, it is, not to make these
things our last end and scope. Every man has his last end, he has something
that he pursues, as his last end; now not to set our affections on things on
the earth, it is, not to pursue these things as our last end: our last end
ought to be above this world, to lie out of this world. I press toward the mark
(says the Apostle) for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3.14. Paul had something as his end which lay beyond this world, which
lay out of this world: we ought not to be content with an earthly happiness: we
ought not to think, If we can acquire an estate, live in pleasure here on
earth, provide for our selves and families, draw forth our lives to a
conderable time, and have our days filled up with earthly comforts; that this
is our last end, this is all we have to look after, and that we need have no
higher scope then these things: A Christian ought to have an end, a scope, and
an interest beyond all earthly things.

2. Not to set our affections on earthly things, it is, not to place our
happiness and felicity in these things; we should not take up our rest and
satisfaction in these things. When riches increase, set not thy heart upon
them, says the wiseman, and the Spirit of God by him. That which men pursue as
their last end, they are apt to take up their rest and happiness in it, when
once they have acquired it: That appears from that of the rich man in the
Gospel: Soul, soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine
ease, eat, drink and be merry. Worldly men make the world their chief good, and
acquiesce in it as their chief good. Now not to set our affections upon the
things on the earth, is, not to acquiesce in, and take up with the creature as
our chief good and happiness. A Christian ought to say, Bonorum summa Deus est,
Deus est nobis summum bonum. Aug.
God is my portion, he is my happiness, my felicity: God is the sum of all good
things, God is our chief good: this should be the language of a Christian. A
Christian should take up in nothing as his happiness but in God himself.

3. Not to set our affections on things on the earth, is this, not to employ
our principal care and industry about these things. Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the
kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Our chief and principal care
ought to be about spiritual and eternal things: and then we do not set our
affections on earthly things, when our first and principal care is not about
earthly things, but about those other things. To seek after, and to set a man's
affections on earthly things in this place, Toto cord desider are. Davenant.
it is with all a man's heart to desire after these things, with all a man's
might and endeavor to seek after these things. Now in this sense, we should not
set our affections on earthly things; that is, the main strength of our
desires, the main strength of our endeavors should not run out to these
things. It is an expression of Austin, Ad Creatorem tendere jubemur, non ad
crea. turam, ut efficiamur beati.
We are commanded to have our tendencie toward the Creator, not toward the
creature, that we may be made happy. The command is, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy strength, and all thy
might. We are no where commanded to love other things so; we are no where
commanded to love the creature with all our heart, and soul, and strength, and
might: we may and ought to love the creature in its place, and in subordination
to God; but we may not love the creature as we love God.

4. To have a man's heart taken off from the world, it is, to be spiritually
dead to the world. Paul says of himself that he was crucified to the world,
and the world was crucified to him, Gal. 6.14. We ought to have dead
affections, as it were, to the world and to earthly things, and to have living
affections toward God and spiritual things: Non usque adeo diligenda terrena,
quin and amplius diligendus Deus. Aug.
not but that the creature is to be beloved in its place; but earthly things
are not so to be beloved, but that God is much more to be beloved: We ought not
to love any thing better then God; nay, we ought not to love any thing equal
with God. Minus te amat, qui aliqui^ tecum amat, quod non propter te amat.
It is a sweet speech of Austin; He loves thee too little, who loves any thing
together with thee, which he does not love for thee. This is to be spiritually
dead to the world, when if our love to God and the creature be compared, our
love to the creature is but poor and mean, in comparison of that higher love we
find working in our hearts toward God himself. A holy soul should be able to
say, Lord, thou art dearer to me then heaven and earth, yea, then all things in
heaven and earth: David said so, Whom have I in heaven but thee, or whom have I
on earth that I desire in comparison of thee?

III. What is that holy contempt of the world we should be aspiring after? For
thus it is expressed in the Doctrine; A Christian ought to have his heart
carried forth to an holy contempt of this world.

That may be opened in a few particulars briefly.

1. We should have low and mean thoughts of the world. The contempt of the
world consists in this, in having low and mean thoughts of the world: he that
contemns a thing, has low and mean thoughts of that thing: He that contemns a
thing, apprehends no great worth or excellency in it, for which he should
esteem it. A Christian's contempt of the world consists in this; when he has
mean thoughts of the world, he sees no such great worth or excellency in it,
for which he should admire it. Paul accounted all things but loss and dung for
the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8. A Christan that
has a true contempt of the world, apprehends there is little good or worth in
worldly things, in comparison of God, and Christ, and eternal things. It is a
great expression of the Apostle, We look not to the things which are seen, 2
Cor. 4.18. We look not to them: What then? we overlook them, we despise them,
we look above them; we have something greater in our eye, and therefore these
things seem little to us: He that has a greater good in his eye, overlooks a
lesser thing; a greater good swallows up a lesser good. This is an holy
contempt of the world, to have low and mean thoughts of the world, to look upon
the world as having no excellenc^e in it, in comparison of God and Christ, and
eternal things.

2. The contempt of the world we should press after, is this: we should not be
too anxious and solicitous about earthly things: Matthew. 6.31. Take no thought,
saying, What shall we eat? what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? that is, take no anxious, no solicitous thought about these things.
Contemnere est rem negligere, and de ta non curare.
To contemn a thing, is to neglect it, and not to take care about it: that is a
sign of our contempt of the world, when we have no anxious thoughts about it,
when we are not much concerned about it, when we have an holy indifferency of
spirit about it; we are thankful to God if he give us these things, and yet we
are not too much dejected or cast down if he deny these things to us. I have
learned, Phil. 4.14.
faith the Apostle, in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content.
Contentation of spirit with a man's present state, is a sign that a man is
crucified to the world: For if a man be wedded to the world, then he is
troubled and discontented, if he have not all he would have.

3. The contempt of the world, and of earthly things, consists in this; when a
man accounts and thinks with himself, that he may be happy without these
things. Let us observe this well: the contempt of the world lies much in this;
when a man accounts and thinks with himself he may be happy without these
things; when a man lives under this apprehension, My happiness lies not in
these things; if God deny me these things, I may be happy without them; the
essence of happiness lies not in these things: This is a sign of the contempt
of the world; he that has such an opinion of a thing, as that he thinks he may
be happy without that thing, such a man may be said to have a contempt of that
thing: This is the contempt of the world we should labor after, so as to think
we may be happy without these things. The Stoics say of their wise man, He may
be without many things, but he wants nothing. Truly, a Christian should be
able to say so, much more; though he be without many things, yet he wants
nothing, nothing that is essential to true happiness: though he be without many
earthly comforts that others enjoy, yet he has God and Christ, and the hope of
eternal things to live upon; and he may be happy in these things, although he
want other things. When a man is fixed in his own thoughts in the estimation of
happiness, he knows he may be happy without this world: this is a sign such a
man is crucified to the world.

4. To contemn the world, is for a man to think he is not made happy by earthly
things, when he has these things: as the Apostle speaks in another case, Meat
commends us not to God: If we eat, we are not the better; if we eat not, we are
not the worse. So a Christian may say, It is not any temporal thing that
commends me to God: if I have much or little, it is not that which makes me
accepted with God. But let us not be mistaken here. First, I grant that a
Christian may see a vein of love in temporal things: He delivered me, because
he delighted in me, Psalm. 18. David saw special love, peculiar love, in a
temporal deliverance: Having given us his Son, Romans 8.
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Matthew. 6.
And seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other things
shall be added to you. When a Christian sees temporal blessings flowing from
covenant-love; when he sees them given in as appendices to greater mercies, so
far he may see the love of God in these things. Secondly, Temporal things, so
far as they conduce to a higher end, may be said in a subordinate way to
conduce to a Christians happiness. The things of this world, so far as they
conduce to keep a man from sin, and to make him serve God the better, so far
they are to be valued. Prove. 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me
with food convenient for me: lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the
Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.
Temporal things, so far as they are means to keep us from sin, and fit us for
the service of God; so far they are to be esteemed: but that which I say is,
that temporal things considered in themselves, do not constitute or make up a
Christians happiness. A Christians true happiness lies out of the road and
chanel of these things; and therefore when he has these things, he ought to
say, My happiness lies above these things. Omnis mibi copia quae Deus meus non
est, egestas est.
All that abundance of mine which is none of my God, is but my penury and want,
says Austin. All earthly things, compared with God and Christ, are none of a
Christians happiness.

5. The contempt of the world consists in this; and I take it, that much of the
spirit of the contempt of the world (if I may so express it) lies in this: When
a man's heart is carried off from the world, because his heart is reserved for
higher things. We look not to the things which are seen, but to the things
which are not seen. Paul's heart was taken off from present things, because his
heart was referved for, and taken up with higher things: Our conversation is in
heaven, Phil. 3.20. He had spoken of some before, that minded earthly things;
now he says, Our conversation is in heaven. The reason why Paul had his heart
taken off from earthly things, was, because his conversation was in heaven; he
expected other things. A Christian should have his heart rapt up with the
contemplation and admiration of eternal things. A Christian should cry out as
Austin does: O amare, O ire, O sibi perire, O ad Deum pervenire.
O to love God, O to go to him, O to die and perish to a man's self, O to come
to God! A Christian should solace and delight himself with the thoughts of the
Divine presence, and account all things here on earth little in comparison of
that presence. It is an expression which Luther has: Debemus magno animo
contemnere mundum, and pleno pectore anbelare ad gloriam futurae vitae.
We ought with a great soul to contemn this world, and with a full gale of
affection to breathe after the glory of the future life. This is the truest
contempt of the world, when the thoughts, apprehensions, desires, and
expectation of future things causes us to reserve our affections mainly and
principally for these things; when we look upon these as those things which
mainly and principally deserve our love. A Christian should keep his heart
reserved for God, and say, Lord, I would not love any thing that may not
consist with my love to thee; I would not enjoy any thing that may not consist
with my communion with thee. A Christian should be able to turn his eye upon
God, and say, Here is my riches, here is my true sweetness, my solace, my
delight, Dominus Deus meus, vita mea, dulcedo mea sancta.
my great happiness and felicity. The Lord my God he is my life, my holy
sweetness, says Austin. This is another discovery of our contempt of the
world, when a man has his heart carried off from these things upon this
account, that his heart is reserved for higher things, and that other things
have taken up his heart.

6. The contempt of the world consists in this: When our hearts sit loose from
the world, and we are at a parting point with these things: Luke 14.33.
Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my
disciple: (...).
does not bid farewell to all things, is not ready to take his leave of all
things. God does not always call us to an actual forsaking of all things; but
we must be in an habitual readiness to forsake all things when he calls us so
to do. Our hearts must not be so riveted and glued to earthly things, but we
must be in a readiness to part with them, and quit our interest in them, when
God calls us so to do. When a man holds fast his estate and comforts, when it
is clear God calls him to forgo them, it is a sign such a man has little
contempt of the world in him.

7. We ought to contemn the world so, as not to envy others for their worldly
prosperity. When a man thinks that others are happy, and that he is not
happy, because he enjoys not what they do; this is a certain sign such a man
has too great and admiring thoughts of the world and earthly things. A man
that has an holy contempt of earthly things, knows that men are not made
happy by these things; and therefore if God has given him higher and better
things, Himself, his Son, his Spirit, his grace, pardon of sin, and the hopes
of eternal things; he is not troubled to see God heaping temporal things upon
such to whom he denies these things. Therefore this is another thing wherein
the contempt of the world does consist, when we contemn the world so, as not to
envy others for their worldly prosperity.

We come now to the Reasons of the Doctrine, why we ought to have our hearts
taken off from the world, and from earthly things.

little good in earthly things. Earthly things are rather good in show and
appearance, then have any thing of solid good in them. The good that is in
earthly things is more in appearance then reality. And as the world makes a
greater show of good then indeed is to be found in it: so what good there is in
it, it is so thin and mean, that it is not that which men take it for. Prove.
23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches take
themselves wings, and flee away. Some observe, that here are two Arguments to
condemn the sin of Covetousness: the one is taken from the vanity of riches,
the other from the instability of them. It is the first of these that I am
speaking of: Will thou set thy beart upon that which is not? Riches are not
what they seem to be: there is not so much good in them as men take to be in
them. External things have little of solid worth or excellency in them. Wisdom
says of her self, that she will cause them that love her to inherit substance:
Prove. 8.21. In the Original it is [that which is] that which has essence,
substance, existence. So the meaning is, Those that love wisdom shall inherit
substantial riches, such riches as have real worth in them: Christ, grace, and
spiritual things, they are real, solid, substantial goods; there is substance,
solidity in these things. But now, external things they are not; that is, there
is none of that substantial solid worth in them. Not but that the creatures of
God are good in their kind, and for the uses for which God has appointed
them: the Lord made all things, and behold they were good, very good. But when
we say there is little good in these things, the meaning is, there is little
good in them in comparison of spiritual and eternal things. Bonum unus gratiae
majus bono Naturae totius universi. Aquinas.
The good of one Grace is greater then the good of Nature, even of the whole
Universe. Also there is little of that good in them which men take to be in
them: men think that perfection is to be found in these things, they think that
happiness is to be enjoyed in these things; earthly things are good in their
place, and for the uses God has appointed them; but they are not good to make
a man happy, they were never created for such an end: and therefore, if men
think that these things are good to make them happy, and that happiness lies in
them, they are lamentably mistaken.

mutable, changeable things: as there is little good in earthly things, so that
little good that is in them, is very mutable, variable and inconstant: This
appears from the former Scripture, Riches take themselves wings and fly away.
If a man should have a flock of Birds pitch in his Field, should he set his
heart on them, should he think himself the richer for them? before ever he can
get near them, they take the wing and fly away. So unstable and uncertain are
the things of this world; no sooner does a man approach to them, and think to
suck a little comfort and contentment from them, but they are gone, and pass
away. 1 John 2.17. 1 Cor. 7.31.
The world passes away, and the lust thereof. The fashion of this world
passes away: Temporal things are Herbae marcescentes, withering Herbs. All
flesh is as grass, and the goodliness thereof as the flower of the field, says
the Prophet, Isai. 40. Should a man set his heart on a fine flower in his
Garden? to day it flourishes, to morrow all the beauty and glory of it is gone:
such are temporal things. It is an expression Austin has, T^^spem poni^ in
rebus praes^^tibus, nec praesentibus, nec eum dieenda sunt praesentia nunquam
stantia.
Thou put thy trust in present things, which yet are not present; for those
things are not to be called present that have no consistence, that never stand
or abide in one constant state. If a man would set his heart upon any thing, it
is his greatest wisdom to set his heart upon that which is immutable; for if a
man set his heart upon changeable things, his happiness must needs alter and
change as often as the things do, that his happiness is made up of. Now all
earthly things are of a changeable nature, and therefore it becomes us not to
set our hearts inordinately upon these things: If we love unchangeable things,
we shall have an unchangeable happiness: 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world; for the world passes away,
and the lust thereof: but he that does the will of God abides for ever. The
scope of the Apostle is to dissuade us from the love of the world, and to
persuade us to the love of God: the argument that he uses to dissuade us from
the love of the world, is, because the world is a mutable thing; the argument
he uses to persuade men to the love of God, is, because God is eternal and
immutable. He that does the will of God abides for ever. One of the Ancients
reads it thus: He that does the will of God abides for ever, even as God abides
for ever. And Austine has this expression, Tenete dilectionem Dei: Hold fast
your love to God; that as God is eternal, so you may abide for ever.

unsatisfied after the g^^atest in joyment of them; Eccles. 5.10. He that
loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. A man may quickly come to
the end of all the good, the pleasantness, the sweetness, the delight, that is
in any earthly thing; and when he is come to the end of that sweetne's which he
did enjoy, he desires more; therefore when a man's enjoyment has been highest,
he still desires more: Nothing can satisfy the soul, but some transcendent
good, such a good as is so great, as is more then the soul can take in: So long
as the soul is capable of taking in more, it is not satisfied. Now a man may
take in all the delight and contentment that is to be found in earthly things;
and when he has taken in all, he is capable of taking in more. This is clear
in Solomon, who made an experiment of all things under the Sun; and when he had
tried all, he cried out, All is vanity and vexation of spirit. The capacity of
the soul is too great, and too big for any earthly thing to fill it; and
therefore when the soul has passed from one temporal thing to another, and
tried what is in one and in another, it remains unsatisfied still.

Riches avail not in the day of wrath: it will be little comfort to a man when
he comes to dye, to think what he has enjoyed, or what he is like to leave
behind him: nay, if a man have placed his happiness and felicity in earthly
things, it will be the greatest torment to him, to think that he must leave
these things. Come to a man that is at the point of death, and who knows for
certain that he shall dye; show him gold and silver, bring forth his Jewels and
most precious Treasures, tell him of his Lands and Fossessions; and how little
will these things signify? Oh but tell him of everlasting happiness, assure
him that death shall do him no harm, that there is a life beyond this, and that
he shall be c^rtainly happy in that life; and this will signify something to
him.

last happiness; our last and true happiness is beyond any thing in this world:
Mundus non patria, sed captivitas nobi^ est.
The world is not our country, but the place of our captivity and bondage. Our
last and true happiness, is to live in he Divine presence, to see and enjoy God
in the heavens. Now that which is not our last happiness, deserves not to have
the main of our affections; that which deserves to take up our hearts, is our
last happiness: we should be setting our hearts upon that which will continue
always: we should be thinking of the life we must live in the other world, and
how we are like to spend the days of eternity; that is the state that is worth
thinking of, when time shall be no more, when there shall be no more changes,
when we shall be wholly taken up in the contemplation of the first original of
all things; that is the state that is worth thinking of, of which I can say,
Thus it shall be for ever; that is the state that is worth thinking of, of
which I can say, When once I am come into it, there is no alteration in it:
Here is always joy, always life, always satisfaction: Here is no sorrow, no
pain, no grief, no death, no fear of death.

of themselves to make him ever the happier at last. It is true, Temporal
blessings, so far as they are sanctified, so far as they further a man in the
ways of God, and help him forward toward the heavenly Country, so far they are
mercies, and so far they may in a sort be said to conduce to a man's last
happiness; but consider temporal things in themselves, they have no influence
upon a man's last happiness. Love or hatred cannot be known by any thing under
the Sun. No man can conclude by the mere enjoyment of th^se things, that he is
the more beloved of God at present, or that he shall have the higher place in
heaven hereafter. Abraham says to the rich man, Son, Luke 16.25.
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus
his evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. God gives to
some men their portion in this life: This they shall have, this is all they
shall have; He fills their bellies with his hid treasures, but this is all they
shall have, he denies to them the heavenly inheritance.

blunt and hinder the soul in its pursuit ater eternal things. Amor terrenarum
viscum spiritualium.
The love of earthly things is as bird lime to the soul, as to the pursuit of
spiritual things: when a poor Bird is taken in the lime-twigs, his wings are
pinioned that he cannot fly upward: the love of earthly things pinions the
wings of the soul, that it cannot ascend to God and eternal things: Terrenarum
appetitus tenebras animarum nostrarum densat.
The inordinate desire of earthly things thickens the darkness of the soul; the
violence and impetuousness of the affections to carthly things, blindes the
judgment, and darkens the eye of the mind when the affections are violently
set upon earthly things, the mind cannot see and behold the excellency of
spiritual things. Nothing so great an enemy to growth in grace, as the love of
earthly things. A man that is addicted to the love of earthly things, can
neither see the evil that is in sin, nor the beauty that is in holiness. Mundo
alligati spiritualis vitii vix possunt nomen apprehendere.
Men that are bound and tied fast to the world, can hardly understand the name
of a spiritual sin: Tell a man that is immersed and drowned in the world, of
spiritual sins, of spiritual pride, self-love, inordinate affection,
hypocrisy, formality in duty, and the like; he understands none of these
things; his conscience is so benumbed through the love of the world, that he is
not sensible of these things And as the love of earthly things dulls the
spiritual senses of the soul, that a man cannot apprchend sin; so it blunts the
soul in the pursuit after grace and holiness: the love of earthly things kills
and extinguishes the love of God: If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. I remember it is an expression of Peter
Martyr concerning Soloman: What love could Solomon have for God, who
distributed and parted his love among a thousand wives? And we may say, What
love can men retain for God the chief good, who part and divide their love to
so many lower and inferior goods?

depressing and debasing of the soul, for a man to set his affections on
earthly things. The soul was made for higher things, and it is capable of higher
things: the soul was made for converse with God the chief good: therefore when
the affections are set upon earthly things, this is the debasing of the soul,
and the depressing of it beneath its own dignity. The soul is an eternal
principle, and must continue to eternity; therefore eternal things are most
suitable to it. Now then, when the soul is bowed down to temporal things, and
taken up in them, this must needs be a great depression of the soul.

Reproof and Humiliation to us, that we are so little of this frame. How little
are our hearts taken off from the world, and carried forth unto an holy
contempt of these things! In stead of contemning the world and carthly things,
we magnify these things in our thoughts, we make the world our great Idol. May
we not take up the Apostle's complaint, and say as he did, Many walk of whom I
have told you often, Philip. 3.
and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
who mind earthly things? They mind earthly things, that is, they only mind
them. There is a lawful minding of earthly things: but to mind them only, or
to mind them chiefly or principally, this is the thing so much to be deplored.
And yet is it not so with many that are called Christians and Professors? the
main current and stream of their affections runs out to earthly things. What is
it they are thinking of, projecting from day to day, and year to year, but
earthly things, and worldly interests? Turbatur mundus, and tamen amatur mundus
The world is troublesome and unquiet, and yet it is still beloved; men are
still fond of it: the world is full of thorns and prickles, and yet men grasp
it fast. God has been rending our estates from us by the Fire, decay of Trade,
and other ways; and yet we pursue the world as hard as ever. He is a rare soul
indeed, that can make his Appeal to heaven, and say, Lord, thou know I am
infinitely more concerned for grace, for holiness, for communion with thee, for
the assurance of salvation, then for any temporal thing. We do not blame men
for their care and diligence in the duties of their Callings; it is their duty
to be diligent in these: but that which we blame men for, is, that earthly
things have the predominancie in their affections; that this poor world, and
the interests of it, have more of their hearts and affections then God and
Christ, and eternal things have. It was a great speech of Austin: Monemus ne
mundum ametis, ut eum qui fecit mundum libere ametis.
We warn and admonish you, that you do not love the world, that you may freely
love him who made the world. Our Savior tells us, No man can serve two
masters: there cannot be two chief goods, two last ends. Sure I am, the
strength of a man's affections cannot be let out two ways at once. Now that
which we are to be reproved for is this, that the main strength of our
affections are let out upon other things, and a very little of our love (if any
at all) is let out upon God and Christ, and eternal things. We ought to reserve
the main of our love and affection for God and Christ, and eternal things: a
little of the creature should content us, so we may have much of God.

So much only in the General: but we shall endeavor to bring the Reproof a
little more home, and to point out the disease more particularly that we are
sick of. Therefore the next Use we shall make is this.

Covetousness: therefore as under the former Point we spoke something of
Heavenly mindedness; so under this Doctrine (having so fair an occasion given
us) we shall speak something of the sin of Covetousness, or Earthlymindedness.
The sin of Covetousness is an Epidemical evil, a common sin, yea a common sin
among us who profess Christ and the Gospel. He is a rare Christian indeed, that
can acquit himself from the taint of this sin. The Scripture is frequent in
warning us against this sin; and our Savior gives us a particular and an
express Caution against it: Luke 12.15.
Take heed and beware of covetousness. Here is a double Caution, a repetition
of the same Caution: See to it, keep your selves from covetousness. In some
Greek Copies it is, (...).
From all covetousness. Austin observes from this Text, Christ knew, not we,
how much it was our concernment to beware of Covetousness. We see no such great
danger in it, but Christ saw a greater danger in it then we are aware of; and
therefore he gives us a double Caution; he bids us take heed and beware of it.
It is also Austins observation, that all other vices do senescere, Sola
avaritia juvenescit.
wax old; only Covetousness is that sin which grows young: and therefore it is
commonly observed, that none are more addicted to this sin then old men.

Here we shall speak to four things, and show,

1. What Covetousness is.

2. What are the Signs and Symptoms of this sin.

3. What are the Evils of it.

4. We shall propound some few brief Remedies against it.

1. What Covetousness is. Covetousness is an inordinate and insatiable desire
after earthly things. Covetousness in a large sense respects all temporal
things. When a man is inordinate and immoderate in his desires or appetite
after any earthly thing, this is Covetousness in a large sense. But in a strict
and proper sense, Covetousness is conversant circa bonum utile, about
profitable good, or the good of profit. When a man has an inordinate appetite
after Riches, Money, Lands, Possessions, an Estate; this is Covetousness in a
strict and proper sense. Now that which makes this desire unlawful, and brings
it under the denomination of a sin, is when there is an inordinate and
immoderate desire of these things. Every desire of temporal things is not
unlawful, neither comes it under this denomination; but it is, First, the
inordinate desire; Secondly, The insatiable desire after these things.

1. When the desire of them is inordinate, and not referred to a right end. It
is the observation of a Learned man: Davenant.
Temporal things may be desired three manner of ways: 1. For the necessities of
life. 2. Or else that by them we may perform works of bounty or liberality. 3.
Or else for fruitions sake: so to desire these things, as to make them our end,
and to take up our rest in them. It is the last of these that constitutes and
makes the sin of Covetousness. We may desire earthly things so far as they
conduce to the necessities of this life, and so far as we may have opportunity
to do good with them: but to desire them so as to make them our last end, and
to enjoy them as our happiness, this is that which makes Covetousness. This is
a sure Rule: No temporal thing is to be desired for it self, but in order to a
farther end. We must enjoy God, and use the creature: we must enjoy God, only
use the creature in order to our enjoyment of God. Now when we stick in the
creature as our last end, this is sinful.

2. As in Covetousness there is an inordinate desire of earthly things; so
there is in Covetousness an insatiable desire of earthly things. Much of the
formality of this sin lies in this. A covetous mind is never satisfied: He
that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver; this is the proper
signification of the Greek word: (...) properly signifies an unsatiable desire
of having more: when a man has never so much, he still desires more. Like a
man that is sick of the Dropsy, the more he drinks, the more he thirsts: this
is the covetous man. It is the nature of earthly things, that they cannot
restinguere suim animae, they cannot stanch the thirst of the soul: therefore
the more a man has of them, (if Covetousness be predominant in him) the more
he thirsts after them.

We come now to the second thing, and that is to show what are the Signs and
Symptoms of this Sin. Covetousness is a spiritual sin, and therefore cannot be
so well detected as some other sins may be: it is true, the objects of
covetousness are external things, as money, riches, lands, possessions, and
these things are visible; but forasmuch as these things may be desired and used
lawfully or unlawfully, according as the disposition or affection of the mind
is conversant versant about them; therefore it is more difficult for us to say
that such a man lies under the predominancie of that sin: But though it may be
more difficult for us to fasten the guilt of this sin upon another, yet every
man's conscience may be judge, how far this evil root prevails in himself. Now
the Signs and Symptoms of this Sin, are such as these.

mind and thoughts run out solely or principally upon earthly things. The
Apostle says of some, that they mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. that is,
they do solely and wholly mind them, they think of nothing else: When a man
thinks of nothing else from one end of the week to another but temporal
concernments, this is a sign of the predominancie of this sin. Our Savior
tells us, Where a man's treasure is, there will his heart be. If a man's heart
lie in the world, if his thoughts and affections lie in it, it is a sign the
world is his treasure, the world is his chief good. It is true, no worldly
business can be dispatched without thoughts; and he that has affairs to do in
the world, must necessarily have thoughts about them: but it is one thing to
have a man's thoughts exercised about things that are necessary, and belong to
his Calling; and another thing for a man electively, and upon choice, to let
out his thoughts upon earthly things. If a man do not electively, and upon
choice, let out his thoughts upon earthly things, he is glad when he is freed
from the cumber of the world; he is glad when he has an opportunity to be
freed from his necessary engagements, to attend on holy things: Whereas, a man
that minds earthly things out of a covetous bumour, the natural bent of his
mind carries him to these things; and upon choice he desires to converse with
these things, rather then with spiritual and divine things.

greatest interest; that is, when a man is more solicitous to secure the world,
then to secure heaven: When a man is more afraid of temporal wants, temporal
streights, then he is, that he shall miss salvation. It was the counsel that
our Savior gave, Labor not for the meat which perishes. Joh. 6.27.
We may labor for the meat which perishes, in a sense: He that commands us
not to kill, commands us to preserve life; and he that commands us to preserve
life, commands us to look after those things that are necessary to preserve
life. But the meaning is, we may not labor for the meat that perishes, in
comparison of the meat that endures to everlasting life. We ought not to make
temporal things our great interest; we should not be so much concerned about
temporal things, as we are about spiritual and eternal. Now when a man is of
this temper: I will secure my worldly interest, whatsoever becomes of my soul;
a few thoughts, a little care shall serve the turn in relation to Salvation,
but I will make the utmost advantage of the world I can possibly; I will loose
no opportunity of advancing my self in the world, whatsoever becomes of the
interest of my soul, and of Salvation: This is a certain sign that
covetousness is predominant in such a man.

Let your conversation he without covetousness, and be content with the things
that you have, Heb. 13.5. intimating thus much, that if a man have not a holy
contentation with his present estate, he cannot keep himself free from the sin
of covetousness: Godliness with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. So much
as godliness prevails, so far it makes a man content with his present estate;
so far as covetousness prevails, it makes him discontent. When a person is
quarrelling with the providence of God, and thinks God does not deal well with
him, because he is not so as he would be, has not such accommodations as he
would have, and it may be others have: It is a sign this evil humor prevails
too much in him.

designs and projects are for the world: that is a man's last end which he
designs most, intends most, and refers all things unto. When a man's highest
design is for the world; it is not the design of his life to glorify God, or
to promote the great interest of Religion in himself or others; but his great
design is to enrich and greaten himself: it is a sign that a man is an
earthly-minded man.

stint nor bounds to a man's desires: When, although God has given a man the
most liberal portion of these things, he is still desiring more. Austin
compares a covetous man to Hell: Look as hell and the grave are never
satisfied, but are always craving; so when men's desires are boundless, the
greatest affluence and confluence of worldly enjoyments put no limits to their
desires, but they are as much craving as ever they were. This is a certain
Sign of the predominancie of this evil. Isai. 5.8. Woe to them that join house
to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be
placed alone in the midst of the earth.

unlawful means to acquire and get earthly things: when a person will lie,
cheat, cozen, defraud, use false weights and balances, strain his conscience
any way to get profit and advantage. Austin says of a covetous person, He is
content with an empty conscience, so he may have a full chest: A covetous man
will strain his conscience any way to advantage himself. This is a certain
sign of the predominancie of this sin. He that will hazard the loss of his
soul for any worldly advantage, must needs love the world too much. When a man
voluntarily commits any known sin, such a man apparently hazards the loss of
his soul: therefore when a man to gain the world will hazard the loss of his
soul, it is a sign such a man loves the world too much.

Inexplebilis appetitus animi quaerentis divitias, and in illis tanquam in
summo bono sidentis. Davenant.
when a man places and reposes his trust and confidence in earthly things. It
is the definition of covetousness, which is given by a Learned man, That it is
an insatiable desire of the mind seeking after riches, and trusting in them as
in a man's chief good. That which a man desires and pursues as his last end
before the acquisition of it; when he has acquired it, he acquiesces and rests
in it. It is proper to a rich man to trust in his riches: and this is apparent
from that speech of the Rich man which our Savior mentions, Luke 12. when he
had gotten riches together, he says to his soul, Soul, take thine ease, thou
have much goods laid up for many years. So Job 31.24. If I have made gold my
hope, or have said to the fine gold. Thou art my confidence. Job professes his
integrity by this, that he did not make gold his confidence; that is an
argument, that it is the property of a covetous man so to do; 1 Timothy 6.17.
and therefore the Scripture warns us not to trust in uncertain riches: This
intimates that it is natural to men so to do.

tenacious spirit; when a man will be sure to hold fast all that he has, and
will part with nothing. Covetousness is an inordinate desire, both of getting
and of keeping earthly things: as covetousness discovers it self one way, when
men have an inordinate desire of getting what they have not; so covetousness
discovers it self another way, when their hearts are clung to what they have
gotten; when they have an inordinate desire of keeping what they have. It is a
Precept which our Savior gives, Luke 12.33. Sell that which you have, and give
alms. This is a hard saying, and few can bear it: It is true, this Precept
ought to be understood aright, it is not binding at all times; for this is a
Rule in Divinity, Praecepta assirmantia non Ligant ad sempes.
Affirmative Precepts, though they are binding, yet not at all times: But this
Precept, when Christ says, Sell that which ye have, and give alms, is so far
binding, that a man should be ready to part with his estate, when God calls him
to it: when it may make much for the glory of God, and the advantage of the
Gospel; when a man has a clear call to part with his estate, a man ought to be
ready so to do. We are not to understand this in the Popish sense, as if we
were bound to sell our estates and go into a Monastery: But when it may make
for the glory of God, and the advantage of the Gospel, and a man has a call to
part with his estate, then a man should be ready to part with it; that I take
to be the meaning of that Precept. On the contrary, when a man holds the world
so fast, that he will not part with a little of his estate upon the highest and
best accounts; that is a sign of the predominancie of this sin of covetousness.

parsim mious sordid spirit, that is, when, though a man be willing to part
with something of his estate, yet not in proportion to what God has blessed
him with, or is becoming of him. The Moralists observe, Covetousness is a sin
opposed to Liberality: Now the Scripture teaches us, the liberal man devises
liberal things. The Philosopher observes, Propter honestatem, and recte quibus
oportet, and quando oportet.
the liberal man will give for honesty sake, to whom it becomes him to give,
and when it becomes him to give: A liberal person considers what is becoming
the dignity of his person, place and condition, and he gives proportionably.
When a man observes to decorum, but suffers a person much inferior to him in
place, in dignity and condition, to excel him ^n acts of Charity; this is a
sign of an illiberal and covetous spirit.

Thus have I given the Signs and Symptoms of this sin.

3. I come to show in the next place the evils of this sin: there is more of
this sin in us then we are aware of, and more evil in it then we are aware of:
Let us consider well the evil of this sin.

1. Covetousness is idolatry. This is twice mentioned in the Scripture: Ephesians.
5.5. This know, that no covetous man, who is an idolater, has an inheritance
in the kingdom of God and Christ, etc. So Col. 3.3, 5. Mortify your earthly
members. What are they? fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupisence, and covetousness, which is idolatry. It is not for nothing that
this is twice mentioned; a covetous man is called an idolater, and covetousness
is called idolatry. The Spirit of God would put a brand upon this sin, the
blackest brand; and what is the brand the Spirit of God would put upon the sin
of covetousness? he calls it idolatry. Oh let us take heed how we love that sin
which God designs to render most odious and abominable. There are several
reasons given by Learned men, why covetousness is called Idolatry. 1.
Negatively, Covetousness is not called Idolatry, in respect of a covetous man's
intention, as if he intended to make his money his God; but in respect of
likeness and similitude, because a covetous man shows that respect to his
money, as an idolater does to his idol. 2. Positively, Covetousness is called
idolatry: 1. Bucause idolatry is one of the worst of sins. 2. Because a
covetous person sets up his wealth and riches in the place of God. A covetous
man loves his wealth more then God; he trusts in his riches more then in God,
and he serves his riches, and is more solicitous about them, then he is
soliticious to serve and please God.

1. A covetous man loves these outward things more then he loves God: that is a
man's God, which has most of his heart. The great Commandment is, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength. When a man loves any thing more then God, that is his god: Therefore
it is well said of one of the Ancients, that a covetous man is guilty of
idolatry, Non exhibitione ceremoniarum, sed oblatione concupiscentiarum.
not by the offering any ceremonies of worship to his gold and silver, but by
the oblation of his own desires and affections: What the affection of the heart
goes out most unto, that is set up in the place of God.

2. A covetous man trusts in his riches: It is proper to God only to be the
object of our trust. He that I make to be my God, he only ought to be the
great object of my trust. Psalm. 91.2. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge
and my fortress, in him will I trust. So that whatsoever it is we make the
great object of our trust, that is our God. A covetous man trusts in his
wealth: Psalm. 52.7. Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but
trusted in the abundance of his riches.

3. A covetous man serves (...) riches. Hence is that of our Sa^^our, Matthew.
6.24. Ye cannot se^ God and mammon. All a coveto^ man's care is to serve his own
prof^ he has little care to serve and ple^ God. This is the first thing to she
the evil of covetousness, it is Id^latry.

2. Covetousness is such a sin (...) does in a peculiar manner alien^ and
estrange the heart from God. The Schoolmen observe, that covetou^ness is such
a sin as makes us clea^ fastest to the creature, Maxim adhaesivum creature,
and maxim aversivum a Deo.
and turns us ar^^ farthest from God. The proper for mal reason and nature of
sin lies i^ these two things: 1. In the aver^sion of the soul from God the
chief good. 2. In the conversion of the soul to the creature: and covetousness
carries both these two in it, i^ carries the soul from God, the chie^ immutable
good, and carries it to the creature, and inferior mutable good.

3. Covetousness is altogether inconsistent with the love of God, 1 John 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. Austin observes from those words, There are
two loves; the love of the world, and the love of God: If the love of the world
inhabit in us, the love of God cannot enter into us: And hence he infers,
Exclude malum amorem mundi, ut implearis amore Dei.
Shut out the evil love of the world, that so thou may be filled with the
love of God. When the heart is fraught and filled with other loves, there is no
room for spiritual and divine love. This is a sure rule, There cannot be two
last ends; if the world be a man's last end, he cannot love God as his last end;
and therefore the love of the world is inconsistent with the love of God.

4. Covetousness is such a sin as is most inconsistent with our communion with
God. It is a speech of one of the Ancients, Amatorem mundi odit spiritus
Christi.
The Spirit of Christ loathes a man that is a lover of the world. God is
curious of nothing so much as of his peoples affections. My son, give me thy
heart, and, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. When those
affections which should be reserved for God, are reserved for other things, God
loathes and abominates such a man: If any man love me, he will keep my words,
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our aabode
with him, Joh. 14.23. God promises, if a man love him, he will make his abode
with him: covetousness is such a sin as is inconsistent with our love to God;
therefore where the love of God is not, God will never make his abode with such
a soul.

5. Covetousness is such a sin as is most directly contrary to the nature of
grace, and the work of the new creature in the soul: the reason is, the nature
of grace is to carry out the soul to spiritual things, and to cause it to
desire spiritual things; grace causes the soul to mind a spiritual happiness,
and to look after a spiritual happiness: grace makes a man see an excellency
in the pardon of sin, in the favor of God, in the image of God, and in
conformity to God. On the contrary, covetousness causes a man to place his
happiness in external things; a covetous person places his happiness in those
things which are bona corporis, the good things of the body: he regards not
grace and spiritual things, which are bona animi, the good things of the mind.
Hence it is that the Scripture ranks covetousness amongst the worst of sins;
Ephesians. 5.5. Colos. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
adulterers, nor esseminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. Here we see covetousness is rankt with the worst of
sins: covetousness is as directly contrary to the nature of grace, as a gross
sin, and in some respect more; and the reason is, because it is possible a man
by surprise, and upon a sudden temptation, may be overtaken with a gross sin,
when yet the bent of his soul has been set against it: but covetousness
consists in this, when the bent of a man's affections lies toward earthly
things; and therefore nothing is more directly contrary to the nature of Grace
then this sin; and it becomes us to look to this, because it is so inconsistent
with the nature of Grace: The thorny ground fell short of a true work of Grace,
upon this account, because the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of
riches did choke the world. Many a man's profession comes to naught, and never
rises up to true grace, because the love of the world is predominant in him:
though he may go far, and have some seeming good affections, yet all comes to
nothing, because the world has the predominancie in his heart. How much does
it concern us to look well to it, to see that we do not loose all our
profession upon this account, that the world has had more of our hearts then
God and Christ have had?

6. Covetousness is such a sin as is most contrary to our future life:
hereafter God shall be all in all. hereafter we shall live upon God
immediately, without other things. In heaven, as we shall have no other
happiness but God, so we shall desire no other happiness but God himself. If it
were possible that the Saints and Angels could desire any thing which they have
not, they could not be happy; for this is the nature of happiness, to have all
the good a man would have. The Saints and Angels in heaven have God for their
happiness, and they are satisfied in him, and desire nothing more. Now when the
heart is carried out after other things, and pursues them as the chief good:
this is most contrary to our future life. It was the speech of a wise and holy
man: Since God shall be all in all hereafter, the less we have to do with the
creature here any more then we needs must, the better. If we were of a right
temper of spirit, we should desire earthly things no farther then were for
present necessity, and as they were accommodated to our present state. True
happiness lies out of the road of these things; true happiness is in another
chanel; true happiness is to see God, to love God, to enjoy God: This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God. When we pursue earthly things as our
great happiness, and have vast designs after these things; this is most
contrary to our future life, which is to enjoy God, and him only.

Lastly, Covetousness is the root of many other sins. The Scripture tells us
expressly, That covetousness is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. A covetous
person sticks at no sin; so he may enrich himself, and compass his own ends, he
will omit the duties God requires, and commit the sins God forbids. God enjoins
secret Prayer, Family Duties, and attendance upon the Ordinances; a covetous
person is so intent upon the world, that he cannot find time for these things:
So for sins of commission, a covetous person will break through many a known
command of God, to come at the world. Covetousness is a fruitful sin; a
covetous person sins against his Neighbor, against himself, and against God.
1. A covetous man sins against his Neighbor; he extorts from another more then
is just and equal, and so covetousness is a sin that is contrary to equity:
Avaritia excedit in acci^iendo, and desicit in dando.
Covetousness exceeds in taking, and is defective in giving; and so is a sin
against equity. 2. Covetousness is a sin against man's self; by this sin a man's
affections are disordered, and turned out of the right chanel: Our affections
were given us to love God the chief good; by this sin they are turned aside to
inferior goods. And hence is it that Austin calls that a perverse love,
whereby the will is turned aside from an unchangeable good, to a mutable
changeable good. 3. It is a sin against God; forasmuch as a covetous person for
a temporal good contemns an eternal good. All these considerations may serve to
set forth something of the evil of this sin.

4. I come in the last place to propound some Remedies against this sin.

1. As an Antidote against covetousness, Let us consider, we must shortly leave
these things: that is not worth setting a man's heart upon, which he must
shortly leave. We know what our Savior says, Luke 12.20.
Thou fool, this night shall they take thy soul from thee, and then whose shall
these things be? What folly is it to make that our happiness, which we cannot
keep always? that is true happiness, which a man may enjoy always; and it is a
pityful happiness that must have an end. Why should we covet that much, which
when we have gotten it, we can keep but a little while! It is an expression of
Austin upon those words, The world passes away, and the lust thereof: Quod
vis? utrum amare temporalia, and transire cum tempore; ant mundum non amare,
and vivere^ cum Deo?
What will thou? will thou love temporal things, and pass away with time? or
else will thou not love the world, and live with God? It might be one good
remedy against covetousness, to meditate of death often. It is Austins
observation, The disease of covetousness is by nothing better cured, then when
the day of death is continually thought of: if a man could think this with
himself, I must shortly dye and leave these things, this would moderate his
desire to these things.

2. Consider, a man's life lies not in these things, whilst he has them: So our
Savior teaches us expressly, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness:
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses. Our life lies not in these things; and there are two reasons of it:
1. Because the abundance of outward things cannot preserve a man's life: the
rich dye as well as the poor, the noble as well as the ignoble. Pale death with
an equal foot knocks at the palaces of princes, and at the cottages of poor
men. 2. Because true happiness does not lie in these things whilst a man injoys
them: every creature has vanity written upon it; and when a man has most of
the world, he still remains unsatisfied. No earthly thing is suitable to the
nature and capacity of the soul: The soul is a spiritual thing, and desires a
spiritual happiness; the soul is an immortal thing, and desires an immortal
happiness; and therefore when a man has most of this world, he still desires
something more.

3. Consider, a little will serve the turn to carry us to our journeys end. It
is not likely we should live longer then the rest of mankind have lived before
us; it is no difficult thing to see to the end of our life: now a little
provision will serve the turn for a short journey.

4. We shall have no need of earthly things in the other state. It is certain
we brought nothing into this world, and we shall carry nothing out of it: We
shall carry nothing into the next world with us, but our grace: earthly things
will be of no use to us at the end of time. Our happiness in the next world is
a spiritual happiness: the holy Angels and glorified Saints are happy without
those things we so much admire; and we must be happy by another happiness at
last, if ever we be happy.

5. If we would be kept from this sin, Avarus nimis est cui Deus non sufficit.
Aug.
let us study Gods all-sufficiencie and the divine perfection. He is too
covetous a person indeed, to whom God himself is not sufficient. God is a
happiness sufficient for himself; he is an happiness sufficient to the Saints
and Angels, and therefore in reason he should be a happiness sufficient for us.
God is the chief good, the center of all perfection. Austin.
What is it that thou love, that thou will not love God? If thou will love
any thing, love the best thing; if thou will covet any thing, covet the best
thing: study Gods all-sufficiencie and the divine perfection, there thou will
find the highest object for thy affections.

6. Let our desires run out much after eternal life. It is an expression of
Austin: We ought, says he, to be covetous after eternal life. The more our
desires run out in one chanel, the less will they run out in another. Did we
covet to live with God more, to be admitted into the Divine presence, to live
in that state in which the Saints and Angels live, we should covet other things
less: this is the truly noble covetousness; we cannot covet this too much, to
live with God in his eternity. Oh let us love eternal life: If we have right
thoughts of the future life and the future state, we shall see nothing worth
desiring and coveting in comparison of that state.

7. Let us pray for a holy contentation of spirit with our present state. This
is the Directiou which the Apostle insinuates, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation
be without covetousness, and be content with the things which you have.
Contentation with our present state, would prevent covetousness; the reason why
our desires are immoderate, is because we are not content with Gods allewance.
Divine providence is never overseen, Divina providentia not potest falli.
never mistaken. Divine Wisdom measures out to every man what is best; and if
we could think so, that would keep our desires from being too violent and
impetuous after these things.

Lastly, let us set before us the example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ;
he is the highest Pattern of holiness in every kind. Christ, when he was in
the world, he was Lord of all, yet he possessed little; and as he possessed
little of the world, so he did not covet and seek after the things of the
world. His heart was wholly taken up in glorifying the Father, and in finishing
the work which he had given him to do: he minded not gold or silver, lands or
possessions; his heart was set upon other things. True it is, that having taken
to himself, not only our nature, but also the infirmities of it; he used the
things of the world in his passage, as things accommodate unto that state of
Humiliation, unto which he had voluntarily subjected himself: yet a little
sufficed him of these things that were necessary for the support of nature; so
far was he from designing to heap up wealth and riches, and from seeking great
things for himself in the world.

Admonition. To admonish us not to set our hearts upon the world and earthly
things. This is the counsel which the Spirit of God gives us, 1 John 2.15. Love
not the world, nor the things of the world. This Admonition is most solemn: if
this solemn Admonition, which the Spirit of God gives us, will not bear weight
in our conscience; what little hope can we have that any other Admonitions
should take place? Vae tibi si amaveris condita, and deserueris Creatorem:
pulcra tibi sunt, sed quanto pulcrior est qui ista formavit? Aug.
if so clear and express a Prohibition (Love not the word) do not bear sway
with us, what should? Woe to thee, says Austin, if thou love created things,
and forsake the Creator: these things seem beautiful unto thee, but how much
more beautiful is he that made these things? We are all of us too prone to fall
into the love of the world, and of earthly things. When first we left God in
our Apostacy in Adam, we fell from God into the creature, and there we have
stuck ever since; and it must be the mighty power of divine. Grace to recover
us out of the creature, and to bring us back to God: the love of the world is
the great temptation to most of us. I often think of the last counsel which an
holy man gave a little before his death: as he was drawing on toward his
dissolution, he called his Relations to him, and gave them this as his last
advice: Make sure of Christ (says he) and take heed of the world; I have found
that my greatest enemy: If the world be our greatest enemy, we have need to
watch so much the more against it. That which we shall do more in the
prosecution of this Use, is to propound several Considerations to take us off
from the love of the world and earthly things.

First, Consider, the love of the world, and of earthly things, is a great
wrong and injury done to God. Aug.
He that loves the creatures more then God, offends the Creator. We cannot love
the world too much, but we must of necessity love God too little. No man can
serve two masters. So much as our love is let forth inordinately upon the
creature, it must of necessity be withdrawn from God. Now this is the highest
Sacrilege and Injustice: Sacrilege, to rob God of that which is his due;
Injustice, to give that to the creature which is not due to it.

Secondly, consider, the Soul was made for greater things: the Soul being an
immortal and an eternal principle, was made to converse with eternal things,
and to seek for happiness in eternal things. Therefore when we love temporal
things, and pursue them as our happiness, we forget the true nobleness and
dignity of our own souls. That which does distinguish us from the Brutes, is an
intellectual principle, whereby we are capable of contemplating and pursuing
something that is eternal: the Brutes mind present things. It is the property
of Sense, to mind something present, and to go no further. When we only mind
and pursue present things, we depress our selves beneath our own species, and
bring our selves; as it were into the rank of Brutes and sensitive creatures.

Thirdly, consider, there are greater things for us to love; there is a greater
and fairer happiness that lies before us: we have God and Christ to love: there
are eternal things that lie before us. Non satiat animam nisi incorruptibilis
gaudii vera and certa aeternitas. Aug. Sero te amavi pulchritudo tam antiqua
and tam nova, sero te amavi. Aug.
Nothing satisfies the soul, but the true and certain eternity of that joy
which is not corruptible. Who would fix his eyes upon a Glowworm, that has
the Sun to look upon? I have loved thee to late (says Austin) O thou that art
so ancient a beauty, and so new and fresh a beauty, I have loved thee too late.
We have the living and eternal God to love, and yet we love dying things. Well
may we wonder at our selves, that having the infinite and eternal God, whom we
might make the object of our affections, we should take up with things so far
short of him. What are a few drops compared to the Ocean? what are a few weak
rays in comparison of the Sun? what are all the creatures in comparison of the
Creator? God is an infinite Sea of perfection: there are no bounds nor limits
to his perfections. In God there is all good that is desirable, all perfection
imaginable, all perfection possible. Do we desire life? he is the fountain of
life. Do we desire wisdom? he is the fountain of wisdom. Do we desire holiness?
he is the fountain of holiness. Neither is there any thing we can conceive to
be truly excellent and good, but it is in him: yea, whatsoever perfection is
possible to be, it is in God. Deus est bonum infinitissime infinitum.
Bradwardin.
God is such a good as is most insinitely infinite. O! what folly is it then to
have our hearts taken off from the infinitely-blessed God, and to have them set
upon little narrow things? It is an expression that one of the Ancients has to
this purpose: The Angels are so inflamed with divine love, that all other
things, yea they themselves seem vile to themselves, in respect of God whom
they love. Did we know God more, we should not be so fond of other things. Oh!
let us turn our souls upon God the chief good; there may we love freely, and
cannot exceed in loving him.

Fourthly, consider, the world and earthly things cannot give happiness unto
men. That is wise love, when a man loves that which will make him happy.
Earthly things cannot do this. You may say, How does that appear? That is
easily made out in few words. Earthly things cannot give a man satisfaction
while he has them; they cannot keep him from death; they cannot comfort him in
death; and least of all can they be a happiness to him after death. Now who
would love that which will not answer the end for which he loves it? The reason
why men love earthly things (although they will not confess it) it is, because
they think to find happiness in them: but now that happiness that men think to
find, is far from them. No temporal thing will afford that to a man, which he
desires and expects from it. Men expect satisfaction from what they do pursue,
but satisfaction is far from them. Why should a man be fond of that, which when
he has it, his happiness must be in something above it; and when he wants it,
it is possible for him to be happy without it. If we had all the things in
this world we could desire, if we are the children of God, and have indeed
tasted that the Lord is gracious, there is something above those things that we
shall still desire. Now if when we have the greatest abundance and confluence
of earthly things, there is something else that we desire, and something else
that must make us happy in the midst of these things, viz. the presence of
God, and the enjoyment of him; and that it is possible for us to be happy in
those things, without earthly things; then there is no reason why our hearts
should be so inordinately set upon these earthly things.

Fifthly, consider, the inordinate love of earthly things is a perverting of
the End for which God gives us these things. God never gave us the creatures,
that we might make them our happiness, or pursue them as our last end; but God
gives us the creatures, that we might see himself in them, admire him in them,
and pass from them to him. It is a speech of Austin: The creature is to be
praised for the sake of God the author and original of it; not to be worshipped
and adored, as if it self were God. All things are of him, and by him, and to
him, Romans 11.36. All things are from God, and they ought to lead to him:
therefore when we love the creatures as our chief good, and stick in them as
our last happiness, we pervert the end for which they were given to us: the
creatures were never given for such an end, but they were given for this end,
that we might ascend to God by them. We ought to use the creatures, not to
enjoy them. Now, then do we use a thing, when we use it to a farther end: we
ought to use the creatures in order to our enjoyment of God as our last end;
but we ought not to take up with them, as if we had no higher end then to enjoy
them.

Sixthly, consider, the inordinate love of earthly things is an argument of
great ignorance and unbelief. Every man would desire and love the best thing:
did he certainly know and believe that there are better things then these that
are present to Sense, he would love those things. We look not to the things
that are seen, 2 Cor. 4. Paul knew that there were better things then those
things that are seen, and that these things were real and substantial; and
therefore his heart was carried out after these things. Now because the
generality of men do not see these things, nor are acquainted with them,
therefore they desire them not. The world lies before men, as a fair and
pleasant garden, and there is many a goodly flower to be seen in it; here is
pleasure, there is profit, there is honor; these captivate the eyes of men;
and because things invisible to the outward senses are not seen or perceived by
them, therefore they mind not these things. But O ye sons of men, how long
will ye turn the glory of God into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and
seek after leasing? Psalm. 4.2. What folly and ignorance is it, to think that
there are no higher things then those which the Brutes are capable of
conversing with as well as you? The Brutes may have their outward senses
delighted as well as you; they may be taken and affected with present visible
things as well as you: but where are your souls in the mean time? where is your
intellectual part? Can Reason discover nothing to you but what is present, and
obvious to Sense? why then is the candle of the Lord set up within you? What
sottishness and stupidity is it, to believe that there is no happiness to be
found, but what is to be found in this world? As if the life which God lives,
were no happiness; as i^ so be the life which the Saints and Angels live in
above, were no happiness While men only seek earthly things it is a certain
sign that they are ignorant of these things.

Seventhly, consider, the inordinate love of the world, and of earthly things,
does greatly unfit a man for death. Die we must, that is certain and the time
of our life here is mos^ uncertain. Now what folly is it to be found in such a
frame, as will certainly unfit us for death? Pythagoras says of Philosophy,
That it is a meditation of death. (...).
Certainly the life of a Christian should be a continued meditation of death:
and if a Christian should always be meditating of death, that he may die well,
die happily, and die comfortably; then certainly it will be his greatest folly
to be taken up with those things that must greatly unfit him for death. Now
there is nothing that will more unfit a man for death, then the inordinate love
of earthly things. If a man's heart lie in the world, how ^oth will he be to
part with the world? No man is willing to part with that which he loves much.
When a man that is a lover of the world comes to die, his heart is as it were
rent from him: his heart lies in the world, and yet he must be rent from that
which he loves so much. An holy soul, an heavenly-minded man, has sent his
heart beforehand into heaven; and it is no difficult thing for him to be
willing that his person should be removed there where his affections are gone
before: but now an earthly-minded man, when his person comes to be removed out
of the world, he leaves his heart, as it were, behind him; and it must needs
be very grievous and bitter to him to part with the world, that has seen
nothing better then the world.

Eighthly, to take us off from the love of earthly things, consider, that all
these things must have an end. The earth also, and the works that are therein,
shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. Should a man set his heart upon that which
after a little while must be consumed to ashes? If a man would love wisely, he
should love that which he might always love. Nothing but eternal things last
always; and therefore the truest wisdom is to love these things. It is easy
for a man to think himself out of all the happiness of this world. A man may
think himself beyond the happiness that is in riches, honors, or pleasures; a
man may easily come in his thoughts to the end of the happiness that is in
these things. Now should a man make that his happiness which he can think
beyond? there is a happiness that a man cannot think himself out of, nor think
beyond it; this happiness is our God, who is infinite and eternal; this is such
a happiness that we can never come to the bottom of. Oh! it is good to love him
as our happiness: if we love the world as our happiness, we and our happiness
are like to pass away together. When the Apostle admonishes us, Love not the
world; what is the argument he urges? The world passes away, and the lust
thereof. The world is a transient thing; and as the world passes away, so the
lusts thereof pass away: when those things are gone which men had made the
object of their love and affections, they have nothing left to set their
affections upon. When this world comes to be burnt up, and the works thereof,
none of those objects are to be seen or enjoyed, which now at the present draw
men's hearts so much to them; Nay, (not to go so far) when men must enter with
their naked souls into eternity, and must leave all these things behind them;
what will they have to love then? how stripped, and naked, and forlorn, may we
well suppose a carnal soul, who was only filled and fraught with
creature-loves, and the love of earthly things, to be, when he comes to leave
these things behind him! All the objects of his affections are left behind
him; he has none of those things left him which once he let out his heart
upon. What a pitiful empty thing is a miserable soul, that is separated from
the Divine presence? while he lived here on earth, he made a shift to love the
creatures, and to suck out as much contentment from them as he could; but now
he is in Eternity, he has none of these things to love: And now it is a great
aggravation of his misery, to remember that he loved these things that did
deceive him.

Ninthly, The inordinate love of earthly things is a sign that a man is of an
earthly carnal spirit, and that his name shall be written in the earth.

1. The love of earthly things is a sign that a man is of an earthly spirit:
Talis est quisque qualis ejus dilectio; terram diligis, terra eris.
Every man is as his love is; if he loves the earth, he himself shall be earth,
says Austin. Every man is molded into the nature of what he loves; if he
loves the earth, he himself is turned into a piece of earth. Austin observes,
That the two sorts or kinds of love that are in the world, have constituted
two kinds of Cities; the heavenly City, and the earthly City. If a man be a
lover of heaven and the things above, he is a Citizen of the Heavenly
Jerusalem; if he be a lover of the earth, he is a Citizen of this world:
therefore let a man put the question to himself, and ask himself what it is
that he loves, and he may know what Citizen he is. The predominant love of the
world, and of earthly things, is a sign that a man is a worldly man, a man of
this world, and that he belongs to it, and that he has nothing to do with the
heavenly City, and the spiritual corporation that is above.

2. The love of earthly things is a sign that a man shall be written in the
earth* It is a great expression of the Prophet, Jer. 17.13. O Lord, the hope of
Israel all that forsake thee shall be confounded; they that depart from thee,
shall be written in the earth, etc. When do men forsake God? when they leave
God, and adhere to the creature: that the following words make out, because
they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters. When men forsake
the living God, and embrace dying creatures, then they depart from God. Now all
such shall be written in the earth: Coelo extorres, and aeternum ad exitium
destinati. Glassius.
an Elegant expression; what is the meaning of it? Banished from heaven, and
destinated to eternal destruction: So one Learned man interprets it. Calvin
carries it much to the same sense: Your name shall be here on earth, but it
shall be blotted out in heaven; that is, there shall be no portion for you in
the Kingdom of Heaven. The Apostle says expressly, No covetous person, which is
an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephesians.
5. Or we may understand it thus: They shall be written in the earth; whatsoever
account and estimation men may be of in this world, they shall be of no account
above with God and the holy Angels; their names shall be written in the earth:
they love the earth, and all the honor they shall have, it shall be upon the
earth: their honor and esteem shall not go beyond this world. Earthly - minded
men that leave great Estates, Dignities and Honors behind them, they may be
famous in the Records and Annals of this world; they may be renowned for their
riches, and the great things they have enjoyed here: but this is all they shall
have, they shall have no estimation in the upper world, their name shall not
and dye on the earth; they shall have no honor, nor carry any esteem in the
heavenly Country.

Tenthly, Consider, there is much of vanity and vexation in earthly things: We
know whose words they are; All is vanity and vexation of spirit. First, earthly
things are vain things.

1. There is not in them that which they promise to us. Earthly things promise
much more then we find to be in them, when we come to try them: We think to
find much more good, sweetness, and contentment in these things, then indeed
we find in them, when we come to experiment what is in them. Now that is a
vain thing, which is empty of that it promises; that is called vain, Vanum
dicitur quod re ipsa destituitur.
which is destitute of solidity and substance.

2. They can never satisfy us; now whatsoever cannot satisfy is vain.
Happiness lies in satisfaction: happiness consists in having all the good a man
would have, in having all the good that he desires: while there is any good a
man would have, and does desire, and has it not, he is not happy. Now there is
no man, by the enjoyment of any or all earthly things, that has all the good
he would have; and therefore he is far from satisfaction, far from happiness.

Secondly, Earthly things, as they are vain, so they are vexations; the labor
and travail in getting them, the care and solicitude in keeping them, the fear
of loosing them, the grief that follows upon the loosing of them, the
defectiveness of something or other in them when we have the greatest abundance
of them, the bitternesses that are mingled with them, bring a great deal of
vexation into earthly things. When men are carried away with inordinate love of
earthly things, they pierce themselves through with many sorrows. Qui mundanis
se implicat, tela parat, quibus consodiatur.
He that intangles himself with worldly things, does but provide darts for
himself, by which he is thrust through. Austin in a discourse of his about the
contempt of the world, has a passage to this purpose. The bands of this world
have a true sharpness; but a false sweetness; a certain grief, but uncertain
pleasure; hard labor, timorous and fearful quiet; they are full of misery, but
empty of happiness.

Lastly, the mordinate love of earthly things does greatly unfit us for
communion with God here, and for the enjoyment of him hereafter.

1. It unfits us for communion with God here. God will not be assable and
familiar with that person, who desires, prizeth, loves, and delights in any
thing more then himself: The way to enjoy most of God, is to be taken more with
God himself then with other things: When we are more taken with God himself,
then with all his gifts; when we are inamoured of the Lord himself, and God is
more sweet to us then all things that come from him: this is the way to enjoy
most of God. Wisdom says, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me. If we love God
himself more then his gifts, then shall we know what it is to be loved of him.
Joh. 14.21. If any man love me, he shall he loved of my Father, and I will love
him, etc. but if we lavish out our hearts upon earthly things, and have great
and admiring thoughts of them, and are vigorous in our pursuit of them, and God
has the least part of our thoughts and affections; God cares not for such
lovers; neither may such expect to attain to any friendship or familiatity with
him here on earth.

2. The love of earthly things, as it unfits us for communion with God here, so
it unfits us for the enjoyment of him hereafter. In heaven, the faculties of
the soul shall be immediately acted upon God; the soul will be wholly taken up
in contemplating, admiring, loving, delighting in God, in praising and adoring
of him. Now when the heart is wholly taken up with earthly things, it is
altogether unfitted and indisposed for such a life. The soul is colored, as it
were, with the objects that it converseth with, and receives a tincture and an
impression from them. A man whose spirit is immersed and drenched in the world,
will be very unfit to have the faculties of his soul carried forth upon God.
The best way to have our souls suited and adapted to the future life, it is to
keep our spirits at as great a distance as may be from present things. We
should be saying often in our own souls: Oh the blessed state, Oh the blessed
life that is above! Oh to see God, to love him, to go to him, to live with him,
in his eternity! How sweet is that life! When we are without those earthly
things which we desire, we should say, our true life, our true happiness is
above, where there shall be no more need or use of these things: when we have
the most of these things, our hearts should be carried up above these things,
and say, We expect, and look for, and long after another happiness; a happiness
that is above these things. We should keep our hearts in the most reserved
frame for the future life, and the future state: We should not suffer our
spirits to mingle too far with present things: Our hearts should sit so loose
to present things, that we may be ready to lay down these things, and to take
up with the happiness that is above. If we suffer our spirits to launch forth
too far into the world, it will be a hard matter to reduce them: and when the
cry is made, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him; we shall
be very unfit to entertain his Call: If our souls stick, and be taken up in the
things of time, we shall be very unfit and unready to deliver them up into
eternity.

AN APPENDIX Concerning Laying hold of eternal life.
1 Timothy 6.12. Lay hold on eternal life.

The whole verse is read thus:

Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art
also called, and have professed a good profession before many witnesses.

Lay hold on eternal life.


LIFE is the great thing which we all desire: there is nothing we fear so much
as death, nothing we desire so much as life. This Text acquaints us what is the
true life: Lay hold on eternal life. Amemus vitam aeternam: Austin.
O let us love eternal life. It is eternal life that is only worth the name of
life: therefore since we are so fond of life, since life is most pleasing to us
of all other things; let us love that life that is truly so. This temporal life
which we now live, is not worth the name of life, in comparison of eternal life.

The Text contains in it a double Gospel-precept.

1. Fight the good fight of faith. 2. Lay hold on eternal life.
It is the later of these precepts that I shall a little insist upon: Lay hold
on eternal life.

The Doctrine that offers it self to our consideration from the words, is this:

That it is the duty of Christians t^ lay hold of eternal life.

In this Point there are two things to be spoken unto.

1. The Object. 2. The Act.
The Object is, eternal life.

The Act is, Lay hold on eternal life.

So that, that which will bound our discourse as to the Explication of the
Point, will be these two things.

1. To show what eternal life is.

2. To show what it is to lay hold on eternal life.

1. What is eternal life?
I shall not speak to this so largely as the subject will bear, (that indeed
were a noble Argument, to discourse at large of eternal life, and that would
afford a long discourse) but I shall give some few Hints only concerning
eternal life, that we may a little conceive of it. I shall endeavor to open a
little briefly the nature of eternal life, in seven Propositions.

I. Eternal life is the state of the blessed in the other world. Eternal life
is the life which the Saints live in the presence of God. 2 Cor. 5.8. Absent
from the body, and present with the Lord. To understand this, we must know,
that there is a natural life, and there is a spiritual life.

1. There is a natural life: and this we may again distinguish into the animal
life, and the rational life. That which we call the animal life, it is the life
which we live in common with the brutes. There is a life which man enjoys in
common with the brutes, and this is that which is commonly called the animal
life. But then there is the rational life; and this is that life which is
proper to men as men. There is an intellectual principle in man, whereby he is
distinguished from the sensitive creatures: and that life which man lives by
this intellectual principle that is in him, this is the rational life. But then
as there is the natural life, so

2. There is the spiritual life. This also is twofold. The spiritual life is
either the life of grace, or the life of glory. 1. There is the life of grace.
The life of grace is that life which the Saints live here in this world, in
Justification and in Sanctification. 2. The life of glory, is that life which
the Saints live with God in the other world. Now the life of glory, that life
which the Saints live with God in the other world, is that which in a strict
sense is called eternal life. It is true, eternal life is inchoate and begun in
this world, in the life of grace, in the life of Justification and
Sanctification; but eternal life is perfect and consummate in the life of
glory, when we shall live with God in heaven. So that eternal life is that life
we shall live in the heavenly country. It is said of the ancient Saints, that
they seek for a better country, even a heavenly, Heb. 11.16. Now this is
eternal life, that life which we shall live with God in the heavenly country.

II. Eternal life is a constant uniform life. The life which we live in this
world, it is bounded and limited by time; it is a certain space and duration of
things, and there is an end: but eternal life knows no end. Eternity is always
standing, Semper stans, semper praesens.
always present; thus, and always thus. When we are sat down to live in
eternal life, then we may conclude, As we are now, so shall we be always: there
is no interruption, no cessation in ^ternal life.

III. Eternal life is a life free from sorrow and trouble. Isai. 57.2. He shall
enter into peace. It is spoken of a godly man, how it shall be with him after
this life, He shall enter into peace. So again, God shall wipe away all tears
from the eyes of his people, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. This life
it is a life of affliction, a life of temptation, a life of grief and sorrow, a
life of trouble and perturbation: but in eternal life there shall be none of
these things: eternal life is a serene tranquil estate.

IV. Eternal life is a life free from sin, and all the relicts and remainders
of it. 1 Cor. 13.10. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is
imperfect shall be done away. Heb. 12.23. The spirits of just men made perfect.
When we come to live with God in eternal life, sin shall be perfectly rased out
of our nature; those relicts of sin, Reliquiae peccati (as Luther calls them)
in the Saints, which are as thorns in their eyes, and goads in their sides,
shall be done away; and they shall be made like to God, holy in their measure
as God is holy.

V. Eternal life is a life of perfect joy. Psalm. 16.11. In his presence there
is fullness of joy, at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore. In
eternal life the Saints possess God, who is the chief good, and all good; and
having God, who is the chief good, and all good, they must needs have all joy.
The joys of this life are false, deceitful joys; they are far from satisfying,
quieting, and contenting the heart: the joys of this life are bitter-swe^t
joys, (...).
the best joys here on earth are allayed with many bitternesses. O but the joys
of eternal life are pure, sincere joys; there is all joy, no sorrow; all
pleasure, no grief. And then as they are pure sincere joys, so they are
soul-sati^fying joys: he that has all the good that he would have, and can
desire no more, must needs be satisfied: the Saints in eternal life have all
the good they would have, and can desire no more: whatever various good things
we sought after among the creatures; in eternal life, one God shall supply all.
Qui^quid hi^ quaerehas, quicquid ^i^ pro mag^o habeb^^, i^se tibi crit.
Whatsoever (says Austin) thou soughtest after here on earth, whatsoever thou
accountedst for great here in this life, God shall be all that unto thee. God
shall be the comfort of meat and drink, of Sun and Moon, of friends and
relations. God shall supply all things to his Saints. Eternal life is a life of
perfect joy.

VI. Eternal life is a life free from changes. This life is made up of Changes:
we change from health to sickness, from settlement to unsettlement, from
prosperity to adversity; yea, we change from one affliction to another, and at
last we change from life to death. So that we may say, Nunquid non humana vita
tentatio super terram?
Is not the whole life of man a temptation upon earth? Oh but in eternal life
there are none of these changes; in eternal life there is one constant, uniform
state of peace, joy, blessedness, and satisfaction. Oh do you not find your
selves weary of changes? Is not this the secret language of your souls, When
will these changes have an end? O lift up your eyes on high, cast a look to the
heavenly country; there shall you find that which you so much desire; there is
perfect serenity, perfect tranquillity; there is no trouble or perturbation,
nor fear of trouble; no death, nor fear of death; no changes, nor fear of
changes: there is an even serene state of things. And the Lord in his infinite
wisdom causes us to pass through so many changes here on earth, that so we may
long after that unchangeable state above.

VII. Lastly, as that which is the complement and perfection of all, eternal
life is to know God and enjoy him, Joh. 17 3. This is life eternal, to know
thee the only true God. To know God in a way of Grace, this is the beginning
of eternal life here on earth; to know God as reconciled in Christ, to know him
as a Father in Christ; this is the beginning of eternal life: and to know God
in the way of the beatifical vision, to see him face to face; this is the
perfection and consummation of eternal life in heaven. Praemium est videre
Deum, vivere cum Deo, etc.
This is, says Bernard, the Saints reward, to see God, to live with God, to be
in God, who shall be all in all, and to have God who is the chiefest good. And
Austin speaks to the same purpose: This is the full blessedness of a man, to
see the face of his God, to see him that made heaven and earth; to see him that
has made him, that bath saved him, and that has glorified him. O what an
inconceivable happiness must it be, to have the Divine Majesty always present
to the eye of the mind? to see and behold the face of God, who is an infinite
good; and not only to see and behold God who is an infinite good in himself,
but also to see God who is this infinite good, willing to communicate himself
to the soul, and to become an happiness to it. The happiness of heaven does not
only consist in this, to be admitted to the sight of God, who is an infinite
good: but also in this, that we shall see the blessed God, willing to
communicate himself to us, and to become a happiness to us Genesis 15.1. Fear not,
Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward: As much as if God
should say, Whatever I am, whatever I have, shall be all thine, so far as it is
necessary to make thee happy. God himself communicates himself to his people,
and he is their reward. With thee (says the Psalmist) is the fountain of life;
in thy light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the fountain of life.
How is it possible that the Saints and Angels should want life, that see the
fountain of life, and are united to him? they see the living God, who is life,
and the cause of all life; and by adhering to him, who is immortal, who is an
indeficient never-failing spring of life; they themselves are immortal in their
happiness, and derive a constant life and happiness from him, who is the
Fountain of life. We may not wonder that eternal life should consist in the
knowledge and enjoyment of God: God is the Fountain of life; therefore they
that adhere to the Fountain of life, cannot be supposed to want life.

Thus have we given some brief touches concerning eternal life; but alas, who
can speak of this as it is? Eye has not seen, nor ear beard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive what the things are, that God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

2. But what is it to Lay hold on eternal life? Here lies the stress of the
Text, Lay hold on eternal life. This brings us to the second thing, and that is
the act, What it is to lay hold on eternal life.

I shall open this in seven Propositions, as I did the former.

1. To lay hold on eternal life, is to make sure our title to eternal life.
Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which
indureth unto eternal life; as much as is our Savior should have said, Labor
to make eternal life sure, and labor to get a part in my Righteousness, as
that only which can give you an interest in eternal life. We see by
experience, this natural life which we live here on earth continues but a few
days; we see we cannot live always here on earth; nay, we see we can live but a
short sp^ce of time here on earth: therefore this is out great interest, to
look after an enduring life, to lay hold on eternal life, and to make that
sure: Certainly that is true wisdom, to consider how things will end at last;
and these are thoughts proper for a reasonable creature, What must be my
happiness after this short life is at an end? To have no hope or expectation of
any thing hereafter, but only to cast upon what is to be enjoyed in this life;
this is to level my self with the brutes; this is to forget of what species and
kind of creatures I am, and that I was created to enjoy a blessed immortality:
For wherein does man differ from the brutes, but that he is capable of an
immortal state and condition of happiness, which the brutes are not capable of?
We ought therefore to make sure our title to eternal life; this is the ultimate
end and perfection of our being. Man was not created to enjoy an earthly
happiness, consisting merely in the enjoyment of earthly comforts; but man was
created to a blessed immortality, in the presence of his Maker. Consider what
the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1.4. To an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you: Our last happiness is
reserved in heaven. To expect our utmost happiness here on earth, this is to
forget the great and ultimate end, for which we were created, and to which we
were destinated. We were not made to have our happiness in this world, we were
created for an higher happiness; our la^^ happiness is to live with God in the
Heavens: This is the happiness w^ are capable of, and therefore this (...) the
happiness we should make su^^ of; Lay hold of eternal life; tha^ is, make sure
thy title to etern^ life.

2. To lay hold of eternal life, is (...) see that the bent and tendencie of o^
souls be carried out after eternal lif^ Lay hold of eternal life; it is as mu^^
as if the Apostle should have said, L^^ eternal life be the great thing in the
eye, let the bent and tendencie of the spirit be carried out after et^rnal li^^
Every one has the bent and tenden^^ of his spirit lying toward somethin^ or
other. Observe the pulse of you own hearts, and you will find the bent and
tendencie of your own sp^rits carried forth toward somethin^ or other. Some
have their hear^ carried out after the riches and profits of the world; some
after pleasures, some after honors: The g^nerality of men have the bent an^
tendencie of their spirits carried ou^ after something in this world. Now God
would have the spirits of his people carried higher then so; God would have his
people look beyond this world, and beyond this life; he would have the bent and
tendencie of their spirits to lie toward eternal life. Lay hold on eternal
life. Contemto mundo, illuc enitere. Calv.
Calvin expounds it thus; Contemn this world, and raise thy thoughts higher.
This is the force of this expression, Lay hold on eternal life; contemn this
world, and raise thy thoughts to something higher: Let this world seem a little
thing in thy eye; and let eternal life be the mark and white in thy eye; let
thy desires and longings be carried out after life. We ought to lay hold on
eternal life; that is, we ought to set eternal things as the fairest things in
our eye: the main of our desires, inclinations and affections should be carried
out that way: Our hearts should be carried above this world, and our affections
should be soaring up aloft to the enjoyment of God in the next world. It is an
emphatical expression of the Apostle Paul, Phil. 3.14. I press toward the mark
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. (...).
The words in the Original are very emphatical, as much as if he had said, I
press toward eternal glory, as making that my uttermost end and scope. Eternal
life should be our scope, the great thing that we should breath and aspire
after: whatsoever is short of the enjoyment of God in heaven, should seem but a
little thing to us. It is a speech of Luther: We ought with a great soul to
contemn this world, and with a full gale of affection breath after the glory of
the future life.

3. To lay hold on eternal life, is to have our thoughts fixed and intent upon
eternal life. 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day
of God. 2 Cor. 4.18. We look not to the things which are seen, but to the
things which are not seen. We ought to have our hearts taken up much with the
contemplation of the things of the invisible world. Though it be but a little
of the glory of heaven and the blessedness of eternal life that we can
apprehend, yet something we may understand of it, as the Word has revealed it.
The Word gives us some glimpses of the heavenly state: the Word tells us, that
we shall be present with the Lord. 2 Cor. 5. Absent from the body, and present
with the Lord. The Word tells us, that we shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
4.17. The Word tells us, we shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God. The Word tells us, we shall be like him, 1 John
3.2. The Word tells us, that our vile bodies shall be made like unto his
glorious body, Phil. 3.21. The Word tells us, that all tears shall be wiped
away from our eyes, Rev. 21.4. and that everlasting joy shall be upon our
heads, Isai. 35.10. These things, and much more, does the Scripture speak of
the glory of the future life. Now our thoughts and meditations should work on
these things. He that has a fair inheritance left him, will be willing some
time or other to go to see it: we have the heavenly inheritance given to us, an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4.
and that fades not away, reserved in the heavens for us. Now since there is
so great an inheritance reserved for us, we should not slight it, but be
willing, as often as may be, to take a prospect of it by faith. Nothing is so
sweet as the contemplation of eternal things: the contemplation of eternal
things is much more sweet then the highest enjoyment of present sensible
things. Eternal things satisfy and quiet the mind; no temporal thing can do
it: let us then lay hold on eternal life in this sense: let us keep our
thoughts fixed and intent upon it.

4. To lay hold on eternal life, it is to pursue after it in our endeavors. As
the bent and tendencie of our affections should lie toward eternal life, so we
should pursue after it in our endeavors. Lay hold on eternal life. (...).
The Greek word signifies to pursue after a thing, and in pursuing after it, to
apprehend and take hold of it. The main scope of our endeavors should be to
attain eternal life: all our endeavors should run out that way, that we may
attain eternal life. We should never think that we can pray too much, that we
can believe in Christ too much, that we can love God too much, that we can be
too much in obedience and holy walking, so we may but attain eternal life in
the end. Romans 2.7. To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for
glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life. The meaning is: God will
certainly give and bestow eternal life on them who by a patient continuance in
well doing seek for it. But we may not mistake here; we ought not to think that
God gives us eternal life upon the account of the merit of any thing that we
do; it is the righteousness and obedience of Christ only, that gives us a
right and a title to eternal life. But thus we are to conceive of it: This is
the race and course that God has appointed us to run; God has appointed us to
run this course and race of faith and obedience here on earth, that so we may
come to eternal life in the end. Hence is that of Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. What
then? Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearing. Certainly Paul did not expect
eternal life upon the merit of his obedience, or of his services; but Paul knew
that God had appointed him such a course of obedience to run here on earth; and
his course being finished, he knew that God would be faithful to give him the
Crown. God has propounded and set before us the Crown of eternal life: it
becomes us to pursue after this Crown with our uttermost endeavors, that we
may attain it. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee
the crown of life. O how sweet, how unexpressibly sweet will it be, to be sure
of eternal life when this natural life fails! If we b^ faithful to the death,
we shall then have the crown of life: that is, If we persevere in a way of
faith and obedience to the end, we shall have the crown of eternal life and
immortality set upon our heads, when this short life does expire. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life: it is as much as
if Christ had said, I will give thee eternal life, when this natural life is at
end.

5. To lay hold on eternal life, it is to live much in the hope and expectation
of eternal life. Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie
promised before the world began. Romans 5.2. We rejoice in the hope of the glory
of God. The main of our hopes should not lie in this world, we should not
fancy to our selves, and expect an happiness here on earth: but our great hope
should be above; we should cast anchor within the veil, Heb. 6.19.
expect happiness in what is to be enjoyed on the other side of time. If the
main of our hopes and expectation be in this life, we and our hopes are like to
perish together: for we our selves must die, and the things we hope for, and
make account of as our happiness, they must die and perish: it is good
therefore to have such an hope as will not fail us, nor deceive us. If we look
for the main of our happiness, yea our only true happiness in the next world,
not in this world; this is such a hope as will never deceive us. A man that
has fixed his hopes in eternal things, when he has lost any temporal thing,
the main of his happiness is still where it was: his hopes and expectations
were carried above this world, and therefore whatsoever his losses and
disappointments were here on earth, this does not shake his happiness: his
happiness was placed elsewhere before, and he is at the same point still.

6. To lay hold on eternal life, it is, not to suffer the comfort of eternal
life to be wrested from us. As we ought to live much in the hope and
expectation of eternal life; so we ought to take comfort in the hope and
expectation of eternal life. Romans 12.12. Rejoicing in hope. As we ought to hope
for eternal life; so we ought to rejoice in the hope of eternal life. I
conceive that much of the force of the Text lies here: Lay hold on eternal life
unto which thou art called, and have made a good profession before many
witnesses. It is as much as if the Apostle had said, Thou have a true and an
undoubted title to eternal life, thou have a firm sure title to eternal life;
thy vocation and calling as a Christian, ^ntitles thee to eternal life: Lay
hold on eternal life, unto which thou art called: that eminent profession of
faith which thou have made as a Christian, and as a Minister, both in thy life
and doctrine; this gives an evidence and proof of thy right and title to
eternal life. Now this is the force of the Apostles argument: Since thou have
so firm a title to eternal life, lay claim to it as thy own; live in the hope
and comfort of it, and do not suffer the comfort of eternal life to be wrested
from thee. Much of the meaning of the Text seems to be contained in this. The
Greek word, as it signifies to pursue after a thing, so also to hold it fast,
and retain it when once we have gotten it. So that the design of the Apostle
is to persuade Timothy to hold firm and fast the hope of eternal life; not to
part with the hope of salvation upon any terms. Lay hold on eternal life: it is
as much as if it had been said, Do not part with thy hopes of salvation and
eternal life upon any terms. The steadfast assured hope of salvation, is the
great thing that must carry us through the difficulties, sufferings, and
afflictions of our pilgrimage here on earth. Therefore does the Apostle exhort
the Thessalonians that they would take for an helmet the hope of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. Putting on the brestplate of faith and love, and for an helmet the
hope of salvation. Intimating thus much, that if they had a well-grounded hope
of salvation, this would fortify them against all the afflictions they were to
meet with here by the way. Whatever afflictions, sufferings and troubles we
meet with here in this world, if we can cast an eye to the heavenly country,
and see that we have a part there, all is well above: there is none of those
troubles, fears, sorrows, where the main of our hope, happiness, and
expectation lies. Therefore let us not part with or let go the comfort of
eternal life: if we part with the comfort of eternal life, we lose that which
must be the standing comfort of our life: nothing can bear us up under the
afflictions of this life, but the solid well-grounded assurance of eternal life.

Lastly, To lay holy of eternal life, it is to look after the first fruits of
the spirit, and to labor after an inchoate possession of eternal life in our
souls here on earth. Our Savior teaches us, He that eats his flesh and
drinks his blood has eternal life. Joh. 6.54. He has it, that is, he has
it in the beginning of it. And concerning his Sheep, he says, I give them
eternal life, Joh. 10. He speaks in the present tense, what he does do for the
present: I give unto them eternal life. Christ has already made over eternal
life to his people, he has given them a right and a title to it, and he has
given them the beginning of it in their souls here on earth: it is a great
Text, Joh. 4.14. The water that I shall give, shall be a well of water
springing up into everlasting life. The plain meaning seems to be, that Grace,
and that of the Spirit of God which Christ has given to his people here on
earth, shall never leave them till it has brought them to eternal life. The
Spirit of God that is in the hearts of the Saints, and the Grace of Godwhich is
wrought in them, shall nover leave them till it has brought them to eternal
life. Hence it is that the Spirit of God is called the earnest of our
inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. an earnest is part of the bargain: the Spirit of God
that dwells in the hearts of Believers, is an earnost of eternal glory: for
what is heaven, but a fuller manifestation of the Spirit of God in us, which
manifests and puts it self forth in part in us here on earth? So that so far as
we are sensible of the indwelling of the Spirit of God, and the operation of it
in our souls; so far we have an carnest of eternal glory. This is that water
which shall be a well of water springing up into everlasting life. We should
labor therefore to be sensible of the indwelling of the Spirit, and of the
operation of the Spirit of God in us, in a way of grace and of comfort. In this
sense we should lay hold of eternal life; that is, we should be earnestly
pressing and making after it in our own souls: we should pray carnestly that
God would let down more of eternal life into our souls here on earth: As he
once said, Lord come down to me, or take me up to thee. We should pray that
eternal life may come down more into our souls here on earth: This should be
the highest ambition of a Christian, to perceive and feel more of the dawnings
and puttings forth of eternal life in his soul here on earth. It is not
impossible for us to perceive and feel the dawnings and puttings forth of
eternal life in our souls here on earth; and this is that we should earnestly
pray for. Someof the last words of Mr. Rutherford were these: Glory, glory,
dwells in Emmanuels land. We should pray for the clearest sights and prospects
that may be of the heavenly glory: The clearer sights we can get of eternal
things, the more shall we find our hearts crucified to the things of time, and
the more shall we find our hearts carried up aloft to those things that are
above, even whilst we are fain to use these other things for our present
necessity.

We come now to the Reasons of the Doctrine, why we ought to lay hold on
eternal life.

short transient thing it soon glides and slips away. How soon do we pass from
one state to another? from infancy to childhood, from thence to youth, thence
to grown age, and from thence to old age and death? My days are swifter then a
weavers shuttle, Job 7.6. Swifter then a post they go away, Job 9.25. This life
is a vanishing thing: it is an easy prospect to see to the end of it: the
longest life here on earth is nothing to eternity: Therefore, since this life
is so shppery, short and uncertain, it is our great wisdom to set our hearts
upon that life that is solid, durable, permanent: What wisdom is it to set our
hearts upon that which is not perminent? We have here no continuing city, Heb.
13.14. Thsi life is madeup of changes and vicissitudes, and abides in no
consistency; it is our great concernment to mind that life which is stable and
enduring.

by us; as we are then, we shall ever be. It is not so with us now; we are not
now, as we shall ever be: we are still changing from one state to another. But
eternal life is that state we shall always rest and abide in. When once we are
entered into eternal life, we may say, It shall never be otherwise with me, then
now it is: this is the state I must take up with, and thus it shall be for
ever. Now does it not become us to be reaching out in our souls after this
state? Certainly we ought to overlook this life, and the whole of our time, as
a little short thing; and fasten our eyes upon the unchangeable state above,
where we must six and abide for ever. We look not to the things that are seen,
for they are temporal; but to the things which are not seen, for they are
eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18.

true life, it is the most noble and excellent life. What a poor life is this
life, to converse with this world, and the things of it, in comparison of
eternal life, in which we shall converse with God and the holy Angels? What a
poor life is this life, which is made up of wants, of sorrows, of complaints,
of miseries, of distresses, of he constant fear and expection of death; in
comparison of that life, where there is all joy, no sorrow; all fullness, no
want; all satisfaction, no complaint; all happiness, no misery; all life, no
death, nor fear of death? Oh this is the life that we should be suspiring and
breathing after.

lay hold on eternal life, because the thoughts and expection of eternal life
will carry us up above the difficulties, troubles and afflictions of this life.
He that sees the Port before him, though he be out at Sea, and is tossed with
waves and tmepests, yet he knows, if he can get safe to the Port, all is quiet,
placid, and serene there. He that hatha prospect (by the eye of Faith) of
eternal life, and the heavenly Country, though he be tossed up and down with
many afflictions, trials and distresses here, yet he knows all is tranquil and
serene above. Ibi nulla mors, nulla aegritudo. There is no sickness, no death.
The thoughts of eternal life may well swallow up all our afflictions: This life
is but for a moment, in eternal life there shall be none of these things to
trouble or disquiet us. Let us wait patiently for the blessed hope, and the
revelation of eternal life, and we shall know these sorrows no more.

If we lay hold on eternal life, death will be no surprise or terror to us:
when this life fails, we shall have another life in view; nay, we shall feel
the beginningso f another life in us. This is eternal life; to know thee, etc.
Joh. 7.3. So much as we know God, adhere to him, rest in him, live upon him,
and are satisfied with him; we have the beginning of eternal life, and this is
such a life as shall never end. That natural life which is in a Saint fails,
and must have anend. Oh! but there is in his soul the seed of eternal life.
Joh. 4.14. The water that I shall give, shall be in him a well of water
springing up to everlasting life. A true Believer has the Spirit of God, an
the grace of the Spirit dwelling in him; and this is the seed o eternal life:
The Spirit of God which has beg^^ the knowledge of God and love to God in the
soul of a Saint here on earth, will continue that knowledge of God and love to
God in the soul to eternity; yea, in eternal life, this knowledge, this love
shall be perfected and consummated. Hence is that of the Apostle, Romans 8.10.
The body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righteousness. The body dies, and the life of it perishes and vanishes away;
but the spirit, the soul of a Saint, which is the seat of Grace, and the
habitation of the Spirit of God, continues and lives when the life of the body
cease. If the soul should dye with the body, then grace it self must be
extinct and perish: But (says the Apostle) the spirit is life because of
righteousness. The spirit of a godly man having a principle of righteousness in
it, continues in being; and the spiritual life of it remains, when the body
dies. It is true, the soul of a wicked man is immortal, and continues to live
when his body dies; but the life which remains to a wicked man after this
life, being a life of misery and torment, the Scripture chooses to call it by
the name of death rather then of life: But a godly man enjoys an happy and a
blessed life in his soul when this life cease: Hence is it that we read of
the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. And Paul desired to be
dissolved, and to be with christ, which was far better, Phil. 1.23. Now when we
feel such a life in us as cannot expire, neither can be taken away from us, why
should we fear death? Luther observes, that the great cause why men fear death,
is a secret suspicion that lies at the bottom of their hearts, Quasi non semper
victuri; as if they should not live always. If I am sure to live, why do I fear
death? If we lay hold on eternal life, and find the beginnings of that life in
our souls, we have that life set up in us which cannot expire. Joh. 6.44. He
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood; has eternal life. How can that be
lost which is eternal? that which is eternal cannot be lost. It is a great
skill to be able to distinguish between this natural life which we live in
common with other men, and that spiritual life which we live as Christians. The
natural life of a Saint is subject to death as other men's is, although the
curse of it be taken away; but there is a life in a Saint, and that is the life
which he lives in, and by the Spirit of God: and this is such a life as cannot
be extinguished. We should labor for that spiritual skill, as to be able to
distinguish between these two kinds of life; and not be without hope as other
men, when this natural life cease; we should remember there is a life in us
that cannot dye. If we have begun to know God, to love God, to live upon him,
and to live to him here on earth; we shall not cease to know him, to love him,
to live upon him, to live to him in eternity, and to eternity.

Reprehension. If we ought to lay hold on eternal life, two things are hence to
be reprehended.

1. That we are so much taken up in following this world, and in the pursuit of
temporal things.

2. That we are so much addicted to the love of this life.

I. We are to be reprehended, that we are so much taken up in following this
world, and in the pursuit of temporal things. Lay hold on eternal life: If we
ought to lay hold on eternal life, then we ought to live above the world, and
contemn it. The eager pursuit of this world is most contrary to our laying hold
on eternal life. We cannot pursue two things at once; while we are pursuing
hard after the world, we must needs let Heaven and Salvation go. The greatest
part of men think not on eternal things; they live as if they were always to
live here on earth: they never think of a future state, nor do they provide for
it. But if we ought to lay hold of eternal life; if that ought to be the mark
and scope in our eye, that shows that we are far wide of that which ought to be
our true mark and scope; when we are wholly taken up with temporal things, and
neglect eternal.

II. We are to be reprehended, that we are so much addicted to the love of this
life. We are commanded to love eternal life, and to lay hold on that, but we
are found of this life, and loath to part with it. He is a rare soul, that is
satisfied with life here on earth, and has such an apprehension of the reality
and excellency of eternal life, that this life grows out of esteem with him.
I grant that this natural life is a blessing, as other temporal blessings are;
but as it is possible for us to love other things too much; so it is possible,
yea, too common to love this life too much; and it is the wisdom of God to
imbitter this life to us by many afflictions, because we are so fond of it; and
that he may weary us out of it, and cause us to long for that which is the true
life. Vita longa, long a infirmitas; a long life is a long infirmity; and we
may add, Longa tentatio, a long temptation. What is our whole life, but a life
of trials and temptations? It is true, we may value and prize life for these
two ends.

1. To work out our Salvation, to make ready for the coming of the Bridegroom

2. That we may do some work and service for God; that we may glorify him upon
the earth, and finish the work that he has given us to do. But to be over-fond
of this life merely for life's sake, is a certain sign of unbelief: It is a
sign we have little knowledge of another life, little acquaintance with
eternal life. Had we a prospect by faith of a better and more excellent life,
we should not be so over fond of this life.

Exhortation; to exhort us all to put the duty of the Text in practice. Let us
labor to lay hold on eternal life. Oh! let us labor to call up our hearts
from visible things to invisible, from present things to future, from momentary
things to eternal: the things of the other world are never the less real,
because they are out of sight. Atheists think that eternal life and all future
things are but a fiction; but we may use to them that Speech of Cyprian: In
aeternam poenam sero tandem credent, qui in aeternam vitam credere noluerunt.
Cyprian.
They shall believe too late to their eternal torment, who would not believe to
eternal life. But let Atheists and Scoffers say what they please; we do know,
or ought to know, that eternal life is the greatest reality. God that cannot
lie, has promised us eternal life, Titus 1.2. The great promise of the Gospel
is eternal life. 1 John 2.25. This is the promise that he has given to us,
eternal life. Unless we make God to be a liar, we must take eternal life for
the greatest reality. In the prosecution of this Use, I shall only propound
some Directions for the better putting in practice of this duty, to show us how
we ought to lay hold of eternal life.

1. Let us have great and admiring thoughts of eternal life: We should labor
to have our hearts raised up with the consideration of the excellency of this
life. Quanta erit illa faelicitas, ubi nullum erit malum, nullum latebit bonum?
Aug. Civit. Dei.
How great shall that happiness be, where there shall be no evil present, and
no good shall be wanting? where we shall be wholly taken up in the praises of
God, and God shall be all in all; we shall see and love, love and praise, as
Austin expresses it. This natural life which now we live, is not worth the
name of life in comparison of eternal life: nay, it deserves to be called a
death, rather then a life; for we always carry about sin with us, which is the
matter and cause of death. But in eternal life we shall not only be free from
sorrow, but from sin the cause of sorrow; yea, we shall be free from the
possibility of sinning. Man's first happiness in the state of Innocence, was
posse non peccare, a power not to have sinned: His last happiness in Heaven, is
non posse peccare, not to be able to sin at all: Though man in his first estate
was endowed with such a power that he might not have sinned; yet it was
possible for him to sin, and he did sin: but in eternal life, the will shall be
so confirmed, as that there shall not be a possibility of sinning. Oh! how
great will that happiness be, when the soul shall enjoy the sweetness of
eternal joys without intermission? when the soul shall forget all its sins and
sorrows, as to any sense or experience of them; yet not so as to be unthankful
to him, who has been its Savior and Deliverer.

2. We should breathe, long, and suspire after eternal life. We should elevate
and lift up our hearts abovetime and this lower world, and breathe after the
sweetness and delights of the Heavenly Country. Those breathings that are in
the hearts of the Saints after eternal things, Cum sitimus res coelestes, tum
sentimus perpetuo aliquid gaudii and voluptatis. Roloc. in Joh.
give them some taste of those things: When we thirst after heavenly things,
says a judicious Divine, we do always perceive and experiment something of joy
and sweetness. Those breathings that are in the hearts of the Saints after
eternal life, are some of the first fruits of the Spirit. Romans 8.22. We our
selves which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
Other men feel no such longings and breathings as these are: for although there
be a natural instinct in all men which carries them out to desire happiness,
yet none but the Saints long and breathe after the enjoyment of God as their
happiness. Therefore so far as we find a thirst kindled in our souls after the
sight and enjoyment of God in eternal life, so far we have an earnest of
eternal life in our souls. How great a thing should it be to us, to be admitted
to the sight of the Divine Majesty! to be taken up from the light of the Sun
and Moon, to the light of him who made the Sun and the Moon; as Austin
expresses it. It is a good observation of Luther: How much joy is there when
God does exhibit by the Word one drop of consolation to such as are tempted and
afflicted in conscience! but far greater and unexpressible will that joy be,
when the God of all consolation shall reveal himself, and shall wholly pour
himself forth unto us in eternal life. How should we breathe after this life?

Thirdly, let us place our happiness, and expect it no where, but in eternal
life. We should carry our hope and expectation above this world; and never
expect to find happiness, Ipse finis erit desideriorum nostorum, qui sins fine
videhitur, sine fastidio amabitur, sine fatigatione landabitur. Aug.
until we come to live with God in eternal life. He shall be the end of our
desires, who shall be seen without end, loved without nauseousness praised
without wearisomness. This is life eternal, etc. It is a vain thing to expect
happiness until we come to see God, and to live with him in his eternity. If
the Lord make our passage in any measure tolerable through this world, this is a
mercy: if he give us any comfort in outward things in this world, these are
mercies, so far as he is seen and loved in them: otherwise, the best comforts
here on earth are pitiful things: for what can be truly good, from which the
chief good is absent? Deus est omnis boni bonum; God is the good of every good;
and nothing is good, but as he appears in it. But we ought to remember, that
our true and great happiness is to live in the Divine presence above, and to
have the sight of God to eternity. And it is not possible that any soul that
has had one glimpse, or one true taste of him, should think any thing to be
happiness short of that sight. This therefore is to lay hold of eternal life,
to keep our spirits aloof off from the world as much as may be, and to keep our
spirits reserved for the enjoyment of God in eternal life. The enjoyment of God
in eternal life, is the point and center that we should be moving and tending
unto. When the Lord gives us any of the comforts and blessings of this life;
when he gives us estates, friends, the comfort of relations; we should say,
These are the gifts of God, and so far they are good; but these are not my
happiness: my happiness is God himself; my happiness is to see him, and to live
with him in his eternity. Here should our desires rest and terminate: and
though we defire and use many things for necessity in the present state, yet
our desire and expectation should be still carried above these things, and end
no where but in the enjoyment of God. Quis alius noster est finis, nisi
pervenire ad regnum cujus nullus est finis? Aug.
What other end have we, but to come to that kingdom, of which there is no end?

Fourthly, we should labor to be in a readiness and preparedness of spirit to
enter upon eternal life. 2 Pet. 3.14. Be diligent, that ye may be found of him
in peace without spot and blame. Our ambition should be, to be found in such a
posture, and to keep our souls in such an holy evenness, as that nothing may
impede or hinder our free passage out of Time into Eternity. We should labor
to keep our Consciences pure. We should see that the guilt of no sin remain
upon our Conscience, unpardoned, unrepented of. We should see that our
affections be not entangled with the inordinate love of lawful things, much
less with the love of any sin. We should labor to have our hearts fortified
with a steadfast belief of the things God has promised us in the other world:
the weakness of our faith in believing the things promised, makes us very unfit
for the enjoyment of eternal life. We should often contemplate eternal life, we
should be thinking of it night and day: all the comforts that we enjoy, all the
necessary employments we are engaged in, should not take us off from the
frequent meditation of eternal life. What so necessary to be thought of, as
that state, which when once it is begun, shall never have an end? This whole
life is but like one long dream, in comparison of eternal life. Oh! let us not
forget eternal life, but be still preparing and making ready for it.

Fifthly, we should not take up, or rest satisfied with what we have already
attained in grace; but press forward toward that which lies before us, and is
yet wanting to us. This is the direction the Apostle gives us from his own
example, Phil. 3.13. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but one
thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Paul's aim and scope was to obtain the
prize: what prize was that? the prize of eternal glory. This is all one as to
lay hold on eternal life. How would he do this? what course does he take to
attain this? He forgets the things that are behind, and reaches forth toward
the things that are before. What are the things that are behind? The
progresses he had already made in Christianity, his former seize in
grace. He had some knowledge of Christ, some love to Christ, some assurance of
Christ's love to him; he had done some service for Christ: Paul forgets these
things; and what then? He presses after those things that are before. What is
that? He presses after that knowledge, that love, that obedience, that
conformity to Christ, which he had not attained to. When we have attained most
grace, most knowledge, most experience; yet there is more still to be attained.
Now we should (...), be stretching forth, (an emphatical word) reaching forth,
stretching forward, extending our selves: do as Racers do when they are come
near the mark, stretch forth themselves to reach the mark, and touch the gold.
So should we be aspiring and breathing to come to as great a propinquity and
neerness in our spirits in point of grace, to the future life, and the future
state, as may be here on earth. We should strain hard to get as great a
sutableness and conformity to the future life as may be.

Sixthly, we should pray that we may be in such a frame, as that we may be
willing to leave this world, and to part with this life, that we may go to live
with God in eternal life. We should be willing and content to live while God
would have us live, and while he has any work for us to do: but when our work
is done, and the Lord calls for us, we should not be so fond of this world, and
of this life, but we should be willing to relinquish the one and the other, to
go to live with God in his eternity. What can be to us that which God will be
to us? Do we find comfort in meat, in drink, in raiment, in friends, in
riches, in honors? God will be much more to us. Quaecunque ab hominibus
honest^ desider a^tur, etc. Aug.
Whatsoever may lawfully or honestly be desired by men, God will be that to us.
He will be life, health, sustenance, abundance, glory, honor, peace, and all
good things. What good can there be wanting in him, from whom every thing that
is good does proceed? Whatsoever is sweet, amiable, pleasant, delectable in the
creature, it all proceeds originally from God; and therefore he must needs be
much more sweet, amiable, pleasant, delectable in himself. Quod efficit tale,
est magis tale: That which makes a thing to be what it is, is much more so in
it self. It is an elegant passage I have met with in Austin: Pulcra trajecta
per animas in manus artificiosas veniunt, ab illa pulchritudine quae est super
animas, cui suspirat aanima mea die ac nocte. Aug.
Those beauties which are transmitted and brought down through the souls or
minds of men into artificial hands, and by them are drawn forth, come from
that beauty which is above souls; unto which beauty my soul (says he) suspires
and breathes day and night. Our souls should suspire day and night after the
sight of our Maker, who is the first and most excellent beauty; Pulchrum
pulchrorum omnium; The beauty of all other beauties, as Austins expression is.
It is a speech which one of the Ancients has: There are some who are still
panting and breathing after the sight of their Maker, Sunt nonnulli qui in solo
Conditoris sui desiderio anhelant, nil jam in hoc mundo cupiunt, solo
aeternitatis amore pascuntur.
and have no desire in comparison but that; they covet nothing in this world,
but are fed with the sole love of eternity. We should labor to be of this
number; our souls should pant and breathe in constant ardent desires after the
sight and enjoyment of our Maker: it is the sight of him must make us happy to
Eternity: and if so, we should not be unwilling (when he calls us) to leave
these Glowworm comforts here below, to behold the face of the eternal Sun, the
presence of whom will make an eternal day in our souls, and no night shall
succeed.

FINIS.

