THE CIRCUMSTANCES Before and after the SPEECH OF WILLIAM LATE Viscount
Stafford.
THe two Sheriffs with a considerable number of Gentlemen on Horseback went to
the Tower-Gate, and there demanded W. Howard, late Viscount Stafford. Between
nine and ten a Clock, a Gentleman belonging to the Lieutenant of the Tower told
the Sheriffs, that the Lieutenant would wait upon them presently, and bring the
Prisoner to the Bars; to which the Sheriffs answered, that they must preserve
the Privilege and Bounds of the City: An Officer replied; Sir, we were ordered
to draw up two Companies from the Gate to the Bar, and there you are to receive
the Prisoner.

Sheriffs. Gentlemen, we will preserve the Liberties of the City, and are come
at the Gate to demand the Prisoner; whether the Lieutenant will deliver him or
no, we demand; and accordingly he was delivered to the Sheriffs between the
Gate and Bars.

Before the Prisoner came, several people being upon the Scaffold; among which,
two that were appointed to write.

The Heads-man came up with two Blocks, one old, one new, in a Bag; also the
Axe covered with a Cloth. The Block being taken out, the new Block was covered
over with black, and laid upon a piece of black Bays, about two yards and a
half long, upon which the Prisoner was to stretch himself. Then the Coffin was
brought up, being colored with two Letters, W. S. 1680. Then W. S. came upon
the Scaffold, and asked for the Executioner.

A. Here he is.

Staf. Have you received money for the Clothes?

A. No. Then his Man took out a Purse of five pound, which the H. man objected
against, and W. S. gave him two Guinnies more.

His Speech was every word writ; which after he had read to the people, being
more than 30000 in number to see Justice done upon the Traitor, he turned
about, and kneeling down prayed in English and Latin. Next he lifted up his
hands, standing up, and said, I beseech thee God not to avenge my Innocent
Blood upon any man in the whole Kingdom, no not against those who by their
Perjuries have brought me here; for I profess before Almighty God, that I never
combined against the Kings Life, nor any body else; but whatever I did was only
to procure liberty for the Protestant Dissenters, and the Romish Religion: And
as for the D. of York, I do here declare upon my Salvation, I know of no Design
that he ever had against the King, but has ever behaved himself as a loving
Loyal Brother ought to do.

So now upon my Salvation I have said true all that I have said, and I pray God
to have mercy upon my Soul.

Then he delivered the Latin Prayer to the Sheriff Bethel.

After which he went round the Scaffold and spoke to the Multitude thus, I pray
God bless the King, and bless you all, especially the Kings Loyal Subjects; for
I know you have a good and gracious King as ever Reigned, God, forgive me my
Sins, I forgive all the World, even those Fellows that brought me here, and I
pray God send them no worse Punishment then to tell the Truth, and so God bless
you all.

Then a Minister applied himself and said, Sir, You disown the Indulgences of
the Romish Church.

To which he answered with a great Passion.

Sir, What have you to do with my Religion, however I do say, that the Church
of Rome allows no Indulgences for Murder, Lying, etc and whatever I have said
is true.

Min. Have You received no Absolution. Answ. I have received none at all.

Min. You said, that you never saw those Witnesses.

Answ. I never saw any of them but Dugdale, and that was at a time, when I
spoke to him about a Footboy.

Then his man took off his Perriwig and upper Coat, and with a pair of Sizers
cut off the Collar of his Masters Shirt, After which W.S. lies down in a white
Satin Wast-Coat, a quilted sky Colored silk Cap with Lace turned up, etc.

He gave his Watch to a Gentleman, and Crucifix to his Page.

Having fitted his Neck to the Block, rise up upon his Knees, and prayed to
himself, then takes the Block and embraced it, Then his Servant cut off more of
the Linen, in all which time he sent up short Prayers, That Christ would
receive his Spirit, then lying down, and praying upon the Block, the Sheriff
Cornish asked of the Headsman, if he had given him any Sign, He Answered No,
whereupon W.S. rose up and asked, what they wanted, to which it was answered,
What sign will you give, etc.

Answ. No Sign at all, Take your own time, Gods will be done.

Whereupon the Executioner said, I hope you forgive me, he made Answer, I do.
Then lying down again, Two of his Servants came with a piece of black Silk to
receive the head; then the Headsman took the Axe in his hand, and after some
pause gave the Blow, which was clivorly done, save the Cutting off of a little
Skin, neither Body nor Head when severed struggled to any purpose, but only
quivered a little.

After which the Headsman took out the Head from the Silk, and held it up to
all, Crying aloud, Here is the Head of a Traitor against the King, after which
the Corpse with the Head wrapped in silk was put into a Coffin, and all carried to
the Tower.

This with the Speech was taken by J. Rous, who was appointed by both Sheriffs
for that very purpose.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Stationers Arms in the Piazza under
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1680.


