ROUSE HIS CASE, Truly Stated and Written with his own Hand in NEWGATE, Two
Days before his EXECUTION, to prevent any false Reports.

Wherein he gives the World an Account

Of Of the Place and Manner how he was Taken. His being before the King and
Council two or three times. The manner of his Commitment, where, and for what.
His Removal to Newgate. His Arraignment with Captain Blage. His Trial apart
from Captain Blage. The Witnesses, and What difference between the Indictment
and what the Witnesses then Swore. His Defense for himself, how he was brought
in Guilty.


Sentence past. With a Declaration against things charged upon him; and a
Confession of his Faith, with his Prayer for the Church of God, etc.

To which is annexed, a LETTER to his Wife, from Newgate.

LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham, by the Order of the Widow Rouse. 1683.

ROUSE HIS CASE, Truly Stated and Written with his own Hand in Newgate, Two
days before his Execution, to prevent any false Reports, etc.
WEdnesday, July 4. 83. Toward Evening I went into Barbican to speak with a
Friend, I went into a Coffee-house, drank a Mugg of Ale, of a sudden I heard a
noise of Swordmen that were coming to search the said House for a person called
Armiger; I being alone in a low. Room, walked into the Garden until such time
as the hurry should be over; while I was in the Garden, out comes one Man, then
another, seeing me, asked if my Name was not Armiger? I replied and said, no.
What is your Name then said one of the persons? Now I was altogether ignorant
of what they meant, Note, that they had no Warrant against me.
or that they had any Warrant from White Hall to empower one or both as a
Messenger or Messengers, and therefore made this Answer, John-Son, being the
Son of John. Note, That if I had been guilty of any Plot, I should not have
been upon the Exchange to the last, and about my own business every day.
But one of them, called William Richardson, being a Messenger, having a
General Warrant to question and take up all that he suspected, demanded the
place of my abode, to see whether I were such a person: Thereupon I made an
Apollogy for my self, and told them my Name was Rouse; Thereupon a Porter was
sent to my House, and about the Neighborhood, to satisfy themselves that such
a one lived there; that would not satisfy, but they would have some known
person^ thereabout to ^ngage for me; when upon I ^^nt, and some where not a^
home, others were shy of Appearing, and when they saw that, nothing must serve,
but they charged a Constable with me, took Coach and carried me to the Fleet
for security, the Secre^^ry of the same being an assistant to the said
Messenge. This was about Ten or Eleven at Night*

Next ^orning I was carried ^o White Hall, Thursday, 5. day.
after a little while I was called into the Secretary's Chamber, where were
present, the King, the Duke of York, Lord Keeper North, Lord Hallifax, Lord
Sunderland, Secretary, Secretary Jenkins; Lord Keeper acquainted me that there
was an Information brought against me of Treason, and instanced in several
particulars. However, if I would be ingenuous, and confess the persons
concerned, or knew of any thing against His Majesty, I should find favor.
Thereupon I desired to be excused from answering then, (to prevent any
mistakes, seeing so many at the Table with each Man his Pen ready to write down
whatever was spoken) but promised to put into writing what I knew of any design
against His Majesty, or the Peace of His Kingdom; which when they heard, the
Duke of York urged with diverse Arguments to speak what I had to say
immediately; but I still insisted upon Writing my Mind: Thereupon His Majesty
proposed, and it was agreed on, that I should take Four or Five hours, and be
alone, to do what was necessary, and the Messenger was ordered to carry me to
the Plantation-Office near Scotland Yard, where a Guard was set till I had
finished. About Four in the Afternoon I went with my Paper, and one of the
Clerks of the Council was ordered to receive it, who calling for it, carried it
in, and I was ordered to tarry a while; mean time Mr. Thomas Lee a Dyer was
called in, who was the person that Informed against me, and who himself was
Sworn against by two others, viz. How of Old-street, and Keeling of
East-Smithfield: when he came out, I was called in and the Lord Keeper told me,
I had not been free and ingenuous, but did keep back what was material, having
received further Information against me; upon which I told them, that I had
done what possible could be done within that space of time allotted, and
promised whatever should accrue to my memory I would faithfully discover, and
not falsely accuse either Friend or Foe: Then I was ordered to withdraw, and
ordered to appear next day by Eight in the Morning; then I returned to the
Fleet again. And

I was carried up again, tarried all the Forenoon, Friday, 6. day.
not called in, but adjourned till Four the same day; at Four a Clock, having
Dined at Temple-Barr, went up again, and was adjourned till Four a Clock next
day; so went to the Fleet again.

Early in the Morning I sent to His Majesty to speak with him alone; Saturday,
7. day.
for which purpose a Gentleman went and acquainted His Majesty, who was in the
Park, and ordered me to come to him; when I came, I found His Majesty at one
end, and the Two Secritaries of State at the other end of the Room, His Majesty
called me to him, with whom I had private conference about a quarter of an hour
and more, in which time I satisfied His Majesty how far Thomas Lee had been
engaged in Words and Actions against His Majesty; His Majesty seemed very well
pleased, and commanded me to put it in Writing, and bring it to him again; so I
went away with the Messenger and followed His Majesty's command, drew up a
rough draft, returned to White hall at the time appointed, sent into the
Secretary that I were come, but instead of being called in, the Council went
away, and the Secretary gave a Warrant to the Messenger for my Commitment to
the Marshalsey, for High Treason, in Compassing the death of His Majesty, and
Levying of Arms.

About Seven or Eight at Night I was sent away by Water with a File of Soldiers
to the Marshalsey, where I were committed close Prisoner, next day put in
Chains, and could not have the liberty of any one to acquaint my Wife where I
was, though I begged as for an Alms, and told the Marshal how my Wife was big
and near her time.

A Messenger came from the Attorney General to acquaint me how I must prepare
against Wednesday for a Trial; Monday, 9. day.
thereupon I writ Mr. Attorney a Letter, wherein I acquainted him with what had
past between His Majesty and my self, and how I was surprised, also how hard it
was, what disadvantages I lay under to prepare for a Trial; for notwithstanding
this notice, I was not allowed any body to come to me, nor the use of Pen, Ink
or Paper.

The Marshal received an order to bring me to Whitehall, Tuseday, 10.
where we went, tarried some Hours, and ordered to appear next Morning.

Instead of going to White Hall, Wednesday, 11.
an Habias Corpus was sent to carry me to Newgate. About Nine in the Forenoon I
was carried to Newgate, where my Wife came to me and tarried about half an
hour, but could get no other Friend till Nine at Night, nor Council to advise
withal without Order of Court.

Captain Richardson carried me to the Old-Baley, Thursday, 12.
and being there, I found that Captain Blage and my self were put in one
Indictment, which was read, to which we pleaded Not Guilty. Then we withdrew;
the Bill given to the Grand Inquest, who found it against us both; afterward
being called again, to hold up our Hands, we Pleaded as before: Being asked by
whom we would be Tried, we answered, By God and our Country.

Friday 13. We were called again, and required to take our Trial, Captain Blage
asked, whether we must Answer, severally or jointly, Sir George Jefferies said,
we might Answer severally, then the Captain Begged Liberty to Answer for
himself, and the Court Ordered me to take mine first, but before I took my
Trial, I prayed the Court for more time, because of the disadvantages that I
had been under, however the Court would not admit of it, but said, I must do it
now, to which I submitted, having no Copy of the Indictment, no Council nor
other to advise withal, the Indictment read, and Witness called in to prove it,
which was, viz. Thomas Lea Dyer, William Leigh, Captain Blage's Mate, Thomas
Corbin also brought, not as a Material Witness in this matter, as Sir George
Jefferies declared, but to declare words that I should speak in 81, whose
Evidence could not be allowed then, because Justice could not be had, and at
such a time, when the Judge was in fear of his Life, as he sat upon the Bench.
Moreover, Sir George Jefferies said, how that I were to be Play Master, under a
great now dead to a Rabble, the fourth Witness was Richardson, the Messenger to
Witness where he took me, and how I spoke of Johnson.

The Witnesses being Sworn, the Indictment was read, how that I should be
Guilty as before, and particularly that on the second of March last, I was with
diverse others at such a place, where Captain William Blage, and had many Arms,
as Blunderbusses etc. and contrived as before, Lea Swears not a Word of this,
but that on the last of June, we were at the King's Head in Sweetings Alley
London, that we contrived taking the Tower, of the City of London, Whitehall,
St. James's, that Captain william Blage, his Mate, and other Seamen were
Engaged in taking the Tower, how that a Golden Ball was to be thrown up upon
Black Heath, for to Gather Seamen together at the drinking of a Bowl of Punch,
that the Aldermen were to be Killed, His Majesty and Duke of York secured, but
said, the truth was Mr. Rouse was not for Shedding of Blood; much less Killing
of the KING and his Highness the DUKE of York, that Goodenough, and I
Discoursed about it, and that Mr. Goodenough did give him thanks for his
Acquaintance with me, that it was contrived, His Majesty was to be seized as he
came from Windsor, that Arms were to be sent down in Trunks, that all was to
be done before Mid Summer, being asked, who began any Discourse of this Nature,
whether he or I first, indeed that he could not well remember, the price of the
Ball was valued by me at 10 s.telling of R. Goodenough of it, he should say, no
matter if it cost 40 s. we will have it, farther he swears, that I should say
that the King had Sworn in Spain e France, to establish Popery in England, and
for not performing his Oath the Papists were angry with him; upon all which,
Sir George Jefferies animadverted, and aggrivated as much as possible.

2. Witness, was William Leigh, who was Informed against by Lea, as a
Confederate with William Blage, in contriving how to take the Tower, this
Witness now was brought, that they might have full Evidence to Swear against
me, he threw that upon me, which he was instigated and prompted too by Lea.

3. Witness, Corbin, who Swore that I should say in 81. that His Majesty had
forfeited his Crown, that he had no more, but what a Parliament could give or
take away when they pleased.

4. Witness, Richardson so proved the word Johnson, whereupon, Sir George
Jefferies took occasion to signify, what Spirit the Prisoner was of always
against the King, that I had as many names as designs.

To all which I replied, viz. first, as to Lea, how he was but of late
acquaintance, being as I well remember about May, so that of the second of
March, must fall to ground, that when he entered into a Discourse with me once,
and again it was about a Foreign Invasion, to oppose which I discovered my
tenderness again and again, that what was discoursed about the Tower and
Seamen, the Captain and others, was by and from himself, as I find he
discoursed with Mr. Hone, and Mr. Keeling formerly, that another, I, nor
Captain Blage did look on it for a great while, but Romantic Discourse; that
it was never in my heart in the least to appear against His Majesty, or do any
thing against the Peace of his Government.

That Lea had been an Industrious drudge, to carry on a Design, and to see how
it would take, that it was his cunning to speak with but one very rarely at a
time, save Captain William Blage, and his Mate was present and no other, that
there was never a word, that ever past about any such things between Goodenough
and I, that I never saw him but twice after such Discourse arose, and one of
the times he asked me if I knew Captain Blage, that he saw he was a stout
Fellow and hoped he was honest, I told him I knew no other and no more, but the
Discourse fell to the Ground that I never knew of any meeting with Captain
Blage, that we were never together with him, that whatever it was, I found Lea
carried it on upon a Design to raise himself in the World.

That I never spoke what Corbin swore too singly and barely, but as that may be
hereafter, that the Mate was under a surprise as to some things, but that I
asked him if he were acquainted with honest Hone. I deny not, but not upon any
account of a Design against His Majesty. That when I said Johnson, I had no
knowledge of the Persons or there asking my name, nor that was a denying of my
name, being asked for Witnesses, let the World Judge in what capacity I were to
produce any, and for what, that what civillity I showed Lea, was no manner of
Argument that I designed Injury to my King, that I was often afraid of his
going away, or that he would be under a Temptation, to do by me, as he often
threatened to do by Keeling, and Harry very often told me, that he was never in
that Rogues Company but once in four Months, that he had been at
East-Smithfield on purpose to Kill that Dog.

That Lea being taken up, and being concious to himself, what he had said, was
Guilty of, and how he was in with Nelthrop etc. who Obsconded that I had heard
him, speak very unworthily of, and against the Duke of York, that he was privy
to some Wicked Design or other, now for fear I should appear against him, the
Devil put him upon Swearing that against me, whereof he knows in his own
Conscience he was the Sole Author, but God forgive him, and grant my Blood may
not be laid to his Charge, then I withdrew, and the Jury brought me in Guilty
of High Treason, against whom I have nothing to say, they are to give Account
at a Greater Bar, if Guilty of any Error, and besides, I ever had a great
Veneration for that Constitution, however, some Euthorigant Licentious Persons
take Liberty to bespatter that Kind of Order.

Next Captain Blage was called, and but one Witness against him, he was
acquitted.

Saturday the Fourteenth, Captain Thomas Walcot, a Man I never knew, William
Hone and I were called to the Bar, where each of us read our Sentence of Death,
not to speak of the Defense I made them, for it was overruled, now after all
that has been said Pro and Con, It concerns me as a Man, an Englishman and
Christian, for the satisfaction of all Persons to whom this Story shall come,
having a clear Conscience, as to any Design against the King or Government,
save that I heard such discourse, that I could not heartily acquies in.

I do declare solemnly, in the Words of a dying Man, being under the Sentence
of Death, and as I know to whom I must give Account for the same.

That I ever declared against King Killing Principles and Practices, but rather
looked on it as my duty, and made it my Practice to Pray for him, as often as I
Prayed for daily bread or for my own Soul.

That I never knew none of the Persons in the Pr^clamation, until the first
Pr^clamation after, Collon^^ Flemsey See. That I was never to be a Play Master
to any ^abble under agreement to the Lord now dead, and Sir George Jesserres
said, I were but only a Pay master in Flanders 78. for Lea must needs know, and
then he could say, that they were all concerned, and many go up and down
England, if so the more Wicked Wretch he to Conceal it so long, and for being
so she, ^otwithstanding all my siftings of him to know, but as I ^^id he had a
Wicked Design to carry on, and so he might escape at last, he did not care
against whom he swore, for there are more besides my self.

That I never knew of any Arms, as Blunderbusses, etc. provided or to be
provided, That I never spoke to any Se^men, about carrying on a Design, save a
kind of discourse, which Lea fomented and promoted in the presence of Captain
William Blage, and his Mate, with whom I was as an old acquaintance, acquainted
for many Years, and whom I knew to be Faithful to his Prince, whom he had
served for many years at Sea, with his life, whom I assisted for his dispatch
to New York, and knew his resolution, and bent lay that way, for which place he
bought a Ship, and was making all manner of have to be gone.

That I never knew of any design against the City, or much less Killing the
Aldermen, that I never knew of Attaching His Majesty (whom God preserve) as he
should come from Windsor or any place else, that I never heard one word from
Richard Gondenough, of acting any such thing or any other, that I had been
acquainted with Richard Goodenough many Years, as an Attorney and no otherwise,
and therefore it was unlikely that he should give Iea thanks for bringing him
to his acquaintance, that these were none of my words, I never did or could
say, that His Majesty had taken an Oa^h in Spain (...) France to do so and so,
and that I should have it under the Kings hand, I utterly deny it, but I
remember I heard a profligate Villain speak somewhat to that purpose, this was
some Years past, and I might speak what a Villain that was he that spoke after
that rate, that what was spoke by the Mate, and about his Answer, observing
with himself the slightness of many places about the Tower, which made him say
any Man might take it with Four or Five Hundred Men, if they had such a mind,
and Provision accordingly, that it was only for discourse sake, without any
premeditated Design.

That what Corbin said about the Crown, was enquired into (...) France by a
former Jury not to hold water, that when one of the Company Wyat, was speaking
of the Power of the Power of Popes over Kings, etc. I replied again, that if
that were so, that the Pope could depose Kings at pleasure, and dispose there
Crowns to others, (which I opposed and denied) that then he might give it to me
or any other, and by that Doctrine, I might or any other there Challenge it, so
that Corbin dealt by me as a Jesuited Evidence, who hearing a Minister Preach
upon that, in Psalm the Fourteenth verse the first, the Fool has said in his
Heart, there is no God; he goes and swears that the Man spoke Blasphemy,
saying, there is no God, leaving out the former Words, which being joined are
honest and good, and if Corbin had been so honest, as to speak all what I said,
my words could no more have been Treason and Disloyal; then the Ministers words
Blasphemous, but I am bound to pray God to forgive my Enemies, not only seven
but seventy times seven, and God forgive them all (tho never so Implacable) as
I am taught to pray that God would forgive me my Trespasses.

That I declare my Abhorrence of such Designs and Practices, as have brought an
Odium upon the Protestant Religion, let Men pretend to what they will, I am
sure they could be none that either Fear God, or Honor the King; if any blame
me for knowing any thing of it, and did not immediately discover it, I must
Answer, that my Design was good, and I were loath to carry a piece, or a broken
Story, as I told His Majesty, or else he had heard it sooner, and that Lea was
well advised of, and my discharging him from my House, gave no small Jealousy
among other things. This being the Sum and Substance what I have to say, I now
conclude, in owning my self (whatever others say or think) to dye in the belief
of the Doctrine, of that part of Christ's Church planted in England, being
agreeable to the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the
Chief Corner Stone, praying God to hasten the calling of the Jews, To bring in
the Gentiles, destroy Babylon, build up Sion, preserve Great Britain,
especially His Majestles Person and Government, that Peace with Truth may
Flourish, Bless and provide for my dear Yoak-Fellow and little ones, with all
my Relations; preserve London and Westminster, order and overruled all public
and private Transactions, to his Glory, and hasten his coming the second time.

Lastly, I Commit my Body to the Care of my Friends by His Majesty's leave, for
a decent Burial, Believing a Resurrection, and my Soul to that God whose right
it is: But this would not be granted the Petitioned for,

from Newgate, July, 1683. J. Rouse.

A Letter, Written to his WIFE out of Newgate.
WHen God brought us first together, we made full Account of parting one time
or other, but whose Lot should be first, or the manner of our parting, and
death, that was Locked up in Gods Cabinet, and now after Fourteen Years
cohabitation we must part, it is true, were it at our own House, and by an usual
ordinary common way, we should be better pleased it may be, but this is the way
appointed, my Sins have been the procuring, though Evil Men the Instrumental
Cause. This we know, it is appointed to all Men once to dye, and after that the
Judgment, it is now my Lot to be called away, not by an ordinary, but
extraordinary, Violent Shameful way of dying, but what of all that? May God
being reconciled to me through Christ, the Handwriting Concealed, Sins
Pardoned, Nature Sanctified, Soul Washed in the Blood of Sprinkling, Conscience
Excusing not Accusing, as to that Crime Charged on me, though I have received
Sentence from the Judgment Seat of Man, I shall be acquitted at the Judgment
Seat of God, having this Confidence, the manner of dying, accompanied with such
outward Ignominy and Reproach, and so many Hundred Spectators, some to Triumph,
others to please fancy, and a few out of true Love and Sympathy, I say in this
Confidence, I am highly unconcerned, it is but a few hours, and this Noise,
Rout and Vanity will be over. What shall Indians that Dream of a place (after
death) full of Carnal pleasure, shall Papists upon Account of their Merits, and
an Absolution at Death, endure any kind of torture, and shall I who neither
believe the one, and who abhors the other, be afraid of that which is but a
Bugbear to an ingenuous noble Soul, who is born from above? and now through
the Infinite Merits of his dear Jesus, the alone Redeemer (besides whom he owns
no other) that very Soul is hasting to the place from whence it came; and for
the Body, the outer Shell, believing a Resurrection, however that be torn,
shattered and devoured, every piece and particle shall be collected and brought
together.

Now I bid thee adieu, till we meet where all Signs and Tears shall be wiped
away; but before we part, I am under all Obligations imaginable, to leave thee
that I can to support thee, since I have left thee in such a condition, as
(without a great measure of Strength and Grace) the thoughts thereof would
quite sink thy Spirit: But cheer up from these Considerations, What though my
Husband be dead and gone, yet I have a tender, loving, good Father alive on
Earth, and which is more, I have a greater and far better Father in Heaven.
What though I am a Widow, and have many Fatherless Children to take care of and
provide for; what then? have I not a God who has styled himself the Father of
the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow in his holy Habitation? And so go
on, reckoning as to Habitation, manner of dwelling, the difference of fine or
course Food and Raiment, and as to Friends and Enemies, Read, studdy Jobs
condition. When at any time you think of your Husband and manner of his death,
endeavor to fetch Honey out of the Lions Carcass; banish away all hard
thoughts of God, who has done us no wrong; though this Providence seems harsh
and severe to us, yet it is Just and Righteous in our Lord, Even that God that
chastises the Heathen, shall not he correct? Psalm 94. He that teaches Man
knowledge, shall not he know what is best for me? I know that thoughts, and
many troublesome and solicitous ones, will now and then arise, and work
strangely; Consider it was thus with Holy David: Then in the multitude of thy
thoughts within thee, let Gods Comforts delight thy Soul. Martha was cumbred
about many things, I hope my Mary has chosen that part that will never be
taken from her; then let her acquiesce, in whatsoever revolutions shall pass
over her head in this World, etc.

Here follows his Advice to his Children.
To my dear Children whom I leave under the protection, and to the care of that
God who is the Father of the Fatherless; as my Daughters, Elizabeth and Mary,
my two Sons now in being, John and Thomas, and that which my Wife Travels with,
God give her a good time: Advice to them all in general.
DEar Children,
since I am to leave you, and leave you in a vain, wicked, unkind World, and
cannot leave you each an Estate or Portion to live upon in this world, I
cannot, I dare not go off this Stage without letting you know that you had a
Father (some of you do now remember it, but all of you cannot) and not barely a
Father, but such an one as did hope, a few days past, to have lived and seen
you his Children to find Grace both in the eyes of God and Men; since its
otherwise, and I am called away from you by an untimely and violent death, even
such a death as probably may be cast in your Teeth hereafter by some kind of
people. I leave you all I have (instead of Silver and Gold, Lands, and Houses)
that is, the Prayers, Blessing and Counsel of your Loving Dying Father, with a
strict charge, as ever you hope to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, to keep it
by you, follow it each of you in your own persons, and convey it down to your
posterity, and the Great God Sanctify you, Bless, Protect and Keep you from all
sin and danger hear, and at last bring you to his Eternal Kingdom.

Your Loving Father J. Rouse.

My Dear Children,
my Prayers for you are, that as you are mine by natural Generation, That God
would make you his by the Grace of Adoption, that when your Earthly Father
shall leave you, the Father of Spirits may take care and provide for you;
though you and every of you be Children of Wrath by Nature, you may never be
Subjects of Wrath; though you live in the World, you may be kept from the evil
of the World; and lastly, when you leave this World, you may have a House, not
made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

By way of Counsel: Children, these things I write from a heart full of Bowels,
especially since I am not like to see you, or speak one word to you more in
this World.

In General: Fear God and keep his Commandments: Remember each of you your
Creator in your youth.

Particularly, Above and before all other things mind the Duties of Religion
Godward, as Prayer for what you shall want, praise for what you have or shall
receive; Read the Holy Scriptures some part every day, especially the Psalms,
Proverbs, and the Epistles of St. Paul, etc. and therein that which concerns
you and your practice. Also other good Books, particularly the lesser
Catechism, and Bishop Vshers Grounds of Religion. Neglect no Ordinance of God
public or private: In Reading read a little at a time, and read distinctly;
learn the 119 Psalm by heart.

2. Be obedient and dutyful to your dear Mother, and obey all her lawful
Commands cheerfully, etc. Read Col. 3.20.

3. When you have Masters and Mistresses, mind Col. 3.22.

4. Submit to, and pray for Kings and all you live under, that under them you
may live peaceable, etc.

5. Be kind and courteous to all persons.

6. Avoid all evil wicked Company; among all Company be Wise as Serpents,
Innocent as Doves; when others Curse, do you Bless; pray for any that shall
despitefully use you. Read Matt. 5.

7. Be kindly affectionated one toward another, do your utmost to build up one
another for Heaven; and next, assist each other with what God shall give you of
this World, one may be Rich another Poor.

8. Remember the Poor, especially they of the Household of Faith; if you have
nothing to give them, at least Pity or Pray for them, that you can bestow at
all times. What you do, do with a good Will and in Faith; He that gives to the
Poor, Lends to the Lord.

Now to Each of you a part.
And first to Betty, thou art grown up, its high time for thee to think of thy
Duty toward God first, next to thy tender Mother; Come away from loose Wanton
Girls, studdy to serve and please thy Mother, and ease her as much as may be in
helping and looking after the Younger; Give not thy Mother cause to complain of
thy undutifulness and stubborness; God make thee such another Elizabeth, who
with her Yoke Fellow walked in all the Commandments blameless.

Mary, What I say to Betty I say to thee, and God enable thee to choose the
better part.

John, Thy Name fignifies Grace; God furnish thee with all manner of Grace from
the Fountain of Grace, John 1.12. Remember as thou art the Elder, and God spare
thy Life, as God shall enable thee, I charge thee to mind thy Mother and
Sisters.

Thomas, be not thou faithless, but believing; what advice I give in general to
all, and in particular to thy Brother John, I give to thee.

To that unborn at present, whether Benony, if a Boy, or Mara, if a Maid,
though thou never saw thy Father, I lay the same Obligation upon thee as
upon the rest in thy Capacity: and so the God of Heaven and Earth keep and
Bless each and all of you in Souls and Bodies, and the Grace of God that
appears, teach you all, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, you may
live Soberly toward your selves, Righteously toward Men, and Godlily toward
God, in this present evil World.

Dated from the Prison of Newgate, where I am under the Sentence of Death from
Man, upon the Account of High Treason Sworn against me, though (Blessed be God)
under no Sentence of my Conscience within, for designing or compassing the
Death of his present Majesty, (whom God preserve) or Levying Arms against his
Royal person or Government; yet as in duty bound, do pray for my Enemies, that
God will not lay my Blood to their Charge: And so I conclude, Your Tender,
Loving Father, a few hours before his Execution, J. ROVSE.

FINIS.

