TWO SPEECHES IN PARLIAMENT: The one Concerning Religion, and fit men to be
chosen for the ASSEMBLY. The other Concerning a West Jndie Association at a
Committee of the whole House in the Parliament, 21. Iacobi.

By Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, Knight, Surveyour of His Majesty's Court of Wards and
Liveries.

LONDON: Printed by B. A. for Henry Seile at the Tigers Head in Fleet Street,
1642.

Mr. SPEAKER:
GOD has wonderfully blessed Us this Parliament in Discoveries, and
Deliverances, in Prevailings and Successes: what manner of Men therefore ought
we to be, in Acknowledgment and Thankfulness? And let us return a Real
concreate Thankfulness, expressd in Action.

We have often said and professed, that Religion, as it is the chief, so it
ought to be our first business; yet many other have gotten Precedence of it,
we have hitherto made but a small Progression.

Wherefore M. Speaker, let us not now slack to proceed in it, with Sobriety,
Wisdom, Charity, until we have settled it in a solid grounded, peaceable way,
suitable to the quality, and importance of the Cause; when That is done, every
thing else will be done the better, for it.

Concerning sit men to be chosen for the Assembly.
Mr. Speaker, I am glad we are coming toward Religion, to bind up the loose
scattered Pieces of it in an Orderly regular Government.

The Masterpiece of this great work will be the Election of fit Agents; wise,
learned, unbiased Men, such as have showed themselves desirous of Reformation,
in the Government, in the Lyturgie, willing to remove whatsoever may offend or
scruple weak and tender Consciences. Men not hide-bound in their opinions,
Lovers of Peace, more then of themselves. Peace is Tranquillitatis Ordo, and
Order is the soul of outward things, it keeps them quiet and clear from jusling
and interfeering one with another.

A man may be a very good and able Pastor of a Parish, a very learned and
painful Lecturer to a great Congregation, and yet not so fit for this active,
extensive Employment. For, a man may be Learned with another man's Learning, but
he must be wise with his own Wisdom. Therefore, they should not be narrow,
shady, speculative men, but rather, men of large, sober practical
understanding, prudent men. Prudence is, Rerum Agibilium Ratio, the Reason and
Rule of things which are to be Acted.

Wherefore, M. Speaker, It behooves us to be exactly careful, that we choose such
men as may give countenance and authority to the work, else we shall weaken and
hazard the whole Frame. For mine own part, I will take no Exceptions against
any, but leave them wholly upon the Consciences and Judgments of their Choosers.

My humble Motion is, that after this long-desired, and long-delayed
Reformation, we may now all of us join as one Man, for the Peace of Jerusalem,
and the Israel of God; So shall we prosper, because we love it.

The second Speech, concerning a West-Indy Association, at a Committee of the
whole House of Parliament.
Sir Dudley Digs,
I Do profess, that as my Affection, my Reason, and my Judgment, go strongly
with the scope and drift of this Proposition; so shall a good part of my poor
fortune, when it comes to Execution.

For to my understanding, there was never propounded in Parliament, a design
more proper for this Kingdom, nor of more pregnant advantage to it, whether we
consider the Nature of our situation, or the quality of our Enemies Forces.

As we are an Jland, it concerns our very being to have store of ships to
defend us, and also our well-being by their Trade to enrich us.

This Association for the West Indies, when it shall be regulated and
established by Act of Parliament, and thereby secured from the violence and
injury of any intruding hand, it will certainly give many men encouragement and
confidence, voluntarily to bring in large and liberal contributions, toward
so noble, so profitable an Enterprise. So that in short time, we shall see many
new ships built, many brave men employed, and enabled for the service of their
Country, none of this money shall be carried out of the Kingdom, but laid out
for shipping, which is the defense of it, and bestowed upon our own men, who
must be fed and maintained, though they stay at home. For this, we shall reap
the fruit of whatsoever benefit Plantation, Traffic, or Purchase can procure
us, besides honor and security.

Now, let us a little consider the Enemy we are to encounter, the King of
Spain. They are not his great Territories which make him so powerful, and so
troublesome to all Christendom. For it is very well known, that Spain it self
is but week in men, and barren of Natural Commodities. As for his other
Territories, they lie divided and asunder, which is a weakness in its self;
besides they are held by force, and maintained at an extraordinary charge
insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet is he like the great Giant, who
was said to have too hands, but he had 50 bellies to feed, so that ratably, he
had no more hands then another man.

No Sir, they are his Mines in the West Jndies, which minister fuel to feed
his vast ambitious desire of universal Monarchy: It is the money he has from
thence, which makes him able to levy, and pay Soldiers in all places; and to
keep an Army continually on foot, ready to invade and endanger his Neighbors.

So that we have no other way, but to endeavor to cut him up at root, and seek
to impeach, or to supplant him in the West Jndies. By part of which course,
that famous Queen of most glorious memory, had heretofore almost brought him on
his knees. And this our undertaking (if it please God to bless it) must needs
effect it sooner and quicker: the whole body of the Kingdom being united and
concurring in a perpetual supply to this action, so that he will have no free
time given him to rest.

Moreover, this will be a means not only to save but to fill His Majesty's
Coffers, enabling the people to give him liberally, and often; the Kings ships
will have little to do, but to guard the Coasts, for the Sea-war will chiefly
be made at the charge of the subject.

Thus, (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt not but that in short time, both King and
people shall be safe at home, and feared abroad.

To conclude, I shall be very glad to hear any man make Objections against this
Design, so that he do it with an intention to refine and perfect the work; but
if any shall speak against it with a mind to hinder and destroy it, I must
entreat him to pardon me, if I do scarce think him to be a good Englishman.

FJNJS.

