Dr. ROYSE's SERMON Preached before the KING AT BELFAST in IRELAND.

A SERMON Preached before the KING AT Belfast in Ireland, ON The 14th Day of
June, 1690.

By GEORGE ROYSE, D.D.

Fellow of Oriel College in Oxon: And Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Printed by the King's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Crouch at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley,
over against the Royal Exchange. 1691.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
HEB. XI. And the former part of the 33d Verse. -- Who through Faith subdued
Kingdoms.


IN this Chapter you have the glorious Achievements and memorable Actions of
your Forefathers, the Patriarchs and others set before your eyes: And the main
Engine by which they accomplished all their Victories was, as the Author of
this Epistle tells us, Their Faith. By Faith, says he in the next Verse, they
escaped the edge of the sword, waxed valiant in fight, out of weakness were
made strong, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. And if we look back
upon the Sacred History of former Ages, it is observable, that all the great
Actions and Successes in the World were nothing else but the triumphs of a
conquering and invincible Faith.

When Might and Power have been armed against it, when Wit and Malice have
combined to crush it, when Tyrants and mighty Men rose up, and threatened
nothing less than Ruin and Destruction to the weaker Forces, then did this
Shield of Faith receive all their Batteries, maintained its Post against all
its Enemies, threw down their Walls, razed their Strongholds, and scattered
those that delighted in Blood. Thus the Chariot and the Horse fell, and the
Tyrant slept his last sleep, when the Just Man lived and triumphed by his
Faith. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand upright,
says the Prophet; that is, we who by a lively Faith reposed all our Trust and
Confidence in the Name of the Lord.

And no wonder, that this Faith does subdue Kingdoms, since as St. John tells
us, 1 John 5.4.
it overcomes the World

Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms. In which words we have a plain Matter of
Fact related to us, viz. That the great Champions of the World did purchase all
their Victories and Triumphs by their Faith. And here, not to run over the
several Acceptations of the word, by the Faith of these heroical Spirits seems
more particularly intended, that which Divines call, fides Miraculorum; that
is, a belief (wrought in them by a Divine impulse) of God's miraculous
Assistance against their Enemies, or a firm persuasion, that he would work such
Miracles by their hands, and bring mighty Matters to pass, which in the nature
of things seemed nowise probable: And in this sense it is used by the Apostle in
those words, Though I have all Faith, 1 Cor. 13.2.
so that I could remove Mountains, etc.

But because we do'nt live in an Age of Miracles now, much less can we pretend
to such extraordinary Impulses, or special Promises on which they built their
Faith, I shall therefore take the word in a larger sense, so as it may be
applicable to us, namely, as it implies our belief of God's Promises in general
made over to his Church, and our consequent Trust and Dependence on him for the
fulfilling them: And in this sense too, I hope to make it appear, that through
Faith still we may subdue Kingdoms.

Inclearing of which, I shall observe this following Method: First, I shall
show in general, That our Belief and Confidence in God, is the best Expedient
in the World to secure the Success of our Arms, or to Subdue Kingdoms.
Secondly, I shall Enquire upon what Grounds and Motives we may expect the same
Success as our Forefathers had. Thirdly, and Lastly, What is required of us in
order to this Success: viz. That we follow their Examples in building a lively
Faith and Confidence upon God.


As to the former, That our Faith and Trust in him is an admirable Instrument
for subduing Kingdoms will appear true beyond contraction, whether we confider
it in its own natural Tendency, as it is suited to such an end, or in reference
to God's Providence, who does usually crown it with Victory and Triumph. First,
if we look upon it barely in its own natural tendency, the belief and
persuasion of an invincible Arm to assist us, seems admirably fitted for the
advance of any undertaking whether of Peace or War. The very opinion of such
Succors and Assistance as it gives a man a fair prospect of success, so it
must be highly instrumental to it. For in the usual course of things Believe
and Conquer do generally go together, and a firm persuasion that we shall
succeed, is a considerable step to promote it. The true rational Ground of
which is this, That every Man's Belief is the great Spring of all his
Endeavors and Undertakings, and all the World do act either more faintly or
vigorously according to the persuasion of their own strength, agreeably to the
prospect they form of, and the event of things.

If a Soldier, through the apprehensions of the weakness of his Party, be
distracted with Fears and Doubts about the Issue and Consequences of an
Engagement, this as it must naturally sink his Spirits, so it will
proportionably slacken his Endeavors too. But he that is buoyed up by the
thoughts of Omnipotence, as he must be flushed with the sanguine hopes of a
good Issue, so he will be warm and active in pursuing it. And therefore the
Belief of a Divine irresistible Power, as it must carry a great stroke in the
vigorous advance and application of the Means, so it must be allowed to have a
proportionable influence in determining the Issues of War.

And for this reason, should we suppose with the Atheist, that Providence did
not interpose at all in our Battles and Engagements, yet the bare belief and
confidence of it is of admirable use in advancing the Sword abroad, as well as
preserving its Authority at home; for be our persuasion either right or wrong,
yet since every man naturally does act agreeably to it, and since such a Belief
does as naturally tend to the exciting of our Industry and whetting our
Endeavors, consequently it must be of great use and advantage in the Day of
Battle.

And therefore whether Religion be true or false, yet it is but common prudence
in a General to preserve a due sense and esteem of it in his Soldiers, because
this Armor of God has a peculiar force as well as the Sword and the Spear or
any other Instrument of War.

But not to talk only in general, the Power and Influence of this will be
sufficiently cleared, if we show in particular, that such a Belief of an
Almighty Power is the only true Motive and Foundation of Men's Hope and Courage.
For it is granted on all hands, that Hope and Courage as they are the great
Virtues of a Camp, so in the natural course of things they bid fairest for
Success, and therefore if this Religious Persuasion be the only Motive to
excite these, the matter will be put beyond dispute, that our Faith may do
great service in subduing Kingdoms.

As to the former, it is certain our hopes of Success are always built upon our
belief of it. A man cannot reasonably hope for what best pleases him, but what
he first believes may probably happen, and according to the degrees of this,
our hope grows more firm as well as more rational. A sanguine expectation of
Success without any grounds or reason may be styled a foolish Confidence, but
does not deserve the name of Hope. And therefore then only do we hope like wise
men, when we build it upon those Powers above that cannot fail us, when with
the Prophet we make God alone our Hope and our Confidence, when we trust to the
strength of Israel, and that right hand which will have the pre-eminence. This
is like founding our House upon a Rock, where the Floods and Storms shall not
confound our Hopes, or ruin our Confidence. But to fix it upon any other
Powers, whether our own Strength, or the Conduct of a General, is like Building
upon the Sand, where the unsoundness of the Bottom does make the Pile as
precarious, as the Foundation is treacherous and uncertain. He that conquered
the Giant by Faith and a Pebble, has sufficiently cautioned us against such
confidence as this. Put not your trust in Princes, Psalm. 146.3.44.6.
nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. I will not trust in my bow,
neither shall my sword save me. And that we may not think this a Prophetical
Strain only, or a touch of Pious Cant, our own reason does convince us, how
unwarrantable that confidence is, that is founded barely upon human Succors:
for be our circumstances at present as fair as you would have them, be your
conduct or strength as great as you imagine, be it far superior to that of your
Enemies, yet the chances of War are so various and uncertain, and the fate of
it depends upon such multiplicity of accidents, that we can never have a true
bottom and security for our Hopes, unless they are settled upon an invincible
Power above.

But then should we suppose, that we are only equal to our Enemies, this as
'twill render the case in the nature of things more hazardous and doubtful, so
it must lessen our hopes and confidence: for where two Enemies shall appear in
the Field with equal Forces, as they must engage upon the greatest
uncertainties, so they cannot have any sure grounds for their hopes, unless they
were persuaded that there was a God to interpose, and to determine the
balance. But should we put the case, that we are inferior to them, then to be
sure we can borrow no hopes from human Succors, because the natural course of
things does determine the Victory in favor of their side. The consequence of
which is, that in all the circumstances of War a man can never have a sure
bottom for his confidence whilst he depends only upon the Powers below; and
therefore the Belief of an Almighty Power is the only Foundation of a Rational
Hope.

And as all our Hopes of Success in War are derived from the Succors of
Religion, so our Courage too does draw all its Life and Spirits from the same
Principle: For men's Courage must necessarily rise and fall together with their
Hopes; and men of Bravery and Valor, as the Philosopher observes, are always
men of Hope. And therefore as our Belief of God's Providence over us is the
great Spring and Vital Principle of the one, so likewise it is the main
Instrument to excite the other.

To speak plainly, the business of War is such a hazardous Enterprise, and the
prospect of Death so terrible, that a Soldier who has any apprehensions of it,
cannot well engage with a true heart and courage, unless he be persuaded, that
there is God above, that will take care for him here, and reward him hereafter.

You know very well, that the main Office of Courage is to moderate our Fears
and Apprehensions of Death. Now Death is an Evil too big for human nature, when
we consider it in its self abstracted from our Faith, and as there is nothing
in nature that can compensate for it, so nothing in mere nature seems equal to
encounter it, for human nature as such must necessarily fear it, as it thinks
on it; and therefore the Assistances of Religion as they are absolutely
necessary to moderate these Fears, so likewise to maintain our Courage. It Is
true indeed, a man may rush into the Battle without fear or wit, but this is
not the Courage of a Man that considers, but of a Beast that has no
understanding. True Courage is always joined with the consideration of those
evils which it encounters, and as Tully describes it, it is consider at a
periculorum susceptio, a deliberate and thoughtful undertaking of any danger;
and therefore those that take the Sword without any thoughts and apprehensions
of what they are about, do^ make show only of a Brutal Force, but cannot be said
to exercise a true Manly Valor: And it is much the same case with those who
fight only out of a brutish rage and fury, for these discover only the violence
of a Passion, not the greatness of Mind; and this sort of Courage is usually
found as false in the Trial and Experiment, as it is in the Notion. For those
who through a passionate heat and fury engage in Duels, are commonly the
greatest Cowards in a Camp.

All which seems to establish the truth of our Assertion, That a Religious
Belief is the Foundation of all True Bravery and Courage, and consequently the
best Expedient to Subdue Kingdoms. And that we may not look upon this as a mere
fanciful Notion, or the Idle Talk of Divines, I shall only appeal to common
experience and observation, viz. That those in all Ages who have been most
Celebrated for their Faith, have been equally admired for their courage and
bravery too, as particularly the Worthies of this Chapter, and the Primitive
Christians. Whereas Profane Wits and Atheists that have abandoned the belief
of a God, have been always looked upon as the most timorous Creatures, and the
greatest Cowards in the world. And if we examine the History of the Heathen
States, it is observable, that the Success of their Arms was in great measure
advanced by their belief and confidence in their Gods.

Hence in the Roman State we find, that in all their extremities and dangers
from their Enemies, they took sanctuary at last in Religion, and when the
Soldiers spirits were sinking, their Generals always took care to possess
their Minds with this notion, that the Gods were on their side, and declared
favorably for them. And this is the reason, why they so often produced Divine
Prophecies and Oracles in favor of their undertakings, and always consulted
their Priests about the will and pleasure of their Gods, that by these
counterfeit intimations of the favor of their Gods, they might raise their
spirits, and give them Courage in the day of Battle. And next under Divine
Providence, we may ascribe the greatness of the Roman Empire to those
encouragements which they fetched from Religion, and the belief of their Gods.
Agreeably to which Matchiavel himself, though he was no great friend to
Religion, yet in his Discourses upon this subject, he fairly owns, that the
advance of their Arms, and enlargement of their State, was chiefly to be
imputed to a sense of God and Religion established amongst them. Such a vast
influence has our Faith and Belief upon the Councils and endeavors of
Mankind. And not to multiply testimonies, but to reduce all in short.

In the natural course of things it is plain, that a Man's Belief in all cases
does carry a mighty stroke in advancing his undertakings, and particularly this
persuasion of invincible succors and assistance from above, must necessarily
inspire him with an answerable degree of Courage, it must raise his hopes, give
life to his resolutions, animate his endeavors, and this will go a fair way to
the taking of Cities, and subduing Kingdoms.

And as this Faith and belief of Gods Providence has a peculiar efficacy of it
self to advance our Arms, so by the Providence of God it is usually attended
with a suitable success.

That God Almighty does interpose in our Battles and Engagements, is as
certain, as that he does exercise a Providence over Mankind: for the success of
Arms and of National Engagements is such a considerable province, and so great
a part of his government of the World, that we may as well question, whether he
intermeddles at all in Humane Affairs, as whether he does interpose in this.
Taking it for granted then, that Providence does equally preside over Camps as
over Kingdoms, it is but reasonable to suppose, that he will bless those Arms
with victory and success, that are advanced in his Name, with a due regard and
application to him, and determine things in favor of that side, who build
their Faith and relyance on him. For by believing and trusting in him, we
really engage him as a Party for us, and by being his dependants, we entitle
our selves to his more special care and protection: Every one we know does
think himself obliged to show a peculiar concern for his own Favorites and
dependents, and if the measures of humane kindness do extend so far, much more
may we conclude it from the goodness of God, which is infinitely greater than
that of his Creatures. Agreeable to which we have his own assurance: Prove.
29.25.
Who so puts his trust in the Lord, shall be safe. Psalm. 34.22.
And none of them that trust in him shall be desolate. Psalm. 121.7.
The King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most high he shall
not be moved. Where as on the other side, he that does not think his God worthy
to be trusted, does fairly forfeit all title to his providence and protection;
for it is but just with God, that he should signalize himself in the defeat of
those Arms, that are bruitishly advanced without any sense or dependence on
him: And this was the usual methods of his dealing with the Jews, when they
trusted in God and in the strength of Israel; he went out with their Hosts, he
fought their Battles, and subdued the Nations round about them; but as soon as
they fell back, and shook off their dependence on him, he gave them into
captivity, and into the enemies hands. It Is true God does not exercise the same
visible distinguishing Providence, in rewarding men's Faith with Temporal
Blessings, as in the days of old, but yet as he is still Governor of the
World, he seems engaged to crown the Faith and Piety of Nations with visible
success, that by this means he may signalize his Providence to the World, and
keep up a just sense and esteem for Religion, by giving such an open testimony
and approbation to it. As for the virtues of private men indeed, they are not
always blessed here with good fortune and success, because in their single
capacities, they shall be sufficiently rewarded in another world. But fince
public Societies and Nations, as they are Politic collective bodies, have no
other stage but this world, for the reward and punishment of their common
virtues and vices, therefore Providence seems more highly concerned to dispense
and award them in this present life. And this has been the general observation
of the Heathen States, that their Gods bestowed Victory and Triumphs upon
Kingdoms, according to Men's Piety and dependence on them. Hence Tully makes a
fair acknowledgment, that the Romans did not owe their Conquests either to a
prevailing strength, or to their own extraordinary Valor, Art, or Stratagem,
but that they subdued the whole World by the irresistible power of Religion.
And Zosimus ascribes the fall of that Empire to the contempt of their Gods, and
a disregard to their Worship. And if these be the usual methods of Providence
in rewarding the Faith and Piety of Nations, it is obvious to conclude, what a
mighty influence our Religious belief may carry in subduing Kingdoms: and
therefore if we would all jointly agree in advancing our Faith and Religion
together with our Arms, we should have but little reason to doubt of the happy
issue and success of them.

And what grounds and encouragements we have to hope for this success, is the
second general Head to be considered.

And here whether we regard either the promises of God to his Church, or the
conduct and bravery of our General, whether we consider the Cause in which we
imbark, or the Enemies which we are about to encounter, they all speak out, Be
strong and of a good courage ye shall possess the land. As to the former, what
grounds we have to hope from Gods promises, it must be granted, that we have no
particular promises made to us, that we shall subdue this or that Nation, as
the Worthies of this Chapter had; but since it must be allowed, that God
Almighty does exercise as great a care over the Christian as over the Jewish
Church, we cannot well suppose, that he has left it without the same hopes and
encouragements: We all know that in these last days he gave up his own Son,
that he might purchase to himself a Church at the expense of his own Blood; and
as this is a higher demonstration of love, than ever was shown to the world
before, so it gives us most solid and rational grounds for our hopes and
confidence. And as greater love than this could not be shown, so neither any
greater security, than those general promises, which he has made over to it,
that he will be with it unto the ends of the world, Mat. 28.20. Mat. 16.18.
and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Which promises
however they run only to the Church in general, yet they are no less sure and
infallible than the most special promises whatever, and therefore they are an
equal encouragement for our Faith and Hope. How much the general interest of
the Reformed Church and Religion does depend upon the present Juncture and
success of things, I need not tell you; and since God has interposed his word
for the Maintenance of his True Religion in the World, we may reasonably build
our confidence on this, and face our Enemies with a true heart and courage. It
was not long since that you stood by, and saw the salvation of your God, in the
seasonable deliverance of this National Church, when a conjured race of professed
Enemies at home were creeping into its Bowels, and a Conclave abroad was
engaged to make trial, how far the gates of hell could prevail against it.

And since we have this fresh experiment of a kind Providence, in that he has
delivered us, this may justly add strength to our Faith, that he will yet
deliver us. The work is already begun, and if through want of Faith we don't
murmur and repine in our Tents, in the power of the most High we shall not
miscarry. And as we have good hopes of Success from the consideration of those
promises, which God has made over to his Church, so if we look upon that great
instrument next under him, whom he has employed to effect it, we may magnify
still the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. A Prince, who as he was miraculously
brought amongst us to begin our deliverance, so heseems to be acted now by a
new Commission from Heaven to complete it. A Prince who has already conquered
by Faith, without the force of Arms or an engagement with his Enemies. In
short, a Prince in whose Conduct and Valor we might safely trust, if 'twas any
wise allowable to put our trust in Princes: And as the presence of his Royal
Person, so the Merits of the Cause too do jointly conspire to give us new
Courage and Resolution. For whatever Notions some Men have framed to themselves
of the late Revolution in general, yet none of those pretended scruples can
affect us at present, who are engaged now against a Foreign French Power, and
an open avowed Enemy to the Kingdom. I have no time to dwell on this, but if
there be any Cause of War, that is just and honorable, you may plead it now:
for this is no idle Contest betwixt Princes about mere punctilio's of Honor,
no groundless quarrel to enlarge your Bounds, or to serve the Lust and Ambition
of a General, but the glorious Defense of your Country, against the unjust Arms
of a violent aggressor; the Maintenance of your Liberties, Fortunes, Laws,
Religion, and whatever else can be supposed dear unto you; and if you don't
think this a sufficient warrant for unsheathing your Swords, farewell first the
English Spirit, and next the English Subject too, Farewell long-adored Liberty
and Property, Farewell the Protestant. Name and Interest throughout Europe,
whose Fate must shortly be determined by the issue and success of your Arms.
But besides the Merits of the Cause, there is one consideration more that bids
fair for success, and that is the Enemies whom you are about to engage, the
Irish and French Forces, the former a byword and a proverb amongst Nations,
both for their Courage as well as Understanding, and therefore they seem rather
to challenge your Scorn and Contempt, than to exercise your Valor; the latter
an Enemy, that never made any generous Conquests by the power of his Arms, but
by that of his Money, and ow's more to the perfidiousness and treachery of
those he fought with, than to his own bravery. An Enemy whose Titles now adorn
the English Crown, as the lasting memorials of your Forefathers Victories over
him. In short, an Enemy whose greatness as it can be ascribed only to your
Luxury and Ease, so it must as certainly be humbled by the recovery of your
ancient Valor. Lay all these things together, and if they don't determine the
Victory on your side, it is because you want that Faith, which will subdue
Kingdoms.

Which brings me to the last thing to be considered, what is required of us in
order to the Success of our Arms, namely that we exercise the same Faith as
these Worthies did.

As our belief and trust in God is an eternal duty of Natural Religion, so it
carries an indispensable obligation along with it in all circumstances and
conditions whatever, but more particularly now the hazards and uncertainties of
War do challenge the exercise of it in a more eminent manner. For the issues
and chances of War are all determined by a Superior Hand, and it is God alone,
that gives victory unto Kings. The wise man has long since told us, that the
race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, but time and
chance happens to all. We may talk and project for Victory and Success, we may
join hand in hand, unite our Hearts and Councils, and form the Scheme and
Contrivance well, but we are assured at last, that the Counsel of the Lord it is
that shall stand, and the right hand of the Lord will have the pre-eminence.
And therefore since we cannot safely build upon our own strength and measures,
it is but common prudence, and interest to advance our Faith together with our
Arms, and to build our confidence on him, in whom alone true Succors are to be
found. Go on then Great Prince in the power and defense of the most High, and
enlarge thy Conquests over thy Enemies abroad, as thou have already over the
Hearts of thy Subjects at home. And you who have the glory of serving under his
Conduct, imitate the Faith of these Worthies here, and the bravery of him that
leads you. Then when ye pass through the waters, Isai. 43.2.
he shall be with you, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow you.
Psalm. 60.12.
Then through God we shall do great acts, for it is he that shall tread down
our enemies.

Then as by your Faith you shall subdue Kingdoms, so you shall secure that
Faith too from all the dangers of Popery and Superstition. In short, then shall
we return every man safe under his vine, and under his fig tree, and rejoice in
the mighty works of our great Deliverer. Unto whose Providence and Invincible
Arm, which alone is able to secure, as well as subdue Kingdoms, unto his
Almighty Providence and Protection I commend you all.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 19. for our Fathers, r. these Worthies. p. 6. l. 3. r. and
agreeably to that prospect which they have of the issue and event of things. p.
11. l. 19. r. as necessarily. p. 12. l. 13. r. the true greatness. p. 16. l.
23. r. usual method.

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-Head-Ally
next Cornhil.
FOLIO.
THE History of Scotland, written in Latin by George Buchanan. Faithful
rendered into English.

The History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward II. King of England and
Lord of Ireland, with the Rise and Fall of his great Favorites, Gaveston and
the Spencers. Written by E. F. in the Year 1627. and Printed verbatim from the
Original.

The History of the Affairs of Europe in this present Age, but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani,
Cavalier and Procurator of St Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood, Knight.

QVARTO.
A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Guild Hall
Chapel, upon Good Friday, March 29. 1689. By George Royse, D. D. Fellow of
Oriel College in Oxford, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at White Hall, on the 28th of
December, 1690. By George Royse, D. D. Fellow of Oriel College in Oxford, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

A Sermon Preached before the Deputy Governor and the Company of Merchants
trading to the Levant Seas, at St. Bartholomew Exchange, May 1. 1689. By Edward
Smith, A. M. Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin, and Preacher to the
Factory at Smyrna.

The True Interests of the Princes of Europe, in the present State of Affairs.

The A-la-Mode Secretary, or Practical Penman. A New Copy-Book.

Youth's Introduction to Trade, showing the way for Dispatch of Business, and
making Receipts, Bills of Debt, and Bills of Parcels incident to most Trades,
with Forms of Letters, etc. very useful and necessary for a Scholars Practice.
Both by John Airs, Master of the Writing-School near St. Paul's.

OCTAVO and TWELVES.
Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands. By Sir William
Temple of Shene in the County of Surry, Baronet, Ambassador at the Hague and
at Aix-la-Chapelle, in the Year 1668.

De Jure Marritimo and Navali. Or a Treatise of Affairs Maritime, and of
Commerce. In Three Books. The Fourth Edition. By Charles Molloy.

Britania Languens: Or a Discourse of Trade. Showing, that the Present
Management of Trade in England, is the true Reason of the Decay of our
Manufactures, and the late great fall of Land-Rents, and the Increase of Trade
in the Method it now stands, must proportionably decay England. Humbly offered
to the Consideration of the Parliament.

Cardan his three Books of Consolation, Englished. Of great use in these Times.

The Art of Painting in Oil. Wherein is included each particular Circumstance
relating to that Art and Mystery, containing the best and most approved Rules,
for Preparing, Mixing, and Working of Oil Colors.

Advice to the Readers of the Common Prayer, and to the People attending the
same, with a Preface concerning Divine Worship. Humbly offered to
Consideration, for promoting the greater Decency and Solemnity in performing
the Office of Gods Public Worship. By a well meaning, (though unlearned)
Layick of the Church of England T. S.

Christianity in short; Or the way to be a Good Christian. Recommended to the
use of such as want either time or capacity for reading longer or learneder
Discourses. By C Ellis, Author of the Gentile Sinner.

The Young Clerk Completed, being a Royal Sheet of Paper full of variety of
the Clerks Hands, with breaks off the Court Letters, and 166 Words abbreviated
in Court Hand, and fairly Written at length in Secratary. By John Airs at the
Hand and Pen in. St. Paul's Church yard. Price 2 s. 6 d. So contrived as to be
cut in parts, and Rolled up in a small Pen-case. Sold (with the rest of the
Author's Works) by S. Crouch at the corner of Pope's Head Ally in Cornhill.


