Rules, Orders, AND DIRECTIONS BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

Dublin Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty;
And are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street, 1672.

BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. RULES, ORDERS and Directions made and
Established by Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council, for the better Regulating
the several Cities, Walled Towns, and Corporations of Cork, Waterford,
Kingsale, Youghall, Cashell, Clonmell, Athlone, Londonderry, Carrigfergus,
Colerain, Strabane, Charlemont, Trym, Dundalke, Kilkenny, Wexford and Ross, in
the County of Wexford, and the Electing of Magistrates and Officers there.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS in and by one Art of Parliament, lately made in this Kingdom;
Entitled, An Act for the Explaining of some doubts arising upon An Act;
Entitled, An Act, for the better Execution of His Majesty's Gracious
Declaration for the Settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and Satisfaction of
the several interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other H^s ^ubjects there;
And for making some alterations of and additions unto the said Act, for the
more speedy and effectual Settlement of the said Kingdom.

IT is amongst other things therein contained, Enacted, That it shall, and may
be lawful to, and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor, or
Governors, and Council of Ireland for the time being, from time to time, and at
all times to come, during the space of Seven years, to be accounted from the
Nine and twentieth day of September, One thousand six hundred sixty five, to
make and stablish such Rules, Orders, and Directions, for the better regulating
of all Cities, Walled Towns, and Corporations, both New and Old, and such as
shall be created within this Kingdom, and the Electing of Magistrates and
Officers there, and to inflict such penalties for the breach thereof, as they
in their wisdoms shall think fit, so as the penalties for breach of the
Rules, Orders, and Directions to be made, touching such Corporations, do not
extend farther than to the Removal and Disfranchisment of such Persons, as
shall be found guilty of the breach thereof; and such Rules, Orders, and
Directions, so to be made as aforesaid, shall be as good and effectual in Law,
to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been specially and particularly
Established by Authority of this present Parliament, and shall remain,
continue, and abide in force, for such and so long time, as in the said Rules,
Orders, and Directions shall be limited and appointed, any thing in the said
Act, or otherwise to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

WE the Lord Lieutenant and Council, in pursuance of the said Act, and the
Authority thereby given unto Us, Have thought fit to make and Establish; And We
do hereby Make and Establish the Rules, Orders, and Directions hereafter
mentioned, for the better Regulating of the aforesaid several Cities, Walled
Towns, and Corporations and the Electing of Magistrates and Officers there.

First, That upon all Elections to be hereafter made, after the Last day of
December next* of any person or persons to serve in any of the Offices of chief
Magistrate or Magistrates, Recorder, Sheriffs, or Town Clerk of any of the said
several Cities, walled Towns or Corporations, the names of the persons so
Elected to serve in the said several Offices, shall be by the said Corporations
forthwith after such Election presented to the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors, and the Privy Council of this Kingdom to be approved
of by them, and the said persons so Elected for any the said Offices, shall be
for ever hereafter incapable of serving in the said several Offices, or any of
them, until they shall be respectively approved of by the Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors, and the Privy Council of this Kingdom by
Order under their Hands; And in case the persons, or any of them, whose names
shall be so presented to the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or
Governors and Council of this Kingdom, shall not be so approved of within Ten
days after their names shall be so presented, then and in such case the said
Corporations shall from time to time proceed to a new Election of fit persons
for the said respective Offices, for which the persons so presented, shall not
be so approved of, and shall in like manner present their names to the said
Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors, and Privy Council of
this Kingdom, until they shall have chosen such persons for the said
respective Offices, as shall be so approved of as aforesaid.

And that all such of the said Officers that are Annually chosen, who by the
Charters of the said respective Cities, Walled Towns or Corporations, or any of
them, have not been usually Elected three months before the day whereon they
are to enter upon the Execution of their said respective Offices, shall for
ever hereafter be Elected for the said respective Offices on that day Three
months, which shall preceed the day whereon they are to enter upon the
Execution of the said respective Offices, unless the said day shall happen on a
Sunday, and then the said Election to be on the day following (the said three
months to be accounted Kallendar months) to the end that there may be
sufficient time between such their Election, and their entering upon the
Execution of their said respective Offices for the obtaining of the approbation
of the Lord Lieutenant and Council, or other chief Governor or Governors, and
Council of this Kingdom, and for the making of new Elections in the places of
such who shall not be so approved of.

Provided always that this Rule shall not extend to the Election of any persons
in any of the said Cities, Walled Towns or Corporations, who shall be chosen in
the place of any such of the said Officers that are annually chosen who shall
dye within the year of their Execution of the said respettive Offices, or
within one Month before they are to enter upon the Execution thereof.

Secondly, That no person or persons, that shall hereafter be Elected, either
Mayor, Bailiff, Sovereign, Portreef, Burgomaster, Recorder, Sheriffs,
Treasurer, Alderman, Town Clerk, Burgess, or one of the Common Counsel, or any
Magistrate, or such or the like Officer within the said several Cities, Walled
Towns, and Corporations, or Master, or Wardens of any Corporation Guild, or
Fraternity within the said several Cities Walled Towns, or Corporations shall
be capable of holding, enjoying or executing any the said Offices, places or
employments, until he or they shall have taken the Oath of Supremacy,
Established by Act of Parliament 2do Elizabethae in this Kingdom, and the Oath
of Allegiance, besides the Oaths usually taken upon the admission of any
persons into the said Respective Offices, places, or Employments. And also this
ensuing Oath, viz. I A. B. do Declare and Believe, That it is not lawful, upon
any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the KING; And that I do abhor
that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or
against those that are Commissioned by him. So help me GOD. The said Oaths to
be taken, before such person or persons as shall admit them to the said several
Offices, places, and employments (who are hereby empowered authorized and
required to administer to them the said Oaths) and upon any such person or
persons refusal to take the said Oaths, The Election of any such person or
persons into any the said Offices, places, or employments, is hereby declared
to be absolutely null and void (such persons only excepted, with whose taking
the said Oath of Supremacy, the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom for the time being, for some particular reasons
shall think fit, by writing under his or their hand by Name to dispense.

Thirdly, That all Foreigners, Strangers, and Aliens, as well others as
Protestants, who are or shall be Merchants, Traders, Artizans, Artificers,
Seamen, or otherwise skilled and exercised in any Mystery, Craft, or Trade; or
in the working or making any manufacture or in the Art of Navigation, who are
at present risiding and inhabiting within this Kingdom, or who shall at any
time hereafter come into the said several Cities, Walled Town, or Corporation,
with intent and resolution there to inhabit, reside, and dwell, shall upon his
or their reasonable suit or request made, and upon payment down, or tender of
Twenty shillings by way of Fine, unto the Chief Magistrate, or Magistrates, and
Common Counsel; or other persons authorized to admit, and make Freemen of such
of the said several Cities, wal'd Towns, or Corporation, where he or they do
intend to inhabit, reside, or dwell, be admitted a Freeman of any of the said
several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporation: And if he or they shall desire
it, of all or any Guild, Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade,
Craft, or other mystery within any of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or
Corporations, during his or their residence for the most part, and his and
their Families constant inhabiting within the said several Cities, Walled Towns
or Corporations and no longer; and shall have, exercise, and enjoy all
privileges and immunities of Trading, Buying, Working and Selling, in as large
and ample manner as any Freeman of any the said several Cities, Walled Towns,
or Corporation might have, exercise or enjoy by virtue of his or their Freedom:
And that every such person or persons, who shall be admitted to be fre as
aforesaid, shall from thenceforth be deemed, esteemed, and taken, and be
Denizen and Denizens within this Kingdom, any Law Statute, Charter Usage, or
Custom of this Kingdom, or of any of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or
Corporations to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always,
That all such Strangers, Artificers, and others, to be admitted Freemen as
aforesaid, shall take the Oath of Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King,
His Heirs and Successors, and also such other Oaths as are accustomably taken
by all or any Freeman, or members of the said several Cities, Walled Towns, or
Corporations or by any the members of any such Guild, or Brotherhood; Society,
or Fellowship of the Trade, Craft, or other mystery, which he or they shall
occupy, or exercize, in case he or they shall desire to be incorporated into
any such Guild, Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship aforesaid, and shall pay
all such and like Charges, as all Freemen His Majesty's subjects, of the like
Trade, Craft, or mystery, shall or do use to pay, and no other or more; And
that if any Chief Magistrate or Magistrates, or other persons authorized as
aforesaid, of any the said several Cities, wal'd Towns, or Corporations; or any
Master, Warden, or other Governor of any Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship;
or any Trade, Craft, or mystery within the said several Cities, walled Towns or
Corporations shall refuse to admit any such Stranger, being a Merchant, Trader,
Artificer, Artizan, Workman or Seaman, residing or coming into this Kingdom,
with intent as aforesaid, to be a Freeman of any the said several Cities,
walled Towns, or Corporations where he or they intend to inhabit, reside, or
dwell; or to be a Brother or member of any Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship
within them or any of them every such chief Magistrate or Magistrates, Master,
Warden, or other Governors respectively, shall upon complaint and due proof
made, of such refusal, before the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or
Governors, and Council of this Kingdom, be by their Order Disfranchised, and
from thenceforth incapable (without their License) of being a Freeman or member
of any such City, Town, or Corporation; And evey such Stranger being a
Merchant, Trader, Artificer, Artizan, Workman or Seaman, upon tender by him
made of Twenty shillings, by way of Fine as aforesaid, and taking the Oath of
Allegiance before any Justice of the Peace, of the County next adjacent to such
City, Town, or Corporation, or wherein such City, Town, or Corporation is
situated (who is hereby authorized and appointed to administer the said Oath)
shall thereupon by virtue hereof, be deemed, reputed, and taken to all intents
and purposes to be a Freeman or member of the said City, Town, Corporation,
Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or mystery, where he
or they shall inhabit, reside, or dwell, and be denied admission as aforesaid;
And thenceforth have, exercize, and enjoy the liberty and privilege of
Trading, Working, Buying or Selling of any commodities whatsoever, in as large
and ample manner, as if he had been admitted a Freeman of such City, Town, or
Corporation, a Brother or member of such Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship of
any Trade, Craft, or mystery within the same, taking the usual Oaths of such
Freemen, Brothers or members, which Oaths any one Justice of Peace near
adjoining, shall have power to administer, and paying all such charges as
aforesaid, any Law, Custom, Charter or Usage, to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding: And in case any person or persons shall give any interruption
or disturbance to any such Stranger, being a Merchant, Trader, Artificer,
Artizan, Workman, or Seaman as aforesaid, to the hindering him in his Trading,
Working, Buying or Selling as aforesaid, contrary to the intent and meaning
hereof, all and every such person and persons so offending, shall upon like
complaint and proof made of his or their offense therein, before the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors and Council of this Kingdom
for the time being, be by their Order Disfranchised, and from thenceforth
incapable without their License of being made a Freeman or member of any of the
said several Cities, Walled Towns, or Corporations

And these Our Rules, Orders, and directions, We do hereby Order and Establish
for ever hereafter, to continue in force in all the aforesaid several Cities,
Walled Towns and C^rporations of Cork Waterford, Kingsale, Youghall, Cashell,
Clonmell, Athlone, Londondery, Carickfergus, Colerain, Strabane, Charlemont,
Trym, Dundalke, Kilkenny, Wexford, and Ross. And that the same be forthwith
enrolled in the Rolls of His Majesty's High-court of Chancery in this Kingdom.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the Three and Twentieth day of
September, 1672. Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin Canc. Drogheda. Arran. Conway and
Kilulta. Massereene. Hen. Midensis. Fran. Aungier. Art. Forbese. Jo. Bysse.
Rob. Byron. Will. Stewart. H. Ingoldesby. Theo. Jones. Char. Meredyth.



