Sr. Benjamin Rudyerd Surveyor of his Maties Court of Wards and Liueries.


TWO SPEECHES BY Sir Benjamin Rudyard, CONCERNING THE PALATINATE.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable, 1641.

THE FIRST SPEECH UPON THE FIRST DAY, CONCERNING THE PALATINATE. BY Sr.
BENJAMIN RUDYARD.
Master Speaker,
THis great Affair of the Palatinate, concerns this Kingdom in Nature, in
Honor, in Reason of State, in Religion.

We all know, how near in Blood the Prince Elector is to his Majesty.

Many of us here know, what solemn Protestation has been made in this place,
for the recovery of the Palatinate, by which we are bound in Honor to pursue
it with our best assistance.

God has so framed the Powers of man, and so ordered the course of things in
this world, as that in all actions, right Reason, and true Religion may well
hold, and go a great way together.

If we consider Religion according to reason of State, we shall find, that
Christendom divides it self into two sides, with the Pope, against the Pope.
His Majesty is the greatest King of the Religion; and therefore fittest to be
the Head of that Party, which will add a greater Greatness to Him then can be
gotten any other way.

The means to it are, first, to preserve Religion sound and entire, within His
own Kingdoms at home: next, to unite the Homogeniall parts of it, pieces of
the same, together, by Alliances, by Confederations abroad.

The good Effect of this Germane Match was lost by the ill Councels of those
times; It will be an Honor to us to repair it by better.

The restoring of the Prince Elector to his Territory and Dignity, will restore
Religion there; will strengthen it; may increase it further in Germany; which
consideration is of a great and vast Consequence, proportionable to the
greatness and vastness of that Country. It will likewise refresh and comfort
the needful heart of that most Noble, Virtuous, and Magnanimously suffering
Queen of Bohemia, his Majesty's sister, his Highness mother, who is ever to be
highly and tenderly regarded by this House, by this Kingdom.

This is a fit conjuncture of time to begin it in, whilst the King of Spain
has so much to do of his own, as he is not able to afford his usual aids to
the Emperor, which probably may induce the Emperor to abate of former
resolutions.

That which is now propounded, is only a Manifest, to express and declare our
zeal and heartinesse to the Cause, thereby to give it Countenance and
Reputation in the present Diet at Ratisbone. Reputation, in matters of State,
does many times prevail, as much as Substance.

His Majesty's Father (of blessed memory) and Himself, have for many years
mediated and treated with the successive Emperors, by all fair and amiable
ways. They have been deluded, they have been neglected. It behooves us, Master
Speaker, to be Englishly sensible of the Injustice, of the Indignity.

Wherefore my humble Motion is, That the House will be pleased, presently to
name a select Committee, to compose a Declaration suitable to the Importance of
the Cause.

THE FIRST SPEECH UPON THE SECOND DAY, CONCERNING THE PALATINATE. BY Sr.
BENJAMIN RUDYARD. At a Committee of the whole House.
Master Whitlock,
IF we may do the Prince Elector good, by our good word, I hope we shall not
stick to afford it Him. A Word spoken in due season, is worth more than Gold
and Silver at another time.

His Majestyes Ambassador is now at the Diet at Ratisbon, where the Emperor
and other Princes are by friendly Treaties endeavoring to make up the breaches
of Germany. If this opportunity be omitted, His Highness affairs will be
exceedingly cast behind hand.

It is true, That our Treatyes heretofore have not been prosperous; the reason
has been, because of the unhappy distance between the King and his people,
which brought a disvalue upon this Kingdom abroad. But now, when the world
shall take notice of the good understanding between his Majesty and his
Subjects, by an earnest and solemn Joining of the whole Parliament with his
Majestyes Declaration, the Propositions coming from hence, will carry with
them more weight, more Authority; which is the way to redeem our Engagement at
an easy rate, to save those great Charges which some do so much fear.

If we should be backward in this great work; we shall cancel the Obligations
of Nature, of Honor, of Reason, of State, of Religion, which bind us to it.

Wherefore, Master Whitlock, my humble Motion is, That we may draw up a short
round Manifest, to wait upon and affirm the Kings Declaration, to be still
managed by advice of Parliament, which will be safe for our selves, more
powerful and effectual for the Prince Elector.

FINIS.

