A Glimpse of some Truths to be made known in these LAST TIMES.

In Three PARTICULARS SHOWING, I. The End and Use of all External Ordinances.
II. The Nature of the Spiritual Death and Resurrection. III. The Day of
Judgment, what it is, and when it is.


By THOMAS ROYLE a member of the Army.

ISAIAH 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the sign of the black Spread-Eagle at the
West end of Paul's near Ludgate. 1648.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
Christian Reader,
ALL those Disciples that stooped down, and looked into the Sepulcher, where
the body of Jesus had layen, they clearly figured out this truth; That many
Christians in this age should be so taken with shadows and outward things, that
they should continue in them, when God had withdrawn his presence and gone into
a higher Dispensation: When Mary would not believe the Angel, but that the body
of Christ was in the place where it was buried; why, says the Angel, He is not
here, for he is risen: Mind the words, for there is a mystery in them; Let me
discover my thoughts to those my Friends who contend for a Natural Day and
Sabbath, is if there were more holiness in one day then another; truly I must
tell you thus much, that you have not finished your six days work, and so are
not come to see your rest in the seventh: This seventh Day, and Lords Day,
which John speaks of, is Christ that high mystery in us, who is perfect Rest
and Beauty; therefore says the Text, there remains a Rest to the people of
God: and he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own
works, as God did from his.

A word to those who look upon God and Heaven to be a far off above the
Firmament, in some place distant from the Creature; I must tell such their
apprehensions are dark, and low, and fleshly, for God is in every Creature, and
appears in all things that we behold, his workings are in a mystery; and those
that speak much of Heaven, that it is a place of Glory, it is so, but it is not
any local glory without, absent from the Creature; Heaven is this, a clear
Discovery of God, he appearing spiritually in us to be our fullness and rest,
that so the Creature acts not, nor lives any more to it self, but God in Christ
is all in all, both in him and for him: and this is it that Paul minds us of,
Ephesians. 1.3. who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places
in Christ.

As I have spoken a word of Light, in the beginning and first part of my book,
to those who contend for outward things and shadows, so let me speak a word of
love to you who profess your selves to be come out of Egypt, and brought
through the wilderness to the brink of Canaan; I mean you, my dear friends, who
live above Ordinances, which type is fulfilled in you, that so now your
fellowship and union is with that mystery of God, being made one with it: why
then contend not about doubtful Disputations, but let us labor after those
things which concern our peace; For it is a good thing, says the Apostle, that
the heart be established with grace, following peace and holiness with all men,
therefore let us commisserate the condition of such Christians as stand in that
night of Darkness, I mean whose practice it is to carry on shadows and outward
things, cracking the nut when the kernel is gone: It may be in this
Dispensation there appears a great Light to them, that they see much of God in
it; therefore this Light cannot be put out till there appears a greater; as to
instance in Naturals, in that season of the year, which we call Winter, many
people labor at their Callings in the night, being up and abroad before the day
appears, they now make use of Candlelight to walk by; but when the Day appears
and the Sun shines, then the light of the Candle is darkened by reason of the
greater light, and so is put out, for it is not of any use: so it is in
Spirituals, it may be many a poor Christian walks by Candlelight and
Starlight, which are the speakings and teachings of men carrying on outward
things; but when that Spiritual Day Christ dawns and appears in them to be
their fullness, then their former Light is made Darkness; so that now all
shadows are vanished away, and are not of any more worth in their eyes.

I have, with all tenderness, in my following Discourse, laid open something of
the mystery of God, but so far as I have deviated from the word of truth I
shall not own: When the Christian comes to moderate my Discovery of Scripture,
let him not be rash to utter himself, but let him wait till the flowers of
Experience smell sweetly in him.

The first part of my book discovers what is the end of all Shadows:

The second part declares the Resurrection of Christians.

And the third and last lays open the Day of Judgment, what it is, and when it
shall be.

T. R.

I. PART. A WORD OF Light and Truth discovered, for all Christians to mind: But
first especially to those who contend for outward Excellencies, as Form, and
external Order and Ordinances; which are the Sepulcher where the body of Christ
has layen.
My Friends,
J Shall make manifest and lay open the truth, according to that mystery of God
that leads me forth: I mind all along, by the mystery of Truth which speaks in
me, that all those Offices, Gifts, and Ordinances were typical, which the
Apostles practiced in their time; therefore they clearly figured out that Glory
and Beauty which should be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. I mind further that those
Ordinances which the history of Scripture speaks of, as Breaking of Bread, and
Water Baptism, were a Dispensation according to the weakness of the Disciples,
and they were to carry them on for such a time, but not for ever, as some say:
for as the coming of Christ in the flesh did put an end to all the Ceremonies
of the Law, even so do the appearances of Christ in us swallow up and put an
end to all shadows; I mean both Breaking of Bread and Water Baptism: these
Administrations were truth according to that low Dispensation that the poor
Disciples were under: therefore the Apostle tells them in 1 Cor. 11.26. says
he, in that history of truth, For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye do show the Lords Death: But mind the Apostle a little, they were to
carry on, for a season, that shadow: but if you ask me, how long? why, the Text
tells you, till he come: that is, the coming of the spirit of Truth in them:
for truly so long as Christ was with them in the body, they had very few
discoveries of that Doctrine of Truth that should appear in them. You may see
by the history of the Scriptures that they were mightily taken with the person
of Christ, and with those fleshly privileges that he carried about while he
was in the body: Therefore the Scripture tells you, that when he was to depart
and be gone from the Disciples, they were in great sorrow: but says Christ, I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice: that is, my next appearance
shall be to you in Spirit, and I will be your fullness, and you shall have
spiritual fellowship with me: before it was external in the body, but now you
shall be made partakers of the divine Nature: for I am the mystery of God in
you.

A word or two concerning Water Baptism. I mind that the Apostles had never any
Commission from Christ to baptize with water, for John was the Minister of
water, and what the Apostles did they did upon his account, which was for the
finishing of such a time, and then an end was to be made of it, for it was
legal and ceremonial: this Baptism of water was to be eaten up and put out by
the Baptism of Christ; mind one Scripture for to confirm this, Mat. 3.11. I
indeed, says John, baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes
after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire: that is, I John have material
water to baptize you with, which is a sign and legal, and to continue no longer
but till you be baptized with the holy Ghost; as much as if John had said, when
the Baptism of Christ appears, then I give up my Office; the Scripture that
proves this is John 3.30. One word more for the clearing of this.

You must mind that God has his movings to all the children of truth, for he
dispenses his own fullness by times and degrees, and so makes the Soul to lie
down in green pastures, and leads it by the still waters: See how God did move
to Paul, from one Dispensation to another, that so Paul did forget all those
things that he esteemed of formerly: He now desires to know Christ, and the
power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his Death, if by any means he might attain to the resurrection
of the dead: Oh the weight of these expressions! At this time Paul was come to
know his union and oneness with the mystery of Truth, by being made one with
it, now you find Paul but preaching one Baptism, not Water Baptism, but the
Baptism of Christ; for says he, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: and that is
the Baptism which the history of truth holds forth, 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one
Spirit are we all baptized into one body: the same Baptism you may see, Romans
6.3, 4. Know you not, says the Text, that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death: Mind that word into, which was the
Baptism of the Spirit, which gives us fellowship with him. Here I have labored,
with that light that draws me forth, to make clear and to show what is the end
of all shadows: If you grant me this to be truth which I have discovered with
abundance of tenderness and love, then there will spring this truth, That all
Dispensations of external Ordinances, I mean Breaking of Bread and
Water Baptism, and outward Order, if God has removed out of these and
withdrawn his presence from them, then they must needs be a waste and barren
wilderness where no water is, and a place for the Owl and the Raven to dwell
in; and he shall stretch out upon them the line of confusion and the stones of
emptiness: thorns shall come up in those places, nettles and brambles in the
fortresses thereof, and there shall be a habitation for Dragons, and a court
for Owls, the wild beasts of the Desert shall also meet with the wild beasts
of the Island, and the Satyr shall cry to his fellow; the scritch owl also
shall rest there, and find for her self a place of rest; there shall the great
owl make her nest, and lay and hatch, and gather under her shadow; there shall
vultures also be gathered every one with her mate. If you enquire the mystery
of this history, I answer, That all Dispensations that God has appeared in
formerly, (but now is gone out of them into a higher discovery of his own
fullness and beauty,) they are places for the mystery of iniquity, and the son
of perdition, and for the spirit of Antichrist to possess and act in. It is the
wisdom of the Reader not to be high-minded, but fear, sitting at the feet of
Christ with Mary, but be silent; then shall there appear a light in obscurity,
and all your darkness shall be as the noon day: I my self have been a stranger
in the Land of Egypt, but the mystery of Life has brought me forth, and made
me free: Therefore sing O Daughter of Sion, be glad, and rejoice, for the Lord
is in the midst of thee, thou shall not see evil any more.

II. PART. A Mystery revealed to many Saints, CONCERNING A Christians spiritual
death and resurrection.
Dear Friends,
J Shall labor to put an end to such Disputes as we have had formerly: The
thing and principle that I intend to treat upon, is, concerning the
Resurrection of Christians, which I shall discover clearly according to that
light that breaks forth in me.

First, let us weigh the history, and then let us come to the mystery; I find,
in the 11. of John, that Christ and Martha were in serious discourse about the
body of Lazarus* upon this Jesus says unto her, thy brother shall rise again;
Martha said unto him, I know he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the
last Day: to that question Jesus did not answer her, for the thing that she
drove at was the resurrection of the body; but Jesus discerning her low and
fleshly apprehensions, he comes to take her off with these words, I am the
Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live: The Mystery of this Scripture in me, is this, That Christ is the
spiritual Resurrection of Christians; a Resurrection out of Darkness into
Light, out of Nature into Grace, that so he bears not any longer the Image of
the first Adam, which was a figure of all fleshly wisdom, but now he is risen
in the likeness of the second Adam, that so now that mystery of iniquity,
wicked one, and son of perdition is crucified in him, as the flesh of Christ
was crucified: the Christian having some glimmerings of this, that the man of
sin is subdued in him, then comes he to have his union and oneness with that
mystery of God in him; then is he entered into his rest, as Christ did into
his: And this is that resurrection and spiritual gain, which both Christ and
the Apostles mind in the Scriptures.

Friends, let us dwell a little upon that history in 1 Cor. 15.35. says the
Apostle there, But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what
bodies do they come? Weigh the discourse of these Scriptures following; the
Apostle, to take off the first objection, says, Thou fool, that which thou
sowest, is not quickened, except it dye: And that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat or some
other grain: But, says the Text, God gives it a body as it has pleased him,
and to every seed his own body: and so the Apostle goes to illustrate and set
forth a spiritual Resurrection and not the Resurrection of the natural body.

But you may object and say, Phil. 3.21 Who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body?

To this I reply with Scripture, and then the mystery of it, says the Apostle,
There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body: The meaning of the
Apostle is not, in that in the Philippians, as if Christ were in one single
person or figure of a man glorified in flesh or the body without, in a local
glory; therefore if you contend for this, your apprehensions are but fleshly
and low: for truly friends, to deal freely with you, Christ is not of any other
substance or form but the Divine Nature, and so is no more, till he is in
Spirit in his creatures; and when he appears in them, then is their
Resurrection* It may be you will say this is truth: But is there not a
Resurrection of the Natural body again in that form which it bears now? for the
Scripture says, And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last Day: The meaning of Christ in these words is not, That those earthly
bodies of the Disciples should be raised again in the same form that they were
in; but the mystery of this history is this, as much as if Christ had said,
When I appear in you, then I am that last Day, then shall you be raised up; for
my second coming is in the Spirit: Then I will lose nothing of that mystery of
God in you, for I am one with it. But you may object further in those words of
the Apostle, Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
amongst you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? but if there be no
resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not risen: and if Christ be not risen,
your faith is in vain, you are yet in your sins: It may be, the discourse of
these Scriptures, in the outward sense of them, may appear to many to have such
a truth in them, as that the natural body shall be raised; but I deny that to
be a truth according to such results and conclusions, for the mind of the
Apostle drives at a further mystery, for when he says, If there be no
resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: That is as much as if the
Apostle had said, if you be not made free from that law of bondage, which has
taken you captive, being dead in sins and trespasses, then Christ, which is
your Resurrection in you, is not risen; but the Apostle knowing that he was
made light by the mystery of truth in him, he concludes in these words, But now
is Christ risen from the dead, that is, Christ was so risen spiritually in
Paul, that he had a clear discovery of it.

I have made manifest here in these lines of love for all those that are truly
wise and prudent to weigh, let me have a charitable censure of all my friends,
who feu^ the stammerings of my tongue.

Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall cast out the dead.

III. PART. The Day of Judgment, what it is, and when it shall be.
TEnder Friends, I shall labor to lay open such a mystery as has bin hid from
many ages, but has showed it self to me within these few days: the principle
is this, concerning the day of Judgment: It may be my discourse will seem
strange to many: I shall explain my self what the last day is, and when it
shall be.

We shall begin with such Scriptures as seem according to the outward sound of
them to contend for such a natural day, as if Christ would come again in the
flesh, being darkness to all the world, and to confound all such people as have
not any knowledge of him, but this is fleshly, notional and Jewish, yet this is
the doctrine of England.

I shall cite some Scriptures, and then open the mind of them. Mal. 4.5. Behold
I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful
day of the Lord. Some understand his coming to be in the body to destroy all
persons that are not found in him, and will dissolve and break in pieces this
earthly tabernacle, as the material earth and all things that we behold shall
pass away: these apprehensions are low and dark. Friends, the day of Christ is
spiritual, and where he says, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: This Elijah is those
spiritual appearances of Christ in us; this is he who shall suddenly come to
his temple, even the messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Now shall the day of
the Lord be dreadful consuming and burning up all fleshly excellency in us,
destroying the son of the bondwoman, which is creature wisdom and darkness in
us. The second Scripture is this, But who may abide the day of his coming? and
who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire: The mind of
this Scripture in me is this, That the coming and appearance of that day and
mystery of God in us is like a refiners fire, judging all the fleshly pomp, and
burning up all carnal glory, which may be was a principle in us. Oh friends,
when this day Christ dawns in the soul, no flesh is able to stand or abide his
coming, for he appearing spiritually in his creatures kills the very life,
strength and power of all that fleshliness in them, then is the day of Judgment
which will not be terrible to the soul but sweet and refreshing. The next
Scripture is this* Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: The mystery
is this; When God comes and appears spiritually in Christians to be their
fullness and perfect rest, then does that earthliness and darkness in them
tremble and melt at his presence. The next Scripture to clear, may be 2 Cor.
5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body according to that he has done, whether
it be good or bad: This Scripture seems according to the outward sense,
difficult to clear, but truly there is a mystery in it, and I would have all
Christians to mind, that the Judgment seat of Christ is not in any form or
shape of the body without, for he is not of any other substance in his
appearance but what he is in Christians spiritually, and where that principle
appears, so as the Christian has a clear discovery of it: he sees now that the
son of the bondwoman, which is the flesh and creature-wisdom, which are
notions of the first Adam, must give an account to the son of the freewoman
for persecuting him, that is, when Christ comes to reign in Spirit in us, then
shall all his enemies be made his footstool, and this shall be perfected before
this earthly tabernacle be put off that we bear about with us: and the flesh
shall be so judged and killed, that it shall be subject to the Testimony of
Jesus, I mean the Spirit of Prophecy which is in us: Let not any despise my
labor of love in this short discourse; I have laid open how the day of God
appears, and what the workings (...) it and that it is spiritual and not
natural burning up and judging that earthly Creation in us. Therefore now sing
and rejoice oh daughter of Sion, for (...) I come, and I will dwell in the midst
of thee, then shall the wilder(...) and solitary places be glad, and the Desert
shall rejoice, and blossom (...) the rose, it shall blossom abundantly and
rejoice, even with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto
it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon they shall see the glory and beauty of
it; then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing,
(...) in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert, and
an high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way ^f
holiness*

My friends, all this works in a mystery in you, you are that wilderness and
solitary place that shall be glad, and the the time when this shall be, (...)
when that day Christ, who is the mystery of God, breaks forth and appears in
you, to be your fullness and perfect rest, then is that Scripture fulfilled in
you, That the envy of Ephraim is departed, and the A^ver^^ries of Judah are cut
off; so as Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and ^udah shall not vex Ephraim. All
those that have a beam of love made manifest in them, will clearly understand
and discern my discourse; but th^se that cannot discern it, and grant it me to
be truth, my council to them is this, to be silent, for their strength is to
sit still, till that mystery of life speak in them, then there appears a way in
the wilderness, and springs in the desert.

Out of Sion the perfection of beauty God has shined.

Your Friend in the nearest tie and bond of love Thomas Royle, a Member of the
Army.


