Maromah. The LORD of ROME THE ANTICHRIST, Finally and fully Discovered: His
NAME and the NUMBER of his Name, hitherto wonderfully Hid in the words of
SOLOMON and ISAIAH, but now Revealed beyond all Scruple and Doubt: To the most
Seasonable Comfort of all the Faithful: To the everlasting Confusion of POPE
and Popish Ministers: To the Vindication, Praise and Encouragement of all
PROTESTANT WITNESSES, peculiarly the Happy DISCOVERERS OF THE LATE MOST Horrid
Popish Plot, BEING A SECOND SERMON On PROVE. xiv. 25.

Preached in Istleworth Church, on November. 16. 1679.

By WILLIAM RAMSAY, B. D. Lecturer in Istleworth, Chaplain to the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Butler Earl of Ossory, etc.

PROVE. xiv. 25. The Original of ^^ue. The Witness of Truth delivers Souls:
But the Lord of Rome speaks lies.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Benj. Billingsley at the Printing-Press within
the South-west Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1680.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, Lord Bishop
of LONDON, One of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. Health and
Happiness from the LORD JESUS CHRIST.
My LORD,
TO publish this to the World, to present it to your Lordships hands, and by
your hands to the Church, is a Duty of such Exigency, that to seek leave to do
it, or to make Apology for it, were as great a Folly, as to omit it were a
Crime. For I present nothing of my own, (all that, if any thing, is nothing
worth:) but I present what God in great Wisdom for many Ages laid up in the
inmost Treasury of his Prophets, peculiarly, of Solomon and Isaiah; and what
now in good Providence he has discovered in the Very season of Time. The
Discovery is his own, and nothing is owing to me, but I am an hundred fold more
than before indebted to his Fatherly Goodness, whereof this is not the first
Experiment of a Thousand. My Lord, however this may appear at present; I dare
here engage my Reputation for ever (which is the greatest Engagement can be
expected) that in a short time this will appear to be of God indeed, and every
man that knows the terms of this Discourse, will judge it a vain thing to
seek any other Account of the Name or Number of the Beast. This is the End of
that Great Controversy of the Antichrist, Who he is: and I hope may prove an
effectual end of all Controversy between Protestant and Papist. It is the Key
of all the Prophecies concerning Antichrist, and for ought I know, may serve to
open all those Mysteries of Scripture, Old and New, which are yet locked up.
Sure I am it will be very comfortable, profitable, and of present use to the
Whole Church. I have a greater and fuller Demonstration of this to make in my
next Discourse. But I would discover the Whole in the same Order to others, as
God has chosen to discover it to me. And I desire the help of all my
Fellow Laborers in the Vineyard of Jesus Christ; and in the first place the
Blessing of God, and the assistance of the Great Witness of Truth, by your
Lordships Prayer and Intercession for

My LORD, Your Obedient Servant in Jesus Christ, William Ramsay.

A SERMON PREACHED November. 16. 1679.
PROVE. xiv. 25. A true Witness delivers Souls: but A deceitful Witness
speaks lies.


THe Text contains two propositions. The first, a Character of a True Witness.
A True Witness delivers souls. The second, a Character of a Deceitful
Witness, A Deceitful Witness speaks lies. In a late discourse we showed these
Characters to be very proper; and that they are Prophetical as well as
Proverbial: The first containing a Prophecy of Jesus Christ, of Hed-emeth, the
Great Witness of Truth, whose Office was to deliver Souls. The second
containing a distinct Prophecy of the Great Witness of Deceit, of Antichrist,
who, in direct opposition to Christ, comes and is come to destroy souls with
lies. We asserted also that the Hebrew Word, which in the text is rendered A
Deceitful Witness, does plainly, literally and grammatically signify The Lord
of Rome. So that the whole text is to be rendered thus verbatim according to
the Hebrew. The Witness of Truth delivers Souls; but the Lord of Rome
speaks lies. This thing I only touched occasionally in that discourse, my
design then being to justify the Character and prophecy of the Witness of
Truth; which having done, I think it necessary by a peculiar discourse to clear
that Assertion; both for mine own sake, because it is my Assertion, and I think
asserted by none before: and also for your sake, that they whom I suppose to
desire more certain knowledge of the truth of that Assertion, may, as much as
lies in me, be fully satisfied therein: But chiefly for the Truth's sake,
which hereby will greatly be advantaged; when the false Witness shall be found
so distinctly revealed. For if we can make it plain, that the Holy Ghost has
couched this Truth in this Proverb, and has by the pen of Solomon distinctly
named the Lord of Rome as the Deceitful Witness that speaks lies, and that in
direct opposition to the Witness of Truth that delivers Souls; if this be
made plain, it will put an end to all Controversies between other Churches and
Rome. For the Lord of Rome will not only forfeit his Infallibility, that great
Shield of his Papacy and Supremacy; but the World too will deny him to be the
Vicar of Christ, and will look upon him as the Great Antichrist, and, next to
Satan, the Father of lies. This will certainly come to pass, if men can once
read in express terms of Solomon, that as the true Witness, which is Christ,
delivers Souls; so the Lord of Rome speaks lies. Now this, with the help of
That True Witness, we shall show undeniably, not conjecturally, to be the
express terms of Solomon, expressed with all the Circumstances of Wisdom and
Truth that became that Spirit by which Solomon wrote or spoke. To the full
proof whereof, premise we,

1. That though the Discovery be clear and evident to those that can be brought
to understand, yet it must not necessarily be evident to all that hear; for all
that hear cannot be brought to understand. So the Discovery of the New World of
America was presently evident to all that Columbus could bring thither to see
that World; but most of other men, who would not go to see it, would not
presently believe it; but now that so many have seen it, I think almost all men
believe it. So I shall do my endeavor to bring men to the knowledge of this
Truth, that by their own understanding it may be evident to them, as it is
evident to me; and when it is evident to Many, the rest will believe as they
ought.

2. When the thing is discovered, it will be certain and evident, as we have
just now said: but the Discovery must not be easy nor obvious, nor therefore
to be rejected because never yet made. This is plain in respect of all
Prophecies, as Christ observed to his Apostles, Mat. 24.15. speaking of Daniels
Prophecy of the Abomination of desolation; Whosoever reads, says Christ, let him
understand. As if Christ had said, Many have read that Prophecy, and you have
read it, but who has understood it? None; but I tell ye now plainly, that it
is the utter Destruction of Jerusalem, which you shall live to see. Even so;
many have read this Prophecy of Solomon, but it follows not that any has
understood it, till the appointed time, which I shall show ye, is now. But this
Prophetical obscurity is most peculiar to our case, which contains the
Discovery of the Name of Antichrist, and of the Number of his Name. For of this
very thing, it is written by the Prophet himself, who speaks most of this
matter, Rev. 13.18. Here is wisdom, says the Great Prophet John. Let him that
has understanding count the Number, etc. Beloved, be ye so far from expecting
something obvious to every man that reads; that rather reject ye this
Assertion, if ye find not both Wisdom and Understanding in it; yet not my
wisdom, or the wisdom of man; but the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, who knew how to
couch so valuable a Prophecy under the contemptible covert of a single term of
Solomon: And now to discover it by a contemptible Instrument, when the very
time calls for it. Nay, not the Wisdom only, but the Goodness of God is
apparent in these long concealments of prophetical Truths, and the open
Revelation of them in their proper times. For instance, had Solomon writ in
vulgar and obvious terms, that the Lord of Rome speaks lies; Then had
Solomon's Books at least, if not all the old Scriptures, been burnt by the
Lords of Rome, without some extraordinary Miracles of preservation, which did
not so become divine Wisdom, who knew how to order the matter better without
them. Again, had Solomon writ this in terms obvious to every Reader, or had it
been discovered before the time; then such Lords of Rome as have been Witnesses
of Truth, had been branded with an undue Character: Now then is the time, that
this Prophecy should be discovered, and first here in England; for here first,
by the most wonderful Discoveries that ever were made in the world, the Lord of
Rome appears to be indeed, that Great Witness of deceit who speaks lies, and
by Lies destroys those Souls which the great Witness of Truth came to deliver.

Proceed we directly to the Discovery. The thing to be discovered lies hid in
the Hebrew term, which in the Text is rendered A deceitful Witness. The Hebrew
term is in the first Original written with these four letters only, M. R. M.
H: Now the Hebrews, till above four hundred years after Christ, writ no Vowels
in their words, as a, e, i, o, or u, but writ the Consonants only, and
understood the Vowels. Which Custom of that Language God himself was the Author
of, when he gave his Law to Moses written without distinction of Vowels: and I
cannot doubt but the Divine Wisdom appointed it so, to this very end, that many
things and prophecies might lie hid in that obscure Writing, till a proper time
to be discovered. And so it came to pass; for the Christians, discovering daily
more and more testimonies of the Truth from the Old Scriptures, and confounding
the obstinate Jews with their own writings; the Masorethans, that they might
either change or obscure such places in Scripture as plainly made for the
Christians against them, found out this trick of writing Vowels, [which however
in it self a perfection of writing, yet was in them but a trick of corrupting]:
and several places, which they could not corrupt, they utterly rejected, even
the whole Book of Daniel; and consulted to serve Isaiah so, but public shame
could not permit that. But Prophecies of the nature of the Text, which lay hid
in close Coverts of words admitting another vulgar sense, as this word Mirmah
does; such they could not attempt to change; for they could not suspect any
prophecy in them: and I know there are more in the Scripture, and there may be
many more which I know not, in which the Wisdom of God shines wonderfully to
him that understands, and his gracious Providence to preserve his Truth from
them that would suppress it utterly, were it in their skill and power. These
Masorethans added their points and vowels to all the Words, of the Old
Testament, Ann. Chr. 479. twelve hundred years ago at the most. From this,

It Is plain, that the Vowels of this word Mirmah are not of Divine Authority,
unless we have other authority than that of the Masorethans. But the Letters of
the word being originally written by Solomon are of Divine Authority, that is,
M. R. M. H: which Letters according to the exact analogy of the Hebrew reading,
make the entire word of Maromah, of which Mirmah is only a contraction: for the
Word Maromah gives every letter its Vowel; but the word Mirmah casts out the
middle-vowel, O, from the letter R, and for the long vowel, A, puts the short
vowel i, and so draws together three Syllables into two; Maromah into Mirmah.
So that the whole difference is from the Vowels only, which, as all confess,
are not Divine Scripture. If then the Letters, which are certainly of Divine
authority, contain in them a more profitable Truth, than what is expressed by the
Masorethans pointing of it; and if that Truth be plainly confirmed by other
Scriptures; then without all doubt we ought to embrace that Truth, and to use
the words of the Holy Ghost to the greatest advantage of it. So, seeing the
Scripture of the Holy Ghost is really and literally Maromah as well as Mirmah,
we may read Maromah as well as Mirmah; yea, rather Maromah than Mirmah, if
Maromah be more significant and conform to the Holy Ghost in the other
Scriptures, as we shall show it is. We reject not the word Mirmah; no; But

We prefer the Word Maromah, for reasons to be given: and we retain the word
Mirmah, which in its vulgar use signifies Deceit; and so was a most fit word to
conceal the Prophecy included in Maromah, which Mirmah too includes in its
radical signification; yea, is the same Word essentially with Maromah, and is
the same word, letter for letter, in the Original writing of Solomon, which was
the writing of the Holy Ghost: It was necessary then it should be read Mirmah,
till the discovery of the Prophecy of Maromah contained in it. But when the
Kernel must be produced, then the Shell must be broken. Then leave we Mirmah as
the Shell; and prove we the property of Maromah.

Maromah, literally and grammatically, according to exact Lexico-graphy and
Etymology of the Hebrew tongue; and which is more, according to the style of
the Prophets, Old and New, signifies the Lord of Rome.

I will first prove the grammatical, and then the prophetical signification of
the Word. The Grammatical signification is apparent three ways; all as plain
as Grammatical things can be, only, as was premised, it must not be Obvious to
Every Grammarian, nor to be read in the School-Dictionary; for then where is the
Mystery? of which it is said, Let him, that reads, understand. And here is
Wisdom. And let him, that understands, count the Number, etc. But you shall
see the Wisdom of God shine out from a single word; even from this word of
Maromah. Only have patience, and despise not small things, which the wise God
makes choice of to confound the things that are great.

And first, to foreshew the Lord of Rome, which is spiritually Babylon, the
Spirit would use a Babylonian word; for Maromah is an Hebrew word in the
Babylonian Dialect; for Mar, says Buxtorfius, is Vox babylonica, and signifies
a Supreme Lord, and is often used by the Rabbis, says the same Buxtorfius,
for Bahal, or Adon: and not only by the Rabbis, but by the Holy Ghost too,
both in the Old and New Prophets, Dan. 2.47. Maremalchin, a Babylonian word,
for the Lord of Kings, 1 Cor. 16.22. Maranatha, a Babylonian word, for the Lord
comes: Even so Maromah, for the Lord of Rome. For Rome is Originally a Hebrew
word, and the Hebrews have no other word for Rome, but Roum in the Hebrew
Dialect, and Romah in the Babylonian or Chaldaick dialect, whence comes the
Greek word Rome, with an e in the end; which answers the Hebrews He; and from
the Greek came the Latin word, by turning e into a, as in cena, musa, and a
thousand such. Indeed the Greek and Latin tongues come originally from the
Hebrew, as Arpenius has learnedly shown; but especially this word Rome came
from the Hebrew, as will better appear by the consideration of the Hebrew,
Roum, which you may see in every Lexicon.

Roum is an Hebrew Verb, and signifies to be High and exalted, or to exalt
Ones-self in place, power, and pride, or to usurp high and great things,
chiefly indeed it is spoken of the exaltation of God above all, as Psalm. 46.10.
Know that I am God, says the Lord; I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will
be exalted in the earth. Aroum baggojim, aroum baarets. But secondarily, the
word is used, for the pride, ambition and usurpation of men, as we shall see.
From the Verb Roum come the Substantives, Roum, and Romah; both which signify
Height in place, power, or pride, from which certainly comes the name of the
City of Rome. From the same Verb you have also Maroum, which is the principal
Word we look for, and you have it in every Hebrew Lexicon. See Buxtorfius in
the Radix Roum. Now the commonly received signification of Maroum, in the
Lexicons, is, The high One of the Earth, or the High thing of the Earth; to
which if ye join the first Etymology, in which is shown that Mar is an usual
term for Lord; then it will appear plainly that Maroum, as Maromah, signifies
literally and grammatically the Lord of Rome. For as it appears in Buxtorfius,
in the Radix Roum, that the Substantives Roum, and Romah, are all One; so it
must needs be equally plain, that Maroum, and Maromah, are all One.

But if ye ask, which of these is the proper and Original Word? Maroum
certainly with Vau-cholam, is the Original Hebrew word in the Hebrew dialect;
and Maromah in the Chaldean or Babylonian dialect. The Pronunciation of
Vau-cholam is certainly very hard, and I think quite lost among the Hebrews
themselves: but as for the Greeks and Latins, who have no Vau-cholam in their
Language, neither can pronounce it; the Greeks are forced to take an e in the
end, and for Roum say Rome: the Latins take an a, and say Roma; the English
take an e quiescent and say Rome. And all because of the difficulty of
pronouncing Vau-cholam in the word Roum, or rather Rovm. After the same manner
the Original Word, Maroum, with Vau-cholam, is after the Greek fashion,
Maromeh; after the Latin, Maromah; after the English, Marome, with an e
quiescent; all which alters not the signification of the word, but the
pronunciation of it only. So homo in Latin is made huomo in Italian, Hombre in
Spanish, un homme in French, yet all are Originally the same word with homo, a
man. Much more easy is it to conceive Maroum and Maromah, to be the same word
in the Hebrew tongue, which counts not the difference of Vowels, nor of
accidental, but chiefly of essential or radical letters. For which,

Observe, that the Radix Roum has two cognate and collateral Radixes, one on
one side, and the other on the other: That is, Marah and Ramah. Marah with an
Aleph, whence comes Mar a Lord, or one that exalts himself, has the same
signification with Roum, to exalt it self: but Marah with an He, signifies to
Rebel, which is a thing consequent to pride. Ramah is of the same radical
letters with Roum, only He in the end is put for Vau the middle; which, as we
showed, is an usual thing; and Ramah signifies to deceive; and thence comes
Remijah and Mirmah, Deceit; So that however the words be taken; whether Roum or
Romah; whether Mirmah, Maroum, or Maromah; whether from Marah, Roum or Ramah;
take the words as you will, it still will appear, that God has lodged the
Mystery of Rome, and of the Lord of Rome in these words, which signify Pride,
Rebellion, Usurpation and Deceit, the certain distinctive Characters of that
proud City, and of the lofty Lord that rules therein, who has deceived the
Nations with his Lies. This then is the plain issue of this long Grammatical
discourse, that the word of the Text, which is rendered a Deceitful Witness, is
literally and grammatically to be rendered Maroum or Maromah, that is, the Lord
of Rome.

Thus much for the Grammatical; come we now to the Prophetical property, use
and signification of this word. And first, Observe: That the Word Mirmah,
though it signifies in its common use, Deceit, in genere, yet the Scriptures
use it not, but where Antichrist is foretold or spoken of; which argues the
peculiar application of that word to that purpose. Besides the Text, I have
noted six places in this Book of the Proverbs, where Solomon uses this word,
and they have all a peculiar application to the Deceitful Witness, Antichrist,
as the Text has. The like may be observed in the other Books, as Psalm. 5.6.
Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord shall destroy the bloody
and deceitful man. The Word is Mirmah or Maromah. And Psalm. 10.7. His mouth is
full of cursing, and deceit, and fraud. The Word again is Mirmah or Maromah.
And these places mean plainly of Antichrist. But where the place is not
applicable to the deceit of Antichrist, there Deceit is not expressed by the Word
Mirmah, but by Remijah, took, or some other word.

But for the Prophetical use of this word, we have undeniable Authority in the
Prophet Isaiah, in the 24th, 25th, and 26th, Chapters: In which the Prophet
foretells the Judgment of God upon Rome, calling the Romans, chap. 24.4. The
haughty people of the earth. The Hebrew word is, Meroum ham haarets; that is,
The Maromah people of the earth, or the People of Maroum or Maromah, The Lord
of Rome: or it may be rendered, the Maroum of the people of the earth, that is,
the Roman Lord of the people of the earth, or the Supreme Lord of the People of
the earth. For we showed that Maroum is the true Original writing, or
pronunciation of the Word: And v. 21. It shall come to pass, in that day, that
the Lord shall punish the host of the High ones that are on high, and the Kings
of of the earth upon the earth. The Hebrew calls it Zeba hammaroum bammaroum,
that is, verbatim, The host of the high One in the high One; he will punish
Maroum in Maroum, that is, the Lord of Rome in his own person; or, he will
punish the high Lord of Rome in the high City of Rome, and all the Kings of the
earth that join with him; and Chap. 26.5. He brings down them that dwell on
high, the lofty City he lays it low. The Hebrew is, Joshebe Maroum, the
inhabitants of Maroum, that is, the people of the Lord of Rome, or the people
of the high or proud City of Rome. Then Maroum is a prophetical term for
Antichrist, which I might show in many more places; but I shall show it
agreeable to the style of Christ too and of his Apostles.

Maroum, as every Lexicon will show ye, signifies him that exalts himself on
high. Now this is the very distinctive term that Christ and S. Paul have used
for Antichrist. Christ, Luke 14.11. Whosoever exalts himself, shall be
abased; and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Which, though it
obviously be understood of every proud or humble man; yet is primarily to be
understood of the Exaltation of Christ, because of his voluntary Humility: and
of the destruction of Antichrist, because of his proud Usurpations. Paul
following the style of Christ, speaks plainly of Antichrist, and calls him the
Maroum, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who exalts himself above all. This is, the Maroum, The
Lord of Rome, who has made himself Supreme, that is, Maroum, exalted over all.

What need we say more? We have said this to satisfy Critics in Grammar and
Style. But if any man be not satisfied with this; we have yet an undeniable
Argument, that Maroum, the Lord of Rome is. The Antichrist: and that Maroum is
his Name; Even the Argument of the Holy Ghost, Rev. 13.18. His Number is six
hundred threescore and six. We shall show this so clearly, that no scruple can
remain; and you shall see, that here is Wisdom, even the Wisdom of God, to
preserve his Truth in a Word: and here is Understanding without error, to
count the Number of the Beast. And that ye may know, how plain it is to be
counted, I shall give first an Example of the like work.

As it is foretold of Antichrist, that the Number of his Name shall be 666. so
was it foretold of Jesus, that the Number of his Name should be 888. See we
then how the Name of Jesus makes up that number of 888. and then if the Name
Maroum make up in like manner the Number of 666. then our work is done. The
Name of Jesus in the Greek tongue has six letters, i, e, d, o, u,

These six letters make the Number of 888, thus: i, 10. e, 8. d, 200. o, 70. u,
400., again, 200. These put together, make 888. 200, and 200, and 400, make
800. and 70, and 10, make 80. and the e 8.

Even so does this Name of Maroum make the Number of 666. For it contains
originally, as we showed ye, four letters, M, R, V, M. no more, and no less.
Now in the Hebrew account, M. stands for forty, R. as the twentieth letter in
Order, is twenty; See Psalm. 119.123. the twentieth part: there is sixty of our
Number in the two first letters. V. is the sixth letter in the Alphabet, and
makes the odd 6; and M. final, that is, M. as it is shapen in the end of a
word, for so in the Hebrew it has a peculiar shape, stands always for six
hundred: So ye have the whole Number of the Beast 666. in the Name of Maroum;
just as ye had 888. in the Name of Jesus. Thus you see the Prophecy of John
fulfilled concerning the Number of the Name of Antichrist; after the very
example, as the Prophecy of the Sybilla was fulfilled concerning the Number of
the Name of Jesus. In both you see the Wisdom of God, that can preserve the
Truth, and foretell things to come in a single Name: and you see in both
understanding given to men to count the Mysterious Numbers of Mysterious
Persons; Christ the Great Witness of Truth, and Antichrist the great Witness of
Deceit.

There remains a petty Scruple or two: 1. Why was not the Name of Antichrist to
be numbered in Greek, as the Name of Jesus? The answer is easy. The Uniformity
is better as it is. For as Christ an Hebrew, was numbered in Greek, so
Antichrist a Roman, is numbered in Hebrew. If ye ask, why not an Hebrew in
Hebrew; and a Roman in Roman? I answer, First, perhaps to prevent suspicion;
lest if the Names had been numbered in their Mother-tongues, it might be taken
for an Invention of their own Mother or Country. There is secondly, another
good reason. Christ was sent to the Nations, to teach them the Wisdom of God,
therefore his Name was to be numbered in the language of the Wisdom of the
Nations, which then was the Greek tongue: But now Antichrist is the great
Witness and Lord of Babylon, spiritually so called; therefore his Name is
numbered in the Babylonian Language; for as we said, Maromah in both ends, and
Maroum too in the first Syllable, are Hebrew words in a Babylonian dialect. So
all things are proper.

2. A Scruple may be made. Why is not Antichrists Name to be numbered an
Individual Name; seeing the Name of Jesus is individual? I answer, There is but
One Christ Individual; and therefore his Name must needs be individual. But
Antichrists are many: but the greatest of Antichrists is the Lord of Rome, that
Lord of Rome which exalts himself as Supreme above all; and because there is
but One at a time, though many at once may fight for it; the many, that succeed
one another, are by succession made One, but cannot be One individual; so no
individual name of Antichrist can be numbered, but a Specifical Name. Now the
most specifical Name that can be thought on, is this of Maroum, or Maromah, or
Lord of Rome; which is also to say, Lord exalted over all; Or Lord supreme.
Therefore, we have rightly chosen this Name to number; and we know we have
chosen aright. For as we know the Name of Christ by the Number of 888. so we
know the Name of Antichrist by the revealed Number of 666. Rest we then here,
for I know not the least scruple remaining. Yea, I know, whoever shall seek
another Name or Number of the Beast, shall seek in vain. Nothing is here of my
own making. Neither Word nor Signification, nor Letter, nor Number. The Word of
Maroum is of the Prophets. Isa. 24, 25, 26, chapt. The Signification of the
Word, you may see in Buxtorfius; and in every Hebrew Lexicon. The Letters and
the Number of the Letters you have in every Hebrew Alphabet: but most
distinctly and prophetically in Psalm. 119. My work was only this, to
understand what I read, and so to collect it as to give you the understanding.
I doubt not but more time will give both you and me more understanding. But God
gave me this, and I hope will give as much more as is good for me: and this is
enough for this time of this matter. Let the Text be read thus: The Witness of
Truth delivers souls: But Maroum, The Lord of Rome speaks lies. Then a word
or two to that Epithet, Speaks lies.

The Lord of Rome speaks Lies two ways; By Himself, and by his Emissaries.
First, The Lord of Rome speaks Lies by himself. We shall not undertake to
give ye the Number of his Lies, as we gave ye the Number of his Name; for we
might better give the Number of the Stars, or of the Sand of the Ocean-shore.
But, as the Stars are reduced to Classes, so shall we reduce the Lies of the
Lord of Rome to three Classes; that is, of Doctrine, of Discipline, and of
Manners.

The first and fundamental Lie of the Doctrine of Maromah is, That he has
asserted himself Infallible, and that he cannot err when he speaks in his
Chair. This is the Mother of Lies, and he the Father. And with this famous
Infallibility he has begot an innumerable Issue of Lies, and has put them out
to be espoused by all Nations; and many Nations have been deceived with them
these many Ages: But thanks be to God and to our Witness of Truth, Jesus
Christ; for he by his Gospel has discovered these lies unto us, and has
delivered our Souls from this Witness of Deceit, Our Witnesses of Truth, which
the Lord has raised up from time to time in the Reformed Churches, have
confounded Maromah in thousands of Controversies. We at Present deny his
Assertion of Infallibility, and that not from our own mouth, but from the Mouth
of the Holy Ghost, who speaking by Solomon, has said unto us, Maromah, The
Lord of Rome speaks lies: Ergo, is not Infallible.

2. The Great and Fundamental Lie of his Discipline is this, That he is the
Vicar and Substitute of Christ, The Supreme Lord over the Christian World,
exalted by Christ over Kings and Princes, and over all that is called God on
Earth. With this his Lie he has got the Crowns of Kings and Emperors into his
hand, and has brought Kings and Emperors under his feet, and disposes of them
and of their Kingdoms as he pleases, gives the Life of Kings into the hands
of Murderers, and the Murderers of Kings are his Martyrs; Massacres of Nations
are his Holy Leagues, and the most hellish Plots are the most meritorious Works
of his best beloved Sons and Subjects. But Now this Lie is laid open to the
World. Maromah is proved to be the Deceitful Witness directly opposite to the
Witness of Truth which is Christ, and therefore the Antichrist, and not the
Vicar of Christ. Yea, his own mouth betrays him; for he professedly exalts
himself above all on Earth; Therefore he is the Maroum, whose Number is 666. And
of him it is written, Maromah speaks lies.

3. The Great and fundamental Lie of his Manners is this, that he styles
himself, The most Holy, and The most Humble too, even The Servant of the
Servants of God. But certainly he is the most unholy and the most proud; the
most destructive and the most abominable evil among men; and therefore termed
by the Holy Ghost, not a Man but a Beast. And the Bishops of Rome, since they
were Maroums, that is, since they usurped Supremacy, have been the most cruel,
bloody, most filthy and abominable Beasts in Nature; that the name of Beast was
never so agreeable to any thing on Earth, as to the Popes of Rome.

Gregory the Great was the first who took that Title of The Servant of the
Servants of God: not in a spirit of Humility, but of the greatest Pride and
Envy. For, the Emperor preferring John Jejunator Patriarch of Constantinople
before Gregory, and giving John the title of Universal Bishop: Gregory oppenly
opposing John's Supremacy, took it upon himself the best way he could, by the
equivocal Title of Servant of the Servants of God. In the mean time neglecting
no Stratagems to promote his Supreme Authority. For which sole end, he sent his
Agents, Austin and the other Monks into England, to lay the foundation of his
Usurpations there. So that of a truth Gregory was the First Maroum, at least in
plot and design: but his Successor Boniface the third, was an open and professed
One, who obtained of Phocas Emperor the Title of Supreme Bishop and Lord of
the Church. And the Usurpation had such success, that Boniface the Eighth, in
solemn Jubilee, Attired one day in Pontificalibus, another in Imperialibus,
with two Swords before him, made Proclamation that he was Supreme Lord and
Emperor of the Whole World, and Accursed all the Kings of the Earth that
subjected not their Kingdoms to him.

So egregious is that Lie of the Title of Most Holy, and of the Servant of the
Servants of God, that since the time of that most ambitious Hypocrite Gregory
the Great, there has not reigned One Pope but what has been a monstrous Beast
in Manners; All monstrous in Pride, Covetousness, Rebellion, Deceit, Usurpation
and Impostures: And Most, professed Atheists, Whoremongers, Sodomites,
Simoniacks, Blood-shedders, Incendiaries, so unwearied in plotting and raising
Wars among Christian Kings and Princes, murdering the Fathers by the Sons,
and Brother by Brother, Sovereigns by Subjects, and one Neighboring Prince by
another; that we read in History more Christian and Royal Blood shed by the
Popes of Rome, than ever was shed by all the Enemies of the Church of God,
since God had a Church on earth. While then the Pope acts thus most bloodily
and most beastly, and yet calls himself Most Holy: We answer from the Holy
Ghost; Maromah; The Lord of Rome speaks lies.

Lastly, He lies by his Emissaries. For these are taught and teach; That to
Lie and Equivocate is their Duty, when it serves their Masters turn. Therefore
they Equivocate in their Names, and Habits, and Professions, changing them
every day, and often in a day, as the weather of their Affairs changes. They
equivocate in their Doctrines, resolving their Cases and Controversies, as may
serve to engage all manner of Proselytes. They Equivocate at the Bar of
Justice, holding Murders and Massacres to be just, and no Oaths so lawful as
such as serve to conceal their Plots. They Equivocate on their private
deathbeds, and give up their Ghost with Oaths of Equivocation; as is certain
of Tresham's Case in King James his time, acknowledged by Garnet himself. What
wonder then if they dye on the Gallows with Oaths of Equivocation! We are sure
the Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey dyed with Lies, or (which is the most
deceitful kind of lies) with Equivocation and horrid Execration denying that
bloody Fact. We are sure they dyed Lying. What wonder if the Plotters dyed in a
lying or equivocating Denial of the Plot. We are sure Ireland dyed Lying; why
not the Rest! especially Gawen, who in his last words tells ye of Material
Prolocution, a new and fine way of Deceit; when a Jesuit may speak what words
he will; but means nothing but the sound of the words, but leaves the hearer to
give what signification he will, and to deceive himself if he will, Si vult
decipi, decipiatur. I think it necessary, says the Jesuit, to speak these
words, but I mean no such thing. Thus the Life and Death of an Emissary of
Rome, is Lying, Equivocation, or, as the Martyrs of lies have taught us,
Material Prolocution. As Christ is the great Author of Truth, and came to bear
witness to the Truth, and to save all by the Truth: Even so it is apparent,
that the Lord of Rome walks in direct Opposition to Christ; is the great Author
of Deceit, and by all methods of Lying, seeks to deceive all. Therefore the
Lord of Rome is the Antichrist. And of him in opposition to the Christ, Solomon
prophesied: A true Witness delivers Souls, but Maromah, the Lord of Rome
speaks Lies.

Let us pray.
O God, who have laid up great treasures of Wisdom in the Scriptures of thy
holy Prophets, and revealest them in due season to those that seek the Truth in
love; [So by the Books of Jeremy thou gave Daniel understanding to count the
Number of the years of the time of thy Mercy to Jerusalem: and now by the Books
of thy Prophets Solomon and Isaiah, thou have given us the understanding to
count the Number of the Name of the Witness of Deceit, who deceives the
Nations:] We bless, and praise, and magnify thy Name, and beseech thee for thy
Names sake, let not the Miracles of thy Mercy be lost upon us, and continue
graciously still to preserve us, our King and Nations, from the Plots and
Deceits of the Wicked: that thy Name may be great, that thy Gospel may prevail,
in this, and all the Kingdoms of the Earth, by the Merits of the Great Witness
of Truth, JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

FINIS.
MIrmah, Or, The Deceitful Witness: A Prophecy of Solomon, now first and
seasonably discovered; wherein the Deceitful Witnesses of Rome are made
manifest to all; And our Protestant Witnesses are Justified, Praised and
Defended; chiefly the late happy Discoverers of the Romish Plots and Deceits.
Being a Sermon Preached November. 5. on Prove. 14.25. By William Ramsay Lecturer
in Istleworth, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Ossory. Sold
by Benjamin Billingsley at the Printing-Press within the Southwest Piazza of
the Royal Exchange.


