MOSES Returned from MIDIAN; OR, Gods kindness to a Banished KING; His Office,
and His Subjects duty.

As it was delivered in a SERMON, Preached at Linlithgow, on the day of
Thanksgiving for His MAJESTY our Sovereigns Happy Restoration.

By J. R. M. L. And published By A. G. P. L.

ACTS 7.34. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of My People which is in
Egypt, and I have heard their groaning and am come down to deliver them: and
now, come, I will send thee into Egypt.

Magistratus est res optima and feracissima multorum bonorum operum.

Bull. Dec 2. Ser. 6. Principio, subditorum est, sancte, reverenter and
honorifice, non abjecte and vulgariter, sentire de Principibus suis.

Exhibeant eis etiam (subditi) foris honorem, cuique regno and patriae
consuetum. Idem.

Dec. 2. Ser. 9. Published by Authority.

Edinburgh, Printed by Gedeon Lithgow. 1660.

MOSES returned from MIDIAN: OR, Gods kindness to a Banished KING; His Office,
and His Subjects duty.
ACTS 7.35. This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a Ruler and a
Judge? The same did God send to be a Ruler and a Deliverer, by the hands of the
Angel which appeared to him in the Bush.


GOvernment is so necessary for the entertainment of an orderly and comfortable
society amongst men, that, next to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, there is no
greater blessing can be bestowed by the Lord upon a people then a lawful and
righteous Ruler, who will govern for the Lord, ruling in righteousness and
judgment. Therefore does this Protomartyre Steven, while he is recounting the
great mercies of God to the Church of the Jews, stay long in rehearsing the
Lords sending of Moses to be Ruler, etc. unto them, as the Churches eminent
mercy; yea, in all this recapitulation, he mentions none of the sins of the
Jews, but that of rejecting Moses their Ruler, verse. 27. and 39. and their
black sin of Idolatry, which (verse. 40.) followed upon their rejecting of
Moses: That we might see, that Rebellion against lawful Authority, is as
unavoidably the forerunner of rejecting God, as honor to the King, is, by the
Apostle, (1 Peter 2.17.) immediately subjoined to the fear of God.

My Text seems to quadrat well with what is the occasion of this joyful Day:
which will the better appear, by holding out the several parts and purposes
therein contained. They are three: The first, is the sinful and rebellious
carriage of the people to a Ruler sent them of God, They refused, etc. Secondly,
What the righteous Lord, out of compassion to His people, did for this
oppressed and refused Ruler or King (so the Spirit of God calls him, Deuteronomy.
33.5.) God sent him, etc. Thirdly, You have a threefold office, to the
administration whereof, he is sent and commissioned of the Lord, viz. Ruler,
Judge and Deliverer: Under which also relatively, the duty of people is
determined and set within its limits. There is also a fourth thing in the
words, viz. the hand by the which Moses is sent to that office: which, because
time will not allow us to speak of, is purposely forborne in the Division.

For the first, The peoples sinful and rebellious carriage, in these words,
They refused, or denied, as the word is most ordinarily translated; yea, the
word is sometimes used for a refusal or a denial with disdain and
undervaluing, as Acts 3.13. which also accompanied therefusall in the words, as
is clear from the disdainful saying attending it at the back in these words,
Who made thee, ande? such an answer as we use to give to bussie medlers in
matters not belonging to them: And, verse. 39. its said, They thrust him away,
and would not obey him.

The second purpose in the text, is, what the King of Kings did for this
refused and thrust away Depute of His, concerning which, the text holds cut.
First, What the Lord did in the time of his exile; even kept fellowship with
him, through Jesus Christ the Angel that dwelt in the Bush, comforting and
directing him in a wonderful manner, that he might know he was not rejected of
God, though refused by men. Secondly, That God sent him, after his long so
journing, as it were renewing his Commission, and making him successful with
a mighty hand, in this last essay, so that without violence the people are
conquered to a submission unto him.

The third purpose in the text, (as I have said) is the parts of that office,
to the exercise whereof he is sent, viz. Ruler, Judge. and Deliverer: under
which I conceive is comprehended all that a Sovereign can or ought to claim,
and no more then should be granted to him, since these three are expressly in
his Commission from God, whose the Kingdom is; to the exercise whereof, Moses
was brought by the hand of Jesus Christ, the King of His Church, upon whose
shoulders the Government lies: So that the conceding these things to the Ruler
so sent, can be no Damage, but rather advantage, to the Church of Christ. But
what each of these comprehends of the Rulers power, shall be showed afterward.

Now it follows that we proceed to the Doctrines: and in the entry I would
warn you, that this text, being so full of weighty matter, it will not be
possible, in the short time allowed us, to press forth the whole substance
thereof; nor must that requisite acuracie, in such points, be expected from me.
Therefore many Doctrines I must pass altogether: and such as shall be named,
must be discharged with greater brevitie then perhaps the matter would require.
But, to proceed, I make the first Doctrine to be,

That Government, is, in it self, a thing so evidently necessary and useful,
that even the opposers of lawful Governors, will not speak against
Government. This is grounded upon these words, This Moses, whom they refused.
Where it is only the person which they question; and afterward, Who made thee,
etc? Wherein they challenge nothing but his Warrant, Commission, and Authority
for exercising of that Office. See also verse. 27. It will be supperfluous
labor to prove the truth of this Doctrine, The necessity and usefulness of
Government being clear from Hab. 1.14. Where, to be without a Ruler, is to be
as the Fishes of the sea and the creeping things, the weaker whereof, are
destroyed by the greater and mightier; as also from that Judge. 17. 6. Where
it is said, that in the days wherein there was no King in Israel, every man did
that which was right in his own eyes: Which is also repeated, chap. 18. verse
1. and 19.1. and chap. 21. verse. 25. In which places, it is also observable,
that there is mention made of the wrong which the Levites (the Churchmen)
sustained, that thereby we might see how useful, even to the Church, a right
constitution of Civil Government is. Without this the Church wants the benefit
of that promise, ( Isa. 49.23.) that Kings should be nursing fathers; yea, (
Hos. 3.4.) to be without a King, and to be without a Sacrifice do go together.
The Church may be persecuted by wicked Rulers, but ordinarily is not taken
away, and wholly rooted out, but by the rooting out of the established
Government of that Nation wherein the Church is. And have we not seen how the
Church was wronged among us by the boundless toleration of error, the
Government and Judicatories thereof encroached upon by Acts and Ordinances,
taking the power of Plantations out of the hands of established Judicatories,
and putting the same in the hands of others not concerned, and several such
other practices, as might be instanced, ever since the violence was done to the
settled Civil Government of these Kingdoms? from these things we may see how
useful civil Government is, not only for the State, but for the Church also.
Therefore, as we ought to bewail the sad sufferings of our King, and seriously
mourn before the Lord for these sins, that provoked his Holiness to make our
Israel be so many days without a King; So it is our duty, to praise and
magnify the Lord, who has graciously returned to us our ancient and known
Government, and our own King, to exercise the same: whereby we have a full
accomplishment of that promise, Isa. 1.26. I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning.

The second Doct. is, That even a righteous and good King, may be thrust away,
and refused by these over whom he is sent of God to Govern. This so clearly
arises from what is in the text, that we need not stand to clear the ground.
See also verse. 27. and 39. The same was David's case, 2 Samuel 2. and 5. chap. And
for the prosecution of this point, I judge it not unfit to take a short view of
these few things, which concurred in the thrusting of Moses away: As first, Who
the person was, that refused and thrust him away; and he is described, ver. 27.
to be one, that did the other wrong, that is, a violent and wicked oppressor
of his brethren. Secondly, What it was that moved this oppressor to thrust
Moses away; even fear of punishment: he had done evil, and feared the Judge,
Thinks thou to kill me? He desired, in effect, to be Judge himself, and could
not endure any above him to control his dealing with the weaker: and
therefore, would not so much as suffer Moses to be an amicable adviser, ver.
26. much less to be Judge, ver. 27. Thirdly, The means whereby this rebellion
is carried on: and they are three. 1. The calling in question and contemning of
his Authority and Warrantablenesse of his undertaking, Who made thee a Ruler,
etc? 2. Reproaches of him as a bloody man, that would kill all he ruled over,
though he had no other ground, but his own prejudged opinion, misrepresenting
Moses for one act of Justice, in killing the Egyptian: Wherein, though he
speak the truth materially; yet it was malo animo, to bring Moses in hazard. 3.
The third mean, whereby this rebellion was carried on to it is hight, was
violence, he thrust him away, ver. 27. And where the Authority of a Ruler
begins to be contemned, there (if it be in the contemners power) thrusting away
comes in the close: The fourth thing considerable in the thrusting of Moses
away, is the grounds upon which this refusing and rebellion is builded: and we
find no real ground of provocation from Moses, his worst word we find (ver.
26.) to be, Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye wrong one to another? Innocence
in a King, will not restrain rebellious Subjects. Fifthly, Consider what are
the sad effects of a rebellion, (coming to it is hight) even upon the Subjects,
to wit, oppression of the weaker by the stronger. See Isa. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. And
lastly, That rebellion, once coming the length of thrusting away, God must, in
a more then ordinary way, interpose for the reintroducing of the expulsed Ruler.

I shall say no more for the application of this point, But that the sin of
these who had hand in the horrid murder of our late Sovereign, or the
expulsion of our present, is more inexcusable then that of this oppressing
Israelite, who thurst Moses away, because their just tittle to the Government,
was more evident to them then Moses tittle at that time was to the Jews. And
therefore we ought earnestly to supplicat the throne of grace, that these sins
may no more be laid to the charge of these Lands; and that the divisions of the
people, may be solidly healed: for it is marked, as the first rise of the
occasion of this rebellion against Moses, that the people strove, v. 26.

We might gather our third Doct. by comparing this verse. wherein their refusal
of Moses is spoken of, with verse. 30. Where his forty years sojourning, in a
exiled condition, is mentioned, to be, That sinful opposition and thrusting
away of a righteous Ruler, may have success for along time; but the success
of the oppressor, is the servitude of the subjects. I will not stand on this
Doct. It is too sad a Theme to insist upon. Only this, Although we have reason
to lament, that by the success of oppressors our King has been so long kept
away from us; yet, we have also reason to bless God, that it has not been for
full forty years; and to praise Him from our souls, who has said concerning
us as he said concerning the Jews, verse. 34. I have seen, I have seen the
affliction of my people, I have heard their groaning, and am come down to
deliver them: and now, come, I will send thee into Egypt.

The fourth Doct. arysing clearly from the words, is, That though a righteous
Ruler be thurst away, and long kept away from his just right; Yet the Lord can,
in his time, send him back to the exercise of that Government he had right to.
So dealt the Lord with David, both after Sheba's rebellion and Absolom's; And
so has the Lord done to our King; and it will not be amiss here to consider a
little some things, wherein the sufferings and the return of our King, is
parallel to the sufferings and the return of Moses.

And first, their sufferings, after their expulsion, are parallel: First, In
that both their rights was unquestionable before God and man, though they
wanted the exercise. Secondly, both driven to exile, and put to great pinches
under it. Thirdly, made to sojourn among people of another Religion. Fourthly,
Yet both remained constant in the Truth, (the great glory of their sufferings,)
notwithstanding of their strong temptations. Fifthly, Both found more relief of
strangers then of friends. Sixthly, Both waited patiently until Gods time of
outgate came.

There are also some things, wherein the manner of their returning is parallel,
as, First, Gods hand was eminently seen in both. Secondly, their return was
without blood, or War. Thirdly, Both were unexpected. Fourthly, both were, when
the affliction of their people was at a great hight.

Let us then bless and praise the mighty Lord, whose right hand has done
marvellously. This day is set a part for this end: O let praise be rendered, and
our vows which were made, when our harps did hing on the Willows, be this day
paid in the sight of all the people; the Lords doing in this, is not after the
manner of man. Look to what he has done in restoring the breath of three
languishing Kingdoms; look how mercifully he has done it, and how unworthy we
were, that our Posterity, much less our selves should have seen it, and all
cries aloud, that it is our duty ever to praise Him, and not to let this so
great a benefit slip out of our mind. Yea, with our praise, let us join
prayer, that God may make our King, who has been in so many things like to
Moses in his sufferings and return, like to him also in the sequel of his
Reign, both for gracious and royal enduments, and beyond him for length of
days; Yea, let us pray, God would make him according to his own heart: And we
may have the greater encouragement in this, from what the Lord has done for
Him, and made appear in Him; As also, that most ordinarily, the best Kings,
registrat in Scripture, were such as the Lord trained in the school of
affliction, as may be seen in Moses, David, Jehoash, and many others mentioned,
both in Sacred and Profane History.

The fifth and last Doct. that I shall name, is this, That whom God sends to
the government of a people, he also gives them commission for the Dignities,
Authority, and power belonging to their place: for, says the text, He sent
Moses to be Ruler and Deliverer; Not to be one of the Rulers and Deliverers,
which would take in others to a parity with him, but to be (...), (that is,
(...)) (...): And although that this same God, that sent him, does limit him
and all Sovereigns, Deuteronomy. 17.14. Yet, he takes nothing from them essential to
Sovereignty. So when he sends Apostles, Ministers, etc. all belonging to their
office is allowed them, and ought not to be encroached upon; for, we can no
more expect the full and free exercise of any office from one who is restrained
therein, then a free flight from the pinioned bird; take away the least lith
that God has framed Sovereignty with, and the Sovereign is pinioned. But for
the more orderly and full explication of this Doctrine, there are these four
things to be a little opened up. First, Something concerning a Monarchs
Commission, or the fountain whence he derives his Authority. Secondly, Somewhat
of his Prerogative and eminent Power. Thirdly, Somewhat of his office, and the
duty he is bound before God to perform in the behalf of his people. Fourthly,
Somewhat of the peoples duty, which relatively they are bound to perform to him.

As to the first of these, to wit, the Sovereigns Commission, we see it is
from God, God sent him, (...), The word used in the Mission of the Apostles.
Whence we infer: First. That a lawful Sovereign, hes his Authority immediately
from God ( Romans 13.1.) and not from the people, who, being of God appointed to
be subject to Rule, and ruled, can have no power of ruling in themselves, there
being as clear distinction betwixt the Ruled and Ruler, as is betwixt the
relatum and correlatum of any other relation: wherefore there are some Kings,
who take their sword from off an Altar, in token of their receiving their power
immediately from God; so that the assertion, which allows to people a Majestas
realis, seems to be groundless, and dishonorable to God the only Original
and Fountain of Soveraignity; As also because it takes away the distinction
betwixt Governor and Governed. Secondly, I infer as following on the former,
that a Sovereign, having his Commission from God, as is said, (though God will
call him to an account) yet he is countable to none else for his administration
but to God only: Not only because he has no Pares to be his Judge; But,
because no Commissioner is answerable to any Authority, but that which did
cloth him with the Commission, and that is (upon this subject) God who has
said, By me Kings reign, Prove. 8.15, 16. Thirdly, I infer, that Soveraigus may
expect Gods presence and assistance in the work of their office, if they look
to and depend upon him from whom they have their Commission. Fourthly, I infer,
that the opposing and resisting of them, is to resist the Authority of God from
whom they have their Commission.

But secondly, The words hold out something of his Prerogative and eminent
Authority, as necessarily annexed to his Office and place, to the which his
Commission bears him, in these words, God sent him to be Ruler and Deliverer.
Where it is observable, that what Steven calls a Ruler, is in Exodus 2.14.
called a Prince: to show, that all the prerogatives of Ruling, do appertain to
a Prince. There are two words used in the Commission, to wit, Ruler, and
Deliverer, as said is, under which the Sovereigns power, both in Peace and War,
in Civil and Military affairs, is comprehended; as also, somewhat of that
power, which is distinguished in potestas Legibus astricta, and Legibus soluta:
And under the first of these, viz. Ruler, is comprysed the power of Judging,
which is mentioned in the beginning of the verse. and adjoined to Ruling, even
by the rebel himself; Nor can it be denied (I suppose) to appertain to the
(...): Yea, ordinarily Ruling, and Delivering, are more controverted then
Judging. But, to proceed, by the first, Ruler, there are these particulars of
his Prerogative held forth unto us. First, That he is Chief, Principal and
Sovereign: therefore, even in contradistinction to all the people, he is (...):
Which holds out a priority and preeminency in the person, beside what it speaks
of his office. Secondly, That all authoritative Acts, within his Kingdoms, be
in his name. Thirdly, That all Rule and Power in inferior Officers, or
Governors, be derived from him: Therefore the word signifies not only
Authority; but a primary and fountain Authority. Fourthly, That he have the
power of making the universal Laws of the Kingdom; for, these being the Rule
both for inferior Judges and the judged, it is requisite, that the Ruler have a
special and Sovereign hand in making thereof, the Legislative power being
naturally annexed to Soveraignity. Fifthly, That fince all power in inferior
Judges, is derived from him, their sentence cannot be the last, but may be
appealed from. Therefore the last appeall to any on earth is to the Sovereign,
whose sentence is final and cannot be appealed from, but to God. Under these
as the principal, are comprehended the power of dispensing with penal Laws by
Pardons, and with positive statutes about duty by Licenses; Yea, in some cases,
to alter and abrogat some Laws, although ordinarily, and without weighty causes
these things are not to be done. Together with many other Jura majestatis
reduceable to these and depending on the Soveraignity, as particularly, the
making an universally oblidging interpretation of the Law, and the power of the
execution of the Law, without which, Soveraignity and Laws were but a
mock-authority: These two last, properly appertain to the tittle of the Judge.

There is moreover somewhat further of the Sovereigns prerogative, hold forth
in the word (...), which signifies Redeemer, Savior, as well as Deliverer; And
this is his power in Military matters: which may be divided in these three:
First, His power to declare enemies to the State, the Deliverer being most
oblidged and concerned, by virtue of his office, to know, and consequently to
judge and declare who are enemies. Secondly, His power of making Peace and War:
For, he that may not command his Subjects to be in friendship, or to fight,
does but carry the empty tittle of Deliverer, and in vain expects obedience in
Civils. Thirdly, His power of the Arms, Forces, and Strengths of his Kingdoms,
both by Sea and Land, it being due to him for his and the Kingdoms security. As
also because the governing of these things, is a principal part of Government,
experience having sadly taught, that the power of Armies, not being subordinat
to the Sovereign, usurps a superiority over him and the Kingdoms both; Yea,
does not reason teach, that a Deliverer should not be without a sword, nor have
his sword so locked in the sheath, that he cannot draw it till he call for the
key from these who perhaps may refuse it, and at length loose it themselves?
take the sword from the Deliverer, and quickly the Scepter shall be wrung from
the Ruler.

But I haste to the third thing which I proposed, viz. to hold out somewhat
concerning the Sovereigns Office and Duty, which by virtue of this Commission
Moses was, and all Sovereigns are oblidged to perform toward the people over
whom God has granted them to Rule: And this their Office may be summed up in
this one, that he Rule for God, being faithful to Him by whom Kings reign, and
careful of his peoples welfare. But we shall branch it out in these four:
First, that he be careful of the welfare of the Church, the preciousest
interest that the King of Kings has upon earth: This is a great part of his
Ruling: therefore in Isa. 1. after that the restoring of Judges as at the
first, and counselors as at the beginning, is promised, v. 26. It is
immediately subjoyned, v. 27. Zion shall be redeemed. And this is that which is
promised, Isa. 49.23. and Kings shall be thy nursing fathers. Under which these
three are comprehended. First, That he have a singular care that the purity of
Doctrine be kept up, established and maintained; error and heresy, with the
promoters thereof, discountenanced and punished, (not tolerated, which were
unsuitable for the Defender of the Faith) according to the example of good
Josiah, 2 Chr. 34. throughout. Secondly, That the precious Ordinances of the
Church, the Worship and Government thereof, be established and defended by Law,
according to the example of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.8.11. As also that the
unity and concord of the Officers and Members thereof be tenderly kept up; and
Rents or Schisms solidly cemented. Thirdly, that the Liberties, Patrimony, and
Maintenance of the Church be not encroached upon; But that faithful, learned
and painful Pastors be encouraged, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. and their hands strengthened
by seconding the Censures of the Church by his Authority, and the concurrence
of his inferior Magistrates: All which are incumbent to him as a Ruler for God
and a Deliverer from spiritual evils.

The second branch of the Sovereigns duty and office, is in reference to moral
transgressions, against which, Laws and Statutes ought to be made agreeable to
the word of God; and these Laws would be impartially put in execution, without
respect of persons. Therefore, Isa. 1.26. when Judges are restored as at the
first, etc. Then righteousness and faithfulness spread in Burgh and Landwart.
And v. 28. the punishment of the transgressors, of the sinners and of them
that forsake the Lord, is made mention of. This is no small part of the
righteousness whereby the throne is established.

The third branch of his Office, is in reference to the Administration of
Justice betwixt subject and subject: For which, not only wholesome and just Laws
would be made for the good of the whole (and not for the advantage of some to
the prejudice of many;) But able faithful and conscientious men would be
substitute, who, according to the just Laws, may impartially do justice to all.
2 Chronicles. 19 5.
This is his great duty as (...), a righter of the wronged, without which men
would be but as the fishes of the sea.

The fourth and last branch of the Sovereigns duty and office toward his
subjects, is in reference to their safety both by sea and land, and their
prosperity in their estates and callings: in order whereunto, he is called a
Deliverer, watchfully to foresee, and seasonably prevent whatsoever may bring
hazard and danger to them; or if they cannot be prevented, that then the
subjects be as timely, tenderly and carefully delivered therefrom as is
possible. Thus Moses delivered Israel from their bondage.

There remains only the last thing to bespoken to, to wit, the duty which the
subjects are bound reciprocally to return to their Sovereign: And
questionless, the great weight of duty that lies upon a faithful Sovereign,
calls for the loyal performance of all good Offices from the subjects to him.
The Apostle, (1 Pet. 2.17.) summeth up all in one word, Honor the King: which
may be branched forth in a fourfold duty, employed in the tittles given in the
text, viz. 1. Reverence, 2. Obedience, 3. Fidelity, 4. Aid.

I say, our first duty is Reverence: and that, First, of the mind, Eccles.
10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, or conscience, as on the
margent. They are called gods, and we ought as says Bern. Sentire sublimiter,
have an high estimation of them. Secondly, Reverence in words, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people: Which, (
Acts. 23.5.) is translated, Thou shall not speak evil of, etc. to speak evil
of them is to curse them: And ( Titus 3.2.) immediately after the precept for
subjection to Magistrates, there is a prohibition, Speak evil of no man: and
as we ought to forbear every appearance of evil in other things; so especially
in this, the Authority of a Sovereign being very tender. Therefore, the Apostle
Paul, in the forecited place of the Acts, makes apology for calling the high
Priest whited wall, although unjustly he had commanded him to be smitten: And
Calvin on the place, says in effect, that civil Authority is not to be shaken
off though the Ruler were wicked. I find none in Scripture cursers of a King,
but Shimei, and these Isa. 8.21. Where cursing of the King and of God are
joined together, They shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their
God. Yea, by the Apostle we are commanded to pray for them; and at that time
when he wrote, a wicked Nero reigned: The third kind of Reverence, is with the
body, using a suitable gesture to regal Authority as the Woman of Tekoah, 2 Samuel, 14.4: And Ahimaaz 2 Samuel 18.28. So did all the people, 1 Chronicles. 29.20. I
might multiply other citations, but it is superfluous, exhibeant eis etiam
foris honorem cuique regne and pairia consuetum, says Bullin: dec: 2. ser: 9.
speaking of the duty of subjects to their Sovereign.

The second duty that we ow them, is Obedience, 1 Pet. 2.13.14. Titus 3.1. Such
Obedience it ought to be as excludes resistance to him, Romans 13.2. As is
willing, cheerful and for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. For, their Authority is
an Ordinance of God, and they are the Ministers of God; Yea, this Obedience is
due from all persons, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject, etc. even
Churchmen as well as Laiks: for says Bern. in one of his Epistles, writing to
an Archbishop, Quis vos excepit ex universitate? It is true, that Kings have
no power to exercise Ministerial acts themselves; Yet they have power to put
Ministers to do that which they cannot do themselves, and to punish them, when,
after orderly trial, they are found guilty of Mal-administration: So David,
Solomon, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. governed the Priests, even as
Priests, and the Levits as Levits: But, we say not, that Kings can punish
Church Officers by any Ecclesiastic censure; they can no more depose then they
can ordain: The power of neither of the keys was given to Kings as Kings.
Neither is this Obedience that we press as due from all persons, due in all
things from any person: For, if Kings command what God forbids, Then the
Apostles rule must stand, Acts. 5.29. Obey Gedrather then man. So did the
Egyptian Midwives; So did the three children with approbation from God.

The third duty we ow, is Fidelity: the breach whereof, is above disobedience;
Fidelity to his person, Fidelity to his Authority: if any of these be plotted
against, or injured, there is laesa Majestas. This made David say of Saul, God
forbid I should touch the Lords anointed: Not a lap of his garment can be
touched, but the tender heart is smitten. And in Scripture, we find nothing
taught for loosing subjects from their fidelity and aleadgeance. But on the
contrary, the saints are recorded to have remained loyal, even to wicked Kings
and Emperors.

The last duty is Aid: and that, First, by saithfull counsel and advice, when
called for; and discovery of his secret enemies and their plots. Secondly, by
our estates, cheerfully paying out thereof tribute and custom, Romans 13.7.
Christ himself paid pole money, Match. 17.27. And, Thirdly, by our persons: We
ought to assist our Sovereign both against country Rebels and out-land
Enemies, whenever it is called for by him, who has it in his Commission to
be Deliverer:

I have been the longer upon these things, because no small part of the days
work is to teach you to give to God what is Gods due, even all Honor, Praise,
Power and Dominion, being King of kings and the only Potentate, who has made
this day, that we may rejoice therein: And to give to our Casar what is his
due, even Reverence, Obedience, Fidelity, and Aid: which is a debt upon us by
Gods ordinance, and ought to be paid for conscience sake. I shall shut up all
with repeating the Apostle Peter his exhortation, Fear God, and honor the
King. These two are chained together by the Holy Ghost: Who do the first, will
not neglect the last; and such as are much taken up with the last, would not
neglect the first: Go therefore, and through the rest of this day, express
your joy and thankfulness, as the people did, 1 Chronicles. 29.22. When Solomon was
made King the second time, they did eat and drink (but it was before the Lord)
on that day, with great gladness. Beware of any excess, Sin is no way to
praise God, or please our good King who has declared against it; Do, as, 1
Kings 8.66. Pray for a blessing to the King, and go to your tents joyful and
glad of heart for all the goodness that the Lord has done for CHARLES our
King, and Scotland, England and Ireland His people. And thus, as we bless God
for him; So we pray for all blessings on him from the King immortal, invisible
and full of Glory, to whom be praise for now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

