THE Barbican-Cheat DETECTED; OR, Injustice Arraigned: BEING A Brief and Sober
Disquisition of the Procedure of the Anabaptists Late-Erected Judicature in
Barbican, London, the 28th of the Month called August, 1674.

With some Observations upon their pretended Account thereof, in their
Pamphlet, termed, The Quakers Appeal Answered.

By Thomas Rudyard.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause, seems Just; but his
Neighbor comes, and searches him.

Printed in the Year 1674.

Reader,
HAd not apparent Deceit and Falsehood maskt themselves under the Govert of
Acting a Piece of Justice, it had excu'd the Occasion of reviewing that Day's
Act, so comically performed upon the Stage of Abuse, I thus willingly express
my self, knowing such Judicious and Unbyased there, conclude with me, The
Actors thereof presented their Auditory with Painted Shows or Scenes of
Judgment and Justice; when in Reality there was nothing less amongst them, yea,
so opposite, that Truth was fallen in the Streets, and Equity could not enter.

I presume thee Reader, not ignorant of that Noise and Stir Thomas Hicks and
his Abetters (by his Comedian-Books, which he falsely terms Dialogues betwixt a
Christian and a Quaker) have of late made (in this interval of public
Connivance or Liberty) to represent us and our Principles unworthy of what we
enjoy, or the Respect of men, regarding Sobriety and Virtue. His Talent lying
in Forgery of Principles and Doctrines, and laying the Brats at our Door, he
only has begot; which foul Practice of his has been evidently discovered in 2
Treatises by W. Penn, with Demand of Answer from his Brethren, If they would
own T. H. and his Work, that so accordingly we might deal with them.

The People called Anabaptists having publicly patronized him and his Work,
and avowed them in Print, I can account of Tho. Hicks no less then their Agent
and Representative, and solemnly protest against him and them as Confederates,
in that Abuse of Forgeries, Lies, Perversions and Slanders, (justly charged,
and in Print made out against him.) -- And since they have in so public a
manner taken cognizance of these Matters, and colourably determined the same,
it may not be unseasonable for the sake of Truth, and detecting Falsehood, to
make a serious Scrutiny into these Particulars apart, viz.

1. Their Commission. 2. The Calling of their Court, and Notice to Persons
concerned. 3. The Capacity of the Judges. 4. The Method and Manner of their
Procedure. 5. Their Decree or Judgment.
Which with some brief Observations upon their pretended Answer to the Appeal,
I shall close the following Discourse, and leave the same to the solid Perusal
and Consideration of the Candid and Unprejudiced Reader.

London, 26th 7th Month, 1674. T. R.

THE Barbican-Cheat DETECTED, etc.
First, AS for their Commission, they derived from a Book of William Penn,
tituled, The Counterfeit Christian Detected, wherein is a Postscript by another
Hand, viz. We expect to hear what the Baptists in and about London will ay (as
being appealed to) concerning their Brother Tho. Hicks, his Proceeding in his
Three Dialogues; And whether they approve thereof, or of such Play Books or
Romances in Religion, yea, or nay --

Hence would they derive their Authority, and this take they for a Commission
Anab. Appeal answ.
but surely they understand Words better then thus ignorantly to mistake, to
term this an Appeal (when it only refers to one.)

But I need not wonder at such Slips, since he has so apt an Hand at Matters of
greater Consequence. The words are (as being appealed to) respecting Appeal
before made to them; and so there is in p. 28. and p. 40. of W. Penn's Book,
entitled, The Counterfeit Christian Detected; which had been but Equal and
Honest in T. H. and his Confederates to have delivered to that Auditory, and
the Reader of his Relation.

In page 28. After W. Penn had charged T. Hicks with many old and with seven
new Forgeries, and cleared the same by plain Demonstration, he concludes, With
you, the People called Anabaptists, I leave this Section; Right us, right your
selves; right our Profession of such an Unfair Adversary, and your selves of so
Scandalous an Advocate.

In p. 40. W. Penn, after he had charged him with twenty gross Perversions,
etc. he concludes, Thus have I finished my Observations on his Peruersions,
leaving them also with the People called Anabaptists, upon whom I cannot choose
but frequently call for Justice against this their unjust Member: Concluding my
Complaint in this Section in honest J. Husse's against the like Adversaries on
the same Occasion: Some of those Propositions I did write and publish, other
some mine Enemy did feign, now adding, then diminishing and taking away, now
falsely ascribing and imputing the whole Proposition unto me.

Here Is the Appeal made to them that the Postscript mentions; and here is
committed to them the two Sections, containing an Account of T. H's Forgeries
and Perversions; for these calls W. P. for Justice against their Unjust Member.

But alas! so far are they from answering his Just Demand, that they spare to
mention his Complaint, as I may hereafter fully demonstrate in its place, and
shall desend to the second Particular, which is:

2. The Calling of their Court, and Notice to Persons concerned.
It is observable that W. P's Books were delivered at their-Meeting-House Doors
the 2d of the Month called August last, which Thomas Hicks intimates in his
Relation, page 3. Epistle. Soon after William Penn's Occasions drew him out of
London, and upon the 10th of that Month G. Keith had a Dispute or Conference
with T. H. whom T. H. had also traduced; and then not a word mentioned of a
designed public Meeting; nor till they might be sufficiently assured of the
Absence of W. P. and G. W. either of them being far Distant, and on
before-designed Journeys.

The 19th of that Month they leave a Letter with P. Ford, directed to W. P. to
give him notice of a Meeting the 28th following -- The 20th P. F. returned
Answer:

Yesterday I received a Letter from you directed to W. Penn, concerning a
Meeting to be the 28th instant, at which you say, You Expect Him: This serves
only to give you Notice, that he was gone into the East of England about Three
Weeks ago; and when his Return will be, I know not; neither do I know how to
give him Notice hereof: and therefore I do not see that he is likely to be
there, except you had been pleased to have appointed a Time when he was in the
City, or so near that he might had timely Notice of your Intentions: If this be
designedly done, it is not fair; but if not, the Debate must be suspended till
a time in which the Parties concerned with you, by mutual Consent, agree upon a
Time. This I thought good to let you know, and do judge you ought to let others
know it, that so Vain-Boasting may be prevented as much as in us lies, which
is all from your Friend,

London, 20th of the 6th Mon. 1674. Philip Ford.


The Anabaptists sending the like Letter to G. Whitchead's House, in his
Absence also, being then far distant from London, this Answer was returned by
G. Whitchead's Wife.

I did presume to open my Husband's Letter, lest I might prejudicially keep it:
now finding the Consequence requiring my Husband and W. Penn, at a Day and time
within all liklihood they are incapable of answering, being very remote from
this City; and the Truth is in Plainness, I know not when or where to send to
either of them, and so did think it best to return the Letter, with this plain
Information,

That I am thy Friend, Ann Whitehead. (...) T. H's Relation, Epist to the
Reader.



And what could not this prevail for a further Day? Not a small Suspension of
Time? Alas! no; not with them (as appears) that designed nothing less then
their Presence, and desired nothing more then their Absence. (But were they so
Just to their Auditory to read Philip Ford's Letter, that the People might
understand the Cause of their Absence? No such Matter; that would exceed the
Bounds of Justice we must expect from their Hands) But to do. VV. Kiffin Right,
he openly mentioned as well the former as latter; but wrested them with such
Artifice to his designed Ends, that they served to patch up a nouting Prologue
to his mixed Auditory: and by the East of England in Philip Ford's Letter, he
represented VV. Penn, as in Travail in the East Country or East Indies, he knew
not whether; the Pleasantness of which Discant so pleased the Confederates, and
gratified the airy Sort, that for a Time they filled the whole House with
Laughter; but for this public Abuse, VV. K. has privately acknowledged his
Mistake to his Friends, and so we excuse him.

But as to VV. P. and G. W's Absence, how grandly soever it pleased, and that I
am well assured not a little; he represented as usually are Ru^negates,
Excommunicates and Outlaws; and that because they appeared not upon the
peremptory Summons. I must declare my Occasions have somewhat experienced me in
the Practice of the Courts of Common Law and Equity, and of Courts
Ecclesiastical and Civil within this Kingdom; but of all, from the Highest to
the Lowest, there is none within the Verge of my Knowledge that are so
peremptory in Summons, and so absolute in Decrees: The Excommunicate has forty
Days to assoil himself; Persons not outlawed under two, if not three Terms:
But we must be Adjudged, Condemned, Sentence past on us as Runnagates or
Outlaws upon eight or nine Days Summons (and that not personal neither) beyond
the Severity of all English Courts whatever. And who is ignorant of the
frequent and common Practice in all English Courts; yea, as well in the high
Courts of Parliament, and King, and Counsel, as all subordinate Courts and
Judicatures, Civil or Ecclesiastical, to defer Hearings, and suspend Judgments,
till both Parties can be ready, and to give further Day, in case either Party
by Reason of Absence or Distance cannot probablyattend: But this new Judicature
knows or executes no such Fairness; but absolutely denies such common Justice,
vide to J. Osgood, T. Hicks Relat. Epist. to the Reader. O horrid Abuse! blush
and be ashamed ye Masters of Inquisition, and Pattern of Cruelty in this our
Native Country, that knows no such Practice or Procedure, that you in open
Stage have brought an Emblem and Representative. So shall I descend to the
third particular under Disquisition.

3. The Capacity of the Judges.
And truly, if such as they bespeak themselves, they are, without Exception, no
less then infallible in this Case: say W. K. etc. Relat. Epist. Reader. The
first time, I understood Infallibility was annexed to their Cathedra; but how
comes this stamp of Infallibility upon these Judges with no less Authority then
from the Quaker 's Ensample; if we will credit W. Kiffin's, etc. Logic, Relat.
Epist. Reader, says he, for W. Penn says, That to which an Appeal is made
must be capable of giving an Infallible Judgment; and so a true Judge:
Consequently, says W. K. etc. we must be Infallible Judges in this Case. Must
his Reader take for granted, that Infallibility is a natural Consequence of
Capacity: I grant they were capable of doing right; must they therefore be
Infallible? and have they done that Right? What! have you taken so much Pains
to stigmatize the best of Men with Error, and the very Spirit of God in his
People with Fallibility, and stamp Infallibility upon your selves? Did it
disgust you, that W. Penn made the Light of Christ, or Witness of God's Spirit
in the Conscience (that arraigns the Murderer, pursues the Bloodshed, reproves
the Unrighteous, and gives impartial Judgment without Respect of Persons) a
true and upright Judge, and capable of true Judgment betwixt him and the
Socinian; and shall you strain your Achievements to Infallibility?

But why should W. Kiffin, etc. so unequally repeat W. P 's Words? Can they no
more then T. Hicks, truly repeat a Sentence without Abuse? We might have
expected better Dealing from their Gravity; but I debt it.

Says W. Penn, Spir. of Truth vindic. p. 78. That to which he (viz. the
Socinian) makes an Appeal must be capable, etc. or else he appeals foolishly.
This respects and refers only to the Socinian's Appealing to the Light of God
in the Conscience, and not to Man or any Sort or Sect of Men whatsoever: But W.
Kiffin, etc. that they might sit in Judgment without Control, wrests that
Discourse (which respected and referred to that particular Appeal to the Light
or Spirit of God (so limited by the Appealers) and lays them down in other
Words then had W. P. viz. That to which an Appeal is made, etc. or else the
Appeal is foolish. -- Compare but the Words, and their Artifice is seen; weigh
their Sense and thou will see their Deceit: VV. Penn by his refers only to the
Appealers, and the Light to which the Appeal is made, respects not Men who
distinct or separate from that to which the Socinian appealed, are fallible,
nay, not capable of true Judgment: But W K. etc. (with A W. Penn says) in an
abusive Manner belies his Words, alters his Sense, wrests that to Men which was
attributed to the Spirit of God, or the Light of God in the Conscience; and all
this Pains to attribute Infallibility to themselves -- Take but the Words as W.
Penn really writ, without W. K. etc. their metamorphosing them. -- That to
which he makes an Appeal must be capable of giving an Infallible Judgment, and
so a true Judge, or else he appeals foolishly: But the Light within is that to
which he makes an Appeal, etc. Consequently, says W. K. etc. we must be
Infallible Judges in this Case. Was the Socinian's Appeal to Men? Or was W. P
's Argument or Conclusion for the Judgment of Men? Nothing less. Had it been
so, then those Anabaptists had half covered their Cheat, when now it is plain
to the meanest(...) Man of Reason: And at this Rate might the Anabaptists
argue, Is the Light or Spirit of the Almighty God capable of Judgment in the
Quakers Sense; Ergo ( we Anabaptists) Infallible Judges: And their Consequence
is no less absurd; but it is not to be wondered, that they contest so highly
for Infallibility, when the Credit of all their Procedure pends upon the
Reputation of the Judges: And what Share of Integrity, or Measure of
Impartiality these pretended Infallibles have manifested (by their answering
the Appeal) will in measure apear by Inquiry of the Manner and Method of their
Procedure, which is the next Particular under Disquisition.

4. The Method and Manner of their Procedure.
Truly to understand their Meaning by their Words, or Intentions by their
Expressions, other then each are calculated to cheat the Reader, and gull their
Auditory, I find not. And how T. Hicks, W. Kiffin, etc. have made as well their
Writings, published to the World, as their public Speeches at Barbican to
serve those Ends of Abuse, I may under this Head demonstrate: As introductory
thereunto (I observe in and for what W. Penn appeals for Justice; it is
particularly to be relieved against T. Hicks's Injustice for (...) many
Forgeries and gross Perversions, particularly charged, and plainly demonstrated
against him in two Distinct Sections of the Book, called The counterfeit
Christian detected. Vide page 28. and page 40.

2. I observe in W. Kiffin, H. Knowls, etc. their Letter to W. Penn, dated Aug.
15. vid. Appeal. Ans. Epist. declare they will hear T. H. both in respect to
those Doctrines and Matters of Fact, which he in his Dialogue had laid to the
Quakers Charge.

3. I observe in their Letter of the 23d. to J. Osgood, they declare the Matter
is only Matter of Fact, and not of Dispute: See Appeal Ans. Epist.

4. I take notice of the Judicatures Examination; and they go principally upon
Doctrinals; see from page 1. to page 22. and for Matter of Fact but 10. page
and in all, not W. P's Charges, as laid down by him, once read in their
Assembly.

But what must we understand? will they examine the Forgeries, Perversions,
etc. given in Charge? will they enter into Doctrinals and Fact, or Fact alone?
none shall know by their Writing, but by their Actions; it is manifest, they
went upon neither fairly, but traduced both unjustly.

Again, But W. K. etc. in their Letter. to J. O. tell us that T. H. his Charge
was already exhibited in Print against him; and to what End? not to be opened
or read at the Trials? Who would suppose a Charge, Article or Indictment to be
exhibited against a Malefactor, but to be read against him. And what did these
Infallible Judges (as they term themselves) read the Charge of Forgeries and
Perversions, which W. P had laid down in two Sections of the Counterfeit
Christian detected? No such Matter. Alas, these Judges had Ears for their
Brother, and none for Truth; resolves to acquit him, though to their Infamy.

I do demand of W. K. and you his Brethren, if any Court of Judicature in
England should pretend to try a Malefactor, and determine aforehand not to hear
his Accuser, or at Trial not read his Accusation, and yet acquit him: would not
you brand that Court with Partiality and Injustice? I doubt not of your
affirmative Answer in this Case.

This is clearly our Case with the Anabaptists; W. Penn charges T. H. with
Forgeries, Perversions, etc. demonstrates them in Print, as to Manner and Form,
complains of the Injustice, and leaves the particular Sections with the
Anabaptists. W. K. etc. call T. H. before them, never read the Charge, or
required him to answer what VV. P. had particularly laid down against him in
those Sections, and pass Judgment for his Innocence and our Guilt. If this be
not Partiality and Injustice, I never knew what it was.

But instead of reading the Charge against him, his Liberty is to give it to
himself, and then acquit himself without Interruption: And truly this was not
Casual neither, or occasioned by W. P's Absence; but what they require of him
in their Letter, viz. to suffer him without Interruption; and I think all Men
will take it for granted, that he would charge himself no more with one Hand,
then he could ease himself with the other.

And he who could countefeit a Quaker, and frame such Arguments and Discourse
for him, as gratified his Malice and Envy, to answer and make him speak as many
horrid Untruths, and base Abuses, as his villainous Spirit could invent,
doubtless, would never article against himself, or exhibit a Charge beyond his
Reach of Acquittal: I do not believe, that one in ten of Forger, Cheat, Thief
or Bloodshed, but having such Tems of Trial, could acquit themselves how guilty
soever: But for T. H. I must say, Our English Right is maintained by this
Maxim, Nemo tenetur prodere seipjum, No Man is bound to be his own Accuser:
And for what T. H has. done to clear himself, I believe it is no more then the
greatest Malefactors would desire in the like Case, had they such Brethren for
Judges: But how equal such Procedure is on the Judges Parts, who suffers such
unjustice: A weak Capacity is able to give a Judgment.

I doubt not, but W. K. etc. in the Eye of the Judicious and unbiassed
(notwithstanding their high claim to Infallibility) will appear to be one and
Confederate in the Lies, Slanders, Forgeries and Perversions of T. Hicks, and
equally chargeable with them. Of which I may now be a little particular, and
from which he has not acquitted himself, nay, many of them not once mentioned
in their pretended Answer to the Appeal.

1. In the two Sections of W. Penn's Book, titled the Counterfeit Christian
detected, that charges and proves T. Hicks guilty of many gross Forgeries and
Perversions, particularly therein expressed, as well to Matter as Manner, from
page 6 to page 40. in the first of these, viz. that of Forgeries, no less then
eight, and of Perversion in the second Section no less then 14. wholely omitted
in their late Relation, although these are the Abuses W. P. particularly calls
to the Anabaptists for Redress; vide p. 28. and. 40.

2. The following Section proving T. H. guilty of Lies and Slanders; he omits
no less then eleaven Particulars; and the next Section of T. Hicks his
Contradictions, wholly passed over.

And of those few Particulars he mentioned in the Barbican-Meeting, for the
most part so miserably perverted, mangled and abused, as that they appear in
Shapes, Forms and Dresses, far different from what they were laid down and
explained in our Friends Books: Neither has he been less treacherous in his
Answers thereto, producing Authorities or Citations from our Books, with
Sentences mangled, Words most material wholly omitted, Parts of Sentences cut
off, and that which is more abusive, has in page 24, 27. brought Authorities
from an Apostate's Pamphlet called, The Spirit of the Hat, heretofore printed
or promoted by their own Party: In this Manner could he deal with us, and his
Judges wittingly or ignorantly countenancing the same; vide Quak. App. Answ
page 32. Although W. K. etc. in their Epistle, tell the World, That it was the
Books of the chief Leaders among the Quakers were produced for T. H 's
Discharge. Thus far have I been willing to observe ingeneral, and am ready to
vindicate the Particulars thereof, and might now have instanced, but that the
Books already in Print will largely manifest the same, to which I refer the
Reader: Vid. Count. Chr. detected. from p. 6. to p. 54

5. Their Decree or Judgment.
To find any thing in the pretended Answer to the Appeal or Relation thereof,
that bespeaks it self a Judgment upon the whole, will be beyond the Skill of
any of those Judges themselves: For, their Relation is such a Piece of Mixture
of dark Abuse, Insinuations and Non constats, as if it were; and I doubt not
but it was forged and calculated for a traducing of Truth and covering of
Deceit, which comparing in some of many Particulars with their Act at Barbican,
will casily demonstrate.

But to their Judgment; Our Charge against their Brother is for many Forgeries,
Lies and Perversions, particlarly charged and proved against him in two Books
of W. P. entitled, Reason against Railing, and, The Counterfcit Christian
Detected; which, if not relieved against, we should interpret as the Act of the
whole Baptists, etc. vide Appeal Ans. Epist. So it was (as they themselves say)
their Business to examine whether T. H. was guity, App. Ans. p. 1. viz.
Whether he has been guilty or not guilty of Lies, Forgeries and Perversions,
in Manner and Form as W. Penn charged and demonstrated against him? But have
they given such a Judgment? No such Matter; they use not to be so plain dealing
with the people, nor have we such Measure from their Hands, although they
insinuate that was their Business, as page 1. App. Ans. But instead thereof, in
a crooked and oblique sort, they tell their Reader, That T. H. had charged us
with several Opinions, and produced our Books; upon reading of which they found
them to agree with what he had laid to our Charge, which the following
Narrative (say they) will give a more full Account of: So that hitherto (say
they) we see no Cause of just Blame to be laid unto Tho. Hicks. And what does
his Relation produce touching our Doctrine, or his Perversions, Forgeries and
Slanders not a Sixth thereof mentioned or touched, which, had our Charge been
there produced, would have clearly evidenced to the Shame of their Brother and
Confusion of that Judicature? And he who will take the Pains to read those
Books and compare Thomas Hicks his Charge, with his pretended Compurgation may
have as large an lustance, and as clear a Prospect of as manifest a Cheat under
the Covert and Mask of Justice and Religion, as our latter Age can produce. For
as to the particular Points laid down in has Relation, they are but a
Repetition of some few of his former Abuses, which are now repeated without our
Answers And our Charges against him of Perversions, Forgeries, etc. wholely
omitted.

The Relation allows W. P. to answer such or such a Particular is a Lie, or
Forgery, or Slander; but to tell him how, he denies him Liberty: As if a
Prosecutor of a Malefactor should be only licensed to acquaint a Court, That
the Man was a Thief, Murderer or Burglar; but must not reveal his Felony,
Murder or Burglary; certainly this would be but a dissicult Way of discovering
Offenses, to punish Offenders.

But that this has been the Way, Method and Practice of William Kiffin, Han.
Knowles, etc. with their Brother Tho. Hicks not only their Procedure at their
Judicature in Barbican, but the pretended Relation thereof does fully
demonstrate.

So I shall descend to examine the Consistency of that Relation with it self,
with Truth, and their Carriage at Barbican.

Observe. 1.
To Countenance or Color their Pretense for desire of Justice, they give us a
Text of Scripture out of Deuteronomy 19.17, 18, 19, etc. If a False VVitness
rise up against any man, to testify against him that which is VVrong; then
both the men between wh^^n the Controversy is, shall stand up before the Lord,
before the Priests and the Judges, which shall be in those days; and the
Judges shall make diligent Inquisition; and behold, if the VVitness be a False
VVitness, then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done to his
Brother, so shall ye put away the Evil from you.

Compare this just and equal Law with the Anabaptists Judiciary; That when a
Controversy was betwixt two (the Matters and Charge of both Parties exhibited
in Print) they, in the Absence of one Party, without due notice (according to
common English Right) hear one Party only, the other Party not heard; and then
I leave to the Judgment of the Unprejudiced, whether this ancient just Law
arraigns not their unjust Practice and partial Procedure.

I cannot but take notice of their willing Omission of that part of the 18th
Verse, which no less suits the present Occasion, though somewhat more
distinctly reflecteth on T. H. his Practice against us -- The words are, And
behold, if the Witness be a False Witness, and has testified falsely against
his Brother, then, etc. That he has so testified, I doubt not but that his
Conscience, as well as his Books in Print, are a clear Witness (and if he
Repent not) he will certainly have the Reward thereof: For the Lord is a jealous
God; and the Lying Tongue, and the Heart that devises Mischief, he hates.

Observe. 2.
In the Title Page of the Q. Appeal Answered, mentioning the Barbican-Meeting
(say they) Wherein the Allegations of William Penn in two Books lately
published by him against Thomas Hicks, were Answered and Disproved.

This may serve one sort of Readers to believe all W. P's Allegations and
Charges against. T. H. were answered and disproved; others, that part, a great
or small, but might gull most into a Persuasion, That W. P's Allegations or
Charges against T. H. were at least read before disproved, when they were
neither truly read nor answered, but only some miserably mangled by a
Treacherous Hand, and so misrepresented, and the greater Number and most
considerable not once mentioned or touched.

Observe. 3.
Tho Hicks bestows a Postscript, as an Addition to his former Abuse, wherein he
attempts to wipe off some Particulars charged upon him, and would colourably
excuse the Matters. The first is for his Abuse in a general Charge against us,
That we make use of the Scriptures only to Silence them that plead for it as
their Rule. And for this (general) Charge (he pretends) he has instanced one
particular Person, by whom words of such an import were spoken: How suitable
his Plaster is to his Sore, I leave that to those who will read the Books in
Print, 'twere too tedious here to recite. My Intent is but to show his genius,
that charges us with Baseness general, pretends to prove it by a Particular,
and that not by any direct words, but words of such an Import. I appeal to the
Judicious, if this be candid Dealing. At this rate of Proof, and some rebate
too, 'twere easy to prove the Anahaptists in general the most Cruel and
Treacherous sort that have appeared in the latter Ages of the World.

Observe. 4.
Its of N. Lucas's relating to some words, which T. H. variously charges him
withal.

That T. H. his Charge was as false as malicious, I doubt not; but for T. Hicks
his words in the Close of his Paragraph -- (I do assure thee, that no such
Matter was referred to him) had he attested this or such like in a Court of
Justice, he had scarce excused a Commitment; for he who affirms a Negative of
Persons and Things acted out of his Presence shows his Confidence but incurred
Perjury, or at least the Demerit of a False Witness, for not speaking the Truth
of his Knowledge.

Observe. 5.
The next Abuse of us T. H. would excuse himself of, is this, viz. The Tendency
(says he) of all the Quakers reasoning about instituted Religion, is to
debauch Mankind, and to teach men to live in Rebellion against God. For this he
produces W. Penn (as he says) for his Compurgator. The Paragraph is large, so
I repeat it not; its Substance is to deny the U^e of Water-Dip^ing, or
Babe-Baptism, and their Bread and Wine (termed un cripturally Ordinances of
Christ) this T. H. supposes a Proof: But certain I am, that its easy to prove,
that the enforcing of these Outward Ordinances (as he terms them) and the
various Opinions thereof, each Party pretending no less Authority then the holy
Scriptures for his Persuasion, has Occasioned by the Papists and Anabaptists in
Germany and elsewhere more Massacries, Rebellions, Murders and Acts of
Cruelty, then all other Articles or Opinions in Doctrine and Practice
whatsoever. So to the Witness of God in the Conscientious Reader do I commit
this for Judgment betwixt us and our abusive Adversary, to judge whether he has
not rather added to his Abuse then excused it.

Observe. 6.
I take notice of his representing an Appeal made by some (professed Socinians,
or in their Behalf) and the Answer in Print, his Discant thereon, complaining,
That our Friends, instead of hearing the Persons grieved, etc. constitute the
Person offending to determine and give Sentence in his own Case: Such a
Procedure as this: (ayes he) I believe is not to be instanced, the Quaker
excepted, among any sort of Men, either Christian or Heathen.

Answ. I answer his Complaint from his own Hand.

First, As for their constituting W. P. to Answer the Appeal, instead of
Hearing the Appealers: He tells us in the same page, the Answer of our Friends
was, That William Penn had answered it: How then could they constitute him upon
the Appeal (as Tho. Hicks falsely insinuates) to answer when it was answered
before the pretended Appeal made.

2dly, As to the Complaint of our not Hearing the Persons grieved, and
scornfully treating them, I answer; We scornfully treat no one; but they coming
to advocate for a Nameless Socinian-Pamphlet, we thought it but reasonable to
enquire the Author of the Abuse, who, Jesuit-like, had under Coverts and
Disguise attempted to assassinate the Reputation of our Religion and Persons;
such Mascaradoes in Religious Matters we did and do disdain, and judged their
Missaries unworthy reception, and gave the Answer, as T. H. recites, as their
due Demerit.

And 3dly, For passing Sentence without Hearing the Person complained, not to
be instanced, as he says, among any sort of men, either Christian or Heathen
(us excepted) I answer, T. Hicks in his very next following words appollogizing
(for the Barbican-Sentence) says he, It will be requisite ( and I presume W.
Penn has not Reason to be offended, it being his own Method) for this once,
that a Fool be answered according to his Folly. Well, what would this man have?
Why so angry at us for doing that for which he justifies his own Party? Nay, I
am sure he has parralell'd our Case with Advantage, and that upon his own
showing; In short, he railes, he abuses, he contradicts, he excuses; Not a Case
(says T. H.) to be instanced; and presently he gives us one himself: which
truly puts me in mind of a plain English Proverb, very suitable for his
learning, viz. A Liar had need of a Good Memory.

Obs. 7. And to verify this, take the last Passage in his Postscript upon his
Discant of W. P. telling them, that their Appeal did not intend such Power of
Judgment in the Baptists, that they should try whether Tho. Hicks was guilty,
and to stand by their Judgment right or wrong; upon this T. Hicks runs his
Ordinary Course of Mistake and Abuse, as if we would judge a Man without
hearing, and pass a Sentence without Examination, and so descends to his Letany
(saying) From such Government and Governor Good Lord deliver me. Alas! he had
wittingly or willingly forgot the End of the Appeal; if he return but to his
Judges Epistle to their Reader, in their dark Representatives thereof, he will
find our End of Appeal was to know, if they would own him and his Work, that
according we might deal with him; and to manifest the Nature and Intent of the
Appeal against T. H. see in page 22. in the Section of Forgeries charged on T.
H. says W. Penn, And God will require this Wickedness at the Churches Hand to
which he relates, if they indulge or connive at it: See more page 33, and 34.
Does any believe it reasonable we should make our Enemies absolute Judges, or
according to that commen Anglicism, Ask a Man whether his Brother he a Thief,
and submit to his Opinion? The Matter in Question was, whether they would own
him and his Work, that we might deal with them separate, or as Confederates in
Abuse. And he that would strain the Appeal further, may at that rate make the
unconverted Gentiles Judges over Peter and John, who appealed to them; the
Pharisees over Christ in the Parable of the Husbandman; and the Men of Israel
over the Lord God Almighty, who were called to Judge betwixt him and his Vine:
They are Judges to whom we call for Justice and Judgment, which, if denied, or
not executed, we appeal from them, and testify against them and their
Judgment; so this I affirm is Reasonable, Equal and Practicable, as well in
Religious as Civil Matters, as well in Courts Ecclesiastical as Civil.; so we
with W. P. deny their Judgment.

Concluding with the Prophet's words, He looked for Judgment, but behold
Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry, Isa. 5.7.

Observe. 7.
I observe T. Hicks takes no small Pains in his Postscript to present his
Reader with his Willingness of a public Meeting, and Promise of regular
Dispute, if we will believe the Rules he prescribes, shall be so to him: How
fair a Disputant, and how capable he is for that purpose, Time will experience
hereafter.

Surely T. H. had thou either regard to Honesty or any Measure of Truth
amongst Men, thou'lst not have dared so to misrepresent G. W's Dealing with
thee about a public Meeting: Certainly thou may remember G. W. did first
charge thee for Gross Errors, Self Contradictions and Forgeries, and required
an Open Meeting to make it good; Did thou then directly accept of it? Thou
know to the contrary; but instead thereof give thy Six Particulars to
thwart his Charge: Howbeit, G. W. did sufficiently condescend and earnestly
endeavored for a public Meeting with thee, to make good his Charg against
thee; which thy perverse Delatory Letters (to evade his Charge) prevented as by
the Letters then past betwixt you may be made evident to any unbyassed Mind and
Understanding.

Answerable unto this Account was the Carriage of William Kiffin and his
Brethren at Barbican; what Pains in our Absence did they take to represent us,
as Fugatives, as Runnagates, as Persons not daring to meet them, as Persons
with whom they had used their utmost Endeavor and Capacity to meet publicly,
and always by us denied.

Thus did they insult and romance behind our Backs, when at the same time (as I
have just Cause to believe) they desired nothing less: Nay farther, such
various Reports, such artificial Representations, such abusive Constructions,
have they and their Confederates filled the Minds of the Unsteady People, as if
to Misrepresent, to Belie and Slander us were so far from Injustice, that
'twere their Duty, yea, meritorious to be found (against us) in such immoral
Practices.

I grant, by Contending alone they have got the Goal (a Boy of Seven can do the
like) at which Achievement they do not a little Rejoice and Insult: and as T.
Hicks made a Quaker of his own, and baited him for being such, these designed a
Meeting for themselves, and quarrel because they accomplished it.

Mistake me not; I intend not to involve all those who are under the
denomination of Anabaptists as Actors and Accessaries in this late Abuse; But
Tho. Hicks, William Kiffin, Han. Knowles, Tho. Paul, John Norcott, Robert
Snelling, Jonathan Jenings, Joseph Mortan, John Hunter, William Dix, Edw.
Noble, Joh. Singleton Dr. Daniel Dyke, John Gosnell, Hen. Forty, Tho. Wilcocks,
Maurice King, Tho. Plaint, Owen Davies, John Snelling, John Vernon, To. Maton,
James Baron.
Judges in the late Judicature. and their actual Abettors and Confederates be
they, Presbyter, Independent, Socinian, etc.

Neither intend I this to obstruct any other, who may further scrutinize their
Work and late abusive Pamphlet; only thus much I judged my Duty, as a present
Reproof to their late Actions of Abuse and Falseness.

And this from a Real Lover of Truth, and Hater of Falsehood, Thomas Rudyard.

THE END.

