The Julian Ship Or Paul's Transportation to Rome.
Who Shall Seprateus Roms.

Repent And Believ The Gospel.

Were J a Julius, J' de Choose a Wrack with Paul*

Rather Then Cesars' Seat, Or Crown Jmperiall

F.H. (...)



The Explanation of the Frontispiece.
THE Ship's the Popish Crew, which would Transport the Realm.

Paul's the Church Reformed; Aristarch, his Royal Friend at Helm.

Julius the Roman Captain, Proud Nero's Minister.

Luke, Paul's Evangelist, and Historiographer.

The Ship may Split with Plots, The Wind's Conspire her Doom.

To Paul, and to his Faithful Friends, no harm, no loss, not of an hair shall
come.

Mirmah, Maromah, Maroum.
Three Discourses by the same Author, concerning Romish and Protestant
Witnesses, peculiarly in Relation to the Popish Plot discovered, Anno 1678. and
containing a New and certain Discovery of the Pope's being the Antichrist,
whose Number of his Name is 666. And of the Destruction of Rome. To be sold by
Ben. Billingsley at the Printing-Press in Cornhil.

THE Julian SHIP: OR Paul's Transportation TO ROME. A Discourse on ACTS 27.15.
Made on March 20, 1681/80, the Sunday before the Last Parliament's Meeting at
Oxford.

By WILL. RAMSAY Esquire B. D. And then Lecturer in Isleworth in Middlesex.

Printed because of false Breviat's, spread about in CITY and COUNTRY to
Traduce the Author as FANATICALL; but who as a Preacher of PEACE, did always
Commend and Improve these following Texts.

Romans 12.9. Let Love be without Dissimulation.

Ver. 16. Be of the same Mind one toward another.

Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour One-another, take heed that ye be not
consumed One of another.

1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all Men. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Billingsley, at the Printing-Press in the Piazza of
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1681.

TO THE GENTRY AND CLERGY.
Gentlemen, and Brethren,
I Have a Necessity, and assume the Liberty to salute you both under One Title,
and in One Epistle, assuring my self, that I shall find no less measure of
Candor and Love, than of Censure and Judgment from you both. I cannot fear but
the English Nation, however debauched the Age may be, affords a glorious Host
of right Spirited Men, who keep their Ancient station of true Honor and Piety,
and are always ready with Courage and Cheer to defend the Rights of both,
against that vile Scum of the boiling times, men who seek gain from Infamy,
from Infamy inherent in themselves, and from spots of infamy which they itch to
rub upon others, especially on such whose integrity is vital, and has an active
Influence, and renders every base thing Odious.

I willingly take my refuge to you, that the world may know, how much I abhor
the baseness of a false Spirit. This I must do, not for my private right only,
but for the right of my Name, whereof I am chief in England (and I think it no
whit degraded by my Ministry, or by any Sufferings for it) which was never
stained with the least spot of Disloyalty or Dishonor, and shall never be
spo^ted by any Degeneracy of mine. It has been signalized with most Royal marks
of Honor, witness the Right hand in my Scutcheon with this Motto, Hac dextra
Vindex Principis and Patriae, for which I have the Broad Seal of England. In
Our late Sovereign's Wars, My Father spent a considerable Estate in raising
forces for the Royal Aid, and the Remainder was so engaged, that I now suffer a
total loss of it; yet I repent not, but readily spend my self in his Majesty's
Service, in which I am most unworthily misrepresented by some. I hazarded my
life in three sharp engagements in Ship with the Earl of Ossory, who honored
me with his favor ever after, and Letters, and Title of his Chaplain, and by
his Lordships commendation I was placed in a very beneficial portion of the
Church in the Island of Barbados, where I labored in the Indian Fires four
years, planted Conformity, silenced the Quakers, after many public Combats,
and bodily dangers, reduced hundreds to the Church, and returned not till
forced for want of health, resigning freely a living of three hundred per
annum. For all which, I have the Testimony of Sir Jonathan Atkins his Majesty's
most Worthy Governor there, and his ever most Loyal and approved Martialist,
whose Chaplain I went.

Since my return, finding two Enemies of Church and State, Popery and
Dissension, I have most heartily and laboriously opposed both, and that, as I
am persuaded, with the most proper means: and if any man, of whatsoever side,
can inform me better, I shall instantly embrace his instruction. I could never
persuade my self, that railing against Mr. Calvin, or against Geneva, or
blowing out anger and Passion, and sounding forth persecution against
Dissenters, was or can ever be a proper means to do any good. On the Contrary,
I have found by certain Trial and by many Experiments of ten years time, that
Apostolical Moderation, and Peaceable Persuasion with those Arguments of peace
which the Gospel most abundantly affords, is an effectual way to reduce the
most to Unity. And having followed this way more strictly above two years in
Thistleworth Parish, I found no small number of Dissenting and Dis-satisfied
Souls won to a hearty and frequent Communion, even at the Table of Love.

But this very thing, that many Fanatics (as they spoke) followed me, became
as a Crime, and some busy Sycophants turned Informers, at Court and Cathedral,
that I led a Faction, and made the Church a Meeting House; and they carried on
this Calumny so close and clandestinely that I could not suspect it, till I
found my self supplanted, and scarce then could I beat out the business.

I therefore now declare to the Whole Church, that I never used any unlawful
means or persuasion, nor the least Disloyal motive, to make a Congregation, or
to gain the favor of any person, much less of a party. I Conformed entirely to
the Church of England in all things, especially in the Doctrine of the 39
Articles. I used no means to gain applause of any, but Christian Moderation, as
becomes a Preacher of the Gospel. And I dare confer above 200 Sermons which I
Preached in Isleworth Church, for as Practical and Seasonable and Loyal
Discourses, as any other man has Preached, or as the times required. The only
Sermons which are objected against me are this present and three more already
printed: and I was constrained to print this of St. Paul's Voyage, for some had
spread in City and Country most false and scandalous Breviates, which were not
taken from my mouth, as themselves confess, but were made in Company afterward
from weak Memories and Unsound Heads, and with what ingredient of Prejudice and
Malice, I leave to God and others to Judge. I therefore desire to be excused,
as Printing it altogether upon constraint, to avoid or avert, or at least to
allay a greater evil of Mis-reputation.

I also entreat, that my design in Preaching that Sermon may be understood,
which appears from the final drift of it, which was to move the People to most
earnest Prayer, that God would Unite Our King and his Parliament, contrary to
the manifest endeavors of the Papists. For I always esteemed it the most
dangerous and chief part of the Popish Plot to disturb the close Union and
sweet Agreement of the King and his Parliament, without which neither Our
Church, nor our State can Flourish or Prosper. And without doubt this is One of
his Majesty's greatest Griefs, as his most gracious Declaration does intimate,
that he was constrained to make so many Dissolutions and so short Sessions. As
for the Reasons or Political Causes of these, I always thought them above the
Sphere of a private Man. But, as our Enemies rejoice in these things, I think
we ought all to mourn, and to beg of God with public and private Prayers and
most unanimous Supplications, that he will please in due season to unite and
strengthen the States of the Realm.

As to my other three Sermons, of Mirmah, Maromah, and Maroum, the matter of
them being wholly new (though the assertion Ancient and Orthodox) I judged it
necessary to print them to prevent the strange Accounts which many gave of
them. The Assertion is this, That the Popish Principles and Practices makes
Witnesses of the late Plot most Credible, that the Evidence of things has been
so great that we ought to believe the Matter of Fact, if not with a Divine
Faith, at least with all the Assurance of a Humane and Moral Faith: That the
Pope is the Antichrist, that very Apocalyptical Beast, the Number of whose Name
is 666. That the next thing to be fulfilled, in the Apocalyptical Order of the
seven Vials, is the fiery destruction of Rome, that the time is very near; and
in most probable account to be fulfilled in this Generation or Century.

These things, as to the Assertion, are agreeable to all Reformed Divines of
Note; especially the Ancient Divines and Bishops of England, and of King James
his time. Yet I wonder to hear some Murmur, as if now Divines were better
informed of the Pope, and cannot think him a Beast or the Antichrist: if any
Divine be so persuaded, My Sermons are the more necessary for his sake. As for
the matter in which I handle and prove these assertions, which is the Name of
Maroum, and that singular Prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 24.21. I think that matter
was never touched before to the same purpose, and I think the Name of
Antichrist, to which that Number belongs, was never discovered before, though
thousands of brains have been busy in search of it; and I think the discovery
I made, is the Divine truth, and that Wisdom of God, which St. John commends to
every man that has understanding, Rev. 13.18. which ought not to be kept hid.

Wherefore I again commend those Discourses to the Whole Church of God, as
being of great Consequence and of comfortable Use, especially in these times.
And I do this again, with the more earnest heart, because I have found of a
Truth, that the discovery is sound and effectual and triumphs over all
contradiction and dispute. Neither let any man despise it for my Person, for
God did wonderfully call me from mine infancy to this profession, the first of
my Family that was of it: and I have spent above thirty years in the Study of
Languages and Sciences, but chiefly of the holy Scriptures which I have known
from a Child, and to which as the chief means I ascribe (next to the Grace of
Jesus Christ) my Faith and Knowledge of Salvation.

In fine, I desire the Favor and Civility of all ingenuous men, not to suffer
the abuses of idle and empty Talkers, much less the injuries of busy,
pragmatical Sycophants, to lessen that Just Reputation of Godly Sincerity and
Loyalty, which (as all my Name before me) I pursue and hope to possess by due
and proper means, as being with cordial Affection and unshaken Constancy,

Gentlemen and Brethren, Your faithful Brother and Servant in Christ Jesus, W.
Ramsay.
Thistleworth, Nov. 14, Anno Christi 1681.
ACT. 27.15. And when the Ship was caught, and could not bear up into the Wind,
we let her drive.


THE Trope is frequent in Scripture, that the Church is Typed by a Ship. As by
Noah's Ark, Genesis 6. By the Ship in the midst of the Sea, Mat. 8.23. and 14.24.
and Rev. 8.9. Churches are called Ships. And the body of every Church is called
its Nave. So the Now-Church of England seems to be aptly represented by this
Ship of St. Paul in the Text, which being caught with a Tempestuous Wind,
called Euroclydon, could not bear up into Wind; but was driven at the mercy of
the Master of the Winds. This will appear by all the Circumstances related of
this Ship in this present Chapter. Only I must first premise,

That the Now-Church of England may be taken,

First, In a Common sense, as it includes all called Protestants: Or,

Secondly, In a select sense, as it includes only true Protestants.

Thirdly, In a Malignant sense, as it includes only Papists or Popishly
affected Ones. Or,

Fourthly, In a National sense, as it includes all English Subjects. We shall
use it sometimes in One, sometimes in another sense, as the Circumstances
require.

The Circumstances are principally five, 1. What Persons aboard? 2. Whither
Bound? 3. What Built? 4. What Course? 5. What Wind?


1. The Persons Aboard, are of three sorts. 1. We find Paul and Luke and
Aristarchus, ver. 1, 2. Paul was the great Apostle and Doctor of the Nations.
Luke was the great Evangelist and Scribe of the Holy Gospel. Aristarchus was a
Noble Macedonian, and a Zealous Christian of Thessalonica, who Traveled with
St. Paul, and St. Luke, to defray their Temporal Charges, to guard them from
Injuries, and to help them in all things for the Gospels sake. These three
Persons represent unto us the Now-Church of England in the select sense,
Apostolical and Evangelical.

Aristarchus, interpreted, signifies a most Excellent Prince, as is our Most
Gracious and Sovereign Defender of the Faith, whom God preserve, and by him and
with him, Our Paul and our Luke. Aristarchus may also represent unto us
whatsoever Wise and Christian Statesman or Patriot, who for his Faithfulness to
his Country, is as a Noble Macedonian; and for his Zeal in Religion, and Aid to
the Protestant Ministry, is as a Pious Thessalonian. Also Thessalonica was the
Metropolis of Macedonia, and had its Name from its Victories: so it may
represent our Great and Victorious City of London, whose Victory now shines
over and out of the Fires of her Enemies. In fine, every Protestant Citizen and
Countryman is a Religions Macedonian or Thessalonian in the ship of St. Paul,
Guarding and Attending Our Paul, Our Luke, Our Aristarchus, Our Church, Our
Gospel, Our Government.

A second sort of Persons we find, ver. 1. and 42. Julius a Centurion, the
Commander of the ship, with his Soldiers of Augustus's band: to which we may
join, the Pilot and Master of the Ship, with the Sailers and Mariners and the
whole Ships Crew, ver. 11. and 30. These represent the Church of England in the
Malignant sense, that is, the Popish Church, or Romish Party among us. For
Julius was the Minister of the Roman Emperor, who then was the Cruel Nero,
and, together with the other Pagan Emperors, is by St. John called The Red
Dragon, because made Red with the Blood of Christians: Which Red Dragon gave
his Power and Seat and great Authority to the Beast, the Pope, Rev. 13.1, 2.
Then Julius the Centurion aptly represents every Popish Power, or Civil Romish
Minister among us; and his Soldiers the Popish Laity, Hirelings or Pensioners,
or whatsover Popish instruments or helps. The Pilot and Master, and Ships-Crew,
represent more properly the Popish Clergy with their Adherents, and all that
are Popishly affected. In Relation to the present great Popish Plot; Julius
imports the Chief Civil-Agent therein; the Pilot and Master, the
Chief-spiritual Ones. Only mark, This Julius was no Caesar, and we pray God
avert such a Judgment from us, that ever any Caesar should be such a Julius.

There was a third sort of persons in the Ship. There were with Paul, certain
other Prisoners, ver. 1. These, joined with St. Paul and his Company, may
represent the Church of England in the Common sense, as it includes all that
are called Protestants. But if we take all these sorts of persons together,
that is, all that are Aboard the ship, they represent the Church of England in
the National sense, that is, the whole English Nation. So much for the first
Circumstance, who are Aboard?

The second Circumstance is, Whither bound? We need not hale them. For we may
read afar off, as it were in their Fore-Castle, in the greatest Characters,
ver. 1. It was determined that we should sail into Italy. It was determined
that the Whole Nation of us, The Now-Church of England in the largest sense,
should go to Rome. Julius the Commander of the Ship had received Commission for
this, which he durst not neglect or disobey; for he could not answer such a
default before his Lord, Augustus Nero. It was determined (the Chap. before) by
Porcius Festus, by King Agrippa, and by Bernice, that we should all sail into
Italy to Rome, that we should all be shipped together and transported to Popery.
The French Agrippa, and the Pompous Berenice, were thus kind unto us. And what
was Father le Cheese, Agrippa's Consessor, but a well fed Porcius Festus? And
was not Coleman at least, their most humble Julius? Have we not the Letters of
his Commission taken from his own hands and confessed with his own Mouth? in
which it was fully determined, that we should all sail into Italy. That the
whole Nation of us should serve Augustus Nero, or the Beast in his stead. That
the beast should receive his power again over us, which alas! he has lost so
long. That we should worship him with a new Zeal, and that for his sake we
should set up his Image over us, that is, a Popish power; in which we need fear
nothing, but two things. An Arbitrary Rule to destroy our bodies, that is, our
Lives and Liberties at Pleasure: and an Antichristian Religion to destroy our
Souls of Necessity. This is the second circumstance. It was determined we
should sail into Italy.

The third Circumstance is, of What built the Ship, or, whence the Ship? We
find it ver. 2. First, we entered into a ship of Adramyttium. The Original
Word, is Chadermouth, which the Greeks mollifying, pronounce Adramuttion. It Is
compounded of Chader, a Conclave or privy Room, and Mouth, Death. So that the
ships name was, the Conclave of Death, as if we would call it Portmouth, the
Port of Death; Mouth signifying Death in the Hebrew. Therefore this ship of St.
Paul does rightly represent unto us that ship of the Plot which was built in
the Jesuits Conclave; or, which is all One, in the Conclave of Rome, to us the
Conclave of Death. For there we were all shipped for death, both Bodily and
Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal. Our Enemies had made themselves sure of us.
Their ship was so well built, their plot was so well laid, that they counted us
as much their Prisoners, having got us into their Chadermouth, as Julius
accounted Paul and his Fellows his Prisoners, when he had put them into this
ship of Adramyttium. I dare engage my Life for a Sacrifice, says Coleman to
Porcius Festus, if we succeed not etc. And his Word was made true, but not to
his own Mind. But mind now, whom had they ship't in this ship of Death? Not
only Paul and Luke, but also Aristarchus our Soverain Lord, the best of
Princes; and with him, every Noble Macedonian, every faithful Patriot; every
Christian Thessalonian, every zealous Citizen and Protestant. Thessalonica it
self, they devoted to the Flames. They succeeded in that: they burnt our
fairest Protestant City: but she coming victorious with double Glory out of the
midst of the Popish Furnace, she proved her self a Thessalonica indeed. In a
word, the Whole Nation was put into this ship, their Chadermouth, to be
transported to Rome or Death or Hell: yet Paul and Luke and Aristarchus, that
is, only Our chief and best Ones, were marked out for presents to Nero, for
sacrifices to his holy power. And we shall see wonders in their Rescue. For see
we,

The fourth Circumstance, what course the ship steers? Not what course the
Commander had devised, or the Sailers. For then we had all been undone, and
carried to Rome before this. For ver. 2. They meant to sail by the Coasts of
Asia, in which coasts was Built that Adramyttion, that Portsmouth, that door of
death which was prepared for us, there they had chalkt out an infallible way of
destruction for us all. But God regarded his servants in this Ship: and for his
Church and Gospels-sake he steered his Paul, and his Luke another way. He
brought them first to Sidon, to Agrippa's Confederates, and gave Paul favor
even in the eyes of Julius, and no few friends in Sidon, ver. 3. So God raised
us up friends to help us from amidst our Death-plotting Enemies. From Sidon,
Julius thought to sail straight to Myra: he mistook it for a Roman word, and
thought to work wonders in a moment. But the God of Paul countermanded the
Winds, and steered them under Cyprus, and over the Sea of Cilicia and
Pamphylia, ver. 4, 5, led them a way which they thought not of, for the way of
the wicked the Lord turned upside down, Psalm. 146.9. at length by his
permission they came to Myra in Lycia: where this first ship, having served
Paul more than Julius, finished its course. So has our God made the Popish
Plotters to serve most wonderfully the Gospel's turn, even while they sought to
destroy it. The Parallel of this first ship seems to reach as far as the matter
of Toleration, procured by Our English Julian's: by which they doubted not to
Hobgoble us all, to ship us and transport us, as so many stock fish, and to
sell us to Rome at what rate they pleased. But that ship, their Chadermouth
failing them,

The sacred History tells us, ver. 6. That at Myra in Lycia, Julius found a
ship of Alexandria, sailing into Italy, and put us therein. Myra, from the
Greek is interpreted a place of Myrrh; and Lycia a place of Wolves. Myrrh is a
funeral Odorament, and the Wolves of our Land are the Plotters of Rome. Then
Myra in Lycia was that funeral Consult of Wolves, that is, of the Jesuits: in
which they had bound up together as in a funeral Bundle, the sacred Life of our
King, with the lives of our Paul's, of our Luke's, of all our Aristarchus's, of
every noble Macedonian, of every zealous Thessalonian among us. This was their
Alexandria, in which they thought to conquer all. In this ship, says St. Luke
ver. 7. We sailed slowly many days, over against Cnidus, under Crete,
over against Salmone, and after much ado, came to the fair havens, nigh
whereunto was the City of Lasea. Of these places, Observe, First of Crete, Tit.
1.12. (...), etc. The Cretans are always Liars, evil Beasts, Idle-bellies.
Cnidus interpreted imports the Art of slandering, Salmone of flatterring, Lasea
of Fraud, subtle, and fox-like Circumvention. All these put together, lying,
slandering, flattering, fraud, subtlety, dissimulation, circumvention,
represent unto us the Mystery of Jesuitism, with which (as with the Devil's
Compass) they steered their Alexandria, sailing slowly many days, till with
much ado they came to the fair Havens of some vain and presumptuous hopes.

For in the height of their Alexandrian hope, behold what befell them and their
Alexandria: Their wicked, horrid and plagiary design against Paul and Luke and
Aristarchus, against King and Church and State, was strangely discovered and
brought into light. And our gracious Paul according to his excellent spirit
advised our Julius and his Company to desist and proceed no farther. His
Reasons you have ver. 9, 10. First, that the time of sailing was now spent, and
sailing was very dangerous. For the Jewish Fast of September was over, at which
time of year, Our Popish Plot was fully discovered. Paul also told them, that
the event of a farther Voyage would be with much hurt and damage not only of
lading and ship, but also of their lives. This discovery being made, and that
by the help of their own Confederates, was surely sufficient to make them
desist, had not more than a devilish wickedness wholly possessed and overruled
them. But mark the devilish Obduracy of the Popish Clergy.

For ver. 11, 12. The Pilot and Master of the ship with the Company of Sailers
and Seamen, that is, the Popish Clergy, Cardinals, Provincials, and other
Jesuits and Priests suffered not Julius to hearken to Paul; but gave him all
hopes of the best success, and that they might yet obtain their purpose, and
find a commodious Haven to winter in, even Phenice in Crete. In this they all
joined Votes and Voices, and prevailed with Julius that he consented to them,
and would not hearken to Paul, and so their design for Phenice was concluded.
What this Phenice in Crete imports, is not hard to unridle. Crete, as St. Paul
told us, is the famous seat of Liars; and Phenice, that especially which is in
Crete, is famous for that credit, which the Romans themselves call fidem
Punicam, Phenicean credit, which never fails to fail. Then Phenice in Crete, is
lie in lie, plot in plot, fraud upon fraud, a plot of plots. This was the
Popish Alexandrian plot. They resolved and it was determined, that although
their Chadermouth failed, yet their Alexandria should not. The result of the
Consult was to deny, and abjure the discovered plot with such impudence, that
Heaven and Earth could not possibly believe: and not only so, but their
Resolution was this, while they denied their own plot with a Cretian lie, that
at the same time they would lay a worse plot at the Protestant door with a
Phenician lie. This was their Phenice in Creet. And this was a very cunning and
subtle Haven for them to Winter in. Therefore ver. 12. This Haven is said to
lie toward the South-west and North-West: that is, in the form of an half Moon,
within which their Alexandria might have wintered safe and secure from all Wind
and Weather, and could they have got in here, they had saved themselves, and
had carried us all, Our Paul's, our Luke's, and our Aristarchus's, Our Church
and State to Rome. But God forbad such a thing: yet they went very far toward
it; they sailed very fair for it a while, with a fair south-gale. For as you
have ver. 13. The south wind blew softly upon them, and supposing they had
obtained their purpose, loosing from the fair havens, they sailed close by
Crete, their beloved land, sed praevenit jactum anchorae Deus. But

It was not long, till ver. 14. There arose against them a tempestuous wind,
called Euroclydon. This was the breath of Jehovah our God, which blew our
Enemies from their expected port, from their refuge of Lies, from their dear
Phenice, and saved us from their base Phenician designs: which we consider with
astonishment to the praise of Providence in the

Fifth Circumstance, how they wind? What is that Euroclydon? Many read it
(...): and so the Latin renders it Euro-aquilo. The North-East wind. The Word
seems to import much of the American Hurricane in it, which rising in the East,
Whirles toward the North, and thence to the West, and gathering force round
the Compass, comes to its fullest mischief in the South. However this is
certain, it was Eurotyphonicus. was a sudden Violent, Tempestuous and Mighty
Wind rising from the East, with which their Alexandria was so caught, that she
could not bear up into the Wind, but was violently beaten from the desired
Phenice. Now this disappointment was wonderful in our eyes. For they had
brought their ship in sight of their Phenice, they had a fair soft south-gale
for a time, they thought they had obtained their purpose, they had wiped their
mouths clean of the Plot, as if it had never touched their Lips, they denied
it, they abhorred it, they cursed it, they abjured it to very Death, they got
Martyrs, not a few, zealous Martyrs for their Lie, they had made ridiculous,
odious, infamous, all that should mutter against them; the Discoverers of the
Plot were made the Plotters; Our Paul's, our Luke's, our Aristarchus's, even
they were accused; the Alexandrian-Crew was every day heard loud in Huzzah's.
Phenice was in their hearts, in their eyes, almost in their hands: they thought
surely to Winter there, and the next spring to transport us all. Their Midwife
Sham-plots, their Cnidian, Salmonean, Lasean, Cretian, Phenician Lies, Tricks,
Jugglings, Conjurings, Equivocations, Mental Reservations, Oral Prolations,
Perjuries, Forgeries, precious Subornations, most holy bloody Oaths of
Secrecy, but above all their stupendous, unparalleled, miraculous
Martyrdoms, which Heaven and Earth and Hell do admire, that so many men should
dye for a lie in envy to the Martyrs of Jesus who dyed for the Truth. These
things, I say, made up their hopes so full and fair, that they doubted not to
Winter in Phenice, and next spring to go where they pleased. But the Lord
forbad. There came a North-East Wind from the Lord, and so beat upon their
Crete that they utterly lost all sight and hope of Phenice. To be brief, this
was the Euroclydon of the last Parliament, That Typhonical Wind which blew upon
the Plot from the Trial of Stafford: with which their Alexandria was caught,
and could not bear up into the Wind any longer. This is the sum of the Text,
and when the ship was caught and could not bear up into the Wind, we let her
drive. But you will say, Do not the Papists bear up into the Wind still? I
answer, No: but let us examine what follows the Text, and we'll find, they have
given up themselves to the Mercy of the Winds a long time; and are in a sad
drift, driven they know not whither, even whither the Master of the Winds shall
drive them: and were it not that Paul and Luke and Aristarchus are in the ship,
they had perished long ago. Time will not suffer me to be particular in all
points. I must be content to observe one or two things.

First, That ver. 16. They were by that Stafford-Enroclydon suddenly driven
under the Island Clauda: for being driven from their Crete, from their refuge
of lies, they found their cause to halt fearfully. Stafford notwithstanding his
toughest stiffness fell, and ver. 17. fearing lest they should fall into
quicksands, they were put to all their shifts, they took up their boat, used
helps, undergirded their ship, took down their sails, and being exceedingly
tossed, they lightened the Ship, casting out the very tackling, ver. 18, 19. etc.
This fignifies the Popish vain hopes and shifts in and since the last
Prorogation and Dissolution: since which

We may say, that of ver. 20. Neither Sun nor Stars in many days have appeared
unto us: and no small tempest has laid (and yet lies) upon us: and (had we not
known our God) all hope that we should be saved had been taken away. But, God
be blessed, we find, ver. 21. We have St. Paul to stand up in the midst of us, to
comfort and cheer us and to give us Assurance of that God whom he preaches,
that he has determined (contrary to our Enemies) to save us, that an hair of
our head shall not perish, ver. 22. Now I exhort you to be of good cheer, says
St. Paul, for there shall be no loss of any man's. Life among you, but of the
Ship. Two things he tells us,

1. The ship shall be lost, that is, the Now-Church of England in the Malignant
sense, The Popish Church, the Romish Bottom, their trusty Alexandria shall be
broken in pieces, it shall sail no more in the English Seas You may read, ver.
39. The sailers discovering a certain creek with a shore, thought to thrust in
the Ship there, and to save themselves and the Vessel, and ver. 40. they made
all shifts to do it: but ver. 41. Falling into a place where two seas met, they
ran the ship aground: and the forepart stuck fast and remained unmovable, but
the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves, So now our Popish
Sailers may perhaps have some hopes in the Oxford Creek and Shore, and may
think to thrust in their Alexandria there, and to save the Vessel of their
Plot. But I trust rather the Word of St. Paul, The Ship shall be lost. They Will
find at Oxford two Seas meet, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons;
there they shall run their Alexandria aground. The forepart shall stick fast
and remain unmovable: their Chieftains shall stick where Stafford stuck. As
for the hinderpart of the ship, the rest of the Popish rout, that shall be
broken in pieces with the violence of the Waves. Our English Seas will spue
them out, and our Loyal ground will swallow themalive. And this is the loss of
the ship; to this shall the Popish Alexandria be driven by the Winds of the
Lord our God. But of our lives who are in the ship, Paul tells us, there shall
be no loss of any man's Life among you. This is understood of the Now-Church of
England in the select sense, as it includes all true Protestants. We must
confess even they were, or now are in utmost danger: neither could they, nor
yet can they save themselves. Paul and Luke and Aristarchus, they were in the
ship which was lost, and when it was lost and they suffered loss with the ship:
yea, they were in other peculiar danger, no less unavoidable than ship wrack,
without God. For, ver. 42. The Soldiers counsel, was to kill the Prisoners,
and Paul in the first place. But God turned the heart of Julius to save Paul,
and with Paul the rest. So may the Lord turn the hearts of our Popish Julius's
to save our Paul's, our Luke's, our Aristarchus's; Our Gospel, Our Government.
Therefore also even Julius and his Companions were saved with Paul and his
Companions.

The History tells us not that Julius became a Christian, yet because he
befriended Paul, we have some hope of him, even so we have hope still of the
Popish Julius's among us; that not only their Lives but their Souls too may be
saved with us. But to conclude all, let us mark. with what difficulty even Paul
and his Company were saved.

Ver. 43. Those that could swim, cast themselves first into the Sea, and got to
land. The best among us may be put to swim for our lives: and if the sea,
wherein we must swim, prove not a Sea of blood, which God of his infinite Mercy
prevent, and avert by his Almighty power: yet certainly the Sea we must swim
in, is very tempestuous, and the billows break higher and higher, till God
shall rebuke them and bid them be still. But alas! all cannot swim; some must
be put to harder shifts. Therefore ver. 44. Those that could not swim, got some
on boards, some on broken pieces of the ship, and so it came to pass that they
escaped all safe to land. All! All! None lost; no, not One of two hundred
threescore and sixteen souls, ver. 37. But pray mark

Who these all were? they were they who had Paul and Luke and Aristarchus with
them. That is all who keep and observe the Apostolical and Evangelical Faith;
and who maintain the Aristarchical, that is, the true, best, ancient, just and
lawfully established Government among us, which is by King and Parliament. God
has joined these, no man must divide them. The Papists would take away the
Parliament from the King, and God knows too many join with the Papists in this
point, which is the greatest point the Papists can wish to gain. On the other
hand, there be Commonwealth-men, who would take away the King from the
Parliament: those shall not be saved from the storm, for they want an
Aristarchus on their side. But let us with our Paul, and with our Luke, love
and preserve our Aristarchus to the last, for our Aristarchus both loves and
serves us. This is one English Glory, an Aristarchy, not an Aristocracy, where
many hold the Scepter; but an Aristarchy, where our Sovereign Lord and King is
honored and obeyed of all as most excellent and supreme, as the anointed of
the Lord among us. Whom we obey for the Lord's sake according to his Laws, and
the Laws of the Nation; and for whom we pray to the Lord, that he will keep him
as the man of his right hand, making him a Ruler according to his own heart.
Let us then cleave faithfully to our Paul, to our Luke, to our Aristarchus; and
there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of us. Be what ye ought to
be, be your selves, be true Englishmen and faithful Christians: maintain the
English Law, and the Protestant Faith; Give God, the King, and your Brethren
their due: and I bid you with St. Paul, Be of good cheer, for there shall be no
loss of any man's life among you, but of the ship. The Popish Alexandria shall
be broken in pieces. The forepart sticks already fast, the hinder part cannot
hold long. However,

We are all in the hands of God; we are all at the Mercy of the Almighty. The
Tempest of his wrath is still upon us, even upon us, Our Sins continue it. It Is
his Mercy we are not consumed. Repent we, Fast we, Pray we with St. Paul, that
the Angel of the Lord may be with us also, strengthening us, guarding us,
guiding us in the midst of these raging Waters, which are ready to swallow us
up. Let us call upon the Lord Jesus, as his Disciples did in the like case,
Mat. 8.25. Awake Lord, save us, we perish. He seems to sleep and forsakeus,
because indeed we have forsaken him, and have slept in our sins a long time.
Rise we to Repentance, and he will rise to Salvation; for he is ordained of God
to be Our Savior, to be our Refuge from the storm, our hiding place from the
Wind, our Covert from the Tempest, even from this very Tempest, from this
Euroclydon, which shall destroy his Enemies: but shall not touch the hair of
the head of any man that faithfully trusts in him. So understand we this
Text, And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the Wind, we let
her drive. Now with Tears of Repentance, and with Hearts of Faith, casting our
selves into the Arms of his Gracious Providence, let us with St. Paul bow our
knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ and Pray for our selves and for
the Whole Nation.

O God, who do whatever pleases thee in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas
and in all deep places, who for our Example and great Consolation did so
wonderfully save from the tempestuous Winds and Seas, thy Servants Paul and
Luke and Aristarchus, and a great multitude with them for thy Mercy's sake.
Look now we beseech thee with thy wonted pity upon thy Church which is among
us; Open the bowels of thy most tender compassions upon this sinful and
ungrateful Nation. Save us from the storms of Popery, from the rage of
Antichrist, from the evils of our own sins, which, if thou savest us not, shall
prevail over us to utter destruction. O Lord, whatever loss or damage of
Temporal State we may suffer, suffer us not to make shipwreck of our Faith. A
hair of our heads shall not fall without thy leave; O save our Souls for thy
Mercies sake. Save thy Flock, even for thine infinite Mercies in Jesus Christ,
to whom, with thy felf and Holy Spirit, be praise and honor for ever and ever
more and more without end. Amen.

FINIS.

