Imprimatur,

March. 26. 1672. C. Smith, R. in Chapter P. ac D. D. Humfr. Episc. Land. Sacellan.

THE Tridentine-Gospel, OR, PAPAL CREED: Made at TRENT, and promulgated at ROME
By Pope PIUS IV.

Exhibited and Demonstrated to be NEW, HETERODOX, and ANTICHRISTIAN: IN A
SERMON, By WILLIAM RAMSAY, lately Professor of Philosophy Priest, Confessair,
and Missionary Preacher of the Orde^ of Franciscans in the Church of Rome; now
by Gods mercy Ministe^ of the Holy Gospel in the Church of England.

Hereto is added, Pope Pius his Bull in Latin and English, necessary to be
seen by all the would know the present Faith of Rome, especially in these our
Nation^ where they conceal it.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without Temple
Bar, and Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the
White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1672.

Courteous READER,
EXpect not in a Sermon all that can be said to the too curious, or to the
malevolent; but as much as needs be said to the Reasonable, Ingenuous, and
freely-affected follower of Truth: nor yet that, after so precise and stric^: a
form of Argument as is proper among the Learned; but after an ordinary and
vulgar method, as is meet to incite and instruct a Popular Auditory, whose
profit, not his own praise, the Author always designeth.

GAL. 1.8. But though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.


BEfore I insist upon this Text, Justice and Civility engages me to beg leave
of this Christian Congregation to handle an Antichristian Subject. For to you,
the happy children of the Church of England, I may say with St. Paul to the
Church of Ephesus, Ephesians. 2.19. You are no more strangers and foreigners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone. Wherefore to describe to you the Antichristian Edifice, is
no new discovery, a needless endeavor; and another labor were more opportune,
to wit, to build on the foundation already laid, if not the Gold, Silver, or
Precious Stones of Paul, Apollo, or Cephas; at least some work of edificatory
doctrine which might abide and receive a reward, 1 Cor. 3.12. Yet my present
subject is proper and necessary; for, having lately left the Roman Chair for
the English Church, I am debtor to both. To the one I owe a Christian adieu, to
the other an account of my peaceable ingress. And indeed, before I accuse the
Romish Cause, I profess seriously and heartily with St. Paul, Romans 10.1. My
hearts desire and prayer to God for Rome is, that they may be saved; for I bear
them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. For
being ignorant of Christ's Gospel, and going about to establish a Gospel of
their own, they have not submitted themselves to the Gospel of Christ.
Wherefore, a dispensation of the Gospel being committed to me, what I do, I do
for the Gospels sake, for I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, God forbid,
for it is the power of God, Romans 1.16. able to justify its Preacher, first
justified in its self. To this Evangelical design four things concur observable
in the Text; to wit,

1. That the Gospel St. Paul preached, was the true Gospel of Christ, and
therefore the only Gospel to be preached.

2. As no other Gospel is true, but this of Christ, preached by St. Paul; so,
no Apostle or Angel, much less any Pope, ought to impose upon the Church of
God, or preach to it any other Gospel. If he do, St. Paul has given him his
doom, Let him be accursed.

3. Whether the Pope does impose, and preach, or cause to be preached, such a
Gospel as shall deserve that Anathema, is next to be inquired into

4. If upon our disquisition it plainly appear, that the Pope does impose upon
all his subjects that Pseudo-evangelium, contrary to the received Gospel of
Christ, then am I justified for deserting the Church of Rome, where I could not
remain without being accursed.

The first of these points declares the unity of the Gospel of Christ, to wit,
as there is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. so there is but one
Gospel of this our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, of his Faith and Baptism. And
in this point there is no controversy.

The second point declares the immutability and unchangeableness of the Gospel
of Christ, that is, the Gospel of Christ has such a foundation of eternal,
immutable, and impregnable Truth and Holiness, that no creature in Heaven or
Earth, can, or may presume to alter, violate, change, or demolish it, or to lay
any other foundation of his own. Wherefore, not only Popes, but whatsoever
Apostles or Angels attempting that, shall incurr the curse and indignation of
God. And this point is also free from controversy.

The third is controversial, and examines whether or no the present Church of
Rome lies under this heavy curse, for imposing upon the people of Christ a
Pseudo-evangelium, an adulterate Gospel, which is not of Christ. I shall as
briefly and clearly as time will permit, discover the Adulterate Gospel of
Rome, both to justify my desertion thereof, and i^ if it be possible, to stir
up my Roman Brethren to a just emulation. Therefore I will subdivide this third
point into three resolves.

In the first I will show, what was that Gospel which Christ and his Apostles
preached as the only and immutable way of eternal truth and happiness.

In the second I will show that the present Church of England professes and
maintains the same.

In the third I will show that the Church of Rome preaches and imposes a
contrary Gospel, and consequently lies under the Anathema of the Spirit
expressed in the Text.

To resolve the first, to wit, what was that Gospel which Christ and his
Apostles preached, the usual way of the most learned Doctors is to show that
the written Word of God, is the only Word of God extant on Earth: and
consequently the Gospel which Christ preached, and his Apostles after him, is
that doctrine only which is contained in that written Word. And then seeing
that the doctrine of the Church of England is formally expressed in the written
Word: but the Romish doctrine is neither contained there, nor deducible thence;
It follows that the doctrine of the Church of England is the Gospel preached by
Christ and his Apostles; but the Romish Gospel is another, and accursed by the
Spirit in our Text.

But this manner of proof I will not now follow for three respects. 1. It is
more tedious than our present purpose can spare time. 2. It is of greater
difficulty in Demonstration than many capacities can bear and gain by. 3. Its
demonstration would not resolve our question so home as is requisite. For
although it were demonstrated that the written Word is the only Word of God;
yet would there still remain a question, what part of that written Word is that
Gospel which Christ and his Apostles preached, as the (...), the Vnum
necessarium, the Only way of happiness. Therefore I shall make choice of
another way of proof, short, easy, and clear, and that resolves the Question
so home as to demonstrate what is the true Gospel in the strictest sense, to
wit, what is the only way to Happiness, preached by Christ and his Apostles.
Note well therefore, (I entreat your diligence) that by this Word Gospel in the
Text, is precisely meant that necessary way which Christ and his Apostles
taught to salvation. For so much Gospel must needs be sufficient, and no more
Gospel can be imposed as necessary, either by Paul, Pope, or Angel.

To show this way of Salvation, this Primitive and everlasting Gospel, we need
presuppose or demand no more of the Romists at present, than to grant that the
Word of Christ and of his Apostles, recorded in Scripture, is truly to be taken
and embraced as the proper Word of God. This being granted, our method and
design will no way engage us to dispute, whether there be any traditional Word
of God on Earth or no. For,

In the first place it must needs be evident that the necessary way to
salvation which Christ preached, was no other than that way of repentance, of
which it is said Mat. 4.17. Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. This Repentance, with the good tidings of the
Kingdom of Heaven promised to it, is the Primitive Gospel in the true, proper,
and precise use of that word (...), Gospel. And lest you may suspect me of
ignorance or novelty in the application of that word, I will show you that this
is the phrase of the Spirit of God in the written Gospel it self. And first in
the chapter already cited, Mat. 4.23. this Repentance is termed (...),
Evangelium regni, the Gospel of the Kingdom: for it is there said, Jesus went
about all Galilee teaching in their synagognes, and preaching the Gospel of the
Kingdom; that is, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, as in the 17.
verse. The Evangelist Mark is very plain, 1.14. After that John was put in
prison, Jesus came into Galilee preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God:
what was that Gospel? it follows; and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the
kingdom of God is at hand, repent. You see the Gospel of Christ is concluded in
that repentance to which he promised the kingdom. The same was the Gospel of
his Apostles: for, of them, when first sent out to preach the Gospel, it is
said Mark 6.12. And they went out and preached that men should repent. And this
repentance is again formally termed the Gospel, Luke 9.6. And they departed and
went thorough the towns preaching the Gospel. Even so that Gospel which Christ
immediately before his ascension commanded his Apostles to preach, Mark 16.15.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, is nothing
else than what is explained, Luke 24.47. That repentance and remission of sins
be preached in his name among all Nations.

Therefore let this Proposition, both in substance of import, and in propriety
of expression, stand clear and irrefragable; to wit, The Gospel which Christ
and his Apostles preached, is that repentance which Christ himself preached,
and the Apostles in his name. It remains then to show in what that repentance
consisted; for that, and only that, is the necessary way to salvation, the
(...), the Primitive Gospel, the Touchstone of adulterate Gospels and their
anathemiz'd Preachers, Men, or Angels, according to our Text.

Peace and comfort to all them that love and believe in Jesus Christ. For he
has left the Repentance which he himself preached, and commanded his Apostles
to preach to all Nations, so plainly opened in the Testament of his holy
Gospel, that it is impossible for any man to read the Gospel, or any notable
part thereof, or to hear it read, but he must clearly discover, and understand
what repentance it is to which the Kingdom is promised. For what Sermon of
Christ is there? what Discourse? what Parable? what Sentence or Answer? yea,
what Page, or almost Verse is there in the whole New Testament, which does not
sufficiently proclaim, that, Whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, and observes
his Commandments, is heir of his Kingdom? This therefore, according to the
legal Proclamation of Christ, is true Christian repentance, the Gospel of the
Kingdom, the necessary and only way of Salvation, which Christ and his Apostles
preached; to wit, to believe Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, and to
keep his Commandments. Thus the parts of Repentance are two, Faith and Charity,
Belief and Love. These consummate the (...), the perfect cure and reparation of
man. Wherefore Christ, whenever he solemnly acted the Physician of the whole
Man, of Body and Soul, you will find, that to believe in his Godhead and sin no
more, was the beginning and end of the whole cure. Do thou believe? was the
Therapeutick part; Sin no more, was the prophylactick. Yea, the first was the
design and inference of all his works; the other, of all his words. For all his
wonderful deeds were to persuade men Faith, that he was the Son of God: and all
his admirable Sermons were to persuade men Charity, that is, to keep the
Commandments.

But here we are to observe how these two parts of Evangelical Repentance
mutually include or infer one another. To believe Jesus to be the Son of God is
the sum of Faith, and this, if real and solid, certainly begets charity,
which is the fulfilling of the Commandments. And therefore Gal. 5.6. it is
said, Faith in Christ works by love. And 1 Timothy 1.5. Charity the end of the
Commandment, is put the offspring of Faith unfeigned. Thus true Faith infers
Charity, as the Sun ushers in light. Wherefore Gregory the Great said well,
Quantum credimus, tantum diligimus; As much as we believe, so much we love.

On the other side, Charity necessarily includes or presupposes Faith. For the
first Commandment, and consequently the first object of Charity, is to believe
in God; that is, to have no other Gods beside the true God, which is Jesus,
with the Father, and Holy Ghost. And 1 Job. 3.23. We have confidence toward
God because we keep his commandments. And this is his commandment, that we
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. And the Apostle James bids
us show our faith by our works, for faith without works is dead; that is, is
false, adulterate and feigned: for such men say they have faith, and so boast
to live; but the unity of their works declares the fiction of their hearts.
Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 Job. 2.3. What
then? must he that has Faith to justification and salvation have no sin, as
the Romists attribute to their Priestly absolutions and Papal indulgences? No,
For if we say we have no sin, the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. How then do
we keep the Commandments? it follows immediately, v. 9. If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; to wit, if we have an unfeigned
Faith in his name, which will certainly through love, work a sorrow to offend
him, who is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. Thus it appears that to believe
unfeignedly in Jesus Christ, and to keep the Commandments are two things
inseparable. Wherefore whenever we hear eternal life and salvation promised
to the one, the other must be understood included, as a necessary part of that
Repentance, to which Christ has promised his Kingdom. The mutual relation of
these parts being thus observed we are to consider them distinctly by
themselves. And, first,

The Holy Scripture every where proclaims, That To believe Jesus to be the Son
of God, is an absolute sum of all necessary Faith: yea, I dare say, This is the
way of Salvation, the Repentance to which the Kingdom is promised, and the
whole Primitive Gospel of Christ in the strict sense and propriety of that
word, as we explicated before. And Jesus Christ himself is my Warrant, Author,
and Argument, Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom
he has sent. And lest we might interpret this in too narrow a sense, Christ
would be his own Interpreter, v. 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that
every one which believes on the Son, may have everlasting life, and I will
raise him up a^ the last day. And lest yet we might think, with the Papists,
that he instructed us by halfs, he adds not to his words; to do which, was both
easy and necessary if his doctrine were not already perfect; he adds not, I
say, to his words, but repeats the same words with more brevity and a double
asseveration, v. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me,
has everlasting life. What could be more plainly, more peremptorily, more
authoritatively declared than this? What reasonable man after this plain and
earnest declaration of Christ himself the author and finisher of our faith.
Hebr. 12.2. can think it needful to run after Pope, Apostle, o^ Angel, to learn
if this faith be sufficient, of which Christ has already given sentence; He
that believes, has everlasting life. Must not that needs be the Gospel of the
Kingdom, to which the King Jesus declaratively promises the Kingdom? Must not
that needs be the way of everlasting life, which so solemnly is shown,
commended, and commanded unto us by him that is the way, the truth, and the
life? Let us therefore with all confidence, rely on the most warrantable Word
of Christ's own oral promise, which is so far from needing the confirmation of a
Papal Bull, that Apostles or Angels preaching any other Gospel, are declared
accursed. Yet,

It will not be amiss to see how consonant the Proclamation of the Apostles is
to the Archetypal Word of their Master, to the Primitive and Oral Law of their
Lord. The most beloved Disciple of Jesus, John is an irrefragable Recorder,
chap. 20.31. He bears record that the Gospels were written that we might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing we might
have life through his name. His Epistles are decretal in this point. 1 Jo. 5.3.
he formally professes his design, saying, I write to that end that ye may know
that ye have eternal life if ye believe in the name of the Son of God. Farther,
the practice of the Apostles, as appears in the Book of their Acts, was to
baptize in the name of Jesus Christ; that is, to make members of the Church
such as had no farther knowledge of Faith than to believe Jesus to be the
Christ. Wherefore let no man add to the word of Faith, but rather consent with
Paul, Romans 10.8. This is the word of faith which we preach. If thou confessest
with thy mouth our Lord Jesus, and in thy heart believe, thou shall be saved.

This Faith in Christ includes, or infers (as we said) Charity, which is the
fulfilling of the Law, to do to others, even as we would they should do to us,
Mat. 7.12. The whole law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5.14. If we love one another, God abides
in us, and the love of God is perfected in us, 1 John 4.12. This Belief and
Love combined in one, most amply express that Repentance which Christ and his
Apostles preached, to which they promised the Kingdom. So we find them jointly
expressed, 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we believe in the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one another. This is his Commandment
both Old and New, 1 John 2.7.

We therefore briefly and clearly conclude our first Resolve; to wit, that the
Gospel which Christ and his Apostles preached, as the only and immutable way of
eternal truth and happiness, consists in the Faith and Love which is in Christ
Jesus; that is, to believe Jesus to be the Son of God, and to keep his
Commandments, and is essentially neither more nor less: For, as the whole law
is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5.14.
So, the whole faith is preached in one word, Confess with thy mouth and believe
in thy heart the Lord Jesus, Romans ^0.8.

From this our first Resolve, the second is with ease and evidence deduced; to
wit, That the present Church of England professes and maintains that
Primitive Gospel. For it is manifest that the said Church imposes upon no man,
as necessary to salvation, more than what the written Word of Christ imposes,
Article 6. of the 39. and the written Word is demonstrated to impose what we
have said, and no more. It remains only to exhort the happy members of this
Church, as Paul did, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou
have heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

But the glory of the Church of England will appear more illustrious after a
view taken of the Church of Rome, which follows in this third Resolve; wherein
I will show that the Church of Rome imposes a Gospel contrary to the Primitive
Gospel of Christ.

For the days have already appeared, wherein according to the Spirits
prediction 2 Timothy 4.3. Men were not content with plain, sound, and wholesome
doctrine of Faith and Love in Christ Jesus, (...), but the swelling lust and
pride of their hearts bred an itch in their ears, which gave them no rest till
heaps of Masters had rubbed them into such a temper of madness and absurdity,
that they turned Apostates from the Truth to embrace Fables. This Pride and
Itch were the diseases of the Romish people. These heap; of Masters were Romish
Doctors, Canonists, and Schoolmen. The Truth is the Gospel, and the Fables are
Romances; that is, Romish Tenets, and Tridentine Articles. And although this
Apostasy, which the Apostle here, and 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. speaks of, was not
completed in the first Centuries of the Christian Church to a notorious
degree, nor perhaps is yet fully accomplished: yet the Apostle there, v. 7.
witnesses that even then the mystery of iniquity was a working. But in these
last days, Certes, The work is brought to so notorious a Fabric, that he must
needs renounce the Principles of Reason, and quit all belief in the Scriptures,
that will not acknowledge the Roman Forgery of a new Gospel, which with a
monstrous Art was contrived into one frame and body in the Council of Trent,
out of the chief Romantic pieces, that from the beginning, Iniquity had
wrought on. We have a whole world of Testimony, but their own solemn confession
is the best evidence. For,

Pope Pius the Fourth, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, to their own eternal
confusion, by an authentic Bull canonized a certain form of profession of the
present Faith of Rome, commanding the same to be professed, avowed, and sworn
solemnly by all Ecclesiastic and Religious Professors, and by all Proselytes
and promoted persons of the Church of Rome, as the true Catholic Faith,
without which no man can be saved. Which is the proper and distinctive title
and character of a Gospel. I commend the Bull it self to your reading; I will
now, First, show the occasion of their creating this New Creed. 2. I Will give a
sum of that Creed. 3. I Will demonstrate its novelty and contrariety to the Gospel.

The occasion of this strange production was this: The Points of Romish
Doctrine dissenting from the Gospel and Testament of Christ, were amplified to
such a quantity by Bulls, Decrees, Canons, and Schoolmen, and imposed so
heavily upon the People from Chair and Pulpit, that the aggrievance of such
doctrine became palpable and notorious to the world, especially such learned
men as had knowledge of Holy Writ. Wherefore many most learned and zealous
Christians, notwithstanding the Popes terror and tyranny, in the Spirit of
Christ Protested against it. But the Pope seeing on one side, that his Empire
could not subsist, if his Schoolmens inventions were once annulled; and on the
other side, knowing that no authority of God, either from Scripture or Creed,
gave warrant or surety to his Doctrine; being now invaded most zealously by
many Christian Doctors, Princes, and Nations, he herded together that great
Synagogue of Schoolmen at Trent, all his adjured Vassals, all sworn Followers
of their respective Leaders and Princes of School-doctrine, Alexander H^les,
Thomas Aquinas, John Dunscot, and William Occham, which are the four
Evangelists of School-Gospel in the Church of Rome. In this eximious Synagogue
of Schoolmen, the Mystery of Iniquity first presumed the title of a Gospel;
that is, of the true Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved. There
Truth, long deserted and forsaken, began to be solemnly disavowed and forsworn.
And Fables of Romantic Faith, which had long passed for true, began to be
avowed, as the Gospel of Truth. There to the Gospel of Jesus Christ is
arrogated another Gospel of Rome, to the Apostolical Symbol, the Roman Creed.
The Apostolical one consists in 12 short Articles, because the Authors thereof
summarily delivered what is necessary to believe. But that of Rome consists in
14 long Articles, because seven Devils, that is, a sum of Iniquity, as Gregory
the Great interprets, being cast out of Rome when Christianity first took
place, they entered again with double number and force, when Popery made the
last things of Rome worse than the first.

The sum of these 14 Articles follows:

The First puts generally and indefinitely all the Traditions, Customs, and
Constitutions of the Church of Rome for the foundation and ground of Faith.

The Second gives the second place to the Scriptures after the pre-eminent
authority of Romish Constitutions, restraining the Spirit of God speaking in
the Hagiographers to the narrow sense and interpretation of Schoolmen.

The Third loads the Law of Christ with seven Sacraments: whereof one, to wit,
Penance, includes within it self a larger Law, Creed, and Gospel than Christ
and all his Apostles ever preached.

The Fourth is very zealous, and puts all the Rites, Customs, and Ceremonies
used by the Church of Rome in her solemn administration of Sacraments among the
necessary tenets of Christian Faith.

The Fifth involves an infinity of Creeds; to wit, all and several the disputes
and points which the Council of Trent was pleased to declare and define
concerning the spacious matter of Justification and Original Sin.

The Sixth makes a full profession of the Sacrifice of the Mass and
Transubstantiation.

The Seventh professes the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be perfected under
the sign of Bread alone.

The Eighth holds Purgatory, as a Territory subject to the Pope.

The Ninth holds the Adoration and Worship of Saints and their Relics.

The Tenth holds Image Worship.

The Eleventh holds Pardons, Graces of the Pope, and Indulgences, as most
necessary instruments of Salvation.

The Twelfth professes the present Church of Rome to be the Only, Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church, Mother and Mistress of all other Churches, and
voweth unlimited Obedience to the Pope, as Head thereof.

The Thirteenth universally and undoubtedly receives and professes all the
Decrees and Declarations of Roman Canons and Councils; but above all, (to wit,
even the four Primitive Councils) whatsoever is delivered, defined, or declared
in the holy and sacred Synod of Trent, and rejects all things contrary; to
wit, even the Scripture it self.

The Fourteenth recollecteth all the foresaid Articles, and solemnly promises,
voweth and swears to maintain and teach them, not as Articles of Peace, of
Obedience, of Conformity or Legal Doctrine, but, as the true Catholic Faith,
without which no man can be saved. Which is the character and essential
property of the Gospel of Jesus Christ (even in that strict sense we before
explicated) usurpt by this Scholastic Synagogue of Trent to mysterize and gild
Iniquity. This is the sum of that Gospel which the present Church of Rome
maintains; and so from the beginning of my Discourse hitherto

I have laid open both Gospels, first, that of Jesus Christ, which consists in
believing in Jesus Christ, and in keeping his Commandments: then, That of
Christ's pretended Vicair the Pope; which consists totally in believing the
Popes Definitions, and in obeying his Precepts. He that acknowledges not the
contradiction and repugnancy of these two Gospels, must needs forfeit the
esteem of a reasonable man, as well as of a right principled Christian. Behold
their difference from bottom to top.

The foundation of the one is Jesus Christ, which was laid from the beginning,
and another foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11. The foundation of the other
is Papal Supremacy, which was not from the beginning, but laid by man is to be
raised by man. The holy Spirit builds the faithful on the first foundation by
hope in the grace and merits of Jesus Christ. The Pope builds his credulous
children on his own foundation, by hope in the grace and merits of his Pardons
and Indulgences. The charity of Jesus Christ, which is to love one another as
he loved us, is the furniture and perfection of the first building; but slavery
and bondage to Papal jurisdiction is the top and consummation of the Roman
Edifice. Recitasse confutasse est. The bare rehearsal of such a Creed is a full
conviction of its heterodox absurdity.

Yet that its novelty may more appear, we will set before it three illustrious
Opposites of Evangelical Light; to wit, Primitive Creeds, Primitive Councils,
and Primary Texts of Scripture.

As for Primitive Creeds: The whole Christian World ever held, yea, the present
Church of Rome, in word, though not in effect, holds, that the Apostles Creed
was by them in the H. Ghost designed as a sum of all Christian belief necessary
to salvation: wherefore the primitive Church never presumed to add, but only to
declare it in more open exp^essions of the same thing, as appetrs in the Creeds
of Athanasius, of Nice, o^ Constantinople. But this Creed of Trent is a
palpable piece of Creation for it is totally new both in matter and in form. And
to deny its novel^ were as gross an absurdity in point of understanding; as to
deny the rising of the Sun were an absurdity in sense: yea, greater, as its
difference from the Primitive Creed is as manifest, as the identity of the
rising and setting Sun is certain. For its Articles are of an impertinent and
opposit^ import to the Primitive, more in number, greater in bulk, stranger to
sense harder to Reason, burdensome to Conscience, contemptible to Religion The
Primitive Creeds may justly glory in the foundation of Christ; to wit, his
written Word in which they a^e found contained. The Creed of Trent, has
nothing to glory in greater than the Romish Schools, Papal Decrees, Canons,
Customs, Constitutions, and Senses of Men. The Primitive Creeds have the
Testimony of the whole World, Christian and Antichristian. The Creed of Trent,
besides repugnance with Christian Principles, is reprobated by the most learned
and sober part of Christendom; to wit, Protestant Churches and Nations. The
Primitive Creeds sound nothing but Gods honor and worship through Jesus
Christ. This of Trent sounds nothing but Lucre through a form of godliness,
denying the power thereof, with popular Superstition, vendible Devotion, and
tyrannical exaction of Faith and Obedience.

The Primitive Councils are four, of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and
of Chalcedon. In these the whole Christian World, on which as yet the dew of
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles stood fresh and fair, unanimously made
a Catholic, united, and most solemn attestation of the Faith of Christ. Which
the Council of Nice first did, Ann. 325. not by defining new Articles, or
creating new matter, or producing new form of Faith: but by declaring and
defending the Old, contained in the Apostles Creed. Which, as a just measure of
Faith instituted by the Holy Ghost, that great Council presumed not to
transgress. The same was observed by the Council of Constantinople, Ann. 381.
which repeated, confirmed, and ratified the Symbol of Nice, defending the
Article of the Holy Ghost by a clear expression of his p^oceeding from the Son.
The Council of Ephesus, Ann. 431. presumed no addition of Articles, but
confirming the Apostolical number, defended that of Christ's divine and unique
personality, against Nestorius. The Council of Chalcedon 451. confi^med the
method of the former Councils, defending and declaring the two distinct Natures
of Christ, against Eutiches. Thus these four Catholic Councils had no other
product of Faith than is formally contained in the four Catholic Gospels. In
fine, The work of the Holy Spirit in the Primitive Councils, was nothing more
or less than to establish that Faith which he inspired the four Evangelists to
write in the Gospel, and the Apostles to preach in their Creed. But in these
last days, non Sanctus Spiritus, sed sanctissimus Pater; not the Holy Spirit,
but the most Holy Father, [for so he loves to be entitled, who superlatively
exalts himself above whatsoever is God in Heaven, or is called God on Earth]
has wrought a new work, and est mirabile in oculis nostris, a New Gospel of
Apostolical and Ecclesiastical; that is, Roman Traditions, Customs, and
Constitutions, grounded on the Cathedral word of a Pope; not as the old Creed,
a sum of the work of the Scriptures, written by the instinct, and confirmed by
the wonderful works of the Holy Spirit; but a sum of the work on Earth, to wit,
of the Canon law of Rome, written by the instinct, and confirmed by the most
mighty Bulls of the most Holy Fathers the Bishops of Rome. Which sum his said
Most Holy Paternity defines to be the true Catholic Faith, without which no
man can be saved: which Definition whosoever infringeth, he shall not only
incur his Holiness displeasure, but the indignation also ( imperet ei Deus, God
rebuke him) of Almighty God. And the rebuke will quickly follow, if you please
to consider four Primary Texts of Scripture.

Joh. 20.31. These things [of which the Apostolical Symbol is a Sum] are
written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing you may have life by his name. Why then were not these other things,
of which this Papal Symbol is a Sum, written: if, as his Holiness defines,
there is no life, no salvation without them?

Acts 15.28. It is approved of the Holy Ghost and us [say the Apostles at
Jerusalem] not to impose on you a greater burden than these necessary things.
Has the Holy Ghost, in length of years, disapproved in Trent what he approved
in Jerusalem? to double the burden of belief and obedience? It Is far more just
and reasonable to judge, that he who glories in the Vicairship of Christ, and
Succession to Peter, is heir and possessor of that spirit of Roboam, 1 King.
12.20. Speaking hard things to the people of Christ, making his least finger
grosser than the back and shoulders of Jesus, making his sweet yoke uneasy,
and scourging with Scorpions the flock of Christ, for which the good Pastor was
scourged with whips.

The Apostle Jude in his Catholic Epistle, v. 3. thinks it necessary to exhort
us to contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. But Pope Pius
commands us to fight for the Faith now of late inspired into the holy Fathers
of the Council of Trent, initio Bullae. But let us obey the holy Apostle, who
like a Messenger of God, exhorts us with a salutation of Mercy, Peace, and
Charity: But let us avoid the Papal Spirit as of a contrary Satanical mission;
for, more Impious indeed than Pius by name, he usurps a threat of the
Indignation of God, and as if that were not enough to fill his blasphemous
throat, he adds a double one of St. Peter and Paul, implying his own as the
root of his bitterness.

In fine, Our Text casts an imperative reiterated Curse upon whomsoever, in
Heaven or Earth, Apostle or Angel, that preaches any thing as Gospel besides
what was already preached, even at the first preaching of which the Creed is a
Catholic Sum. How monstrous then is the Papal presumption! To retort this
Curse upon the Spirit of God; to wit, upon all that in obedience to that
Spirit, admits not the Gospel he preaches, which is not only besides what was
first preached, but evidently new and repugnant; A Symbol of Papal definitions
elevated by Papal Decree, above the prerogative of the written Law and Gospel
of Christ, amplified without limit, numero, pondere, and mensura, in number,
weight, and measure! Not we therefore, whom God has commanded to bless them
that curse us: But God the Father of all Mercies, as well as the Avenger of the
Impious, will decide, yea has decided in his holy Word this day declared in
your ears, the Cause of his holy Gospel.

Let us not fear the terror of Man, but submit to the power of Christ Jesus,
subscribing to his holy written Testament on Earth, that our Names may be
written in the Book of Life in Heaven. Let us fight a good fight of constant
Faith in the true Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, militant on Earth:
which Name is no way due to the Romish Synagogue. For she denies the Catholic
doctrine of the Gospel, and the Apostolical legacy of the Creed, seeking to
establish a Gospel and Creed of her own, on Papal authority and Romish
tradition, whence her name is Papal or Roman; and not (...), a Church,
consisting of Members called and chosen by the calling of Christ, and the Word
of his Spirit: but rather (...) or (...), a City or Synagogue convened and
driven together by political stratagems and powerful coaction. But as the
Scriptures are certainly the Catholic Testament of Christ, and the Creed an
Apostolical Legacy of Faith: So whatsoever Church maintains these, as at this
day Our Church of England, is truly Catholic and Apostolical.

Now rejoice, thou Spouse of Christ! Prosper and flourish gloriously, thou
House of God, thou Church of England! The Heavens reap perpetual harvest of Joy
and Glory in the Saints that ascend to the Tabernacles of Immortality, from the
Tents of thy Militia! The Angels ever protect and guard thee, that the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against thee! The Queens also of the Earth, that is, thy
Sisters, the other Reformed Churches of Christ, admire, praise, and honor
thee! but to speak thy happiness in a word, God loves thee! for, Thou art that
Philadelphia, that beloved Sister of Christ, to which the Spirit speaks, Rev.
3.9. I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee. Because thou have kept the word of my
patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come
upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. Behold, I come
quickly: hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. That is,
You Pastors and People of the Church of England, hold fast the form of sound
words, which you have, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.13.
Hold fast the Primitive Gospel of the Kingdom, which consists in Faith
unfeigned in Jesus Christ, and in such Love one to another as Christ loved us
withal. That no man take thy Crown. Not only Men by humane Traditions and
politic inventions will rob thy temporal Crown, usurping Supremacy: but even
thy right to the Crown of eternity, will as soon leave thee, as thou shall
leave thy first Faith and Charity.

To conclude, Take a short Corollary or Recapitulation of all that has been
said. First it has on one side been manifestly evidenced from the Word of God,
that the Gospel of the Kingdom, that is, the Repentance to which Christ
promised his Kingdom, is to believe and love, to believe in the Savior Jesus
and to keep his Commandments.

Secondly, on the other side, it has been manifestly evidenced from the solemn
profession of Faith in the present Church of Rome, canonized by Pope Pius
Quartus, that she imposes as necessary to salvation, a far heavier burden than
that Gospel of Christ; to wit, the Creed or Gospel of Trent.

Thirdly, it is evident in our Text, that it is not in the power of Apostle or
Angel, much less of a Pope, to impose another Gospel than that of Christ. And
then in fine,

Fourthly, it must needs be evident, that whosoever is so much a Christian as
to believe the Scriptures, and so much a reasonable Man, as to distinguish
between one Gospel and another, must needs acknowledge the Church of Rome to
preach another Gospel than that of Christ: and consequently, if he loves and
hopes eternal life, will desert that Church which leaves the paths of the
Gospel of life, and seek to be Member of such a Christian body as adheres to
its head Jesus Christ, by a sincere adhesion to his saving Gospel. Such is the
Evangelical, Apostolical and Catholic Church of England: in which God maintain
and increase the Faith and Love which is in his Son Christ Jesus through his
Holy Spirit. Amen.

BULLA Sanctissimi Domini nostri, DOMINI PII, Divina Providentia PAPAE Quarti,
Super forma Juramenti Professionis Fidei. PIUS Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei,
ad perpetuam Rei Memoriam.
INjunctim nobis Apostolicae servitutis officium requirit, ut ea quae Dominus
omnipotens ad providam Ecclesiae suae directionem, Sanctis Patribus, in nomine
suo congregatis, divinitus inspirare dignatus est ad ejus laudem and gloriam
incunctantur exequi properemus. Cum itaque juxta Concilii Tridentini
dispositionem omnes, quos deinceps Cathedralibus and superioribus Ecclestis
praefici, vel quibus de illarum dignitatibus, canonicatibus, and aliis
quibuscunque beneficiis Ecclesiasticis, curam animarum habentibus, provideri
continget, publicam orthodoxae fidei professionem facere, seque in Romanae
Ecclesiae obedientia permansuros spondere, and jurare teneantur: Nos volentes,
etiam per quoscunque, quibus de Monasteriis, Conventibus, Donibus, and aliis
quibuseunque locis Regularibus quorumcunque Ordinum, etiam Militiarum,
quocunque nomine vel titulo providebitur, idem serva^^, and ad hoc, ut unius
ejusdem fidei professio uniformiter ab omnibus exhibeatur, unicaque and certa
illius forma, cunctis innotescat nostrae sollicitudinis parts, in hoc alicui
minime desiderari, formam ipsam praesentibus annotatam, publica^i, and ubique
gentium per eos ad quos ex decretis ipsius Concilii, and alios praedictos
spectat, recipi and observari, ac sub^enis per Concilium ipsum in
contravenientes latis, juxta hanc and non aliata formam, professionem
praedictam solemniter fieri Auctoritate Apostolici tenore praesentium districte
praecipiendo mandamus hujusmodi sub tenore.

Ego N. firma fide credo and profiteor omnia and singula, quae continentur in
Symbolo fidei, quo sancta Romana Ecclesia utitur; videlicet:

CRedo in unum Deum Patrem Omnipotentem, factorem coeli and terrae, visibilium
omnium and invisibilium, and in unum Dominum Jesum Christum, Filium Dei
unigenitum; and ex Patre natum ante omnia saecula, Deum de Deo, lumen de
lumine, Deum verum de Deo vero, genitum, non factum, consubstantialem Patri,
per quem omnia facta sunt: qui propter nos homines and propter nostram salutem
descendit de coelis, and incarnatus est de Spiritu Sancto ex Maria Virgin, and
homo factus est, crucifixus etiam pro nobis sub Pontio Pilato passus, and
sepultus est, and resurrexit tertia die secundum Scripturas, and ascendit in
coelum, sedet ad dextram Patris, and iterum venturus est cum gloria judicare
vivos and mortuos, cujus regni n^^ crit finis: and in Spiritum Sanctum Dominum
and vivificantem, qui ex Patre, filioque procedit: qui cum Patre and Filio
simul adoratur, and conglorificatur, qui locutus est per Prophetas: and unam,
Sanctam, Catholicam, and Apostolicam Ecclesiam. Confiteor unum baptisma in
remissionem pecc^torum, and expecto resurrectionem mortuorum, and vitam venturi
saeculi Amen.

1. Apostolicas and Ecclesiasticas traditiones, reliquasque ejusdem Ecclesiae
observationes and constitutiones firmissime admitto and amplector.

2. Item sacram Scripturam juxta eum sensum, quem tenuit and tenet sancta matter
Ecclesia, cujus est judicare de vero sensu and interpretatione sacrarum
Scripturarum, admitto, nec eam unquam nisi juxta unanimem consensum Patrum
accipiam, and interpretabor.

3. Profiteor quoque septem esse vere and proprie Sacramenta, n^^ legis a Jesu
Christo Domino nostro instituta, atque ad salutem humani generis, licet non
omnia singulis necessaria, scilicet, Baptismum, Confirmationem, Eucharistiam,
Poenitentiam, Extremam Unctionem, Ordinem and Matrimonium, illaque gratiam
confer, and ex his Baptismum, Confirmationem, and Ordinem, sine sacrilegio
reiterari non posse.

4. Receptos quoque and approbatos Ecclesiae Catholicae ritus, in supradictorum
omnium Sacramentorum solemni administratione recipio, and admitto.

5. Omnia and singula, quae de peccato Originali, and de justificatione in
Sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo definita and declarata fuerunt, amplector and
recipio.

6. Profiteor pariter in Missa offerri Deo verum, proprium and propitiatorium
sacrificium pro vivis and defunctis, atque in sanctissimo Eucharistiae
Sacramento esse, vere, realiter, and substantialiter corpus and sanguinem, una
cum anima and divinitate Domini nostri Jesu Christi, fierique conversionem
totius substantiae panis in corpus, and totius substantiae vini in sanguinem,
quam conversionem Catholica Ecclesia transubstantiationem appellat.

7. Fateor etiam sub altera tantum specie, totum atque integrum Christum,
verumque Sacramentum sumi.

8. Constanter teneo Purgatorium esse, animasque ibi detentas fidelium
suffragiis adjuvari.

9. Similiter and sanctos una cum Christo regnantes, venerandos atque
invocandos esse, eosque orationes Deo pro nobis offerre, atque eorum reliquias
esse venerandas.

10. Firmissime assero imagines Christi ac Deiparae semper Virginis, necnon
aliorum sanctorum habendas and retinendas esse, atque eis debitum honorem, ac
venerationem impertiendam.

11. Indulgentiarum etiam Potestatem, a Christo in Ecclesia relictam fuisse,
illarumque usum Christiano populo maxim salutarem esse, affirmo.

12. Sanctam Catholicam, and Apostolicam Romanam Ecclesiam, omnium Ecclesiarum
matrem, and magistram agnosco, Romanoque Pontifici, Beati Petri Apostolorum
Principis successori, ac Jesu Christi Vicario veram obedientiam spondeo ac juro.

13. Caetera item omnia a sacris Canonibus, and oecumenicis conciliis, ac
praecipue a sacro-sancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita, and declarata,
indubitanter recipio, atque profiteor, simulque contraria omnia, atque haereses
quascunque ab Ecclesia damnatas, rejectas, and anathematizatas, ego pariter
damno, rejicio and anathematizo.

14. Hanc veram Catholicam fidem extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, quam in
praesenti sponte profiteor, and veraciter teneo, eandem integram and
inviolatam, usque ad extremum vitae spiritum, constantissime [Deo adjuvante]
retinere, and confiteri, atque a meis subditis vel illis, quorum cura ad me in
munere meo, spectabit, teneri, doceri, and praedicari, quantum in me erit,
curaturum.

Ego idem N. spondeo, voveo, ac juro: sic me Deus adjuvet, and haec sancta Dei
Evangelia.

Volumus autem quod praesentes literae in Cancellaria nostra Apostolica, de
more, legantur: and ut omnibus facilius pateant, in ejus Quinterno
describantur, ac etiam imprimantur. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc
paginam nostrae voluntatis and mandati infringere, vel ei ausu temerario
contraire. Siquis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit indignationem omnipotentis
Dei, ac ^eatorum Petri and Pauli, Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum.

Datum Romae, apud Sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo
quingentesimo sexagesimo quarto. Idibus Novembris, Pontificatus nostri Anno
quinto. Fed. Cardinalis Caesius Cae. Glorierius.
Lectae and publicatae fuerunt suprascriptae literae Romae in Cancellaria
Apostolica, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae Millesimo quingentesimo sexagesimo
quarto. Die vero sabbati, Nona Mensis Decembris, Pontificatus sanctissimi in
Christo Patris and Domini nosti, Domini Pii Papae Quarti, Anno quinto.

A. Lomelinus Custos.



The BULL of our Most Holy Lord, The Lord PIUS, By Divine Providence the IV. of
that Name, Upon the Form (* 1) of the Oath of the Profession of the FAITH. PIUS
Bishop, Servant of the Servants (* 2) of God, that these Presents may be of
everlasting Memory.
THe Office of Apostolical service incumbent upon us, requires, That such
things as Almighty God for the provident Government of his Church, has deigned
by his divine Spirit to inspire into the Holy Fathers (* 3) congregated in his
name, We without delay hasten to execute to his praise and glory. Seeing
therefore it is so disposed by the Council of Trent, that all such as hereafter
shall be promoted to any Praefectship in Cathedral or other Great Churches, or
to whom it shall happen to be provided for out of the Dignities, Canonries of
the said Churches, and whatsoever other Ecclesiastical Benefices having a
Curateship, shall be obliged to make a public Profession of Orthodox Faith,
and to promise and swear, that they shall ever persever in the Obedience of the
Church of Rome. We also having a Will that the same be observed and practiced
by all such as shall be provided for out of Monasteries, Convents, Houses, and
whatsoever other places of Regulars of whatsoever Orders, even of Military
Professions, under whatsoever Name or Title, and desiring also that so much
solicitude as concerns our self, may not to any one seem to be wanting in this
matter, to the end that a Profession of one and the same Faith may be uniformly
made by all, and one only and certain form thereof may be exhibited to all, We
by Apostolical Authority and by the tenor of these Presents, districtly
commanding, command, that the form which is expressed in these presents, be
published, and throughout all Nations, by these to whom it belongs according to
the decrees of the said Council, and by others abovesaid, be received and
observed, and under such pains as the said Council has decreed against the
Refractory, the said Profession shall be solemnly made in this following, and
no other form, and under this following tenor.

IN. with firm says believe and profess all and several the things which are
contained in the Symbol of Faith This Symbol of Faith is not only the short
Constantinopolitan Creed, which here immediately follows, but also the long 14
Articles added by the Council of Trent, and here by the Pope commanded to be
professed as a sum of Orthodox Faith.
which the holy Church of Rome does use; to wit,

I Believe in One God (* 4) the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and of earth,
of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, and born of the Father before all time, God of God, Light
of Light, True God of a True God, begot and not made, consubstantial with the
Father, by whom all things were made: Who for us men and for our salvation
descended from heaven and took flesh by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and
was made Man, crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered, and was
buried, and rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended
into heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father, and is to come again with
glory to judge the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom shall be no end: and in
the holy Ghost the Lord and giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son, and is adored and glorified together with the Father and the Son, who
spoke by the Prophets: and one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. I confess
one Baptism to the remission of sins, and expect the resurrection of the dead,
and life of the world to come. Amen.

1. I most firmly receive and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical (* 5)
Traditions, and all other Customs and Constitutions of the same Church. Here is
begun the principal part of the Roman Creed, and the real sense and import of
this first Article is, I believe in the Pope.


2. Also I admit the holy Scripture (* 6) in that sense which the holy Mother
Church has held and holds, to whom it belongs to judge of the true sense and
interpretation of the holy Scriptures: nor will I ever receive or interpret
them but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

3. I profess also that there are seven true and proper Sacraments of the new
Law, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, for the salvation of Mankind,
although all are not necessary to each one; to wit, Order, Baptism,
Comfirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Matrimony; and these all
give grace: and of these Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, cannot be reiterated
without Sacrilege.

4. I also receive and admit all received and approved Rites of the Catholic
Church in the solemn administrations of all the abovesaid Sacraments.

5. I also embrace and receive all and several the things (* 7) which have been
defined and declared in the sacred and holy Synod of Trent, concerning Original
sin and Justification.

6. I also profess that in the Mass there is offered to God a true, proper, and
propitiatory sacrifice for the Living and the Dead, and that in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist is contained truly, really and substantially the
Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and there is made a perfect change of the whole substance of the Bread into his
Body, and of the whole substance of the Wine into his Blood; which change the
Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation.

7. I confess also that whole and entire Christ and the true Sacrament is
received under one only species, of Bread.

8. I constantly hold that there is a Purgatory, and that souls there detained,
are helped (* 8) by the suffrages of the faithful.

9. Likewise that the Saints reigning with Christ, are to be worshipped and
invocated, and that they offer prayers (* 9) for us to God: and that their
relics are to be worshipped.

10. I most firmly assert that the Images of Christ, the Virgin Mary, and of
the other Saints, are to be had and kept, and duty of honor and worship to be
given them.

11. I also affirm that the power of Indulgences was left in the Church by
Christ, and that the use of them is most conducive to the salvation (* 10) of
the Christian people.

12. The holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of Rome (* 11) I acknowledge to
be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and I vow, swear, and promise true
Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, as successor of B. Peter Prince of the
Apostles, and Vicair of Jesus Christ.

13. Also all and whatsoever other things delivered by way of Tradition,
defined and declared by the holy Canons, and the General Councils, and chiefly
by the sacred and holy Synod of Trent, (* 12) I undoubtedly receive and
profess, and together all contrary things and whatsoever heresies by the Church
damned, rejected, and accursed, I also damn, reject, and accurse.

14. This true Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved; (* 13) which
at this present I freely profess and truly hold, I the same N. do promise, vow,
and swear most constantly, God assisting, to retain and confess entire and
enviolate to the very last gasp of life, and to procure, as much as shall lie
in me, that the same be held, taught, and preached by all my inferiors, and by
those who are committed to my care and charge. So God help me, and these holy
Gospels of God.

Farther, It is is our will This new and voluntary Gospel and Creed having no
other foundation than the will and work of Man, will dissolve of it self, as
all other works of men, however glorious for a time.
that these present Letters be read in our Apostolical Chancery according to
the custom: and, that they may be more open to all, they shall be writ in the
Quintern of our said Chancery, and also imprinted.

Therefore it shall be lawful to no man whatsoever to infringe the page of this
our Will and Commandment, or with daring rashness to contradict it. But if any
one be so presumptuous as to attempt that, let him know that he shall incur the
indignation of Almighty God, and of the B. Peter and Paul his Apostles. (* 14)

Given at Rome, at S. Peter's Ann. Chr. 1564. the Ides of Nov. in the fifth Year
of our Pontificate. Fed. Cardinalis Caesius Cae. Glorierius.
The Letters above-written were read and published at Rome in the Apostolical
Chancel, Ann. 1564. on Saturday the 9. of December. in the fifth year of the
Pontificate of the Most Holy Father and Lord in Christ, our Lord Pope Pius the
fourth.

A. Lomelinus Custos.




The little Stars inserted in this Romish Symbol, are to lead the Reader to the
following Notes, which discover the Sophistry of Mysterious Iniquity hid
therein.

Notes upon this BULL.
THis Profession of Faith is truly that form of Godliness, of which the Apostle
speaks, 2 Timothy 3.5. which the Papal Church professes, yet really denies the
power thereof; as these following Stars make clearly appear. For first,

(* 1) Here is a solemn celebrity of a form of Profession of the Orthodox Faith
of Jesus Christ. Yet weigh the matter contained, and it proves nothing else in
fine but a vow of unlimited obedience to the Pope, and of a Faith totally
captivated to his Councils, Canons, and Decrees: as most specially appears in
the 12. 13. and 14. Articles of the New Creeed.

(* 2) Here is a form of the most Christian Humility imaginable, where the
Bishop of Bishops terms himself the Servant of the Servants of God: but
consider a Satanical pride, or a greater if possible, wherewith he exalts
himself above all that is called God, glorying in the title of the Most Holy
Lord, which he prints above in Capital Letters, and maintains in trampling on
the heads of Kings and Emperors, by usurpt supremacy.

(* 3) Here is an extern form of Divine Doctrine, which is pretended to be
inspired by God into the Holy Fathers congregated in his name. But the real
truth is, that these Fathers were Schoolmen, more famous for knowledge in the
Canon Law of Rome, than for holy life in the law of God; inspired with the
Spirit of Aquinas and Scotus, and other School-Evangelists, more than with the
Spirit of their Master Christ, as appears in their long New Creed drawn from
their Schools and not from the Gospel: Congregated, not in the name of the
Lord, for then his Law would have been their Rule: but in the name of the Pope,
whose Kingdom they have sought for as most faithful Vassals.

(* 4) Here is an illustrious form of Catholic and Apostolical Belief; to wit,
a solemn Profession of the Primitive Creed of the Apostles, illustrated by the
Council of Nice, and of Constantinople, as a just sum of the Faith of Christ.
But this same Faith is mysteriously subverted by a New Creed of Traditions
immediately added, exceeding the former in number of Articles, in weight of
difficulty, and in measure unlimited of School-Assertions.

(* 5) Under the form of these words, Apostolical, Ecclesiastical, Catholic,
Holy, Church, Mother, etc. lies always hid the adulterate matter of the Romish
Synagogue.

(* 6) Here is a form of receiving the Scripture, but in truth they receive it
only in such tenor and sense as the Fathers admit; that is, the Schoolmen
approved by the Pope. For although this Article craftily seems to mean the
ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, yet truly they are admitted no more
than the Pope and his Schoolmen are pleased to approve; and what is really
here meant by the Mother Church, you may see plainly in Art. 12.

(* 7) This seems a short Article in form, but in matter it is greater than a
just Creed: for the things declared and defined by the Council of Trent,
concerning Original sin and Justification, are many and weighty.

(* 8) This and the following Articles of this New Creed are very fallacious by
a diminutive form of expression which craftily hides a matter of greater
Moment. As here the souls in Purgatory are only said to be helped by the
Suffrages of the Faithful. Yet certain it is, that the Pope lays claim to a
greater power in that infernal Territory, and boasts to possess the Keys
thereof, and to open and shut at pleasure: especially to such as are liberal in
Alms.

(* 9) Here is also a diminution of words: For indeed the Roman tenet is, That
the Saints are to be adored and worshipped for this cause chiefly; to wit,
because Salvation, and other divine benefits are obtained by their Merits and
Grace; as the Catechism of the Council of Trent plainly expresses, Part. 3.
Number. XXIV. Whence is manifest that the Roman Church makes the Saints
fellow-Saviours with Christ: for Christ is not a Savior any other way than by
procuring us salvation and other benefits by his merits and grace.

(* 10) Here is also a diminutive expression: For the Pope usurpeth Indulgences
not only as conducing to salvation, but truly as fully sufficient to save all
those that receive them; for to such he promises infallible forgiveness of all
sin, and pain due to sin, especially if the Indulgence include a condition of
giving Alms.

(* 11) This Twelfth Article is both diminutive in expression, and captious in
consequence. For, first, it means that all the Churches and Nations of the
World are subject to the Laws and Canons of Rome. A thing which neither
Scripture nor Reason, nor any Christian Principle can sustain. Secondly, It
would infer, That the Pope, as Vicar of Christ, is Lord and Master of the
Nations of the World, and can dispose of Empires, Crowns, and Diadems, when and
how he shall at any time define.

(* 12) By this appears that the Council of Trent is the only measure and rule
of Faith in the Church of Rome. Whereas on the contrary, S. Paul instructs
the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 1.8. to measure their Faith by that Gospel only,
which from the beginning they had received, and was by himself preached unto
them. And indeed this long New Creed of Rome is not derived in the least from
Canonical Scripture; but in whole and in part from the Canons of Trent.

(* 13) Without which no man can be saved. This evidently shows, That this
Profession of Faith is not made as a means of uniformity only, as are the
Articles of the Church of England: but as a New Creed, Gospel, or Rule of
Essential belief, and as such is here imposed by the Pope upon his Subjects to
be professed, vowed, sworn, and maintained under pain of eternal damnation.

(* 14) By this direful Curse of the Pope, so confidently cast on those that
reject his New Creed and Trent-Gospel, appears, how contrary the Papal Spirit
is to the Spirit that spoke in Paul, Gal. 1.8. where a Curse is declared to
fall on those who shall preach a Gospel other than that which was already
preached by Paul. The Curse therefore, except we manifestly deny the Holy Ghost
in his great Apostle, must fall on the Pope and and Papal Preachers; except
they can find a Privilege, greater than given to Apostles, or Angels, to
preach and establish New Gospels at pleasure.

Wherefore no man, so much a Christian as to believe the Scriptures, can in
Conscience make scruple to reject this Papal Symbol, as Anathematized with its
Author: Otherwise, as captive to accursed Doctors, let such an one certainly
expect to be led in darkness, deprived of the Truth and Light of Christ.

In fine, It appears, That as the sum of the Primitive Creed and Gospel is to
believe in God; so the sum of the Romish Creed and Gospel is to believe in Man,
the Pope. And as the Rule of the Primitive Faith is the Word of God, the holy
Scriptures; so the Rule of the Romish Faith is the word of Man, Papal
definitions. And as the end of the Primitive Faith is the Charity of God, to
keep his Commandments; so the end of the Romish Faith is Slavery to Man, to
ma^^tain his Supremacy. Thus alas, Rome has left the Fountain of livi^
waters, God, for the broken Cisterns of the digging of man, wh^^hold no water,
Jer. 2.12.

FINIS.
A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Ro^^ and the
hazard of Salvation in the communion of it. In Answer^ some Papers of a
Revolted Protestant; wherein a particular acco^^ is given of the Fanaticism and
Divisions of that Church;

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D.D.

Sold at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Har^ in
Westminster Hall. 1672.


