THE LAST WORDS OF Coll. RICHARD RVMBOLD, Mad. ALICIA LISLE, Alderman HENRY
CORNISH, AND Mr. RICHARD NELTHROP:
Who were EXECUTED in England and Scotland for High Treason in the Year 1685.
The Last Speech of Coll. Richard Rumbold, with several Things that passed at
his Trial, 26 June, 1685.
ABout 11 of the Clock he was brought from the Castle of Edinburgh, to the
Justices Court, in a Great Chair, on Men's Sholders; where at first he was
asked some Questions, most of which he answered with Silence; at last said, He
humbly conceived, it was not necessary for him to add to his own Accusation,
since he was not ignorant they had enough already to do his Business; and
therefore he did not design to fret his Conscience at that time with Answering
Questions. After which, his Libel being read, the Court proceeded in usual
manner; first asking him, If he had any thing to say for himself before the
Jury closed? His answer was, He owned it all, saving that part, of having
Designed the King's Death; and desired all present, to believe the words of a
Dying Man; he never directly nor indirectly intended such a Villainy; that he
abhorred the very thoughts of it; and that he blessed God, he had that
Reputation in the World, that he knew none that had the Impudence to ask him
the Question; and he detested the thoughts of such an Action; and he hoped all
good People would believe him, which was the only way he had to clear himself;
and he was sure, that this Truth should be one day made manifest to all men. He
was again asked, If he had any Exceptions against the Jury? He answered, No;
but wished them to do as God and the^ Consciences directed them. Then they
withdrew, and returned their Verdict in half an hour, and brought him in
Guilty. The Sentence followed, For him to be taken from that Place to the next
Room, and from thence to be Drawn on a Hurdle, betwixt Two and Four of the
Clock, to the Cross of Edinburgh, the Place of Execution, and there to be
Hanged, Drawn and Quartered. He received his Sentence with an Undaunted Courage
and Cheerfulness. Afterward he was delivered into the Town-Magistrates Hands;
they brought to him two of their Divines, and offered him their Assistance upon
the Scaffold; which he altogether refused, telling them: That if they had any
good Wishes for him, he desired they would spend them in their own Closets, and
leave him now to seek God in his own Way. He had several Offers of the same
kind by others, which he put off in like manner. He was most serious and
fervent in Prayer the few hours he lived (as the Senturies observed, who were
present all the while.) The Hour being come, he was brought to the Place of
Execution, where he Saluted the People on all sides of the Scaffold, and after
having refreshed himself with a Cordial out of his Pocket, he was supported by
two men while he spoke to the People in these words:

Gentlemen and Brethren, It is for all men that come into the World once to
Dye, and after Death to Judgment; and since Death is a Debt that all of us must
pay, it is but a matter of small moment, what way it be done; and seeing the
Lord is pleased in this manner to take me to himself, I confess, something hard
to Flesh and Blood, yet, blessed be his Name, who has made me not only
Willing, but Thankful for his Honoring me to lay down the Life he gave, for
his Name; in which, were every Hair in this Head and Beard of mine a Life, I
should joyfully sacrifice them for it, as I do this: And Providence having
brought me hither, I think it most necessary to clear my self of some
Aspersions laid on my Name; and first, That I should have had so Horrid an
Intention of Destroying the King and his Brother.

[Here he repeated what he had said before to the Justices on this Subject.]

'It was also laid to my Charge, That I was Antimonarchial.

It was ever my Thoughts, That Kingly Government was the best of all, Justly
Executed: I mean, such as by our Ancient Laws* that is, a King and a Legal
Free-chosen Parliament. The King having, as I conceive, Power enough to make
him Great, the People also as much Property at to make them Happy; they being
as it were contracted to one another: And who will deny me, that this was not
the Just Constituted Government of our Nations? How absurd is it then for Men
of Sense to maintain, That though the one Party of this Contract breaks all
Conditions, the other should be obliged to perform their Part? No; this Error
is contrary to the Law of God, the Law of Nations, and the Law of Reason. But
as Pride has been the Bait the Devil has catched most by, ever since the
Creation, so it continues to this day with us. Pride caused our first Parents
to fall from the Blessed Estate wherein they were created; they aiming to be
Higher and Wiser than God allowed, which brought an Everlasting Curse on them
and their Posterity. It was Pride caused God to Drown the Old World. And it was
Nimrod's Pride in Building Babel, that caused that heavy Curse of Division of
Tongues to be spread amongst us, as it is at this day. One of the greatest
Afflictions the Church of God groaneth under, That there should be so many
Divisions during their Pilgrimage here; but this is their Comfort, that the day
draws near, whereas there is but One Shepherd, there shall be but One
Sheepsold. It was therefore in the Defense of this Party, in their Just Rights
and Liberties, against Popery and Slavery --

[At which words they Beat the Drums; to which he said:]

They need not Trouble themselves; for he should say no more of his Mind on
that Subject, since they were so disingenious, as to Interrupt a Dying Man,
only to assure the People, He adhered to the True Protestant Religion,
detesting the Erroneous Opinions of many that called themselves so; and I Dye
this day in the Defense of the Ancient Laws and Liberties of these Nations: And
though God, for Reasons best known to himself, has not seen it fit to Honor
Us, as to make Us the Instruments for the Deliverance of his people; yet as I
have Lived, so I Dye in the Faith, that He will speedily Arise for the
Deliverance of his Church and People. And I desire all of you to prepare for
this with speed. I may say, This is a Deluded Generation, veiled with
Ignorance, that though Popery and Slavery be riding in upon them, do not
perceive it; though I am sure there was no man born marked of God above another;
for none comes into the World with a Saddle on his Back, neither any Booted and
Spurred to Ride him; not but that I am well satisfied, that God has wisely
ordered different stations for men in the World, as I have already said; Kings
having as much Power as to make them Great, and the People as much Property as
to make them Happy. And to Conclude; I shall only add my Wishes for the
Salvation of all men, who were created for that end.

After ending these words, he prayed most fervently near three quarters of an
hour, freely forgiving all men, even his greatest Enemies, begging most
earnestly for the Deliverance of Sion from all her Persecutors, p^rticularly
praying for London, Edinburgh and Dublin, from which the Streams run that Rule
God's People in these three Nations.

Being asked some hours before his Execution, If he thought not his Sentence
Dreadful? He answered, He wished he had a Limb for every Town in Christendom.

Madam Lisle's Last Speech.
Gentlemen, Friends and Neighbors;
IT may be expected, that I should say something at my Death, my Birth and
Education being near this place. My Parents instructed me in the Fear of God;
and I now Dye of the Reformed Religion; always being instructed in that
Belief, that if Popery should return into this Nation, it would be a Great
Judgment. I Dye in expectation of Pardon of my Sins, and Acceptance with the
Father, by the Imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ; He being the End of the
Law for Righteousness to every one that believes. I thank God through Christ
Jesus, I depart under the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than
that of Abel; God having made this Chastizement an Ordinance to my Soul. I did
as little expect to come to this place upon this Occasion, as any person in
this Nation; therefore let all learn not to be High minded, but Fear. The Lord
is a Sovereign, and will take what way he sees best to Glorify himself by his
poor Creatures; therefore I humbly desire to submit to his Will; praying of
him, That in Patience I may possess my Soul-

The Crime was, my Entertaining a Nonconformist Minister, which is since sworn
to have been in the Duke of Monmouth's Army. I am told, if I had not Denied
them, it would not have affected me: I have no Excuse, but Surprise and Fear;
which I believe my Jury must make use of to Excuse their Verdict to the World.
I have been told, That the Court ought to be Council for the Prisoner: Instead
of Advice, there was Evidence given from thence, which (though it was but
Hearsay) might possibly affect my Jury. My Defense was such, as might be
expected from a Weak Woman; but such as it was, I never heard it repeated again
to the Jury.

But I forgive all persons that have Wronged me; and I desire that God will do
so likewise. I for give Coll. Penraddock, although he told me, He could have
taken those Men before they came to my House.

As to what may be expected for my Conviction, That I gave it under my hand,
that I discourst with Nelibrop; that could be no Evidence to the Court or Jury,
it being after my Conviction and Sentence.

I acknowledge his Majesty's Favor in Revoking my Sentence; and I pray God he
may long Reign in Mercy as well as Justice, and that he may Reign in Peace, and
that the True Religion may Flourish under him.

Two things I have omitted to say, which is, That I forgive him that desired to
be taken from the Grand Jury, and put upon the Petty Jury, that he might be the
morenearly Concerned in my Death. And return Humble Thanks to God, and the
Reverend Clergy, that Affisted me in my Imprisonment.

Alicia Lisle.
Sept. 85.
Alderman Cornish's Expressions in the Press Yard, just before he went out of
Newgate, 23 October. 1685.
HE seeing the Halter in the Officers hand, said, 'Is this for me? The Officer
replied, Yes. He said, Blessed be God, and Kissed it. And afterward he said,
Blessed be God for Newgate; I have enjoyed God ever since I came within these
Walls; and blessed be God that has made me fit to Dye. I am now going to that
God which will not be mocked, to that God that cannot be imposed upon, to that
God that knows the Innocence of his poor Creature.

A little after he said, Never did any poor Creature come to God with greater
Considence in his Mercy, and Assurance of Acceptance with Him, through Jesus
Christ, than I do; but it is through Jesus Christ; for there is no other Way of
coming to God, and finding Acceptance with him, but through Christ: There is no
other* Name under Heaven, whereby we can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus.

Then speaking to the Officers, he said; Labor to be fit to Dye; for I tell
you, you are not fit to Dye: I was not fit to Dye my self, till I came in
hither; but, O! blessed be God, he has made me fit to Dye, and made me willing
to Dye in a few Moments: I shall have the Fruition of Jesus, and that not for a
Day, but Forever; I am going to the Kingdom of God, where I shall enjoy the
Presence of God the Father, of God the Son, and of God the Holy Spirit, and of
all the Holy Angels; I am going to the General Assembly of the First Born, and
the Spirits of Just Men made perfect: O! that ever God should do so much for me.

Then the Officer going to Tie his Hands, he said, What! must I be Tied then
Well a Brown Thread will serve the turn; you need not Tie me at all; for I
shall not stir from you; for, I thank God, I am not afraid to Dye.

As he was going out, he said, Farewell Newgate; Farewell all my Fellow Prisoners
here; the Lord Comsorr you, and be with you all,

Mr. Nelthrop's Letter to his Relations from the Palace of NEWGATE, 30 October.
1685. the Dawning of the Morning.
Dearest Parents, and Ever-loving Brothers, and Tenderhearted and Beloved
Sisters:
THrough the infinite Goodness of God, the nearer I approach my End, the more
Joy and Comfort I find in my Suffering Estate (if I may so call it) I can
through Mercy say, That I have found more true Delight and Comfort this Night,
than in all the Days and Nights of my whole Life? and I hope the Lord will
continue it, that his Name may be Glorified by me the meanest and poorest of
all his Servants; and I hope (through Free Grace) he will keep me Faithful to
the end. My Soul is so ravished that I can hardly write; and my Joys are more
unspeakable, than ever my Fears were.

I did this Night see my dearest Brother and Companion Capt. Alovff, and his
Face to me was as the Face of an Angel; and he gave me that Comfort, that I
cannot but say, that my Love to him is beyond whatever I had to the dearest
Relation.

When God blows, every thing has a Beauty and Luster upon it; here is an
Answer of Prayer, and such an Answer as (dearest Relations) must engage you all
to be constant in the performance of that Duty, which, like Jacob's Ladder,
though it flands upon the Earth, yet reaches up to Heaven. Here is the Love of
God made manifest to a poor Sinner at the Last Hour, like the Thief upon the
Cross, he that never knew before what the Love of God was to his Soul, I find
it now filled with it, and running over. Now bless the Lord, O my Soul! yea,
all that is within me bless his Holy Name for this Dispensation. Now Light
appears out of Darkness in the Face of Jesus Christ; and all Worldly Joy and
Comforts seem to be as they are, not hard to be parted with; Father, Mother,
Sisters and Brothers, Wife, Children, Houses and Lands, are (as my dearest
Savior says) to be parted with for him, or we are not worthy of him: I bless
his Name, I find no Reluctance to do it, he having brought me to his Footstool;
and I can heartily say, The Will of the Lord be done in this matter. I ever
before now saw a Beauty in Worldly Comforts, but now they seem so small, by the
great Beauty and Luster I see in God in Christ Jesus, that I am Astonished to
think how I have been wandering all my days, and spending my Time and my Money
for that which is not Bread.

O! strive to get a Taste of this Love of God in Christ Jesus, and it will
perfectly wean you from this Deceitful and Foolish World. What are Worldly
Honors and Riches? O! set not your Hearts upon them, but get a Treasure in
Heaven, that your Hearts may be there also. O! lose no time; for if once you
knew the Sweetness of it you would never be at rest till you found him whom
yout Soul loves: It will be more, yea, infinitely more than all Worldly
Enjoyments can afford you, though in their greatest, perfection: It will make
your Life Sweet, and your Death most Comfortable. It is that Bread which the
World knows nothing of, and therefore makes little or no inquiry after it.

Dearest Relations, whilst you and my other dear Friends, are like Aaron and
Hur, holding up the Hands of Moses, I am (through Grace) getting Victory over
the Ama, lakites. I can embrace my dear Companion with more Joy in this Field
of Sufferings, than ever I could have done, had I met him Crowned with the
Laurels of Victory. O! the Mercy to Dye with such a Friend, and such a Valient
Soldier of Jesus Christ, who has kept his Garments clean. And I now begin to
pity them that must stay behind, who have many Temptations to encounter with.
It is but a little, yea, a very ljttle while, and my Warfare will be
accomplished; and if God continue his Love and Influence upon my Soul, it will
be both short and sweet.

I have little of this World about me; I leave you all the Legacy of what was
ever dear to me, the Best of Wives, and Five Poor Children, who must pass
through an Evil and Sinful World, but I have committed them to God, who has
commanded as, To cast our Widows and Fatherless Children upon him.

Dearest Parents, dear Brothers and Sisters, All Adieu; my Time draws on; my
Paper is finished; and your Dying Child and Brother recommends you all to Him
who is All-sufficient, to that God of Peace, that brought again from the dead
our Lord Ie^^s Christ, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of
the Everlasting (...) make you Perfect in every Good Work, to do his Will,
working in you that which is well pleasing in his Sight, through Jesus Christ;
to whom be Glory forever and ever, Amen.

R. N.

Mr. Richard Nelthrop's Last Speech.
THe Great and Unexpressible Trouble and Distraction I have lain under, since I
came into my Troubles, especially since my last Confinement in Newgate, have so
broken my Reason, that for many Weeks last past, till the Day in which my
Sentence was passed, I have not had any Composure of Mind; and have been under
the greatest Trouble imaginable, since my dearest Wife had the Favor granted
her of coming to me; but I am at present under great Composedness of Mind,
through the infinite Goodness of the Lord.

As to that I stand Outlawed for, and now Sentenced to Dye; I can with Comfort
appeal to the Great God, before whose Tribunal I am to appear, That what I did
was in Sincerity of my Heart, without seeking any private Advantage for my
self; but thinking it my Duty to hazard my self for the Preservation of the
Protestant. Religion and English Liberties, which I thought highly invaded, and
both in great Danger of being Lost.

As to the Design of Assassinating the late King, or Murdering of him, or his
present Majesty, 'twas always a Thing highly Against my Judgment, and which I
always detested, and was never in the least concerned with it, neither in Purse
nor Person, nor never knew of any Arms bought for that intent, nor did I
believe there was such a Design, nor never heard any Disappointment of such an
Affair, or Arms, or Time, or Place, save what after the Discovery of the
general Design Mr. West spoke of, as to Arms bought by him; 'twas at Newmarket,
and the first News I heard of the Fire, was at Beverly in Yorkshire.

As to my coming over with the late Duke of Monmouth, it was in prosecution of
the same Ends; but the Lord, in his Holy and Wise Providence, has been pleased
to blast all our Undertakings, though there seemed to be a very Unanimous and
Zealous Spirit in all those that came from beyond the Seas.

And as to the Duke of Monmouth's being declared King, I was wholely passive in
it, I never being present at any public Debate of that Affair, and should
never have advised it, but Complained of it to Colonel Homes and Captain
Patchell; I believe the Lord Gray and Mr. Ferguson the chief Promoters of that.

As to the Temptation of being an Evidence, and bringing others into Trouble or
Danger, though the meanest person, I always abhorred, and detested the Thoughts
of it both when I was in and out of Danger of Life, and advised some very
strongly against it, except when under my Distraction in Prison, that amongst
other Temptations did then violently assault me; but through the Goodness of my
dearest God and Father, I was preserved from it, and indeed, was wholely
incable of doing it for want of True Reason; and could never receive the least
shadow of Comfort from it, but thought Death more elegible; I was sometimes,
during my Distracted and Disquieted Condition, free from it, though notwithout
other Temptations far more Criminal in the sight of men: And I bless the Father
of all Mercies, and God of all Consolations, that I find a great Resignedness
of my Will to his, finding infinite more Comfort in Death, than ever I could
place in Life, though on Conditions that might seem honorable, every hour seeing
the Will of God, in his ordering this Affair, more and more cleared up to me;
God has given, and God has taken; blessed be his Holy Name, that has enabled
me to be willing to suffer, rather than to put forth my hand unto Iniquity, or
to say of Confederacy with them that do so. I am heartily and sincerely
troubled for what has happened, many men's Lives being lost, and many Poor
Distressed Families Ruined; the Lord pardon the Sin he has seen in it; and he
in his wonderful Providence has made me and others concerned Instruments, not
only of what is already fallen out, but ( I believe) in hastening some other
Great Works he has to do in these Kingdoms, whereby he will try and purge his
People, and winnow the Chaff from the Wheat; the Lord keep those that are his
Faithful to the End.

As to my Faith, I neither hope nor look for any Mercy, but only by the Free
Grace of God, by the Application of the Blood of Jesus, my dearest and only
Savior to my poor sinful Soul.

My Distresses have been exceeding great, as to my Eternal Estate; but through
the infinite Goodness of God, though I have many heinous Sins to answer for, yet
I hope and trust, as to my particular, that Christ came for this very end and
purpose, to Relieve the Oppressed, and to be a Physician to the Sick.

I come unto thee O blessed Jesus, refuse me not, but wash in thine own Blood,
and then present me to thy Father as Righteous: What though my Sins be Crimson,
and of a Scarlet Die, yet thou can make them as White as Snow. I see nothing
in my self, but what must utterly Ruin and Condemn me; I cannot Answer for one
Action of my whole Life, but I cast my self wholely upon thee, who art the
Fountain of Mercies, in whom God is Reconciling himself unto the World; the
greatest of Sins and Sinners may find an All sufficiency in thy Blood to
cleanse them from all Sin. Dearest Father of Mercy look upon me as Righteous;
and through the Imputed Righteousness of thy Son, he has paid the Debt, by his
own offering himself up for Sin, and in that thy Justice is satisfied, and thy
Mercy is magnified.

I Dye in Charity with all the World, and can readily and heartily forgive all
my Enemies, even those who have been Evidences against me: And I most humbly
beg the Pardon of all I have any wise in the least injured; and in an especial
manner, I most humbly ask the Pardon of the Lady Lisle's Family and Relations,
for that my being succored there one Night with Mr. Hicks, brought that worthy
Lady to suffer Death; I was wholely a Stranger to her Ladyship; I came with Mr.
Hicks; neither did she (as I verily believe) ever know who I was, or my Name,
till I was taken* And if any other have come to any Loss or Trouble upon my
Account, I humbly beg their Pardon, and were I in a Condition, would as far as
I was able, make them requited.

Grant me thy Love, O Dearest Father! Assist me, and stand by me in the Needful
Hour of Death; give thy Angels Charge over me, poor Soul, that the Devil may
not touch nor hurt it; defend me from his power, and deliver me from his Rage,
and receive me into thy Eternal Kingdom, in and through the Atonement of my
Dearest Redeemer, for whom I praise thee, and unto whom, with thy self and Holy
Spirit, be ascribed all Glory, Power, Might, and Dominion forever and ever,
Amen.

Lord Jesus Receive My Spirit.

