Dr. ROYSE's SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, December 28. 1690.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, AT WHITE HALL, ON The 28th of
December, 1690.

By GEORGE ROYSE, D. D. Fellow of Oriel College in Oxon: And Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Printed by the King's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Crouch at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley,
over against the Royal Exchange. 1691.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen.
1 St. JOHN, chap. v. And the latter part of the Third Verse. -- And his
Commandments are not grievous.
THE Words having no dependence on the Context, and containing only a plain
single Assertion, all that concerns me at present, is to confirm the truth of
them, and to recommend the Laws of Religion under this Notion, That they are
not Grievous.

In clearing of which Proposition, I shall observe this following method: I. I
shall enquire in what sense the Laws or Commands of our Superiors may become
grievous and burdensome to the Subjects. II. I shall vindicate the Laws of our
Religion, from the Imputation of those supposed Grievances and Hardships that
are cast upon them. And, III. I shall draw some Practical Inferences from the
whole, to enforce our Obedience to them.


As to the former, the Laws of our Superiors may become grievous to their
Subjects in one or all these respects:

Either, first of all, when they offer violence to our Frame, and cross the
true Genius and Constitution of our Natures.

And this no doubt is a very hard Imposition, to be obliged to move against the
stream, to row against wind and tide, and to thwart the true natural tendency
of a reasonable creature.

And therefore did the Commands of our great Master impose any such
difficulties upon his Subjects, the complaint then might be somewhat
justifiable, That his Commands are grievous.

But on the other side, if it can be cleared, that these men are quite mistaken
in the right notion of their own frame and make, that man by his natural frame
and constitution, is a religious, as well as a reasonable Creature, and that he
has strong propensions and inclinations to Religious Duties founded in his own
nature.

If this can be cleared, I say, then it will follow, That his Commandments are
not grievous in this sense, but in the Apostle's words, our Reasonable Service.
Romans 12.1.


And this shall be the Subject of my first Proposition.

But, secondly, a Law may be called grievous and burdensome, when it carries
with it only the will and pleasure of the Lawgiver, without any good reason or
excellency to recommend it.

For as the Sovereign then does exercise an arbitrary and despotical Power,
when he establishes Laws upon no good Reasons, so the Subject is in no better
condition than that of a slave, when he is forced to obey, without
understanding the reasons of it.

And this seems to be the Case of the Jewish Law, I mean, those ritual and
ceremonious Observances which make up a great part of it.

That a man should be forbidden to eat of such and such Meats; that he must not
sow his field with mingled seed; that he must not wear a Garment pieced up of
linen and woollen; that he must not round the corners of his head, Lev. 19.27.
nor cut his beard of this or that fashion.

All these Laws, as they carry with them no inherent goodness or excellency to
recommend them, so they look like the arbitrary Impositions of God Almighty,
and the pure results of an unaccountable Authority.

And therefore as they seem unreasonable in the establishment, so no doubt they
will be thought no less troublesome in the discharge.

For though it must be allowed, that the Will of God is a sufficient reason for
our Obedience in all instances where he interposes his authority, yet when our
own reason is not convinced of the goodness and excellency of what he commands,
when it is conscious of no other obligation, but that which arises from his
pure sovereign will and pleasure, in this case a man must drag on heavily in
his duty, move as it were by whip and spur, and pay a forced unnatural service,
as slaves and flatterers do to their imperious Lords and Tyrants.

And consequently, did the Laws of Christianity carry no other motives for our
obedience, but the bare stamp of an uncontrollable authority, the Objection
would be strong and forcible, That his Commandments are grievous.

But on the other side, if it can be demonstrated, that these Laws are so far
from being arbitrary magisterial Impositions, that they seem to be the eternal
Laws of our own reason, then his Commands cannot be styled grievous in this
sense; and this shall be the Subject of my second Proposition.

But, thirdly, the Laws of our Superiors may become grievous, when they ravish
us of our liberty, and destroy the right exercise of our natural freedom.

For since the sweets of liberty, and the pleasure of living at large are so
highly agreeable to humane nature, and so eagerly pursued by all Mankind;
therefore if the Laws of Religion did lay unreasonable restraints upon men,
and, like so many Fetters and Shackles, did tie them up from the enjoyment of
their true liberty, there might be some reasonable pretension to allege, That
his Commands are grievous.

But, on the other side, if it can be proved, that these men are mistaken in
the notion of true liberty, that freedom does not consist in an exemption from
Laws, or in living up to the swinge of their Appetites and Inclinations, if it
be certain, that there can be no true Liberty where there is no Law, and that
the Laws of the Gospel are the only Rules that can instate us in it, then it
will follow beyond contradiction, that his Laws are not grievous in this sense.
And this shall be the Subject of my third and last Proposition.

Having thus far explained in what sense the Laws of our Governors may become
grievous and offensive to their Subjects, I come now to my second general Head
proposed, Viz.

To vindicate the Laws of our Savior from the Imputation of these Grievances;
and this I shall endeavor by confirming the forementioned Propositions.

And first of all, the Laws of Christianity do not contradict the right frame
and constitution of our Natures.

And there needs no other proof of this, but to examine what is the true temper
and constitution of a reasonable Creature.

For the main reason why Religion all along has been represented so
contradictory to, and irroconcileable with our tempers, can be ascribed to
nothing else but to a want of due consideration, what is the right frame of a
Reasonable Nature.

The Atheist fancies, that he is the bare result of matter and motion, the
sanguine Libertine thinks that he is nothing but the mere composition of flesh
and blood; and the covetous Miser imagines, that he is only a temporary Machine
and Pageant cut out for the Stage of this present World.

Now when men shall entertain such dishonorable Notions of their own frame,
resolve all into mere body and matter, and own no other inclinations, but the
blind impetus and tendency of these, no wonder if Religion be thought a flat
contradiction to our tempers. But this is rather the representation of a Beast,
than the true state and account of Humane Nature. And if this be all that goes
to make up a reasonable Creature, I can see no difference, besides the shape,
betwixt the Horse, that has no understanding, and his Rider.

For assign what difference you please, and call it by the name of Reason, Wit,
or Cunning, all these are but pedantick Titles, and undistinguishing
Characters, unless we will allow some nobler attainment, I mean a sense and
capacity of exercising Religious Duties, to be an Ingredient of his Frame and
Constitution.

For it is plain, Bishop Wilk. Not. Rel.
as for what we call Reason in general, that Beasts, by a mere natural
sagacity, do make such near approaches to it, that we can hardly distinguish
betwixt the Cunning of a Brute, and the Reason of some Men.

And therefore as we would assert the distinction and prerogative of our
Natures, we must fix upon some higher Principles to enoble our Frame, and those
will be found no other than the Principles of Religion.

For it must be allowed on all hands, that those are the true Principles of a
reasonable Nature, that do really distinguish it from all other creatures. And
since to be capable of receiving divine impressions, and to pay a rational
regard to the Laws of our Maker, are the peculiar privileges of our natures,
that make the true difference betwixt us and the rest of the parts of the
visible World; therefore the right frame and constitution of a man does consist
in this, that he is a subject fitted for the exercise of Religion.

It Is true indeed, we usually ascribe the difference betwixt us and other
Creatures to our Reason or Understanding; but this is but another name for
Religion.

For to speak plainly, Reason is nothing else, but the clear principles of good
and evil, truth and falsehood, or else the rational consequences and conclusions
that are drawn from them.

And therefore the Principles of Religion are no other than the Principles of
Reason, as shall be shown hereafter.

And consequently, to say a man is naturally born a reasonable creature, is the
same in effect as to say, that he is naturally a religious creature too,
because the right exercise of his reason does consist in understanding and
living up to those Laws of Religion, that are laid upon him, and that we may
not fancy this a more imaginary notion, do but consider, what strong
propensions and inclinations there are in humane nature to religious duties, of
which there can be no account given, unless we resolve them into the natural
frame and temper of our minds. It Is from hence springs that invincible
inclination to religious Worship which is so notorious and visible in the
World, that they chose rather to worship Stocks and Stones, than to be wanting
in that service to which their natures so strongly prompted and inclined them.

It Is from the same principle that the Laws of Justice and Honesty have so far
possessed and overruled the minds of men, that they have made choice rather to
expire in the observance of them, than to survive their innocence and integrity
by transgressing them. All which supposes, that man by his natural frame and
constitution is powerfully determined to the exercise of those Religious Duties
which God and Nature have imposed upon him, and therefore the Atheist may as
well say, that Hunger and Thirst are no natural Inclinations of the Body, as
that the Laws of Religion are forced and unnatural to the Mind.

And what we assert in general, will be found no less true, should we descend
to the particular Laws of the Gospel: for there are but two things, that seem
more especially to grate upon humane nature; the one is the subduing our Lusts
and Passions, which the Scripture expresses under the hard terms of pulling out
right Eyes, Matthew. 5.29.
and plucking off right Hands. And the other is, the sacrificing our Lives to
the interest of Religion. But neither of these will appear a violence to our
temper, if we view things in their true light.

As to the former, the subduing our Lusts and Passions, this is nothing else
but that regular order and economy which God has established in the frame of
man, that reason should have the ascendant and government over our passions,
and that as the Mind is a superior principle to the Body, so it should exercise
a peculiar Empire and Dominion over the several inclinations of it, and
therefore this is so far from being a contradiction to humane nature, that it is
the true natural frame and state of it; for in effect, it is no more than to
say, that the Man should rule over the Beast.

And as for the other, the sacrificing our Lives to our belief and persuasion,
it is no more, than what the wisest Heathens have taught, and the best have
practiced.

It Is true indeed, this seems to cross that great Principle of Self-love and
Self-preservation, which is so closely interwoven with our natures. But then it
must be considered, that Self-love and Self-preservation, though they are the
supreme Law of other Creatures, that have no higher Principles to steer by, yet
in a reasonable nature they lie always under the regulation and conduct of a
superior Principle, the Mind.

And since the Mind of Man is the nobler part, and more properly styled the
Man, therefore it is a greater violence to a reasonable creature to sacrifice
the belief and persuasion of his Mind, than to offer up his Body a sacrifice to
that: so that upon the whole matter it appears, that the Principles of Religion
are so far from crossing the true genius and constitution of our nature, that
they seem rather highly suited and agreeable to it.

And this will appear from the second Proposition, viz.

That the Laws of Religion are no Arbitrary Impositions of God Almighty, but
wonderfully accommodated to the reason of Mankind.

Had God Almighty never interposed his Authority in enforcing these Laws upon
us, yet still they would have approved themselves to the reason of Mankind as
wholesome rules and provisions at least, such as are admirably fitted to the
state of humane nature. The Principles of Justice, Honesty and Gratitude do
bear such a congruity with our Reason, that they look rather like the Eternal
Laws of our own Natures, than the Magisterial Decrees of our Lord and Master.
Whether they are naturally stamped upon the mind, or do grow up rather by the
exercise of our own reason and discretion, has been matter of dispute amongst
some: but both of them suppose, that they are the natural results and genuine
dictates of our Mind and Reason. And if we may guess at the reason of Mankind
by the unalterable consent and approbation of the wisest men, this will amount
to a very fair proof, that the Laws of Religion are nothing else but the common
Principles of our own Reason: for it is plain, there is scarce any Government in
the World, but what has approved of the matter of these Laws, by incorporating
them into their respective Polities, and establishing them as a part of the
Civil Constitution. And the more any State have emproved their Reason, and
civilized their Tempers, the higher in proportion they have advanced the
Principles of Religion, as particularly under the Roman Government.

Now it is altogether unaccountable how these religious Rules should meet with
such a general establishment, unless they did approve themselves to the general
reason of Mankind. To Worship a Supreme Being, to be sober and temperate as to
our selves, and to be just and honest to our neighbor, are the main substance
of what our Savior commands, and yet all these we know have had the good luck
to meet with a favorable suffrage and entertainment even from those that never
discerned any stamp of Divine Authority upon them.

But how the whole World should conspire in the approbation of these Laws,
cannot well be accounted for, unless we own, they have a strong foundation in
Humane e^^s^on.

The Atheist indeed tells us, that these are the bare positive Decrees and
arbitrary Constitutions of the Civil Power, but then at the same time he cannot
explain, how these should come to be the public Constitutions of so many
different Ages and Countries, unless we allow that the best reason of all
Nations and Times have approved the great excellency and reasonableness of them.

And this shows, that these Laws are eternally and intrinsically good in
themselves antecedently to any positive Constitution whatever, because the
general reception of them in the World can be ascribed to nothing else, but to
that inherent goodness and excellency that recommended them.

There is one Objection indeed against what I have urged, viz. That there have
been several Governments in the World, that had so little sense of these Laws,
as not only to approve but to reward those very Vices, that carry a flat
contradiction to them, and consequently there is not that reason and excellency
to be found in those Laws, for which we are pleading.

But this is no fair way of concluding what is the best sense and reason of
Mankind, by the particular corruption and degeneracy of the worst of men.

Should there be several monstrous Births produced in the World, no one I hope
would conclude this to be the regular shape and proportion of a man, but an
accidental derivation from it.

In all these cases we must try things rather by the general consent and
standard, than by any particular exceptions to the contrary, for there may be
Monsters in Morality and Religion too as well as in Nature, but neither of them
do conclude against the unalterable Laws of Nature and Reason.

And, that we may discern further the Reason and Excellency of these Laws, I
shall show in the third and last place,

That the Laws of Religion are not such Fetters and Shackles upon Humane Nature
as to destroy its true Liberty and Freedom.

That Liberty does consist in an exemption and freedom from Laws, is a Doctrine
as false as it is popular.

For, to speak properly, a Law in general, is not so much a tie and
confinement, as the direction of a reasonable creature, and it serves rather to
maintain and enlarge, than to destroy our freedom.

And this is true, whether we respect either our Civil Liberties, as we are
Members of a Government, or else the Inward Liberty and Freedom of our Minds.
As to our Civil Liberties, it is certain what Tully affirms, the Laws are
Fundamentum Libertatis, the Foundation and Spring of all Civil Liberty, and in
all Governments whatever, where there is no Law, there is no Freedom. For Civil
Liberty is nothing but a freedom from the Violence and Restraint of other Men;
and this can never be enjoyed, where every one shall be permitted to live at
his own swinge and pleasure, for then to be sure I shall be soon ravished of my
Liberty, where every one is left free to invade it.

And as our Civil Liberties are rather preserved than oppressed by Humane Laws,
so the Inward Freedom of our Minds, is far more advanced, than impaired by the
Laws of Religion: For the true Freedom does not consist in an absolute
indifferency, without any regard to good or evil, as some imagine.

God and the good Angels are the freest Agents in the World, and yet they are
not free to do evil, and when we our selves come to be translated to the same
happy state, we shall no longer be so indifferent to either: such an
indifferency of the Will to good or evil, is rather an imperfection of our
Natures, or, at best, but a relative Perfection accommodated to our present
state, and serving the ends of our probation here, but the true perfect Liberty
does consist in acting up unalterably to the Laws of our best Reason.

For the clearing of which, we may consider, that Liberty is nothing else but a
Power to act thus or thus, according as our best Reason shall determine; and
therefore as the true Liberty is founded in Reason, and lodged only in
reasonable Creatures, so the right exercise of it does consist in living up to
the Principles of Reason; and consequently, to choose Evil, is as great an abuse
of true Liberty, as it is a want of Reason and Discretion.

From whence we may conclude, the absurdity of that Position, That there can be
no Freedom where a man is determined by Laws. Now this is the same thing as to
affirm, That wise Men cannot be free, because they are determined by wise
Councils and Advices; and at this rate, none but Fools and Madmen would be
free, because none but these refuse to be determined by wise Proposals, and
this is such an odd sort of Liberty, that no man in his wits can ever plead or
contend for.

It being allowed then, that it is no abridgment of true Freedom to be
determined by wholesome Laws, all that remains is to show, that the Laws of
Religion do rather maintain our Liberty than destroy it. And the reason of this
is plain and obvious; because these Laws have a natural tendency to free
Mankind from the Dominion of those Lusts and Passions, which put the World into
a true condition of slavery: for slavery, as it relates to the mind, is nothing
else but an unnatural subjection of it to the dominion of sin, by which it is
put quite out of its own power, and hindered in the free exercise of its reason.

And this is no other Notion, but what Tully and the wiser Heathens have all
along taught the World, and therefore he describes it thus, Obedientia fracti
and abjecti animi arbitrio carentis suo: from whence he concludes, that all
wicked men are slaves, because being bound over to work drudgery to their
Lusts, they have no longer any commands over themselves, nor power to think or
act freely.

And the Scripture does every where reckon them as slaves, by stiling them, the
servants of sin, sold under sin, Romans 6.16, 17. Hom. 7.14. v. 23.
in captivity under the law of sin. And this of all others is the greatest
oppression of our Liberty, that can be imagined; for our Lusts and Passions
were born slaves to our Reason and Understanding, and therefore to be subjected
to the dominion of these, is to be a slave to those that were born slaves to
us, and he that fancies this to be a true manly Liberty, let him have his ear
bored through, and be a slave for ever.

And if subjection to Lust and Passion be the true state of Slavery, then
consequently the Laws of Religion, that teach us to manage and govern these,
are the best Fence and Security of our Freedom. Hence the Religion of the
Gospel is styled the perfect Law of Liberty, hence God's Service is called
perfect Freedom, and good men only are honored with the Character of sons and
free men.

In short, this is the only true manly Liberty that I know of in the World, I
mean that whereby the mind is set free from the dominion of our Passions,
disengaged from the power of Lust, and restored to an empire over it self,
which the Sword cannot invade, nor the Tyrant reach. This is the Liberty and
Frecdom of God, Angels, and good men made perfect, which does not consist in an
exemption from Laws, but in living up unchangeably and unalterably to them. And
thus much for the third and last Proposition, That his Commands are not
grievous in this sense, by destroying our true Liberty and Freedom.

I come now, by way of Conclusion, to draw some Practical Inferences from the
several Heads.

And from the first we may conclude, That if the Commands of our Religion be so
highly agreeable to our Frame and Constitution, therefore it is but highly just
and reasonable to live up to the Laws of our own frame. There is no Creature in
the World, but what is governed by the Laws of its own Nature, the Beasts by a
principle of sense, and all other Bodies by the unchangeable Laws of Matter and
Motion. And what a shame and reproach is this to Humane Nature, that we alone,
who understand the Laws of our Frame, should be the only persons that trangress
them.

From the second we may conclude, That if the Principles of Religion be nothing
else but the common Principles of our own Reason, therefore as we would
maintain the Reputation of our Understandings, so we should act up to the true
Dictates of them; and since the Commands of Religion are so highly Reasonable
and Excellent in themselves, consequently our Minds should be affected as well
with the Goodness and Excellency of those Laws, as awed by that Authority which
established them.

From the third and last we may conclude, That if the Laws of the Gospel do
rather advance than impair our Liberty, therefore we should no longer reflect
upon the Goodness and Justice of God Almighty; as if he had imposed so many
Fetters and Shackles upon our Natures, but rather Adore, Worship, and give
Praise unto him for affording us that perfect Law of Liberty, which alone can
set us free.

And since a true manly rational Liberty does consist only in a freedom from
the Power and Dominion of our Vices, let us all henceforth shake off those Clogs
and Ties of Lust and Passion, which have hitherto not only beset, but enslaved
us. And then as we shall find our selves free from the slavery of these, so we
shall have no reason to complain, That his Commandments are grievous.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Pope's-Head-Ally
next Cornhil.
FOLIO.
THE History of Scotland, written in Latin by Geo. Buchanan. Faithfully
rendered into English. The History of the Life, Reign and Death of Edward II.
King of England and Lord of Ireland; with the Rise and Fall of his great
Favorites, Gaveston and the Spencers. Written by E.F. in the Year 1627. and
Printed verbatim from the Original. The History of the Affairs of Europe in
this present Age, but more particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in
Italian by Battista Nani, Cavalier and Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir
Robert Honywood, Knight.
QVARTO.
A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Guild Hall
Chapel, upon Good Friday, March 29. 1689. By George Royse, D.D. Fellow of
Oriel College in Oxford, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's. A Sermon
Preached before the Deputy Governor and the Company of Merchants trading to
the Levant Seas, at St. Bartholomew Exchange, May 1. 1689. By Edward Smith,
A.M. Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin, and Preacher to the Factory at
Smyrna. The True Interests of the Princes of Europe, in the present State of
Affairs. The A-la-Mode Secretary, or Practical Penman. A New Copy-Book. Youth's
Introduction to Trade. Both by John Airs, Master of the Writing School near
St. Paul's.
OCTAVO.
Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands. By Sir William
Temple of Shene in the County of Surry, Baronet, Ambassador at the Hague and
at Aix-la-Chapelle in the Year 1668. Britannia Languens: Or a Discourse of
Trade. Showing, That the Present Management of Trade in England, is the true
Reason of the Decay of our Manufactures, and the late great fall of Land-Rents,
and the Increase of Trade in the Method it now stands, must proportionably
decay England. Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Parliament. Cardan
his three Books of Consolation, Englished. Of great use in these Times. The Art
of Painting in Oil. Wherein is included each particular Circumstance relating
to that Art and Mystery, containing the best and most approved Rules, for
Preparing, Mixing, and Working, of Oil Colors. Christianity in short; Or the
Way to be a Good Christian. Recommended to the use of such as want either time
or capacity for reading longer or learneder Discourses By C. Ellis, Author of
the Gentile Sinner. The Young Clerk Completed, being a Royal Sueet of Paper
full of variety of the Clerks Hands, with breaks off the Court Letters, and 166
Words abbreviated in Court Hand; and fairly Written at length in Secretary. By
John Airs at the Hand and Pen in St. Paul's Churchyard. Price 2 s. 6 s. So
contrived as to be cut in parts, and Rolled up in a small Pen-case. Sold (with
the rest of the Author's Works) by S. Crouch at the corner of Pope's Head Ally
in Cornhil.

