THE GOOD Old WAY Defended, Against the Attempts of A. M. D. D. in his BOOK
Called, An Enquiry into the New Opinions, (Chiefly) propogated by the
Presbyterians of SCOTLAND: Wherein the Divine Right of the Government of the
Church by Presbyters Acting in Parity, is Asserted; and the pretended Divine
Right of the Hierarchy is disproved: the Antiquity of Parity and Novelty of
Episcopacy as now Pleaded for, are made Manifest from Scriptural Arguments, and
the Testimony of the Ancient Writers of the Christian-Church: and the
groundless and unreasonable Confidence of some Prelatick Writers exposed. Also,
the Debates about Holy Days, Schism, the Church Government used among the First
Scots Christians, and what else the Enquirer Charge us with, are clearly
Stated, and the Truth in all these Maintained against him.

Likewise, some Animadversions on a Book called the Fundamental Charter of
Presbytery; in so far as it misrepresenteth the Principles and Way of our First
Reformers from Popery: where the Controversy about Superintendents is fully
handled: and the Necessity which led our Ancestors into that Course for that
Time is Discoursed.

By GILBERT RULE, one of the Ministers of the City, and Principal of the
College of EDINBURGH.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.

To the Right Honorable, PATRICK EARL of MARCHMOUNT, Viscount of BLASONBERRY,
LORD POLWARTH, of POLW ARTH, REDBRAES, and GREENLAW, etc. LORD High CHANCELLOR
of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND.
My Noble Lord,
I Have presumed to Prefix your Lordships Name to this Work, hoping that your
Lordship will count it no dishonor for the Greatest of Men to Patronize the
least of the Truths of GOD: and knowing your Zealous and Pious Concerns, as for
the State, so for the Church of CHRIST, as now Established in this Nation. My
Design in this Dedication is not to seek the Rul^rs Favor: having had for many
Years, the Honor to be more Regarded by Your Lordship than ever I could
deserve: nor to Engage your Lordship to own our Church against her open and
secret Enemies; knowing how steadily you have appeared for the True Interest of
the Church, and of the Nation, In utraque fortuna; and how fixed your
Principles are with respect to both. But what I aim at is, to express the true
Sense I have (as I know my Brethren also to retain) of your Lordships Wisdom,
Zeal, and Fortitude, encountering the Greatest of Hazards, and enduring the
most grievous of Hardships, for that Holy Religion that ye Profess; and for the
Liberties of your Native Country. The eminent Post your Lordship is now in, as
it is a Token of your Princes Favor, and His Majesty's Wise Choice of a sit
Instrument for High and difficult Work; So it is the LORD'S Reward for your
hard Services; and his giving you the Opportunity to do him further Service, of
another Sort: and his Trying you whether ye will Eye GOD'S Glory above all
things (when ye have the Occasion, and Temptation of seeking your own Things)
as ye did when ye Ventured, and lost your All in this World for him. GOD
expects that ye will now Pay your Vows made in your Trouble; and that ye will
be singly, and actively for him: the Time is short wherein we can Walk or Work,
and Occasions are uncertain. There will be great Peace in Reflection (when our
Work is at an end^) on sincere Endeavors, and Application of Mind, to the Work
that the LORD has put in our hand. That the LORD may long Preserve your
Lordship, and continue your Capacity to do Him Service, and that he may
Blessyour Noble Family with His best Blessings, is the earnest prayer of,

Edinburgh, December, 20, 1697. My Noble Lord, Your Lordships Devoted and most
Humble Servant, G. R.

TO THE READER.
THat I again appear publicly in this Paper War, (being, for my Age Miles
emeritus) needs no other Apology than the Necessity that the Months that were
so Widely Opened against the Truth, and right Ways of GOD, should be Stopped:
and I knew of no other Endeavors this Way, when I entered on this Work, nor
till I had finished it. After it was in the Press, and some Progress made in
it, I read the Learned and Industrious Mr. William Jamesons Nazianzeni
Quaerela, and Vo^um Justum; wherein the same two Authors that I Deal with, are
solidly Refuted, and the main Subject that I Treat off, is Handled: which made
me think that B^ok might Supersede mine. Yet the Advice of others Wiser than my
self, and my own second Thoughts, finding fewer Coincidences in them than might
have been Expected: And that the one Work is more Historical, the other more
Argumentative; so that they may make up a complete Answer to what our
Adversaries have now thought sit to say; and Considering that some Debates are
here insisted on which he has not touched: and that two Witnesses are better
than one: these Considerations (I say) determined me not to stop the Press, And
indeed, the Unaccountable Confidence of these Authors, on the slenderest
Grounds, should be exposed as much as may be: while they Build so Important
Truths and Practices (and press them so warmly) on Phrases, Words, and Modes of
Speaking used by the Ancients, which signified quite another thing then, than
what now they are commonly applied to. The Learned Clericus, in his Preface to
Ars Critica, Sect. 3. at the end, has these Words here very apposite. Quot and
quanti viri crediderunt se Historiam Christianarum Ecclesiarum, and Opiniones
eorum qui S. S. Patres vocantur, in numerato habere, qui revera Hospites ea in
re fuerunt? nempe, Vocabula nuda didicerant, aut Voces, quibus ex Hodiernis
placitis Significationes tribuebant. If we lay such Weight on Ways of Speaking
of old used, as sufficient Arguments for Prelacy, it is reasonable to allow the
same with Respect to Popery: And in that Case, Thou art Peter, and on this Rock
will I Build my Church: and, I will give to thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, etc. shall infer the Popes Supremacy with as good Reason, as the
Fathers Ascribing Jurisdiction to the Bishop, without mentioning the Presbyters
at the same time, does infer his sole Power: seeing, as our Lord in another
Place, gives the same Power to the rest of the Apostles, that here He seems
to give to Peter alone; so do the Fathers often speak of the Ruling Power of
Presbyters, as well as they several times mention that of Bishops, without
mentioning Presbyters. No Protestant will admit the Consequence in the one
Case; wherefore neither ought we so to Argue in the other Case.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 16. read Principle. p. 5. l. 25. r. Theorems. p. 50. l. 5. r.
James. p. 136. l. 8. r. Matters of Fact. p. 146. l. 7. r. Praeses. p. 150. l.
36. r. them. p. 181. l. 37. r. approved. p. 186. l. 37. r. great. p. 194. l.
11. r. Struggling. p. 198. l. 38. r. Rank. p. 199. l. 2. r. the. p. 204. l. 15.
r. Andabatarum. p. 207. l. 2. r. enjoin. p. 242. l. 36. r. Holy. p. 247. l. 1.
r. Congregations. p. 247. l. 26. r. Religious. p. 257. l. 16. r. sound. p. 279.
l. 33. r. Ceremony. p. 284. l. 37. r. Solemnities. p. 297. l. 13. r.
acquainted. p. 309. l. 16. r. Things. p. 310. l. 35. r. Writings.

If there be any other Mistakes of the Press, it is left to the Readers Candor
to Correct them.

THE Good old way defended, etc.
IT has been observed by some, who have read this Book, that the Author has
been much beholden to some of the Jesuits and other Papists, not only for his
Arguments; but even for his Invectives and Reproaches cast upon his Adversaries
(had he been so just as to acknowledge the true Authors of his fine Notions,
there had been less blame in it) and even the imputation of Noveltie, of the
Opinions of Presbyterians, (with which the Frontispiece of his Book is adorned)
is the same Reproach that the Romanists do constantly cast on the whole of the
Protestant Doctrine, which in their ordinary cant, is, the new Gospel. If he
has proved, or shall prove, that our Principles for Paritie, and against
Prelacy, is newer than the first settling of Gospel-Churches by the Apostles;
he has some advantage against us: Yet if our way have been owned, and
practiced in Scotland, before the Papacy, and among the Waldenses, for many
Ages; The edge of his prejudice against it, will be a little blunted: The
former I have already debated with some of his Party, and may have occasion to
resume that Dispute, before I have done with this Book. The other may be easily
made appear; For in their Confession of Faith (after they had fled to Bohemia)
called Confessio Taboritarum, Joan. Lukawitz, Waldensia P. 23. They expressly
deny, that By Scripture warrant, Ordination is to be performed only by Bishops;
and that Bishops have more Authority than single Priests. Perin. Hist. of the
Vaudois, p. 53, 62. (cited by Owen of Ordination, p. 4.) Shows, that they had
no other Ministers for 5^0. years, than such as was ordained by Presbyters.
Walsing. Hist: of England. page 339. Tells us, that the Lollards (the same
Sect with the Waldenses) had their Ministers Ordained by Presbyters without
Bishops. Now of this Sect, even their Enemies witness that they were very
Ancient. Reinerius, an Inquisitor, in his Book contra Haereticos, says, that
it had continued longest of all the Sects; For some say, (these are his Words)
they have been from the days of Pope Silvester. 1. (who was in the time of the
first Nicen Council) others from the days of the Apostles.

2. It may also be made appear, that his own opinion, of the Divine Right of
Prelacy is much newer than ours, not only by the Fathers (as will after
appear,) but even the Church of England, was not of that Opinion, till Bishop
Lands time, and but few of them after it. Spellman, p 576. In the Canons of
Elfrick and Wolfin, has these words, Ambo siquidem unum tenent eundem ordinem
quum sit dignior illa pars Episcopi. Catal. test. verit. To. 2. says of
Wicklif, tantum duos ordines min^strorum esse debere judicavit, viz.
Presbyteros and Dia^onos. Fox. Act. monum. T. 2. Among the Answers that Lambert
the Martyr gave to the 45. Questions put to him, has these words, p. 400. As
touching Priesthood in the Primitive Church. there was no more Officers in the
Church of God, than Bishop and Deacons, as witnesses the Scripture full
apertly. He cites also Jerome, for this. After the Reformation, in the Book
called, the Institution of a Christian man, made by the whole Clergy, 1537.
Authorized and enjoined by King and Parliament, to be preached through the
whole Kingdom, it is said, That the new Testament mentions but two Orders,
Presbyters or Bishops, and Deacons. Cranmers, and other Bishops Opinion I have
Cited. S. 2. 2. Out of a Manuscript in Stillingfleets Ira. In the Book called
the Bishops Book, it is said, that the difference between Bishops and
Presbyters was a device of the ancient Fathers, not mentioned in Scripture. For
the same Opinion, Owen of Ordination, p. 114, 115. cites Jewel, Morton,
Whitaker, Nowell, and the present Bishop of Sarum.

3. Yea that this our Opinion for Paritie, and against the Divine right of
Episcopacy, is as old as the Reformation from Popery; is clear from the
Articuli Smalcaldici, signed by Luther, Melanchthon, and many other Divines; as
they are set down lib. concord. Printed An. 1580. Lipsiae art. 10. p 306. Where
they plead their power of ordaining their Pastors, without Bishops. And cite
Jerome saying, Eam (Ecclesiam Alexandrinam) primum ab Episcopis Presbyteris,
and Ministris, communi opera gubernatam fuisse. These articles were agreed on,
An. 1533. After, p. 324, 325. They affirm of Jurisdictio, and Potestas
excommunicandi and absolvendi, that, liquet confessione omnium, etiam
adversariorum nostrorum, communem esse omnibus qui presunt Ecclesiis sive
nominentur Pastores, sive Presbyteri, sive Episcopi. And they cite Jerome, as
holding the same Opinion, and from his words observe, hic docet Hieronymus
distinctos gradus Episcoporum, and Presbyterorum, sive Pastorum, tantum humana
authoritate constitutos esse: idque res ipsa loquitur, quia officium and
mandatum plane idem est, quia autem jure divino nullum est discrimen inter
Episcopum and Pastorem, etc. These Articles were subscribed by the Electoral
Princes, Palsegrave, Saxony, and Brandenburg, by 45. Dukes, Marquesses,
Counts, and Barons, by the Consuls, and Senates of 35. Cities. Yea, to show
that this Opinion was not then disliked, even in England; Bucer, and Fagius,
who subscribed them, were brought into England by Cranmer, and employed in
promoting the Reformation. The subscriptions of the Noblemen mentioned, you may
find at the End of the Preface of that Book.

It is, then a confidence beyond ordinary, to call the Presbyterian principle
of Paritie a new Opinion.

4. It is further to be considered, that as Antiquity is not, by it self, a
sufficient Patrocinie for any Opinion; So Noveltie is not always a just
prejudice against it. If our Adversaries plead Antiquity for Prelacy, so may
it be done for many principles which themselves will call Errors; and this sort
of Arguments, has in all Ages of the Church been judged invalide: It is Divine
Institution, not humane practice, Custom, or Ancient Opinion, that must be a
Foundation for our belief: and when they expose our way as new, they should
consider, that what is Eldest in respect of its being, and Gods appointment,
may be new in respect of its discovery and observation: What is old in it self,
may be new to us; because, by the corruption of many Ages, it has been hid,
and at last brought forth to light again: So Christianity it self was a
Noveltie to the Athenian Philosophers, and by them treated with disdain and
mocking, on that account; more than with rational refutation, Acts 17. 19, 20.
Augustins Doctrine of Conversion, is looked on by some as what was new in that
time. So was Luthers Doctrine, and Calvin's, and that of the other Reformers in
their day, respective. If my Antagonist can make it appear, that our Opinion
about Parity, was never countenanced by Scripture, nor practiced in the
Christian Church, till of late in Geneva, or Scotland; Let it then pass for a
Noveltie, and on that account be condemned: but it may be more Ancient than the
Hierarchy; tho for many Centuries; it was not practiced under the Reign, and
in the Kingdom of Antichrist. We are very willing, according to the place of
Scripture, he puts before his Book, to ask for, and walk in the old paths:
but these paths must be such as God of old prescribed to his People (as some
expound the place, of the way that Moses taught them) and which they walked in,
who, we are sure did not err. (as Grotius expounds this place, of the way of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) we know that error has been abetted under the Notion
of the old way, Jer. 44. 17. Neither do we think our selves obliged to follow
all the paths of some Ancient good men, more then the Jews were to do as Aaron
did, in making the Golden Calf, tho that was a very old practice, and that Calf
worshipping had been before Jeremias days, both Ancient and Universal.

5. Some things are to be observed in his Introduction, and first, the ill
words that he very liberally, and at (...) random, bestows on these who are
not of his way; calling their Principles, and Writings, Lybels, Spiritual
Raveries p. 2. He insinuates that we have wickedly combined to defame them p.
3. If p. 4. it be not his business to complain of them, whom he supposes, do
persecute them, I am sure it should less be his work to Rail; with such
unmanly, and unchristian revilings, at them who no other ways oppose him, and
his Party, but by dint of Argument. He does p. 5, 6. Suppose, The Ancient
Ministers of the Word to have been Bishops with Apostolical Authority, and
tells us, How in the Primitive times, they were opposed, by men chosen by the
People, who calculate their Doctrine, to the fancies and humors of the
Multitude, and prostituted the Gospel to promote error, and delusion, in stead
of serving our blessed Savior, they became slaves of the People, by whom they
were originally employed; and because they were so unhappily successful, as to
gratify their lusts, they were therefore voted the most Edifying Teachers.
Whether this be to write a Satyr, or to plead for Truth, to the conviction of
them whom he dealleth with, wise men will judge. It is rather to be
lamented, than denied, that there are such Ministers in the Christian, yea, in
the Reformed Church: but I may confidently say, they are not more zealously
disliked among any party of men, than among the Presbyterians in Scotland:
Whom it is evident, that by all this Discourse, he designeth to defame; We
preach against this Inclination, even as it is in men's hearts: and we censure
it, when it appears in their practice, either to the promoting of Error, or
disturbing the Peace of the Church. More of this he has, p. 7. of Ministers
reconciling the moralls of the Gospel to men's wicked practices, and looser
theorms, and the severe Discipline of the Ancient Church to all license and
luxury, and true faith, that works by love, to airie notions and mistakes.
Whether these words afford us the lineaments of this man's temper, or of the
Presbyterian Ministers, I shall leave to others to determine. I am sure, they
who know the Scots Presbyterians, and do not spitefully hate them, will not
say, that either their Doctrine, or their Exercise of Discipline does tend to
promote Looseness and Luxury. This Author is pleased to represent them under a
quite contrary Character when he finds it for his purpose. Whether the
Presbyterian, or Prelatick Church Discipline, as they have been exercised in
Scotland, come nearest to the severe Discipline of the Ancient Church, it is
easy to determine, by them who have seen the one, and can judge of both,
without prejudice.

6. I gladly would understand what he means by his Assertion, p. 6. That the
primitive Ministers of Religion, had their immediate commission from heaven,
and accordingly they endeavored to restore the image of God in Men: To whom he
sets in opposition these ill men above mentioned. If he mean the Apostles, I
shall not contradict his Assertion; but must look on it as most impertinent:
Seeing the other, who he says, had their Authority from Men, were distinguished
from, and opposite to, not only the Apostles, but the ordinary faithful
Ministers of the Church, who were in, or after their days. Also the Assertion,
so understood, could make nothing for Prelacy, or against Paritie, in the
primitive Church, which seems to be the design of this Passage. If he
understand it of Bishops, who, he fancieth to have succeeded to the Apostles;
this is a new opinion, with a Witness; and for any thing I know, himself first
hatched it: and we shall allow him the honor of this new discovery, that
Bishops have their Immediate Commission from Heaven: I know no Opinions held by
Presbyterians, so new as this, of one who undertaketh to refute their new
Opinions. Sure, if it be so, they must then show their credentials from Heaven,
and the signs of Apostles wrought in them. As 2 Cor. 12. 12. And these might
supersede the King's Congedelire, and their Consecration, and also, all the
debate that is about their Prelation, and will excuse us from owning them, till
we be satisfied in this matter, wherein we promise not to be unreasonably
incredulous.

7. He proceeds in his Reproaches, and unaccountable Extravagancy; while p.
7. He speaks of the shaking of the foundations of Ecclesiastical Unity, (as
if Unity were only found in the Prelatical way) and trampling on Ancient
Constitutions with great Insolence, and Impiety. Supposing (without any
semblance of Proof^) that then the hedge of true Religion is not only invaded
but demolished, when Episcopacy is laid aside, and that without these sacred
Vehicles (viz. The Ancient Constitutions about Prelacy,) true Religion must
evaporate into giddiness and Enthusiasm. If this wild talk be not spiritual
raverie, (to use his own words) I know not what can be called by that Name. It
is of the same strain, that the extravagance of these last days, (which is
wholly charged on Presbytery) is boundless, and Skeptical, and Christianity is
more dangerously wounded, by the delusions of some that are Baptized
(Presbyterians) then by the open blasphemies of Infidels; and that the first
(viz. the Presbyterians) are altogether inaccessible by reason, that they
pretend to extraordinary illuminations, and will not be instructed, their
Errors are made stronger by their vanity. And much more is falsely and
injuriously said to this purpose. To which I have no other Reply, but the words
of Psalms 12. 3, 4. The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue
that speaks proud things, who have said, with our tongue will we prevail, our
lips are our own, who is Lord over us, and Psalm. 120. 3, 4. What shall be given
unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee, O false tongue. We can answer his
Arguments, and are willing to be Instructed by him, and attacked that way: But
who can stand before this kind of Topics? I have not met with any Person who
is of opinion that Presbyterians think to make their Calling and Election sure,
only by Division and Singularity, save this Author. p. 8. Who seems to take
the same Liberty to himself, of speaking all the ill he can devise of
Presbyterians, that the Author of pax vobis does against Protestants of all
sorts. I am not at leisure to enquire how much he has borrowed from that
Author; But it is evident that the strain of both is the same: I shall take
little notice of his confident insinuation. p. 9. That Prelacy was revealed by
our Savior, taught by his Apostles, and received by all Churches in the first
and best Ages: For the truth of this is to be tried in the following Debate;
But I cannot overlook his suposing, that we reject certain Ritualls and
practices, which by the plainest and most undeniable consequences are agreeable
to the general Rules of Scripture, and the uniform Belief of all Christians: If
he can prove the Contraverted Ceremonies to be such, we shall correct our
Opinion about them.

8. He lays some Foundations, p. 10. and 11. For his following Dispute, which
we cannot allow, as first, that the first Christians were agreed among
themselves about not only the great Articles of Religion; but also about the
General Rules of Ecclesiastic Order, and Discipline; under which Head, he
plainly includes the Rituals of the Church. It is to be lamented, that even in
Doctrine, there was not that Unity, that was fit, in the Primitive times: we
read of many Heresies early broached: for Order, it was not the same among all,
there were sad Schisms, as well as Heresies: and for Ritualls, we find no
General Rule they agreed in, for Ordering them, save the Word of GOD, contained
in the Scriptures. For General Councills, that meddled most with these, were
later than the times we speak of. And it is well known, what Fatal Contentions
there were about some of them; such as the time of observing Easter. Yea, the
first Churches had different Ritualls, about which they made no Divisions, but
used Christian forbearance. Socrates has a whole Chapter to prove this; which
is, C. 21. of lib 5. of hist. Ecclesi. Iraeneus reproving Victor, for
Excommunicating the Quarto Decimani, has these words, (...). And at large
shows, that the Primitive Christians did not censure one another, for
difference of Rites and Customs observed among them. Every one knows how far
the Churches of the first Ages were, from uniformity in their Fasting; Some
abstaining from that which others did not Scruple to eat: in the frequency of
Communicating: about the time and manner of Baptising: about the time and
degrees of public penance, placing the Altar, or Communion Table, etc. It is
evident then, that the first Christians did not look on Ritualls, as that about
which Christian Concord should be judged of: They minded things of higher
moment, and greater necessity.

9. Another Paradox that he Advances is, that by this uniformity in Doctrine
and Rituals, they (the Primitive Christians,) strenghned themselves against
Infidels and Heretics. This Assertion with respect to Rituals, is wild and
absurd; not only because such Uniformity was not found, nor much regarded among
them, as has been showed; but also, because this Uniformity in Matters so
extrinsick to Religion, could afford them no strength; more than an Army is the
stronger, by all the Soldiers wearing Coats of the same Fashion and Color. It
was their Unity in the Truths of God, their Managing the Ordinances of God by
one Divine Rule, and their Love and forbearance of one another, in the
different Practice of such Rituals as were not Instituted by Christ, in these
as the Means, did their strength ly. Yet another strange Position; he supposes
the Constitutions wherein he and we differ to have been received among all
Christians, (which never has yet been proved) and affirms, that despising
these overthrows the Foundations of Peace and Charity; and consequently, we
exclude our selves from the visible Fellowship of Christ's Household and Family.
His Supposition (which p. 11. and often else where, he considently lays as a
Foundation of his whole Debate) is groundless; as I hope, will appear in the
Progress of this Disquisition. His Assertion is false and dangerous. For 1.
There was Peace amongst the primitive Churches, where several of the
Constitutions he talks of, were practiced by some, and neglected or despised
by others; as may be Instanced in the Trina Immersio, and many others. 2. Even
about some Truths and Ordinances of God, there were Debates in the primitive
Churches, and some differed from that which was generally held, and yet they
were not Excommunicated, but dealt with by more soft Means, and born with, till
the Lord should enlighten their Mind, according to the Apostles direction,
Phil. 3. 15, 16. 3. It is the way of the Antichristian Church, but of few
others, to unchurch all Sister Churches who differ from them in any thing, even
in Rituals: this is not the Spirit of the Gospel. If he understand that they
only exclude themselves from the Church, who differ from what all and every one
hold who are Christians, his Assertion cannot be contradicted; yet it may be
Ridiculed, for that is impossible for any who is a Christian, to do: but if he
speak of what is commonly received, this very Assertion does Sap the Foundation
of all Peace and Unity in the Church: that all they were to be Treated as
Apostats from the Church and Christianity, who have a singular Sentiment about
any one Point of Doctrine, or Ceremony, even though they Dissent never so
modestly: and this will Authorize all the Severities of the Inquisition.
Whether will men's furious Zeal for Humane Devices carry them?

10. What follows, does surmount all that we have heard. p. 11. Whatever is
uniformly determined by the wisest and best of Christians, (their learned
Bishops and Presbyters) must be received as the infallible Truth of God* else
we have no certain Standard to distinguish the Catholic Church in former Ages,
from the Combinations of Heretics. And a little below, The uniform Voice of
Christendem in the first and purest Ages, is the best Key to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Apostles and their Successors. I make here two Observes, before
I consider the thing that is thus boldly Asserted. The former is, that (may be
through oversight) he gives Presbyters a share in Determining, or decisive
Power about what must be received as the infallible Truth of God, together with
the Bishops: Ergo, Bishops have not the sole Authority in the Church; but of
this afterward. The other is, it is manifest that he here speaks not of the
Apostles, but of the ordinary and fixed Ministers of the Church, who taught and
ruled the Church after the decease of the Apostles, and after the Canon of
Scripture was finished. Now this Position contains things worthy of our
Observation. First, that this learned Author maintains an Infallibility to be
in the Guides of the Church, so as they cannot err; seeing what they Determine
must be received as the Infallible Truth of God. 2. That there must be an
Infallible Judge of Controversies in the Church, beside the Scripture; and
without this, we have no Standard of Truth, but must wander in the dark, the
Scripture being unfit and insufficient to guide us in the way of Truth, and to
discover Heresy to us. 3. That this infallible Judge of Controversies, is the
Bishops and Presbyters agreeing together, and uniformly Determining what is
Truth. But here our Author leaves us at a loss: What if some of these Bishops
and Presbyters who meet to frame our Articles of Faith, or Canons for our
Practice, be none of the Wisest, Best, nor Learned, yet have made a shift to
get into the Office of Bishop or Presbyter? Next, what if his wisest and best
Christians, that is, the learned Bishops and Presbyters, do not Determine
uniformly about our Faith, or what concerns our Practice; but some few
Dissent, or are not clear to go along with the rest? Whether in that case, have
we any Standard for our Religion? He would do well to give us Light in this,
when he has better digested his Notions, and writes his second thoughts on
this Head. If some other Person had written at this rate, we should quickly
have had a whole Book, or a long Preface to one, exposing his Ignorance,
Impudence, and other such qualities: but I shall impute no more to this learned
Doctor, but that he has not well Considered what he here says.

11. It may be it will have little weight with him, if I affirm and make it
appear, that this is plainly and directly the Doctrine of the Roman Church;
yea, their darling Principle: and indeed the Foundation on which that Church is
built; and without believing of which, they affirm that we have no certainty
for our Religion: even as this Author thinks, we have no Standard to
distinguish the Catholics from Heretics. That this is their Doctrine, I might
prove by whole Shoals of Citations; I shall single out a few. Eccius, Enchirid:
de conciliis. Tollatur Patrum and Conciliorum authoritas, omnia in Ecclesia
erunt ambigua, dubia, pendentia, iucerta. Melthior Canus, loc: Com: 7. C: 3.
conclus: 5. In expositione sacrarum Literarum, communis omnium sanctorum Patrum
intelligentia certissimum Argumentum Theologo praestant, ad Theologicas
Assertiones corroborandas; quippe Sanctorum omnium sensus Spiritus sancti
sensus ipsi sit. Quanquam a Philosophis quidem rationem Philosophicae
conclusionis jure forsitan postularis, in sacrarum autem literarum
intelligentia, majoribus nostris debes, nulla etiam ratione habita, credere,
and quas sententias de lege, de fide, de Religione ab illis accipisti
defendere. Greg: de valent: Analys: fidei, lib: 8: c. 9. Quod Patres unanimi
consensu circa Religionem tradunt, infallibiliter verum est. Bellarm: lib. 2.
de Christo, cap. 2: and lib. 1: de Purgatorio, cap. 10. Patres nunquam omnes
simul errant, etiamsi aliquis eorum interdum erret, nam simul omnes in uno
errore convenire non possunt. Here is a sweet Harmony, between our Authors
assertion, and the Doctrine of these learned men, from whom it seems he has
borrowed it. But because (as I said) perhaps he will not be ashamed to own
this, I shall bring an Argument or two, against these Principles that he
asserteth, or are by just consequences, drawn out of his words: referring the
Reader for full satisfaction, to the learned Protestant Writers (whether
Episcopal or Presbyterian) who have defended the Reformation against the
Papists; for I am sure, many even of the Prelatical Party, differ from him in
this Principle.

12. For the 1. That there is not Infallibility in all Points of Faith or
Practice, to be found among the Guides of the Church after the Apostles; but
that any of them, yea all of them, may in some of these Points, err: I prove
1. No such Infallibility is promised to any, or all of the Guides of the
Church, tu es Petrus: lo am I with you: and such like Promises, cannot bear the
Weight of our Authors Opinion; for the Church may be safe from the gates of
Hell, and may have Christ's presence, even though her Guides be under some
Mistakes in lesser Matters. 2 This Infallibility is inconsistent with
Experience: the Guides of the Jewish Church erred foully, when they condemned
our Lord as a Deceiver: and yet that Church had the Promise of Gods Teaching,
Upholding, and Presence, which was fulfilled upon the Remnant of true Believers
that were among them. The Arian Church, and the Popish Church, have foully
erred, and yet both of them did overspread the face of Christianity almost
wholly; but there was still a Remnant according to the Promise. 3. The Fathers
(whom I suppose he means by his wise, good, and learned Bishops and
Presbyters) not only did each of them err in some things, (which I hope he
will not deny, and how then shall Infallibility in all things, be found among
them jointly?) but they disown this Infallibility to be in themselves, or in
others, as is clear from several Testimonies which I have cited to this
purpose; Pref. to Cyprianic Bishop examined, p: 2. To which I now add Clem:
Alexand: Strom: lib: 7. sub finem: (...), etc. we have the Lord for the
Principle of our Doctrine, who has taught us by the Prophets and by the
Apostles. If any man thinks this Principle needs another Principle, he does not
truly keep that Principle. And a little after, (...) etc. We do not rest on the
Testimony of men, but we believe (concerning what is in Debate) the voice of
the Lord: and a little before he tells us, that we do not believe the
Assertions of men, they must not only say, but prove; and that from the
Scriptures. Basil, Regula moralium 72. (...) etc. The Hearers who are
Instructed in the Scriptures, must examine the Doctrine of their Teachers, they
must receive these things which are agreeable to Scripture, and reject these
that are contrary to it. Cyp. Ep. 63. ad Caecilium. Quod solus Christus debet
audiri etc. that Christ alone should be heard, the Father witnesses from
Heaven. Non ergo attendere debemus, etc. We must not then consider what others
before us have thiught should be done; but what Christ did, who is before all:
for we must not follow tho Custom of men, but the Truth of God. Chrisost.
Homil. 13. in 2 Cor. sub finem. (...) etc: Let us not carry about the Opinion
of the Multitude, but try things: ye have the Scripture, the exact Standard
((...)) the Index ((...)) and the Rule ((...)) leaving what this or that man
thinks about these things, enquire of all these things from the Scripture.
Here is another Standard than what our Author mentions. Origin. Homil. in
Jerome. It is necessary that we call in the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures;
for our Opinions and Discourses makes no Faith, without these Witnesses. Cyril.
Catehes. 4. (...) etc. Do not believe me saying these things, unless I have
them out of the Scriptures. Ambros. lib. 1. de fide. ad Gratianum. Nolo
Argumento nostro credas, etc. I would not ye should believe our Reasoning; let
us ask the Scriptures, the Prophets, the Apostles; let us ask Christ.

13. To say that all this is to be understood, of what one or a few Fathers
say, not of that wherein they all agree: This has various absurdities in it;
for 1. It is falsely supposed (as in the Progress of the Debate will appear)
that the Fathers are agreed about the Prelacy our Author contendeth for. 2. If
every one of them may err, why may they not all err, seeing the Collective
Body of them is made up only of infallible men? Christ's promise of being in the
midst of two or three gathered together in his Name, does not free them from
all Mistakes. The Fathers together, and the same men apart, are the same
persons under different Notions; and therefore they cannot be both fallible and
infallible. 3. The Testimonies above brought, do not only make single Fathers
fallible, but whatever Combinations of them ye can imagine; for they are still
men, and the Fathers above cited, make infallibility to be peculiar to Christ
speaking in his Word. Augustine does often and plainly bar this Distinction:
contra Faustum, lib. 11. c. 5. id genus, etc. We must read that kind of
Writing, not with necessity of Believing, but with liberty of Judging. And Ep:
112: ad Paulinam. Quod Divinarum Scripturarum, etc. That which is confirmed by
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, is without doubt, to be believed; but for
other Witnesses or Testimonies (whether single or Combined, he makes no
difference as to this) ye may receive or reject them, as ye shall judge they
have more or less weight. Also, Tom. 2: Ep: 19: Solus Scripturarum libris, etc.
I have learned to give this honor and reverence to the Books of Scripture
only, to believe there is no error in them: but I read others, however learned
or Godly they be, (see how exactly he meets with our Authors notion, of
ascribing Infallibility to what is Determined by the most Wise, learned and
Godly Bishops and Presbyters) I so read them, that I do not believe any thing
to be true because they thought so; but because they prove it by the
Scriptures, that it is so. This forced a Confession from Occam (a Papist of
profound Learning, a Disciple of our Country man Joannes Dans) that Augustine
here makes no difference amongst other Writers, beside the Prophets and
Apostles; whether they be Popes or others; whether they write in Council or out
of it. I shall refer the Reader to the Protestant Writers, who have collected
the Errors and Mistakes even of General, and also more private Councils.

. 14. The second Proposition that may be drawn out of this Authors words, is,
that an infallible Judge of Truth and Error is necessary in the Church,
besides the Scripture; for he tells us, that without the uniform
Determination of Truth, by the wisest, best and learned Bishops and
Presbyters, we have no Standard whereby to judge of the Catholic Church, from
the Combination of Heretics: this Principle falls with the former; for if
there be no Infallibility but in the Scripture, such a Judge cannot be
necessary: for the Church does de facto, subsist without such a Judge. Again,
the chief ground on which his Partisans the Papists, assert the necessity of
such a Judge, is, because the Scripture cannot hear Parties, nor can it
pronounce a Sentence which the contending Parties may hear, and be obliged by:
I ask him, if his wisest, best, and most learned Bishops and Presbyters, can
hear him and me, and audibly pronounce a Sentence for either of us, they being
now all dead, as well as the Apostles and Prophets, and nothing of them extant
but their Writings, as are also the Sacred Writings? The one is not a visible
Judge more than the other; and if we Appeal to the Writings of the Fathers, why
not rather to the Scripture it self, which I have proved to be of more, yea, of
the only infallible Authority. And indeed, there can be no visible Judge but
the present Church, to which therefore the Papists flee. And even that cannot
be such a Judge to all Christians; for they cannot all hear the Pope, or
Council, pronouncing a Sentence, and therefore must be content with their
Writings, or Report of their Priests, who pretend to no Infallibility: and it
is strange, that more certainty should be expected from either of these, than
from the Divinely Inspired Scriptures. A visible Judge we own, to wit, the
Guides of the Church lawfully conveened: an infallible Judge we also
acknowledge; vix. God speaking in his Word: but a Judge that is both
infallible, and also now visible to us, we cannot find. The Protestants
Arguments against this Popish Error I shall not insist on; they are, 1. That
the Spirit of God in Scripture, sends us not to men, but to the written Word
of God, for Decision in controverted, or doubtful Points. Isa. 8. 20: Luk: 27:
29: Mat: 22: 29: John 5: 39. 2. Christ and his Apostles, did always appeal to
Scripture, and to no other Judge. 3. All men may err, as has been showed; and
therefore they cannot be an infallible Judge. 4. If there were such a Judge,
sure the Lord would have told us who he is, and that there is such a one: but
not one word of either of these in the Bible. 5. Neither the Papists, nor such
as this Author, can tell us where we shall find this infallible Judge: they are
not agreed whether the Pope alone, or a general Council alone, or both
concurring, must be this Judge. He tells us of the wisest, best, and most
learned Bishops and Presbyters, but leaves us to guess who these were: it is a
hard case, if our certainty of Faith must hang upon this Pin, who were the
best, the wisest, and most learned among them who have Instructed the Cherch.
The third Proposition above mentioned, cannot stand, the other two being taken
away: it has been made appear, that Scripture is the only Standard; and
therefore not the learned and wise Bishops. Also that they have disowned such
Infallibility and Authority to be in themselves or any men; Et collapsa ruunt
subductis tecta columnis.

SECTION II.
The Question stated.

THe first of the New Opinions with which this Author is pleased to charge
Presbyterians, is that they are for the Government of the Church by Presbyters
acting in Parity, and against Prelacy, or the Jurisdiction of a Bishop over
Presbyters. He is pleased to examine some of our Arguments, and pretends to
answer them, c: 1, 2: and then comes to prove his Opinion, c: 3. Thus stating
the Question p: 105, whether the Rectoral Power, and Episcopal Jurisdiction
that the Apostles had over subordinat Ecclesiastics, was afterward committed
to, and exercised by particular persons, or to a College of Presbyters acting
in perfect Parity and Equality. I do not fancy this Method, that a Dispute
should be so copiously insisted on, and Arguments so much tossed for the one
side, before we come to state the Question, and determine what we controvert
about. Wherefore, though I intend to leave nothing in his Book untouched that
is material, I shall use another Method. 1. I shall state the Question. 2.
Bring more and plainer Arguments for our Opinion, besides these which he is
pleased to take notice of. 3. Reinforce these our Arguments which he meddleth
with. 4. Consider the strength of his Plea for Bishops, on account of their
Succession to the Apostles.

2. In order to stating the Queston, we are to consider, that there are
different Sentiments about the Government of the Church, even among the
Episcopal Party themselves, who talk so highly of Unity, and condemn others who
differ from them, (I mean the Presbyterians) as Schismatics; and such in whose
Communion people may not safely abide, as this Author does more than insinuat,
p: 11. The various Opinions of our prelatical Brethren, I have taken notice of
Rational des: of Nonconform: p: 159, 160, 161. I shall not resume what is there
discoursed; but consider this Diversity somewhat more extensively. Some think
that no one form of Government is held forth in Scripture, or was practiced in
the Apostolic Churches: I have seen this question learnedly Debated in a
Manuscript; if the Abetters of it mean, that sometimes the Apostles acted by
their own sole Authority; at other times they left the Management to the
ordinary fixed Officers in the Church; and on other Occasions, deputed
Evangelists to Govern for them, for a time; or that in some Circumstances of
Government, they did not always observe Uniformity: I think all this may be
allowed; but if it be meant, that the Substantials of Government were not
always the same, as acted by the ordinary fixed Officers; but that some
Churches were then Governed by Bishops, others by a College of Presbyters: I
see no ground for such a Debate, nor to think that there was any such Variety
in the Apostostolick Church. 2. I have some where found it denied, that
Apostles had Majority of Power or Jurisdiction over Presbyters: and Paul Bayn,
dioces: Trial, p: 73: Arg: 5: and p: 77. Conclus: 5. is cited for this Also Mr.
Rutherf: Div: Right of Church Government, p: 21. I need not Debate this. And I
find Bayn says no more, but that the Apostles had not Majoritie of Directive
or Corrective Power as Lords, but only as Christ's Ministers; and that no such
Power is in the Church, save in the Person of Christ: but he expressly allows
in them Ministerial Power, declarative and authoritative. Mr. Rutherf: I
suppose, means no more. This indeed is the Opinion of many, and our
Adversaries cannot disprove it, that the Apostles did not usually make use of
their Power in settled Churches, further than to declare the Mind of Christ to
them; but left the exercise of Church Power to the settled Officers of these
Churches. 3. Some are of Opinion, that though the Apostles exercised Authority
in Governing the Churches, and left Ecclesiastical Officers in the possession
of it, to be exercised by them, during the want of the Christian Magistrate: yet
as soon as the Church had a Civil Magistrate owning the Faith, that all ruling
Power devolved into his hand. This is no part of our present Debate; though our
Brethren in the late Reigns, allowed much more of the Exercise of Church power
to the Magistrate, than was warrantable. 4. We debate not now about the Popes
Monarchical power over the whole Christian Church, though many think that
Monarchical power of Bishops, over the Presbyters and People of a large
District, now called a Diocese, has no more Warrant in Scripture, than this
has. Nor 5. Do we now debate whether the Government of the Church be
Democratital, and to be managed by the body of the people: or so
Aristocratical, as to be managed by the Elders in every single Congregation,
independent on superior Judicatures, to whom no Appeal may be from them, or who
may call them to an account for their actings, and authoritatively Censure
them. 6. Some hold that no one Form of Church Government is now necessary, or
of Divine right, but that the Church or Magistrate in several Churches, may
Appoint what shall be found most fit and suitable to the people among whom it is
to be exercised. This Opinion was lately generally owned by our Episcopalians,
and asserted strongly by Doctor Stillingfleet, now Bishop of Worcester: (that
learned Author does also prove, out of an ancient Manuscript, that this was the
Opinion of Cranmer, and four other Bishops) and it met with no Opposition from
that Party, so far as we could hearof; nay, not by this our Author who is now
so highly become a Jure Divino man. It was then the way to Preferment, and
suitable to the Oath of Supremacy, and more especially to the Test. But it is
one thing with some men, to think that a Popish King may alter Church
Government: and another thing to allow the same Power to a Protestant King. We
are then agreed about the Jus Divinum of a species of Church Government, and
the unalterableness of it: which makes it seem strange, that this learned
Author should make such Tragical Outcrys against our pleading a Divine Right,
as if this were Enthusiasm, yea, much worse than speculative Enthusiasm, p: 14:
Visions and fancies, ibid: while he is as positive for the Divine Right of what
he holds: which we shall not call by so ill names; but think, that who has
the worse in matter of Argument, is in an Error; but such an Error as is
consistent with Sobriety, and good sense.

3. The Question is not 7. What sort of Church Government is best, and nearest
to the Scripture Pattern? for that may be nearer to it, which yet does deviate
from the Scripture; but less than another Form of Government does: and though
that Form of Government is more commendable, than another which comes nearest
to the Pattern in all the Steps of the Administration of it; and we are willing
that parity and prelacy be thus compared in all that they can charge us with,
or we can charge on them; (which Comparison I cannot now stay to make in the
Particulars in which it may be stated) yet they contend that Prelacy is exactly
what Christ wills to be exercised in the Church: and we say the same of
Parity: and herein lies the Question. 8. It is to be noted that our
Controversy is not about the name, but the power of a Bishop. The Pastors of
the Church are called Bishops, Acts 20. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 1. and else where: for
the power of a Bishop, (as this name is appropriated to one Presbyter.) We deny
not that very early in the primitive Church, the Praeses in their Meeting for
Discipline and Government was fixed, and had that place during life, and due
management of his Office: and he had a power of calling and ordering their
Meetings, and was subject to their Censures. But our Brethren are not content
with this; but affirm, that by Divine Institution, and primitive Practice, the
Bishop had a majority of power both extensively, that is over the Pastors and
people, which other Presbyters had not: and that over the Pastors and people of
many Congregations, which we call a Diocese: and also intensive, that is, that
he has power in some things wherein the other Presbyters have no such power:
for they reserve to him the sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction. It is
true, some of them shun the word of sole power, and call it but a Majority of
power: which is but to cover the nakedness of their Opinion, and inconsistent
with their own practice: for they will not say that the Presbyter is assumed by
the Bishop in plenitudinem potestatis, but only in partem sollicitudinis: they
make the Presbyters subject to the Bishop as a Rector, and as a Judge, in that
they can do no act of power without his allowance: and he by himself may
censure them, and cannot be censured by them, even in their collective
Capacity: yea, they maintain that it is of the Bishops good will, not
necessity, or obligation, that he takes the ad-Vice of the Presbyters in any
act of Government: that he is the only Pastor of the Diocese; and all the rest
of the Clergy are his Curats. It is true, some are more modest in expressing
their Sentiments in this matter,; but these things are held by many in
terminis, and particularly all this must be owned by this Author, (though he
gives us no distinct account of his Principles) seeing he makes Bishops
Successors to the Apostles in their governing the Church, and that in their
Rectoral Power, which he describes p. 97. to Preach, Govern the Church, give
Rules and Directions to their Successors, and to all subordinate
Ecclesiastics, to inflict Censures, etc. This power Apostolical, he contendeth
to have been communicated unto the Bishops, and not to all the Presbyters I. S.
in his Principles of the Cyprianick age, talks high of this Power' of the
Bishops Majesty, Monarchy, singular Prerogatives, which I have else where
examined.

4. It is to be considered, 9. That there are diverse Opinions amongst the
Episcopalians, who ascribe this power to the Bishop, about the Foundation of
it, or how he comes by it: some of them say, that Christ while he was on
Earth, Instituted this Authority in the persons of Bishops, and made this
difference between them and Presbyters. This the Bishop of Worcester denies,
while Iren: p: 197. he says, that Christ gave equal power for ruling the
Church, in actu primo, to all Ministers of the Gospel: others make it to be of
Apostolic Institution; affirming that the Apostles after Christ's Ascension,
did appoint it. About this we contend not; but acknowledge it to be of Divine
Right and unalterable, if either of these can be proved: for what the Apostles
did in settling Church Order, was by the infallible Guidance of the Spirit of
God. Others again hold, that this power was not settled till after the Apostles
time, and that it was brought in by Custume, which obtained in process of time,
and by degrees: but being of such reverend Antiquity, and practiced by the
Fathers, and all the primitive Churches, it may not be altered. There are also
among them who say, it is only Juris Ecclesiastici, and was settled by the
Church, and may be by her Authority changed. Our Opinion is, it has none of
these Foundations: that it was never settled by Christ, nor his Apostles; but
that they settled the Government of the Churches, by Presbyters acting in
parity: nor gave power to the Church, or any man, or men, to alter this
Constitution: and so that this Power is usurped and unlawful.

5. Out of what has been discoursed, our present Controversy turns on this
Hinge: whether the Government of the Church, which by Divine appointment, is to
be used in all the ages and parts of the Christian Church, should be by one
Prelate, managing it by his sole Authority, and the counsel of Presbyters, so
far as he thinks fit to ask or take it: or by the Presbyters of the Church in
their several Classes or Combinations, acting with parity of power: the former
part of the Question my Antagonist pleads for: I stand for the latter part of
it: so that our Debate is not about the Accidentals or Circumstantials of
Church Government; nor about what is practiced by this or that Party, (for no
doubt there are many things on both sides that want to be reformed, and which
we can pretend no Divine right for) but it is about the Essentials of it,
Prelacy or Parity.

6: Before I proceed to the Arguments pro or con, I shall briefly examine what
my Antagonist is pleased to premise to his examining of our Arguments: which
may possibly clear our way in some things to be after debated. I first notice
an expression he uses in representing our Opinion; that we hold, that in all
Meetings of the Church, Presbyters act in perfect parity: so p. 12. I hope he
will suffer us to explain the meaning of that Expression, (if any have used it,
which I do not remember) we pretend not to such a parity as excludes the
ordinary power of a temporary Moderator, as has been above expressed: neither
to exclude the majority of Power that preaching Presbyters have above them that
^re only ruling; nor of both above Deacons: nor do we by perfect parity,
exclude that Influence that one by his Reason, may have on others who are not
so well gifted. Wherefore, we own a perfect parity, in no other sense, but that
preaching Presbyters are of the same order with a Bishop; and that he cannot
act in matters of Government, without their concurrence, more than any of them
can act without him. 2. I take notice that p. 22. he says that such a Doctrine
(the Divine right of parity) must be of dangerous consequence; because it is
altogether new. What is to be thought of its noveltie, I have showed Sect. 1..
1, and 2. As also, how weak the consequence is from its noveltie (such as I
have acknowledged) to its being false. The dangerous consequence of it is, in
general asserted; but he has not told what hazard, in particular, arises to
the Church from this way of Government: many think that the greatest and most
essential concernments of Religion, have been more promoted under Parity, than
under Prelacy: if he will prove his Assertion, making the contrary appear, we
shall consider the strength of his Reasons.

7. He asserteth, that our Opinion is not only different from the uniform
Testimony of Antiquity, (which we deny, and shall consider his proofs in the
subsequent Debate) but also the first Presbyterians among our selves; who
declare, in their Confession of Faith, that all Church Policy is variable: so
(...) one they from asserting that indispensible Divine and unalterable Right
of P^rity. He adds, that they only pretended that it was allowable; and more
to this purpose. Let me a little examine this confident Assertion of matter of
Fact. I suppose by the Confession of Faith of the first Presbyterians, he
means that Sum of Doctrine which they appointed to be drawn up 1560, as that
Doctrine that the Protestants would maintain: there, Artiole 22, are these
words: Not that we think any Policy, and an order of Ceremonies can be
appointed for all Ages, times, and places: for as Ceremonies, such as men have
devised, are but temporary; so may and ought they to be changed, when they
rather foster Superstition, than edify the Church using the some. Here is not
a word of Church Government* neither can these words rationally be understood
of Ceremonies in a strick sense, as contradistinguished from Civil Rites and
natural Circumstances in religious actings: for Ceremonies peculiar to
Religion, the reforming Protestants of Scotland never owned, but such as were
of Divine Institution. But that they did not hold the Government of the Church,
by Prelacy or Parity, to be indifferent, is evident, in that in the Book of
Policy, or 2d. Book of Discipline, they do own only four sorts of ordinary and
perpetual Office bearers in the Church: to wit, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and
Deacons, where the Bishop is plainly excluded: nor did they ever look on
Superintendents as perpetual Officers; but for the present necessity of the
Church, not yet constituted. It is like this Debate may again occur: wherefore
I now insist no further on it.

8. He blindly throws Darts at Presbyterians, which sometimes miss them, and
wound his own party: as p: 13, he has this Assertion, when a Society of men
set up for Divine, absolute, and infallible Right, they ought to bring plain
proofs for what they say; else they must needs be looked on as Impostors, or at
least self conceited and designing men; and much to this purpose. Is it easy
to subsume, but this Author and his Partisans set up for Divine, absolute and
infallible right for Prelacy; and yet they bring not plain proofs for what they
say: therefore he and they are Impostors, self conceited and designing men:
they indeed pretend to plain proofs; and so do we: let the Reader then judge
whose proofs are plainest, and best founded; and who are to be judged
Impostors, by his Argument. But in truth there is no consequence to a man's
being an Impostor, from his owning a Divine Right, even though his Arguments be
defective in plainness, and in strength: it only follows that such do
mistake, and understand not the mind of God in that matter, so well as they
should; and that their strength of Reason does not answer the confidence of
their Assertion: and if this be a Blame (as I think it is) no men in the world
are more guilty than his party; nor among his party, than himself: as will
appear in examining his Assertions and Arguments. For self conceit, the Reader
will easily see where it may be observed, if he consider the superciliousness
with which his Book is written. If Presbyterians be the designing men, they are
great fools: for there are no Bishoprics, nor Deanries, nor very fat Benefices
to be had in that way: which might be the Objects of such designs. Who are the
head strong men that will knock others on the head, unless they will swear they
see that which indeed they cannot see, may be judged by the Excommunications,
and the Capias's and consequents of these, which many of late did endure for
pure Nonconformity. I am not acquainted with these Presbyterians, who say that
none but wicked men will oppose our Government: this is none of our Doctrine:
it is rather his own who excludes from the Church such as are for Presbytery,
and affirms it to be dangerous to continue in the communion of such: we do
not Excommunicat any who differ from us about Church Government, for their
Opinion, nor for not joining with us. Neither do we pronounce such a heavy Doom
on the Prelatists who separate from us, as I. S. does on them who separate from
the Episcopal Church: Principles of the Cyprianick Age, p: 19. His calling our
Arguments a labyrinth of dark and intricat Consequences, obscure and perplexed
Probabilities, Texts of Scripture sadly wrested and Distorted, p. 15. This I
say is a silly Artifice to forestal the Readers mind before he hear the Debate;
which will take with few, even of his own party. We are not ashamed to produce
our Arguments, for all this insolent Contempt.

SECTION III.
Some Arguments for Parity, not mentioned nor answered by the Enquirer.

IN this Enquiry our Author pretends to answer our Arguments: and thinks he
has done his work when he has taken notice of two Texts of Soripture, (which
yet he confesses that our ablest Writers, such as Beza and Salmasius, lay
little weight on) one Argument from the Homonymie of the names of Bishop and
Presbyter, and some Citations of the Fathers. Here we desiderate: Ingenuity,
(...) in his picking out our most doubtful Arguments, while he does not (...)
these which were hardest for him to answer: also representing them in such a
dress as we do not so make use of them, and they may be easiest for him to
Debate. It had been fairer dealing if he had represented our cause in its full
strength, and then answered what we say. Before I come to these Arguments which
he is pleased to name, I shall propose some others which he, or some others,
may consider, when next they think fit to write.

2. Our first Argument shall be this: our Lord has given power to Presbyters,
not only to dispense the Word and Sacraments; but to rule the Church, and join
in the exercise of the Discipline of the Church: but he has given no majority
of power to one Presbyter over the rest, nor made this exercise of that power
to depend on one of them; therefore he has not Instituted Prelacy, but left
the Government of the Church to be exercised by Presbyters acting in paritie.
The first Proposition many of the Episcopalians yield. yea, the Bishop of
Worcester says plainly, that Christ has given equal power to them all; which
is the foundation of his Irenicum. But it may be this Author will deny it; and
therefore I shall prove it: to wit, that preaching Presbyters had power of
Government and Discipline. 1. Preaching and ruling power are joined, as given
jointly to the ordinary Pastors of the Church, Heb. 13. 7. The same persons who
watch for the peoples souls (as all Pastors do) rule also over the Church,
ibid: v. 17. they are called in both places (...), Leaders: the word is used to
express any kind of Authority, whether Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastic: but
Church Rulers only can be here meant, viz. who speak the word of God to the
people, and watch for their Souls; and such as they had at that time; seeing
they are bidden salute them, v. 24. To understand this of Dyocesan Bishops, as
some do, is most absurd: for the ground on which Obedience is here enjoined is,
Preaching and Watching, which are things not peculiar to the Bishop: wherefore
not he only is to be obeyed: and thence it follows, that not he only does
rule in the Church. 2. They who are sent to teach and baptize Authoritatively
in the Name of the Lord, and have power to command and require people (by
virtue of their Commission from Christ) to obey what they enjoin them, have
also power of Spiritual correction of them who (professing subjection to
Christ) do not obey his Laws: for we do not read that Christ committed to some
the one of these powers, and the other to others: neither is there the least
foundation in Scripture for that Fiction, that Christ empowered Pastors to
teach people and gather Churches, over whom he would afterward set some more
eminent Pastor to rule them: the strain of Scripture seems to run contrary:
That the Apostles gathered and settled Churches, and then committed the feeding
and ruling of them to men of an inferior Order. Yea, it were strange, if this
had been designed, that no hint is given about that more eminent Pastor, that
should afterward be set over Pastors and people. Neither can it be imagined,
that the Office of begetting of Souls to Christ, can be separated from a power
of correcting, as spiritual Fathers, or that Presbyters should be Pastors
without governing power. 3. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. It is committed to the Elders
that were in the Church, to feed the flock, and take the oversight of them,
((...)) and to beware of lording it over them, which plainly says that they
had Authority; which they should beware of abusing, or stretching too far: now
these Elders are told of their being accountable to Christ, but not a word of a
superior Presbyter, or Bishop, to whom they must be answerable: and this power
is given to as many as were Feeders, or (...); which cannot be denied to
Presbyters. It is true, the word Elder may be applied to a Bishop, yea to an
Apostle, and the Apostle here designeth himself by it; tho he was more than an
ordinary Elder: but that it cannot here be so restricted, appears, because
the Injunction is to Pastors or Feeders in general, as has been said.

3. Our second Proposition of this Argument I prove, because all the grant of
ruling that we meet with in Scripture, and all the Injunctions that are given
to any to rule in the Church, do respect the people as the Object of that work;
we find no Commission to any man to rule over the Pastors of the Church: let
our Adversaries show us such a Commission given to any man, either directly and
expressly, or by good consequence. We read of feeding the Flock, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
and taking heed to themselves (each of them) and to the flock, over which the
Holy Ghost has made them overseers, Acts 20. 28. Here are Bishops of the
Flock, but no Bishop of Bishops, or of Pastors: they were to be corrected, not
by one set over them, but each by the Meeting of the whole. Again, if the power
of the Pastors of the Church (I mean them who dispense the Word and Sacraments
to the people) did depend on the bishop, is it imaginable that it should not
have been told us that Ministers may not preach, nor baptize, etc. without the
Bishops leave? This was needful to clear the Consciences of Ministers: Christ
has charged them to preach, and that diligently; 2 Timothy 4, 1, 2. If the
exercise of this power depend on the Bishop, he may supersede this Charge;
neither can the Presbyter preach if the Bishop forbid him: now what Minister of
the Gospel can satisfy his Conscience in this Matter, unless he see a clear
warrant from the Scripture, that the Bishop has this power over them. Further,
this is to make all the Ministers of a Diocese to have their Commission from
the Bishop, and to be in a proper sense his Curats: which (tho I know some of
our Brethren own, yet) has this absurdity following on it, that it makes the
Ministers of the Gospel contemptible in the eyes of the People, who depend on
them (not on the Bishop, whom, may be, they shall never see, nor hear) for the
means of their Edification: this is not the way to put Ministers in a Capacity
to edify the people, it is to make them the servants of one Man, not Rulers in
the house of God, under their Master Christ.

4. Our second Argument we take from the Apostles enumeration of all the
Officers that, by Divine appointment, are set in the Church: whether
extraordinary, which are now ceased; or ordinary, which are to continue to the
end of the World. But among all these there is no Bishop, with power over
Presbyters; ergo, no such Officer is appointed by Christ: but the Church must
be Governed by Presbyters acting in Parity, and without Subordination to such a
superior Officer. That there is a full enumeration of all Church Officers that
are of Divine appointment made in the Scripture, is evident; for an enumeration
of them is often made, as Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. This
enumeration is either complete or defective: if complete, that is, what we
desire: there can be no Church Officer owned, as Juris Divini, but what is in
some of these places to be found: if any say that this enumeration is
Defective; not only in some one of these places, but in them all: that is, that
there is a Church Officer of Divine appointment that is found in none of them;
he reflecteth a blame on the Holy Ghost, which an ordinary Writer (who
pretends to any measure of ca^or and accuracy) would be ashamed of. The
design of these Scriptures is to instruct the Church, what officers Christ has
appointed to be in his Church, that people may know from what sort of men they
should receive Gods Ordinances, to whom they should Submit, whom they should
hear and own. Now if there be some Officers whom Christ has appointed to teach
and rule his Church, who are not in some of these Catalogues mentioned, this is
a lame instruction in this matter: and we are still at a loss whom we should
own as Christ's Ambassadors to us, and what should be our carriage toward them.

5. I suppose the second proposition is that which our brethren will most
controvert with us: which if they do, they must show us where they find a
Diocesan Bishop in any of these places, or in any other enumeration of Church
officers; if they know of any more. Here some of them have put their invention
on the Tenter-hooks, to find my Lord Bishop among all these Church officers. If
he be found Romans 12. It must be v. 8. He that rules (...), I have met with
none of them who insist on this place. The current of Interpreters either hold
in the general: mentioning rulers. So Estius, Tolet, Hamond: or understand it
of ruleing Elders, who were distinct from preaching Presbyters, as Vorstius,
Gomarus, Beza, Parraeus: Grotius also says, they were (...), de quibus
Tertull: praesident probati quique seniores: horum erat diligenter attendere ad
singulorum mores, monere titubantes, lapsos censura corrigere, Praescribere
panitentiae tempus, and modum; interdum and relaxare. No man will think that
Grotius here means a Diocesan Bishop, who has many thousands of Souls under
his Charge, whose manners he cannot particularly inspect. Some pretend that the
Bishop is designed 2 Cor. 12. 28. Under the name of Governments, (...): but
first, it is plain that here is meant a sort of Governor distinct from the
Teacher, who is here also named: but this is not competent to the Bishop; but
to the ruling Elder. 2. Though an Argument drawn barely from the order wherein
these Officers are mentioned, were not of much force; yet in this place, where
the Apostle does accuratly note the order and dignity of these Officers, by a
first, and secondarly, and thirdly; it must needs be very significant.
Especially seeing our Opposites themselves do take notice of the Apostles words
as marking out out the Degrees of the dignity of these Officers. Grotius, and
Hamond, Estius also, observes the eminency of the Apostles, from their being
first mentioned, with this Note, first; the former two also on these words,
Secondarly Prophets, call them Apostolis honor proximos. Let it then be
considered, when the Apostle is so exact in setting down the order and dignity
of Church Officers, whether it be consistent with this, that Governments, if by
them were meant Diocesan Bishops, should be placed after the Pastors and
Teachers; that is Presbyters. If it be said that Helps, whom we take to be
Deacons, are set before Governments, whom we make ruling Elders; though the
latter be of more respect in the Church than the former. I answer: after the
Apostle has ranked the chief Officers in the Church, both these who were
extraordinary, and who are ordinary, he does not use that exactness in these
that are inferior of either sort: but while he does expressly place the teachers
(who are Presbyters) in the the third place of Dignity, it were absurd, either
to take no notice of the place in which the Bishop should be ranked, or to put
him behind the Presbyter. If any allege that the Bishop is meant both by the
teacher, and by Governments: this were to admit of an absurd tautologie in a
very short list of Church Officers: beside that it were to exclude Preaching
Presbyters, as no Officers in the house of God: for by this gloss no mention is
made of any teaching Presbyter, except Bishops.

6. Others fancy that they find Bishops under the name of (...) Helps: so
Grotius, and Hamond: the latter labors to establish his Gloss, first, in
that Graeci complures, quod hic est (...) explicant (...). But he is neither
pleased to tell us who these Greeks are, nor what reason they give for this
Explication. 2. He seems to plead that here is expressed a part of the
Episcopal power, cujus rei causa (says he) est quod haec erat specialis pars
muneris Episcoporum, quod ipsorum fidei commissa est cura pauperum, and
dispensatio facultatum Ecclesiae: ut testantur Justin: Ignat: Polycarp: etc. Et
Acts 20. 35. This Author rather than not find a Bishop in the Text, he will
turn him to a Deacon: contrary to the Institution of Christ, by his Apostles
Acts 6. 2, 3, 4. what Justin: etc. Say in this point, I cannot examine, because
he has not pointed to the places: but I am sure Acts 20. 35. says no such
thing: nor can I understand what should move this Author so to expound the
place, unless it be because he finds (...) in that Text, and he will force
that word to express the work of a Bishop: it is plain, even from the records
of antiquity, as well as from Scripture, that the Bishops had no further the
Dispensation of the goods of the Church, than that the Ministers and Elders had
a directive power in that matter, and the Deacons did execute what was
appointed by them. But for the Text Acts 20. 35. It is far from aiming at any
such matter: the Apostle sets before them his Example, in working with his
own hands; by which he did two ways support the infirm; both by spareing the
Poors Stock, in his not taking the maintainence that he might have demanded,
and also by giving of what he gained by his Labor, for their relief: I do not
exclude from the meaning of this Text, Acts of mercy toward Souls, by spiritual
instructions, and Consolations, Administered to distressed Consciences. Menoch:
Estius, Piscator, Vorstius, Sclater, Beza, apply this Tex^ to both sorts of
support. Aquinas in locum, makes them to be, illi q^ ferebant opem Majoribus
praelatis in universali regimine sicut Archi-Diacom Episcopis. But to expound
it of distributing the Churches Money, when it is rather to be understood of
giving of our own to the Poor, is a strange Gloss. Further, if this meaning of
the Text were admitted, and if a Bishop had a hand in the Distributions to the
Poor, is it imaginable that, when the Apostle is about to instruct the Church
about Divine Warrant for the chief Officer in the Church, that he would give us
n^ clearer Light about so important a Matter, and that the Government o^ the
Church and the practice of all her Members is so much concerned in, than by
designing him by one of the lowest pieces of his Work; and which is most
extrinsick to his Character? A Notion so absurd and i^ founded, could hardly
have been expected from a person of Doctor Hamonds learning. If the Bishop be
here known by the name of Help, o^ Supporter of the Poor by Alms: that is the
meanest (if any) part of his work: if by the designation of Supporter of
afflicted Souls, by spiritual Advices and Directions, that is common to him
with the Teacher, before mentioned in this Text; and so cannot be fit to
distinguish him from other Church Officers.

7. For Grotius's notion of (...), I oppose, first, by the Argument already
brought from the Order of Dignity the Apostle does so critically observe in
this enumeration of Church Officers. 2. By the force of the word: the native
and genuine signification of which is, to help, uphold, or support one who is
in hazard to fall: which I am sure, is rather done to the Poor by a Deacons
work, or to a troubled Soul, by the work that is common to all Teachers in the
Church, than by that work that is held to be peculiar to a Bishop. That learned
Critic says, it signifies curam alicujus rei gerere; and refers to his
Commentary on Luke 1. 54. where I find he makes it to answer to the Hebrew
(...) which is to strengthen: and he says it signifies also manu ducere,
because the seventy translated it (...). Here is a strange Argument, to proceed
from a man of so profound Learning as is the great Grotius: for neither (...)
nor (...) can be turned manu ducere. It is a stranger Argument Jer. 31. 32.
that Hebrew word is by the seventy turned (...): and Acts 23. 19. Heb: 8. 9.
the same phrase is used for bringing the people of Israel out of Egypt: for
who knows not that (...) and (...) have not the same signification: neither
is (...) turned by (...), but when it is constructed with (...), the hand, laid
hold on by another, being that by which one is supported, that he fall not as
he goes: and it is evident that the force of that word in these places, does
not so much import Gods guiding his people in their way, as his manutenency by
which they are supported. From all which it is plain, that there is no
sufficient ground brought by Grotius, why we should think that (...) imports
any ruling power in them of whom it is to be understood. Further, if we should
grant that this word signifies to take care of a thing; will it follow thence
that this care must needs be ruling care; when the word properly signifies
upholding, (to which indeed care is often needful) but it cannot be said that
care is employed in the word. I have been at the pains to look into all the
places of the New Testament (as far as Stephanus's Concordance could lead me)
where that word, in any of its derivata, is used; and I cannot find one that
has any thing of the notion of ruling. Wherefore I must still abide in the
Opinion which I have else where expressed, and have been by this my Antagonist
severely censured for it, that this Criticism of Grotius is odd and groundless.

8. These of our Episcopal brethren, who make the Bishops to be Successors to
the Apostles in their Apostolic Office, will possibly say, that the Bishops
are mentioned in the first place, in the Lists of Church Officers; viz. under
the name of Apostles. Whether the Bishops be Successors to the Apostles or not,
will fall in to be debated when I come to consider the second Chapter of this
Book, which I am now examining: what I have now to do is, to show that they are
not meant by the Apostles mentioned in the Scriptures that are now under
debate: which may plainly appear, if we consider first, that none of their own
Commentators do so expound any of these places; nor can such a Fancy come into
any man's head, when he considers the Scripture without a present Bias on his
mind, and labors to bring the Sense of the Scripture out of the words, and
not into them. Yea, Grotius, and Estius, on 1 Cor. 12: 28. speaking of the
Apostles there mentioned, have these words, Illos nempe eminenter sic dictos, a
Christo in id vocatos, ut prima Ecclesiarum fundamenta jacerent. And Doctor
Hamond says, these Apostles were called ut Ecclesias plantarent, and regerent,
eadem potestate quam Christus a Patre habuit. I hope none will say that this
can be said of Bishops, or any ordinary and perpetual Officers in the Church.
2. It cannot be denied, even by them who make the Bishops a kind of Apostles,
and allow a sort of Apostolic power to them, but that they are another sort of
Apostles than the first Apostles were: none will say that they are wholly the
same, more than the Pastors of the Church are the same with the Prophets that
were in the Apostolic Church: they must then distinguish the Apostles into
extraordinary, who were sent immediately by Christ, to plant Churches; and
ordinary, who succeed to these, and whose work it is to rule the Churches that
are already planted. Now to say that both these sorts are meant in these Lists,
under the same name of Apostles, is to accuse the Spirit of God of darkness and
confusion, in these Institutions where Light and Distinctness might be most
expected: for in these Enumerations, he is instructing the Church what Officers
she should own as of Christ's appointment: but by the word Apostle she could
never know that there are two sorts of Apostles to be owned: one sort all do
acknowledge to be here meant; they who would have us believe that another sort
of Apostles is also here meant, must give us some better ground for believing
this, than a Synonimous word: I do not know how many sorts of Officers they may
bring in under this name. If they may be allowed to divide the Apostolic
Office at pleasure, and call every one of them who have any part of Apostolic
work to do, a sort of Apostles: this is to expound Scripture at pleasure, and
indeed to make it speak what we fancy. I conclude then, that Bishops have no
Divine right for them, seeing the Lord has of purpose told us what Officers he
has appointed to be in his Church, both at first for planting of it, and
afterward for managing her Affairs to the end of the World, and no Diocesan
Bishop, name nor thing, is to be found among them.

9. A third Argument for Parity, and against Prelacy, I take from the
Commandment that Christ gives about the Administration of Church Discipline,
Mat. 18: 17: that the offended Party (when other more private means of Redress
do fail) should lay the case before the Church: whence this Argument does
clearly result; that Power which is by Christ's Appointment to be exercised by
many, is not Jure Divino, lodged in one person; but Church Jurisdiction is a
Power that by Christ's Appointment, is to be exercised by many; Ergo, it is not,
Jure Divino, in the hand of one person, to wit, a Prelate. The major cannot be
called in question: for if it were otherways, Christ should bid men act
contrary to his own Institution; which to imagine, is most absurd. For the
minor Proposition: Christ's Injunction is, tell it to the Church; which word
does always signify a plurality of men met about some common work; never a
single person acting by himself. I need not here debate with Erastians, who by
the Church understand the Magistrate: nor with Independents, who hence argue
for the peoples Church power: these my present Antagonists condemn, as well as
I do. But our Debate is with them who are for Church Monarchy: whether over the
whole Church, as Papists; or over the several Districts in the Church, as
Prelatists: both of them agree in this, that they place Church Jurisdiction in
a single person; and by the Church, must here understand such a person. Against
this conceit many Arguments may be drawn from the Text it self. First, the
Gradation that Christ here recommendeth, in dealing with Offenders for their
Amendment: that the offended person must first deal with the Offender by
himself alone: next (that failling of its effect) he must take the Assistance
of two or three: if this prevail not, he must bring the Matter to a greater
number, to wit the Church. The learned Drusius, on this Text, cites the
Passage out of (...) which shows, that this Gradation was used in the Jewish
Church, and that as their Discipline, as the name of the Book imports. After
the Author has enjoined the first and second Step (as the Text does) he
adds; Si nec hoc modo quicquam profecit, debet eum pudefacere coram multis,
ejusque delictum publicare: which shows, that the third Step of Reprehension
among them, was not to tell the Crime to a single person: wherefore when our
Lords third Step is to tell it to the Church, it is not like he meant a single
person, however of more Authority than the two or three.

10. A second Proof of this is, the word Church (...), in Hebrew (...), is
never so used; but always signifies a Plurality: why should it then be so used
here? 3. When Christ speaks of a Ratification of the Sentence of this Church
to whom the Complaint is made, and whom the stubborn Offender will not hear, he
does not speak of that Church as a single person: what ye shall bind, and what
ye shall loose. 4. He speaks of that Church which corrects the Offender, as
what may consist of a very small number, two, or three, v. 20. but gives no
hint that a single person can be so looked on. 5. Chrysostom expounds this
place of a Plurality; (...), Sutlif: de Pontif: Rom: lib: primo c: 5. argues
against expounding this of the Pope, from such Topics as will militate as much
against understanding it of a Bishop, in his District: his words are, Per
Ecclesiam non unus aliquis (nam hoc verbi ratio prohibet) sed plures Ecclesiae
praesidentes, intelliguntur. Ut autem unus Ecclesiae summus Monarcha designetur
per nomen Ecclesiae, fieri non potest, repugnat enim natura and nomen
Ecclesiae, quae est congregatio ex pluribus; and in uno consistere, si proprie
loquimur, non potest: repugnat deinde and Patrum interpretatio, qui una voce
non unum Pontificem, sed Episcopos and praesidentes Eccelesiae; seu ut Patres
synodi Basileenses loquuntur, Ecclesiae praesidentium concilium designari
volunt: Here is a plain Confession out of the mouth of an Adversary. For it is
evident that Complaints must be made to lesser Churches, and not to the
Universal Church only: and why one man set over a Province may be called the
Church, and one set over all the Christian Church may not get the same
Designation, is unaccountable. It is here objected by some, that this place is
to be understood of the Jewish Sanhedrim, not of the Christian Church: and this
they pretend to prove, because the incorrigible Offender is to be looked on as
an Heathen or Publican. To this I reply, first, if in the Jewish Church, where
was an High Priest, there was not a Monarchical Government; much less is there
ground for it in the Christian Church. 2. That Christ gave this Direction for
the Christian Church, (which then was presently to be set up) is evident;
because this Injunction is given to the Apostles, who had no hand in the
Government of the Jewish Church; and the same power of binding and loosing
which here is supposed to be in them, is expressly given, and called the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16: 19: John 20: 23: This alluding to Jewish
Customs, and expressing New Testament Discipline by looking on scandalous
impenitent Sinners as Heathens and Publicans, is no Argument against what I
have said; this being frequent with Christ and his Apostles; yea with the
Prophets, long before, to express Gospel matters by Old Testament terms.

11. Argument 4. The Churches even in the time of the Apostles, were governed
by Presbyters acting jointly, without a Bishop set over them; Ergo the
government of the Church by a Bishop set over Presbyters, is not of Divine
Right: The Consequence cannot with any show of Reason be denied: for the
Apostles were more vigilant and faithful, than to suffer such encroachment to
be made upon a Power that Christ had given to his Servants. It is a most
irrational fancy, that the Apostles in their own time, allowed Presbyters to
govern the Church under their Inspection; but after their death appointed
Bishops to rule alone. For first, this had been to allow the exercise of a
power in Presbyters, that not only they had no right to, but which did belong
to others by Divine Institution. 2. What ground is there to say, that this
ruling Power in Presbyters was but temporary, or that it ceased at the death of
the Apostles? Especially considering that some of the Apostles did long outlive
others of them; how should the expiring of that Power of Presbyters be
determined: nor do we read of any ceasing of what Power they once had. This is
a Fiction that no account can be given of. Wherefore our Debate is about the
Antecedent of this Argument; which I must prove by Instances.

12. And first the Church of Corinth was thus governed; not only by the
Apostles connivance, but by his express Direction and Approbation; as in the
case of the incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5. That a plurality of Church Rulers, and
not a single person, had power to censure that man, is proved first; the
Apostle, v. 2. reproves their Negligence in that they had not cast out this
man from among them by Excommunication; they were not duly affected with the
Crime, and did not mourn for it; neither did set about censuring of it: both
these were the effects of their not being so sensible of the evil of it, as
they ought to have been: In this sense Ambrose understands this place: for on
this occasion he says, Si autem quis potestatem non haber, qui scit reum
abjicere, vel probare non valet; immunis est. So also Chrysostom, on the place
(...): non accusat quod non ei significaret; sed quod non deplorarent ut
tolleretur: ostendens quod etiam sine monitore id fieri opportuit, propter
peccati evidentiam. What can be more plain, than that these Fathers looked on a
Community of Church Rulers in Corinth, as having the power of Church Censures?
Yea, that the Apostle thought so too; otherways he could not have charged them
with neglecting this Matter. 2. The Apostle gives his Opinion, that this
scandalous person should be Excommunicated (delivered to Satan) by them
assembled together; (not by one Bishop among them, and of this their assembling
for this end, he says two things; which imply their power: that his Spirit
should be with them; that is his good Wishes, Approbation, and hearty
Concurrance) Menoch: in locum; congregatis vobis quibus ego adsum praesens
Spiritu, affectu, and Sollicitudine. Next, that this was to be done by them in
the Name and Authority of Christ, and with his Power, or Virtue, by which he
would bless this his own Ordinance, and make it effectual: none of these could
be said of this Act, if it were done by a Company of men who had no power from
Divine Institution. 3. The Apostle says expressly v. 12. that they (not thou
Bishop, but ye) judged them who were within; that is the Church Members. 4. The
Apostle speaking of this Excommunication when it was past, says, that it was
the rebuke of many, 2 Cor. 2. 6. not of one Bishop. 5. He after directs the
Church Rulers to take off this Sentence, the man being now truly penitent, 2
Cor. 2: 7. which is an Act of Church Authority, and they could not take off the
Sentence if they had not power to lay it on.

13. Our Adversaries make some Exceptions against this Argument. First, that
the Apostle does not enjoin the Corinthian Elders to Excommunicate the man;
because he says, (...), I have judged: he passed the Sentence, and enjoined
them to publish, and execute it. This is said without ground: for it is
evident, that the Sentence was not passed when this Epistle was written; as is
clear from the Arguments above adduced: the man was not yet purged out, he was
not delivered to Satan: the Apostle saying he had judged already, (...)*
signifies no more but that it was his Opinion, in which, after deliberation,
he was determined, that the thing should be done: beside, that his judging did
not exclude the Presbyters judging with him, more than when James said Acts 15.
17. (...), I judge, it barred the authoritative Judgment of that Council that
sat with him. Again they except, that these Presbyters were not at liberty to
excommunicate this man or not, seeing the Apostle had commanded it; Ergo, this
Excommunication was not in their power. Reply: the Consequence is naught* for
this necessity did not proceed from their want of power, but from the plain
discovery of their Duty, held forth to them by the Apostle. Any Minister of
the Gospel may require any person to do that which is a plain Duty; and yet
not deprive the person of his power in that Act. When the Prophets held forth
the Mind of God to Kings about any Act, they did not take away their Regal
power that they had for these Acts. 3. They allege that this delivering the
man to Satan, was not Excommunication; but an extraordinary inflicting some
bodily Punishment upon him, which only the Apostle, and others having the Gift
of Miracles, could do: and therefore it cannot argue any power in the
Presbyters of Corinth. Reply: This Exposition of the place (though I deny not
some of the Fathers have used it) is without all ground, or example in
Scripture; and a pure Invention to serve a turn. Again, the Apostle reproves
the Corinthians that they had not done this; bids them, with his Spirit joining
with them, do it: but it was never heard, that they who wrought Miracles did it
with the Concurrence of others: Further, this Punishment was inflicted by many,
to wit the Elders of Corinth; but they had no power of working Miracles.
Lastly, Erastus (the chief A better of this Opinion in these latter ages) held
that this power was given to the Apostles, and some others, till there should
be a Christian Magistrate in the Church, to punish Scandals: from this it would
follow, that the Magistrate should now purge out by death, all the Scandals
which the Apostle appointed to be purged out by Excommunication, or delivering
to Satan; such as Drunkards, Fornicators, Railers, etc. which are mentioned 1
Cor. 5. 11. which would make the Church like a Shambles.

14. Another instance of a Church governed by a Plurality of Presbyters, and
not by a Bishop, is that of Thessalonica. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. where the Apostle
enjoyneth them to note, or set a mark upon such as obey not the Apostles word,
and to withdraw from them: this note, is the ignominious Mark of
Excommunication, which should make a persons company be shunned by all
Christians. Erasmus in locum, ut signamus boves cornupetas, quo vitentur: my
Argument from this Text is this, the College of Presbyters at Thessalonica had
power, and that by the Apostles allowance, to Excommunicate them who were
disobedient to the Rules of the Gospel; Ergo, they, and not a single Bishop,
did govern the Church. The Consequence is plain: the Antecedent is founded on
the Apostles Injunction: he commands them to exercise this Discipline; which
he would not have done, if they had not had Authority so to do. Neither does he
here design the person or persons, who were to be Excommunicated; but owneth
them for proper Judges of that, and gives a general Rule by which they should
judge, telling for what Crimes this Censure should be inflicted. The Prelatists
labor to take off the strength of this Instance, by another reading, and
Gloss, on this Text: they read it thus, if any man obey not our word, note, or
signify that man by an Epistle, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. So that they make this to be the Apostles meaning: that they should
write to him, giving him an account of the Scandals that should fall out among
them, to the end that he might Excommunicate the guilty persons, and then the
Church should shun their company: the Presbyters were to examine the Matter,
and find it sufficiently proved; and upon their Information the Apostle was to
pass Sentence.

15. To this I oppose, for strengthening our Argument; 1. This reading of the
Text is contrary to the Current of the Greek Interpreters; AEcumenius,
Theophylact, Basilius, Ephrem Cyrus, all cited. Altar: Damasc: p. 201. Yea
though Estius cite some who are for that reading, yet approves our reading in
these words; Si quis non auscultat praecepto meo, quod per hanc Epistolam
significo: he also, and Menochius, make the design of this Noteing to be ut
vitetur ab omnibus; which could not properly, nor immediately result from their
Complaint and Information sent to the Apostle: of which more after. The Syriack
Version, as also the Arabic, does read this place as we do. 2. The Greek
(...), cannot bear this Interpretation: for it signifies to set a Mark on a
person, or thing; not to give Notice, which is the signification of (...),
Scapula rendereth the first word (which is the word of the Text) insignio,
noto: and he cites for it Graegor: (...) And Athen: lib. 2. (...): but (...),
he turns, signum do, significo: and gives sufficient authority for that
signification. In the New Testament I find not this word but in this place: for
(...), it is used John 12. 33. and 18. 32. and 21. 19. Acts 11. 28. and 25. 27.
And it is evident, to all who read these places, that it cannot signify to set
a Mark on a thing; but to signify, or hold forth. It must then be to put force
on the Text, to draw it to express their giving notice, by a Letter to the
Apostle, of the man's faults. 3. It is evident that the Apostle speaks of this
Epistle of his; not of an Epistle to be written to him from that Church: for he
says not by an Epistle; but by the Epistle, (...): the demonstrative Particle
does restrain the signification to that Epistle vhich he sent to them; which
Epistle brought to them the word that they should obey, but could not bring
from them, to him, notice of what Scandals fell out among them. 4. Upon this
noting of that man, did immediately, and necessarly, follow their abstaining
from the company of the person so noted; as is clear in the Text: which cannot
be said of their giving notice to the Apostle of any Scandal among themselves,
because the Apostle (notwithstanding of their informatary Letter) might not
think fit to Excommunicate the person accused, either because the Crime was not
relevant, or the Proof not sufficient; but it must needs follow on their
setting the Mark of Excommunication on him.

16. Argument 5. If even the Apostles in settled Churches, did not exercise any
part of ordinary Church Discipline, or such as was to continue in the Church,
by themselves, and without the Authority, or the authoritative ^oncurrence of
the Presbytrie; then Bishops may not do it: but the former is true, Ergo: I
think the connection of the Major will not readily be denied: nor can it;
unless our Brethren will exalt their Bishops higher than Christ did his
Apostles, and give them a Power that is wholly boundless. They cannot allege,
that the Apostles might have used such a Power if they would. For that is to be
proved: and further, their not using it, was a binding example to them who
should come after them, from which they ought not to swerve. Before I come to
the proof of the Assumption, I take notice of two Cases in which the Apostles
used a singular Power, by themselves, in the matter of Church Discipline, or
Correption, or other Church Acts. First, when a bodily Punishment was
miraculously to be inflicted; as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira. 2. When
Discipline was to be exercised in a Church not yet constituted, nor furnished
with them who had the ordinary Power; as many think, in the case of Hymenaeus
and Philetus. Saravia, a great Patron of Prelacy, defen. Cap. 20. 2. has these
words: Apostolos and Evangelistas, rebus and Ecclesiis jam constitutis, and in
Parochias Episcopis distributis, nihil quod ad communem Ecclesiae statum
pertinuisset fuisse facturos inconsultis and invitis locorum Pastoribus, and
Episcopis, me firmiter credere. That the Apostles in other cases did not act by
themselves, but with the Presbytery, I prove by Instances of their acting in
conjunction with the Presbytery: and I challenge our Brethren to bring
Instances to the contrary. First, Paul did not ordain Timothy by himself; but
with the Presbyters: though the laying on of his hands be mentioned by it self:
2 Timothy 1. 6. yet, that the Presbytery concurred is clear, 2 Timothy 4. 14. The
effect of the Imposition of Hands is ascribed to that of the Presbytery, as
well as to that of the Apostle; which is a clear Indication of a joint Power.
2. The Apostle did not, by himself, Excommunicat the Incestuous Corinthian; as
has been showed. 3. The Apostles did not judicially determine the Question
about observing the Law of Moses; Acts 15. by themselves, but with the Elders
and Brethren. They object that the Apostle by himself delivered Hymenaeus and
Philetus to Satan. It is to be proved by the Objecters, first, That these two
men were Members of a settled and complete Church. 2. That if so, the Apostle
did this by himself, without the Concurrence of the Presbytery: neither of
which can be proved.

17. Argument 6. We find no Superiority of Power that one had over the rest, in
any sort of Church Officers; Ergo, it is not among the Pastors or Teachers of
the Church neither. The Antecedent is clear; if we go through all the sorts of
Officers mentioned in the Scripture: there was no Apostle had power over the
rest, as all confess who are not for Peter's and the Popes Supremacy. No such
Disparity among Prophets, or Evangelists, or among the Governments, or ruling
Elders, nor among Deacons. I confess after Ages brought in a Disparity among
all these Orders, and invented new ones: it was no wonder then, that an
Arch-Presbyter, or Bishop, was brought in too: but no Foundation in Scripture
(which alone can found a Divine Right) for any such Disparity or Subordination.
The consequence cannot be denied; unless our Adversaries can prove, that this
Disparity is Instituted by the Lord; though no such Disparity in the rest of
the Orders be: which they shall never be able to do. It were strange, if the
Lord should intend a Majority of Power of one Pastor over another, and yet not
Hint that Disparity, when he is setting down all the Officers in his House: and
while that he hinteth no Majoritie among any one of the sorts of Church
Officers, this only should admit of such Subordination. I have brought these
few Arguments for Paritie, and against Prelacy, that the Reader might see how
slightly, and unfairly, my Antagonist deals with us, when he will have the
World believe that we have no sufficient Arguments, because he has refuted one
or two of them, which he was pleased to single out, as easiest for him to deal
with.

SECTION IV.
The Arguments for Parity which our Author pretends to answer, Vindicated.

I Took notice in the beginning of the former Section, that this Author
singleth out some of our Arguments, and these none of the most evident, and
with a great deal of Confidence triumphs over them, as if he had laid our
Cause in the dust: I shall now try if even these Weapons, rightly managed, be
able to wound his Cause; for as he represents them, they can do us little
service: but his unfair dealing will appear in this Conduct. Before I come to
the Arguments themselves, I cannot overlook the general account that he gives
of the Arguments on our side, p. 15. That they may all be reduced to three
Heads. First, either they pretend that this Parity of Presbyters is expressly
commanded by our Savior. Or 2. They endeavor to support it by Consequences
from several Texts of Scripture. Or 3. from some Testimonies of the ancient
Writers of the Church. The latter two sorts of Arguments we do indeed use, but
who ever pretended to the first, I know not. I confess, I no where read in
Scripture Paritie of Presbyters named, nor such words as these, that the Church
shall be in all ages governed communi Presbyterorum consilio, nor that it has
been (...) said, there shall be no Prelacy among Presbyters: and I am sure, the
Scriptures that he mentions as containing our Arguments of this sort, were
never said by any of us, to be an express Command for Paritie; though we hold
it to be a full and plain Command employed, and which may be drawn out of the
words by good Consequence. He says p. 16. the Scots Presbyterians do more
frequently insist on this (arguing from express command in Scripture) than any
of the foreign Presbyterians: which appears to be an injurious Imputation,
from what has been said: for many of the foreign Presbyterians do assert the
Divine Right of Presbytrie as fullyas we do, though I cannot reckon the
frequency of either their, or our insisting on it, that I may compare them, I
am sure many more of them have written for it, than have defended it so in
Print, in Scotland (I mean the Parity of Presbyters, which is the cardo
controversiae; whatever difference may be between some of them and us, in some
other things) Calvin. instit. lib. 4. c. 11. 6. and alibi. Beza, de triplici
Episcopatu contra Sarav. Paraeus, saepissime. Gers. Bucer. disser: de gub:
Eccles. Blondell. apologia. Salmasius, Turretin, loc. 18. quaestion: 29.
Leideck. de statu Eccles. Affric. Voet. passim. Vitringa, de syn. Vet. and many
others. Likewise Smecttym. and jus div: regim: were not written by Scots
Presbyterians: also Paul Bayn Dioces: Trial.

2. The Argument from express command in Scripture which he insisteth on, is
Mat. 20. 25, 26, 27, 28. and Mark 10. 42, 43, 44, 45. and Luke 22. 25. We think
here is a strong and concludent Argument against Prelacy and for Parity; though
we did not call it an express Command. As a foundation for our Argument from
this Scripture, let it be considered, that this Discourse of Christ is
immediately and directly to the Apostles, to whom he was then speaking; and by
consequence, it may be applied to all other Orders of Church Officers, ordinary
and extraordinay. It is a good consequence, Christ here forbids Prelacy
among the Apostles; Ergo, among the ordinary Pastors of the Church likewise.
And ergo, among the Elders, whose work it is to rule. And ergo, among the
Deacons: our Lord is not here saying that there shall be no diversity of
Degrees, or Orders of Officers, in the Church; for he has plainly Instituted
the contrary, 1 Cor. 12. 28. But among the Apostles there shall be no
Sovereignty, nor Subjection, neither among other Officers who are of the same
Order, and whose work is the same. 2. Let it be also noted, that our Lord does
not here mention the Tyranny, or abuse of power, that was exercised among the
Heathen Magistrates, over them who were subordinate to them; but only Dominion
and Authority, which they might lawfully exercise: so that what he aims at
is, that there was Subjection and Superiority among the Heathen Rulers; but no
such thing should be among Church Rulers. 3. Though we deny not that there are,
by Christ's Appointment, diverse Orders of Church Rulers; yet we see no ground to
think that one of these Orders is subject to another, or is to be commanded by
it: we hold that Ministers have no Jurisdiction over the ruling Elders; but
they are coordinate in the Government of the Church. Before I state our
Argument from this Text, I observe how groundlesly he brings this as the
chief Topic that we use, and (overlooking all of our side who have learnedly
and fully pleaded that Cause) he only cites as pleading from this Scripture,
Mr. David Dickson on Matthew who touches it very transiently, and on occasion
of his commenting o^ that Text: and my Book against Stillingsfleets Irenicum,
where it is said expressly p. 98. I confess there be other places more
unquestionable to our purpose: or do I there use that place as an Argument,
further than to clear it from the Exceptions of my Antagonist; which is here
also my work I now draw this Argument from the words cited. That Dominion an^
Authority that Civil Magistrates in their several Jurisdictions did, an^ might,
exercise over these Under-rulers, is not to be allowed in the Church; but the
Jurisdiction of Bishops over Presbyters is such a Dominion and Authority, (that
is, the one is real Jurisdiction as well as the other) Ergo it should not be
exercised in the Church.

3. I shall now examine his Answers to this Argument. First, he says that
Christ here supposes Degrees of Subordination among his own Disciples, as well
as other Societies; and therefore, he says, this Text refers (...) the
Methods of attaining Preferment; that it must not be by force, violence, and
other Arts that are so fashionable in secular Courts: thus he p. 17, and (...)
19. he commands them that they should not exercise their Jurisdiction as the
Lords of the Gentiles, by a spirit of Pride and Domination. This and what
follows he seems to have borrowed from Grotius, de imp. summar potes. circa
sacra. p. 339. who yet was as little for the Divine Right of Prelacy; as of
Parity. To all this I oppone first, That Christ supposes here Subordination
among his Disciples is great is dictum. I deny not that there is Subordination
among them (taking his Disciples for all Christians; but taking the word for
the Apostles alone we deny it) and that both in respect of Degree and
Authority. The people are subject to the Rulers; one sort of Church Officers is
inferior to another; which they may be, without being subject to their
Authority: but there is no ground for inferring this Subordination from what is
here said: for men's Ambition prompts them to make superior Offices in the
Church, that themselves may enjoy them; as well as to aspire to these
Preferments that are extant and allowed. Again, Christ says not, there shall
be no Superiority in the Church; but among them, the Apostles This is evident
from the occasion of this Discourse; which was the ambitious address of James
and John presented to Christ by their Mother; that they might be preferred to
the rest of the Apostles, in that worldly kingdom that they imagined Christ was
to have on Earth: they aimed at such Authority as Civil Magistrates have, the
Superior over the Inferior: our Lord tells them his Kingdom was not of that
nature; neither was there any such Subordinations to be among his Apostles. 3.
That Christ here recommendeth Humility, and condemns Ambition and Pride,
cannot be denied; the occasion given for this Discourse led him to it: but that
this is the only Scope of his Discourse, is said without all Warrant: for he
forbids that Dominion and Authority that was among Civil Rulers, to have
place among them; which yet might be exercised by humble men. 4. That his scope
is to forbid the exercise of their Apostolic or Episcopal Jurisdiction by a
spirit of Pride and Domination, is also said without Book: That this he
condemns, we acknowledge: but that he only condemns this, and not
Monarchical Jurisdiction it self, is a groundless fancy, and contrary to the
words of the Text, which mention the one, but not the other. He tells them
also, Mat. 23. 8. that they were all brethren: where Camero observes that
Damnat rem tituli; viz: magisterium and authoritatem. 5. It cannot be said,
that all the Rulers among the Gentiles, were proud and tyrannical; though not a
few were such: but here Christ forbids that Domination that was among the
Heathen (yea it may extend to Christian) Magistrates, whether they obtain it
ambitiously, and exercise it tyrannically, or not. It shall not be so (as in
the Civil State where Dominion and Authority is exercised) among you. The two
Brethren sought an Authority which they fancied would be in Christ's Kingdom;
not which he intended or instituted: and our Lord not only told them that no
such thing was to be expected by any person in his Kingdom, that one Apostle
should be above another, or one of the ordinary Pastors of the Church should
have Jurisdiction over another; and so of the other Orders of Church Rulers:
but he also reproves their Ambition in so seeking such preferment, if any such
thing were to be in the Church.

4. His second Exception against our Argument is, p. 18. The Apostles exercised
such Jurisdiction over inferior Ecclesiastics, therefore they did not so
understand Christ's words, as forbidding all Prelation in the Church. This is
sufficiently obviated by what is already said: they did not understand it as
forbidding all Prelation in the Church; but among themselves: It shall not be
so among you. Yea, they did not understand it as forbidding Superiority of
Degree or Order; but Jurisdiction over Church Rulers; such as is in the Civil
State, over inferior State Rulers. His third Exception, which he says does
bassle and expose this, Argument to all Intents and Purposes (big words, as his
manner is, when the Matter is very improportionate) that he (our Lord) did that
himself among them, which now he commanded them to do to one another; and
therefore the doing of that toward one another, in obedience to the Command,
should not infer a Parity; unless they blasphemously infer, that Christ and his
Apostles were equal. This is far more easily baffled, and more exposed; if what
has been said be duly considered. But further that our Lord sets before
them an Example of Humility, and being far from ambitious Aspiring, does no
ways infer their Paritie with him; unless he were here only discharging Paritie
among the Apostles; which we do not say, but have asserted the contrary. He is
also condemning the Ambition and Pride that appeared in James and John, and
which he well knew would be found in Church men afterward; and with respect to
that, he sets his own Example of Modesty and Humility before them. Hence it
appears that there is no Infatuation in owning the Scheme of Parity (as he
fancieth p. 19.) but rather than drawing such a Consequence from that Scheme,
deserves that Reproach. That the Apostle Paul, and the Fathers of the Church,
carried as Servants under the Apostolical or Episcopal Dignity, proves nothing
against us: beside that we own no Episcopal Dignity in the Fathers; but shall
controvert it with him when he will, If Walo Messalinus (as he says p. 20.)
lays no great stress on the Argument from th^^ Text, and mean, that we have
stronger Arguments; I do not differ from him: and if Beza say, that here is not
forbidden all Jurisdiction; I have already said the same. He makes yet a 4th
Attempt on this Argument, p. 20, 21. That in the Jewish Church there was a
Hierarchy, and Subordination, by Divine appointment: and if our Savior had
pulled down that ancient Policy, and commanded an Equality among the Presbyters
of the New Testament, he would not have stated the Opposition betwixt his own
Disciples and the Lords of the Gentiles; but between them and the Priests of
the Mosaic Oeconomie: as he does when he reproves the corrupt Glosses
introduced into the Church by the Scribes and Pharisees. The weakness of this
Reasoning will plainly appear, if we consider 1. That it is too great sawciness
in us, to teach our Lord how to reason: If he think fit to make use of one
Topic, and if it be to the purpose (as all that he says must needs he, and
what is here said is manifestly so) we ought not to presume to say he would
have used another Argument, if he had so meant. Indeed if our Adversaries can
make it appear that this way of Reasoning was not here apt, we shall yield that
Christ did not mean as we think he did: But that can never be done. 2. He
falsely supposes that we disown all Subordination in the Church, and that we
think Christ here did intend to condemn it. 3. The Old Testament had not been
so pertinent an Example here, because it was now to be dissolved, our Lord
would no longer allow it in the Church; whereas the Magistratical Authority,
in the several Subordinations of it, was to continue; and he would have a
Difference between the Church and State, to be continually visible in this very
thing. Beside that the Old Testament Hierarchy is no more a Pattern for
Episcopacy, than for Parity; unless our Author will say we must have a Pope, as
they had a High Priest, with universal Authority over the Church. 4. Our Lords
reproving the false Glosses brought in by the Scribes and Pharisees, is
strangely drawn in here, and the Impertinency of it is unaccountable; for how
could he mention any other as bringing these Doctrines, than the true Authors
of them: as he else where warns his Church of Heathen Doctrines and
Practices, and then he names them, and not the Teachers of the Jewish Church.
The other Text p. 21. we never used by it self, as an Argument against
Episcopacy: and we deny that the Text now considered, has been understood in
his sense from the beginning.

Presbyter, where Authority and Jurisdiction is mentioned. I confess I am
unacquainted with such Passages of Scripture: I wish he had named some of them
for our Instruction. We bring to the contrary Acts 20: 28: Phil: 1: 1: 2 Timothy:
3: 1: all which himself mentions. The first thing that he opposes to our
Argument is, that p: 23: he proves at great length, that the Jews, both in the
first ages of that Church, and also afterward, did dichotomise their Clergy
into Priests and Levites; though there was a High Priest above the other
Priests, who also had their Subordinations. And therefore (says he) the
Apostles and Apostolic men made use of the current Phraseology: thus he p: 25.
I shall not contradict him in this Assertion: nor be much concerned what
respect the Apostles had to the Phraseology used by the Jews. But nothing of
this meets with our Argument; unless he will affirm, and prove, that this
Dichotomy was so used as that no Distinction was ever made, either by Name, or
any other Character, of the High Priest from the rest; or of the Heads of the
several Orders of Priests: David, by the Spirit of God, distinguished them from
these Priests that were under their Charge. If he prove not this, he says
nothing to the purpose. and this he will not, I hope, attempt, the Scripture
being so full and plain to the contrary; and that in all the ages of the Jewish
Church, from Aaron to Christ. If he will let us see these special Masteries and
Jurisdictions whereby Bishops were in the New Testament, distinguished from
Presbyters, as he confesses p: 26. The High Priest was distinguished from the
other Priests, even in these times when he says the distinction of Names was
least noticed, we shall pass from this Argument as inconcludent: but this he
can never do; neither has he attempted it: wherefore our Argument is not yet
touched by him. I shall not adventure to list my self among his Ignoramus's,
whom he sets that mark on, that think he pleads that there ought to be a
Bishop above Presbyters, because there was a High Priest among the Jews; though
some of his Brethren use this Plea, and himself in the very next words seems
not to be very far from it, while he says, but rather thus (I plead) that the
Hierarchy that obtained in the Patriarchal and Jewish AEconomie, was never
abrogated in the new. If it be not abrogated, sure it stands in force, and is
of Divine Right to this day: and if so, we must have Jure Divino, not only a
Bishop over the Presbyters of every Province, but a Pope over all these, for so
it was in the Jewish AEconomy.

8. He says p. 28. that the first Presbyter, or (...), in the Apostolic age,
he that was vested with a Prostasia, was as much above the subordinate
Presbyters, as the High Priest among the Jews was above other Priests. This is
boldly asserted; but we see no proof for it. We deny not that in their Meetings
there was one who presided; but that there was one distinguished from the other
Presbyters who had this for his Work constantly, we find not: also that the
Praeses in these Meetings, had the same power (either Extensive or Intensive)
with the High Priest among the Jews, is an absurd and unproved Assertion. The
Concession made by Salmasius makes nothing against us; viz. that there was a
Praeses: but that that learned Author held, that in the Apostolic age there
was one person to whom the proto cathedria was constantly due, we deny; though
we yield that in after ages this usage was brought in; yet without Superiority
of Power. He says p. 29. that there are such manifest and palpable Evidences
of this peculiar Honor and Jurisdiction due to one of the Ecclesiastical
Senate, in the Apostolic age, that the learned Sticlers for Paritie cannot
deny it. His proof of this he brings from the Apocalyptick Angels, from
Timothy and Titus, and from the Succession of Bishops gathered about the middle
of the second Century: and this proof he will have to be beyond all
contradiction. Here were a large Field for Observations, if one were in the
humor to expose this Discourse. I shall take no further notice of his gross
Mistakes, than the Vindication of Truth makes necessary. First, whoever they
be that stickle for Paritie, and yet acknowledge a Jurisdiction due to some of
the Ecclesiastical Senate; either in the Apostolic, or the next following Ages,
they are not only not the learned men; but they cannot be reckoned men of a
common measure of Understanding: what man of Sense will stickle for an Opinion,
and yet expressly yield it to his Adversary: I deny not but some Presbyterians
yield, that early in the primitive times there was a peculiar Honor given to
the (...); but that any of them do carry it so high as the Apostolic age, is
more than I know: I wish he had named them, and pointed to the places where
these Concessions are found in their Writings: far less do I know any that
owneth a peculiar Jurisdiction; for that were indeed to yield the Cause: for
the main thing in Dispute is, whether one of the Presbyters has Jurisdiction
over the rest. 2. It had been more suitable to the design and high pretenses
expressed in his Book, to confound us, and rout our Cause, with these manifest
and palpable Evidences; than to tell us of them in general: I profess I have
hitherto seen no such Evidences in any of their Writings. 3. The Evidences that
he mentions, the Angels in the Revelation, etc. are neither palpable nor
manifest Proofs of such Jurisdiction: he knows that all that has by his
Party been brought from these Topics has been Disputed, and has, I judge,
been abundantly answered: and that Sticklers for Paritie, both the learned
and the less learned, have rejected these Evidences, and denied the Conclusion
they were brought for: and I intend to debate them with him as they shall fall
in. 4. That the Catalogues of Bishops gathered in the middle of the second
Centurie, should be a manifest and palpable Evidence for their peculiar
Jurisdiction in the Apostolic age, is beyond my Comprehension: for the
Catalogues do not determine what was their power; and these who made these
Collections, are not so infallible that their Assertion should be a manifest
and palpable Evidence of the Truth of what they said.

9. That nothing was ever done in Ecclesiastical Meetings, Canonically, without
the Bishops particular Advice, and Authority; (as he argues p. 29.) is of no
force: because first, we know not what he will call Canonically done: if he
think nothing was canonically done without a Diocesan Bishop: this is to beg
the Question, and not to argue for his Conclusion. 2. If he mean that nothing
was done in their Meetings without a Moderator, who presided among them, and
did, with the rest, authoritatively Consult and Determine; this we grant: but
it makes nothing for him. 3. What he means by the Bishops particular Advice
and Authority, I cannot well guess. If he mean that he Advised and Determined
with the rest; that is what we hold. If, that he had a negative Vote; so that
all the rest could do nothing without his consent, he ought not to call for
Proof from us against that; the Probation is to be expected from him, who
affirms it. If, that he determined by himself, and the rest were but his
Council, this we deny also, and he must prove it. It is enough, that we prove
that others with the Bishop, Moderator, or Praeses, did manage the Affairs of
the Church: for which the Arguments above brought may be thought sufficient.
What follows in several pages, is to prove, that the Jews and Grecians did
sometimes Dichotomize their Clergy; yet at other times they mentioned the
Distinctions of the High Priest from other Priests: so of the Bishops from the
Presbyters. This would indeed weaken our Argument, if it had no more force than
he gives it; If we had argued simply from the Church Officers being sometimes
divided into Bishops and Deacons, without distinguishing Bishops, or Presbyters
among themselves. But our Argument being taken not only from this indistinction
of Presbyters in some, but in all places where they are mentioned; and also
from the Scripture not distinguishing them by their Offices, Work,
Qualifications, or the Injunctions that are given them about their Work: these
Distinctions of Presbyters that some of the Ancients use, make nothing against
our Argument: unless he can prove that when they mean Bishops as distinct from
Presbyters, they ascribe also a superior power to them, which he often
asserteth, but never proves. We confess that after the Apostles age, the name
Bishop began soon to be appropriated to the Praeses in the Presbytery; but in
the three first Centuries the Bishop did not rule alone, nor had superior power
to the rest. I have lately defended against another of our Episcopal Brethren:
and shall also endeavor it against the Assaults of this Author, when he shall
please to attempt this proof. Mean while I am not concerned further to Answer
what he insisteth on to p. 39. (where he engages with another of our
Arguments) than to examine some few Hints that seem to be intended as
argumentative, wherewith his Discourse is interspersed.

10. He tells us p. 31. that Cyprian asserts the Jurisdiction and Prerogative
of the Episcopal power, upon all occasions, with great Courage and Assurance.
What my last Antagonist brought for this end, out of the Writing of that holy
Martyr, I have endeavored to Answer: with what success, it is not mine to
judge; if this Author will either reinforce the same Citations, or bring new
ones, I shall not decline the Debate with him. That Polycarp: (as he has it,
p. 32.) distinguishes himself from the subordinate Presbyters, while he
inscribeth his Epistle, Polycarp, and the Presbyters that are with him. Who
(says our Author) if he had stood on a Level with these Presbyters, would
never have distinguished himself from the Community of his Brethren. This
reasoning (I say) is so remote from Concludencie, that our Author has not
consulted his own Credit in using it. For first, whatever prioritie of Dignity
may be hence inferred, as Polycarp being an older man than the rest, or Praeses
in the Meeting; it is ridiculous to infer from this, either Superiority, or
solitude of power. 2. Polycarp might be the Author of the Epistle, and the rest
Assenters to it; that might give occasion to his being named. 3. Will any say,
that when a Letter is thus directed to a Presbytery, for N. Moderator, and the
rest of the Brethren of the Presbytery of E, that this infers Episcopal
Jurisdiction in the person of him who is so named? Such stuff is not worth
refuteing. P. 33. He tells us that Hermas reproves some who strove for the
first Dignity and Preferment: and if then was no such Precedence there in the
Church, there was no ground for his Reprehension. Apage nugas. Have not some
striven for unlawful Preferments, as James and John did for a Dominion in the
Church, like that of the Lords among the Gentiles? Yea, we deny not all
preferment in the Church: may not some ambitiously strive to be a Minister, or
an Elder, yea, or a Deacon? All which are Preferments, if compared with the
people: and may not a Presbyterian Minister strive to be Moderator, without
designing Episcopal Jurisdiction. That Blondel, Salmasius, and Dally, labored
to support this Argument, as our Author represents it, is falsely asserted, p.
35. As is also, that this Opinion (about Parity) was never heard of before the
days of Aerius. If he would attempt to prove all that he confidently asserteth,
his Book would swell to a great Bulk Sir Thomas Craig (whose Memory is
venerable in the learned World) must here also be lashed, as ignorant of
Divinity, and of the Fathers, because he was prebyterianly inclined I find
nothing more that is observable, or that can derogate from the strength of our
Argument, as stated by us, in this his Discourse: only his unmannerly, as well
as false, Assertion, p. 38. that the Ecclesiastical Levellers (so in reproach
and contempt he calls the Presbyterians) flee to this Argument as their first
and last Refuge; and yet nothing is more frivolous and trifling. He may see, if
he will be at pains to read what he pretends to refute; that they have other,
yea better Arguments: and will find it hard to give a solid Answer to this
Argument, represented in its full Strength.

SECTION V.
Testimonies from Antiquity which my Antagonist pretends to wrest from me,
Vindicated.

HE mentions these p. 9. as our third Argument for Parity. Whereas if he had
thought fit to read what has been written on our side; he might have found
thrice as many more, and of more strength than any thing that he makes us to
say. But this, and the two Arguments above debated with him, are all that he
will allow us to have on our side. His Introduction to this piece of his Work
smells rank of such a temper of mind as I am not willing to name; while he
calls them who possessed the Government, and Revenues of the Church, Atheists
and Enthusiasts; and that without exception or Limitation. Thus are all the
Presbyterian and Congregational Ministers of England (as well as others)
charactered by him. We will not retaliate; but the learned and religious world
had, and have another Esteem of not a few who then were in the Ministry; and
judge that Atheism, and other sinful Evils, have been diffused into the Church
after that time; though we deny not that then it was too manifest among some.
He says that Blondel employed all his Skill to make the Ancients contradict
themselves, and all contemporary Records. This I pass as a piece of his usual
and groundless Confidence. He says, when Blondel's Book appeared, the
Presbyterians concluded (before ever they read it) that it was all pure and
undeniable Demonstration. And that his Countrymen (the Scots Presbyterians)
think they need no other Answer to what is written against them, but to say
that Episcopacy, and all that can be found for it, is quite ruined by Blondel,
and Salmasius: and yet that few of them read them. It is not manly so to
despise an Adversary whom one undertaketh to refute; neither is it Wisdom to
spend so many hours, as he has done, to argue the Case with them who are so
despicable: nor is it Christian so to undervalue others whose Praises are in
the Gospel; which I am sure may be said of some eminent Presbyterian Writers;
who now having served their Generation, enjoy their Reward: but it is his way
thus to supply what is wanting in the strength of his Arguments. I wonder who
told him that the Presbyterians did so extol Blondel's Book before they read
it; or that few of them have read him, and Salmasius. Who of us ever said, that
saying Blondel and Salmasius had ruined Episcopacy, was a sufficient Refutation
of it? May not we, without such blame, commend the Works of these learned Men,
as well as he p. 40. tells us that every Line of them is sufficiently
exposed, and frequently; and for this cries up the Bishop of Chester. He
says, we shut our eyes against the clearest Evidences: that we think that
Blondel' s Book may bar all Disputation on that Head: that we refuse to enter
into closs Engagement with them. These are a parcel of Words in which there is
no Truth: and if we should Retort every Syllable of them on himself (I say not
on his whole Party, among whom, I know, there are learned Men, who would be
ashamed of this manner of pleading their Cause) how should this Contest be
decided? Some who have spent more of their Years in Reading, than this Author
has done; and also have given better proof of it; have not so insulted over
their Adversaries, as men of no Reading. There is also little ground given for
his insisting on this, as one of our main Arguments; for tho the Presbyterians
will not part with the Suffrage of the Fathers, while the Controversy is about
paritie of Church power, and the Jurisdiction of one Presbyter over the rest;
yet they use oftener to act the defensive part, with respect to Antiquity, that
is latter than the Canon of the Scripture: and which is of more weight, they
never laid the stress of their Cause on Humane Testimony; but build their
Opinion on the Sacred Writings. But seeing he is pleased to lead us in this way,
we are willing to engage with him (as closly as he will) on this Head: and to
debate both on whose side the Fathers are, his or ours; and whether their
Testimony be so convincing as he pretends it to be.

2. Although I do much dislike my Antagonists rude Treatment of so great a man
as Blondel was, saying that he studied to please the Independents, rather than
the Presbeterians, because they were then more potent and numerous; (so p. 42.)
and calling his Arguments childish Reasonings: p. 43. Yet I do not undertake to
make it appear, that every Testimony he brings from the Fathers is fully
concludent, by it self. I observe also, that this Author, though he professes
to answer the Citations brought by Blondel, yet medleth but with a few of them,
and these none of the most evident; except what Blondel brings out of Jerome:
The first Testimony that he mentions is, the Inscription of Clements Epistle
to the Corinthians, written from Rome; which is, (...), That is, the Church of
God dwelling in Rome, to the Church of God dwelling in Corinth. Blondel hence
concludes, that there was no Bishop in either place, seeing no notice is taken
of him. To this our Authors answer is, this would make for Independency, and
that the Laity (as he speaks) had an equal share in Jurisdiction with the
Bishops and Presbyters. And that this would prove the equality of Softhenes,
Timothy, and Sylvanus, with Paul; because he sometimes joineth them with
himself in the Inscription of some of his Epistles. And that it was the
Humility of Clement that made him so write. Answer 1. He mistaketh the Opinion
of Independents: they have their Church Rulers, and do not put the Exercise of
the Government in the hand of the Multitude: though, I confess, many of them
give the people somewhat more than their due. 2. If this was an Epistle of a
whole Church to a whole Church (as Blondel takes it) there was no need of
mentioning either Bishop, or Presbyters; and so equality of Jurisdiction of the
people with them, cannot be hence inferred: but if it was an Epistle of a
Bishop to a Church, where another Bishop governed, as this Author will have it:
It is an unusual Style not to mention the Bishop, at least of that Church to
which the Epistle was directed: the Humility of Clement might make him not to
distinguish himself from the people; but our Bishops would count it no
Humility, but Rudeness, so to treat his brother Bishop at Corinth. 3. The
Apostle Paul names some of the Pastors of the Church with himself, in the
Inscriptions of some of his Epistles, as his fellow Pastors, who had joint,
though not equal, Authority in the Church with him: but he never assumeth a
whole Church into that Society with himself. By the Church, in both places, it
may be rationally thought, Clement meant the teaching or ruling Church, or the
Church representative; and in that case it might have been expected, if he were
for Episcopacy, that the Bishop, at least in Corinth, should have had some
peculiar mark of Honor: as when a Presbytery among us, is addressed, the Style
is, to the Moderator, and the rest of the Brethren, etc. though no special
Jurisdiction be ascribed to the Moderator. But after all, I look on Blondel's
Observation on this Passage, as rather an Introduction to what he had further
to say from this Epistle, and a cumulative Argument, than to be fully
concludent by it self.

3. Another Passage out of the same Epistle of Clement, brought by Blondel, our
Author takes a great deal of pains about, from p 43. It so entangles him, that
he cannot, with much struggling, get out of the Net. The words of Clement, cited
by Blondel, are, (...). That is, wherefore they (the Apostles) preaching
through Countries and Cities, placed their first fruits, whom by the Spirit
they had tried, to be Bishops and Deacons for them who should believe: neither
was it a new thing; for of old it had been written of Bishops and Deacons, I
will make their Bishops in Righteousness, and their Deacons in Faithfulness.
From this Passage Blondel observes first, that in Clement's time there was
Bishops in the Country, and in Villages, as well as in Cities. 2. That the
City Bishops had no Authority over the chorepiscopos or Country Bishops. 3.
That there were but two sorts of Church Officers, Bishops and Deacons; besides
some other things which are not so much to our present design. Our Author, in
his Answer, overlooketh the two former, which tend most to ruin his Cause (for
the Bishops of that time could not be Diocesans, but Pastors of Congregations,
if these two Observations hold, as they plainly follow from Clement's words)
and he insisteth only on the third, the Dichotomie of the Clergy: which has
less probative for^ than the rest: yet it has more strength in it, than his
Answers are able to enervate: which I now shall make appear. His Answer is,
that he has already answered our Argument taken from the Dichotomie of the
Clergy. Reply. Though we do not make that an Argument by it self, in all cases
where it is found; yet in some cases (and this in particular) it is concludent.
Clement is here giving account what Officers the Apostles settled in the
Churches: and if they settled Bishops distinct from Presbyters, and Deacons,
this account is very lame, and useless. His second Answer is p. 44, etc.
Clement, by Deacons, here understands all Ministers of Religion; whether
Presbyters in the Modernnotion, or Deacons, who, by the first Institution, were
obliged to attend upon Tables? And so by Bishops and Deacons, we may (says our
Author) understand Apostles, Bishops, Presbyters, and Attendents upon Tables.
And then, at great length, he proves that which no body denies, that the word
Deacon, is used i^ a great Latitude, for all sorts of Church Officers. Reply.
The Question is not how the word Deacon may be used in some cases, and on some
occasions, but what Clement here understands by it: I affirm, that it is
absurd to understand it here in that Latitude that our Author fancieth. For
first, his meaning should be, the Apostles appointed in the Churche^ that they
settled, Apostles, Bishops, Presbyters, and Attendents on Tables: so that every
Church in every Village, must have its Apostle, and Bishop too; beside inferior
Officers. 2. If Clement had so meant, it was superfluous to mention Bishops and
Deacons too: it had been enough to tell the Corinthians, that the Apostles
settled Deacons; that is, Officers in Churches; seeing all sorts are signified
by Deacons. 3: To say that Presbyters are to be understood by Deacons, rather
than by Bishops, is without all imaginable ground: the word Presbyter is as
largely used in Scripture, as that of Deacon: if we thus, at pleasure, expound
Names, or rather Words, we may maintain what we will. 4. This Dichotomy being
used on such a design, as to inform the people what were the ordinary Officers
in the Church, by Apostolic Warrant, that they were to have regard to; it
would not answer its end, if there were Bishops whom they and the Presbyters
must obey: for either they were to understand that the Presbyters were
comprehended under the word Bishops; but then they had no Instruction about the
Ruling Bishop, and the Teaching Bishop, as distinct, and how they should regard
each of them: or under the word Deacon; and then they were at as great a loss,
what sort of Deacons he meant; whether the Rulers or Servants of the Church. 5.
Though the word Deacon, be often applied to any who serve God in public Office
in his Church, (yea, or in the State) yet that ever the Rulers, or Teachers of
the Church are signified by it, when it is used distinctively from some other
sort of Church Officers (as it is here) is more than I know.

4. Another Answer he brings to this Passage of Clement, p 46. that Clement
speaks not of Ecclesiastical Policy, as it was at last perfected by the
Apostles; but of the first beginnings of the Christian Church, immediately after
the Resurrection of Christ. Reply. If it be granted, that at first the Aposties
settled Churches to be ruled by Presbyters, and served by Deacons, as this
Answer seems to yield; they must let us know the Grounds on which they
believe that the Apostles did alter this Policy, and set Bishops over the
Churches that they had once thus settled: we find no Warrant in Scripture for
this Conceit; though I know that some of our Prelatick Brethren affirm, that
the Churches were governed by Presbyters, under the Inspection of the Apostles
while they lived; but after their Death, Bishops were appointed to rule over
them. We may rationally expect that they should give us good assurance for this
Change; which yet I have not seen: if they will bring Arguments for it, we
shall consider them. A 4th Answer he brings p. 47. that Clement's words
cannot bear such Parity as Presbyterians plead for; because he does also
Dichotomise the Jewish clergy: among whom were the High Priest, Chief Priests,
Priests, and Levites. Reply. If Clement, when he so divides the Jewish Clergy,
were on purpose instructing us how, and by whom the Affairs of the Jewish
Church were managed, this Answer were pertinent: but if this Distinction be
used occasionly, without this design, it is not at all to the purpose: in the
one case Distinction is required; in the other case, it is enough to express
the thing in general, and undistinguished terms. He brings yet a 5th Answer,
p 47, 48. That Clement exhorting the Corinthians to Order and Harmony, sets
before them the beautiful Subordinations under the Temple Service; and
immediately recommends to them, that every one should continue (...) in his own
order. Reply. If this Reasoning be at all significant, it will conclude, there
must be a Pope, as well as Bishops, in the Christian Church: as there was a
High Priest over all the Priests, and other Jews. We must then understand
Clement, that there must be Order in the Christian Church, as well as in the
Jewish Church; and every one must keep within the Station that God has set him
in: but it noways hence follows, that there must be the same Degrees of
Church Officers in the one that was in the other. What he cites out of Jerome,
Ep. ad Ewagr. admits of the same Exposition; and is plain to be the whole
that Jerome intends by these words, quod Aaron and filii ejus atque Levitae
in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri vendicent in Ecclesia: viz.
That, as in the Temple, there was a Subordination of the Levites to Aaron and
his Sons, so should the Deacon be to the Presbyter, whom Jerome, through that
whole Epistle, proves, to be the same with the Bishop. But it is like we may
afterward hear more of this from our Author. A 6th Answer is p. 48, 49. (for
this Citation galleth him sore, and makes him look on all hands for Relief)
Clement himself distinguishes the (...) from the (...); and the last may
signify Office and Age both together. Reply. He no otherways distinguishes
them, than as the one word signifies Office, or ruling Power; the other, the
Age of them who use to be put into that Office: and though Presbyter is often
used to signify the Office; yet not when it is joined with, and distinguished
from (...). And it is clear, that in that place Clement is exhorting them to be
subject to the Presbyters, as he had done several times in the Epistle; as they
were (...), Rulers, (not one, but more in the Church of Corinth) and as they
were (...), elder in years: wherefore he exhorts young men to Sobriety.

5. It is unaccountable Tergiversation, that this Author, pretending to examine
some of the most remarkable Testimonies brought from Antiquity by Blondel,
insisteth only on that which is of least weight; even in the Testimony already
mentioned, as is above showed: and likeways passes over all the rest brought
out of the same Fathers Writings, without so much as mentioning them. Blondel
shows out of the Epistle of Clement already mentioned, that Clement tells
us, that the Apostles knowing per Dominum, by Divine Revelation, that there
would be Contentions about the Name of Bishop; therefore they appointed
Presbyters and Deacons to manage the Affairs of the Church: so far were they
(says Blondel) from thinking Prelacy the best, or only Remedy against Schism;
as some did in after ages. He does also show, how Clement teaches, that the
Presbyters (or Bishops, for he often interchangeth these two Names as
signifieing the same persons) were set in the Church by the Apostles, and after
by other excellent men (so that the Apostles made no Change in the Government)
that they were placed with the consent of the whole Church (not by the Bishop
and Patron) and he pleads that such as had well done the work of a Bishop
should not be turned out, for the holy Presbyters who have finished their
Course, need fear no Change. And after shows, how absurd it was that the most
ancient Church of Corinth (it had then stood, as it is thought, about 25 years)
should move Sedition against her Presbyters: some turbulent Spirits among them
withstood, not a single Bishop (of whom not a word in all this Discourse) but
the Presbyters of the Church: and he advises the Seditious rather to depart,
that the Flock of Christ might enjoy Peace, (...); with the Presbyters that
were settled in it: it seems he did not name the Bishop, nor provided against
Sedition against him; because he knew no such person at Corinth. And again he
bids them be subject to the Presbyters. Now all this insisted on by Blondel,
he passes by (which was his wisdom) and insisteth only on the Dichotomie of
the Clergy; which has far less weight than these Passages have.

6. He next takes to Task what Blondel cites out of Polycarp; which is, that
writing to the Church of Philippi, he takes no notice of their Bishop: that he
bids them be subject to the Presbyters and Deacons, not mentioning the
Bishop, but a plurality of Presbyters which was in that one Church. His Answer
to all this is, first, that Blondel himself takes notice that Polycarp
distinguishes himself from the rest of the Presbyters, while he says,
Polycarp and the Presbyters that are with him to the Church in Philippi: and
that by this he assumes a kind of Prelation above the rest of the Presbyters at
Smyrna. He fancieth that this is mighty uneasy to Blondel: but it had been
more ingenious to tell us that Blondel brings this as an Objection against
himself, and answers it fully and easily, calling it nuda Conjectura, and
giving several Reasons for Polycarp's naming himself, from his being the older
man, and the older Minister: And being ordained by an Apostle (which was a
Dignity, though it gave no Superiority of Power) as being better known to the
Philippians: and Blondel brings abundance of parallel Passages, where no
Superiority of Power can be imported. All this our Author passes over in
silence. Next he says, this is still the Bipartite division of the Clergy,
which is a mistake; for here is Subjection required to Presbyters in Commune;
which could not all be Diocesans: and their Head, the Bishop, is not noticed:
and his Dichotomie here is Argumentative; because (as was above showed of
Clement) he is telling them what Church Officers they should respect: where the
Bishop was chiefly to be mentioned, if such a person had been in that Church.
He will prove, p. 51: that this can be no Argument for Parity. Because first,
Iren^ refutes the Heresies of the Valentians, from the unanimous D^ preserved
among the single Successors of Polycarp; which could be no Argument, if the
Ecclesiastical Power of the Church of Smyrna had been equally lodged in the
College of Presbyters. I ask him, how does the Parity of Church power weaken
this Argument? Do not Ministers in any Church, succeed one to another, as well
as Bishops? And if they be faithful, they will continue the true Doctrine, and
hand it down to their Successors, as wel^ as Bishops would do. Neither has it
any force, that single Successon are mentioned; for if there were more Flocks
and Pastors in Smyrna there was one Moderator in the Presbytery; who is
mentioned as more eminent, though having but equal power. If there was but one
Pastor and many ruling Presbyters; he and his Successors did preserve the Truth
by faithful Doctrine, not by Episcopal power. His other pro^ is, the Epistles
of Ignatius are zealously recommended in that Epistle of Polycarp; in which
Episcopal Jurisdiction is asserted: of which our Author w^ speak in due time.
When he shall please to speak of Ignatius, we she consider what he says; and
hope to find, that all the proof he ca^ thence bring is insufficient. Mean
while it is an odd way of arguing an Author commends a Book, Ergo, he
approves all that is in it. (...) he had said Polycarp commends Ignatius's
Epistles, in that they ass^ Prelacy, that had been to the purpose; otherways
his Inference (...) without all force.

7. The next Father cited by Blondel is Hermas, in his Book calle^ Pastor: on
whom he lays very little stress, as is evident to any wh^ will read Blondel,
without prejudice: and I think Blondel needed not (...) have mentioned him:
both because he is of little Authority; it bei^ most uncertain what Hermas was
the Author of that Book; whether (...) mentioned Romans 16. 14. or the brother of
Pius: Blondel brings not few Authors on both sides. Also this Hermas says
little either for or against Parity. I observe several things of my Antagonists
conduct wit^ respect to Hermas. 1. He pretends to bring two palpable
Evidences from him, that Episcopacy was the Ecclesiastical Government when that
Book w^ written: which he labors to prove p. 5. because the sending circul^
Letters is insinuated to be the peculiar privilege of Clement, then Bishop
(...) Rome. Answer. This Evidence (and the other will be found to b^ like it)
is so far from being palpable, that it is not intelligible, ho^ this (to a
Protestant) should be an Evidence for Episcopacy: for first if it prove any
thing to his purpose, it will prove the Papacy: viz. tha^ Clement Bishop of
Rome had Authority over all the Churches, and by that power might write
Circular Letters to them. 2. Circular Letters may be written containing Advice
or Information, where there is no Authority: and this was very proper for
Clement, who resided in the Imperial City, which had Correspondence with all
places in the Empire. The 2d palpable Evidence is, that Hermas reproves some
who were ambitious to exalt themselves, and primam Cathedram habere: whence he
wisely infers; If there be no Power, there can be no abuse of it. To which I
answer, I wish there were no Ambition but among the Prelatists. May not one who
is a Presbyterian in his Profession, strive to set up Episcopacy, that he may
be a Bishop? Was there Episcopacy in the Church of Scotland anno 1660, and 61,
when ambitious Men labored, and prevailed to make a prima Cathedra, that
themselves might possess it? And might there not be such in the days of Hermas;
as there appeared to be afterward, and as was in the Apostles times, when
Diotrephes was marked as a (...) 2. There is a prima Cathedra even among the
Presbyterians; the Moderator's Chair, and there may be Ambition in seeking
after even that petty Preferment. The Principatus that he after mentions,
may have the same signification: it does not always signify Authority; but
often a Superior Dignity. The next thing I observe is, he neglects (as is
customary with him) that which seems to have the most strength, among the
Passages cited by Blondel out of Hermas; viz. (...); which last words Blondel
translated, tu ante renunciabis Presbyteris Ecclesiae. Biblioth: Patrum, has
it thus, Tu autem leges in hac Civitate cum Presbyteris qui praesunt Ecclesiae.
Either way it makes more for the Parity of Presbyters, and their Power, in
ruling the Church, than what else our Author has thought fit to take notice of
out of Blondel. The other Citation brought by Blondel, and so laboriously
answered by our Author, I lay little weight on: only I observe his charging
that learned Author with a fraudulent Trick, p. 55. and distorting the words;
whereas the words, as cited by Blondel, and by him, are the very same.

8. The Testimony of Pius Bishop of Rome, is next brought by Blondel, out of
his Epistlle to Justus Bishop of Vienne: where he tells him, Presbyteri and
Diaconi non ut majorem; sed ut Ministrum Christi te observent. My Antagonist
takes this only for an Exhortation to Humility. I know not whether his
Superiors will think it inconsistent with Humility to be obeyed by their
Presbyters; or if any of them will be so humble, as to disown all Majority with
respect to the Presbyters: that Humility is here insinuated, we grant; but that
no more is required, cannot be said without doing Violence to the words I shall
not contend whether this Epistle of Pius be legitime; or spurious; but I
suppose it may be safely asserted, that if it was written by a Presbyterian,
that Opinion is much older than this Author will allow. Another Argument
Blondel brings from Marcion, being rejected by the Presbyters at Rome; and
not admitted to their Communion: whence he infers, that the Church of Rome
was then governed by Presbyters in common. Our Authors answer is first, they
denied to receive Marcion; which is a better Precedent to regulate our Opinions
and ^ractices by, than the Petition of a lewd and profligate Heretic. Reply.
If they had denied on account of their want of Power without their Bishop, (for
the Sea was then vacant) this Answer should have some sense: but they pretended
no such thing; neither did they reprove him for his Address: if he had
addressed to a single Presbyter to be received, he would surely told him that
it was not in his power to Determine in that Matter: but when he addressed to a
College of Presbyters, they gave another Reason for their refusal; of which
anon He brings a second Answer, with his wonted Confidence: as if we were
all out of our Wits who say not as he says in this Matter: and indeed it has
need of this to strengthen it; for it is very weak of it self: it is, that in
the vacancy of the Sea, the College of Presbyters might manage the ordinary
Policy and Discipline of the Church; though they never meddled with such special
Acts of Jurisdiction as were always reserved, by constant Practice, and
primitive Institution, to the Episcopal Order: though they might have received
Marcion upon Repentance, in the vacancy of the Sea, I hope no man will thence
conclude that they would have enterprised any thing of this nature and
consequence, if their Bishop were alive, or if another were chosen in his room.
Reply. 1. Here the Question is manifestly begged: that there were reserved Acts
peculiar to the Bishop, by constant Practice, and primitive Institution: the
Practice is what we are debating: and such Institution we desire to be
instructed in: we find it not in the Bible; which can be the only ground of
that Divine Right we are now contending about. 2. As the Question is begged on
the one hand,; so he yields it on the other, by owning Governing Authority in
the Presbyters without a Bishop: if they have power, they have it from Christ,
Ergo, he has not given all Ruling Power to the Bishop, and made the Presbyters
only his Council. Or let him show us by what Rule of the Gospel, Authority
which they had not before, devolveth on the Presbyters when the Bishop dies.
This Government by Presbyters without a Bishop is not Episcopal Government,
Ergo, it is not contrary to Divine Institution (by this Answer) if the Church
be governed without Bishops, which is inconsistent with the Divine Right of
that Government. 3. I know not what Act of Jurisdiction is higher than
receiving or excluding, and casting out Church Members: wherefore if Presbyters
have this, we must see some special Warrant from Scripture, before we can deny
them another part of Church power. 4 That they would not have acted so without
their Bishop, if he had been alive, is said without ground: if he had been
absent they might have done it: as I have else where showed that the Presbyters
at Carthage did in Cyprian's retirement. If he could be with them it was
irregular to act without him, as being their Praeses; though having no majority
of power. Before I pass from this Argument, I observe a greater strength in it,
than Blondel has mentioned, or my Antagonist has attempted to answer: for
clearing which, we must reflect on the History from which the Argument is
drawn: which is Marcion, the Son of a Bishop in Pontus, for a lewd Act that he
had committed (ob illatum per summum nefas Virgini stuprum) was driven away
from the Communion of the Church, by his own Father; on which occasion he came
to Rome, and attempted to be received into that Church: he was rejected by the
Presbytery; after which he preached his Errors in that City, and made great
Disturbance. Now the Argument that we draw from this Passage is, not only that
the Presbytery did not reject his Petition as being incompetent Judges in that
Case; but their Answer implies a Recognition of their power in this Matter:
for they tell him, (...), we cannot do it without the permission of thy worthy
Father (nor this because of his Fathers Episcopal power, but) because there is
one Faith, and one Agreement; the Bond of Unity between Rome and that Church in
Pontus (I think its Name was Sinope) and was that which they gave as the reason
of their Refusal: seeing he was cast out of one Church, it was not reasonable
that he should be received into another without her consent. Romes Headship was
not then known. But what follows is yet stronger for our Cause; (...): we
cannot go contrary to our excellent Colleague (or Fellow Labourer) thy Father:
where Presbyters look on a Bishop as their Colleague, and in no higher Degree;
and that when they are speaking of the Exercise of Church Authority: they
plainly suppose, that they had the same power to take in, that he had to cast
out: but they would not irregularly exerce that power, as they must have done
if they had recived Marcion.

9. Another of Blondel's Citations, our Author answers with a great deal of
slighting and contempt; its taken out of Justine Martyr's Apology for the
Christians; where he gives an account of the Church Order that was among the
Christians; and mentions no Officer in the Church but Praepositus and
Diaconus. His Answer to this is, Justine's design was only to vindicate the
Christians from the Reproaches cast upon them about their Meetings; he had no
occasion to speak of the Hierarchy: the Christians concealed their Mysteries as
much as they could: and the Names of Bishop and Presbyter as well as their
Offices, were known to the Heathen. How to make the parts of this Answer hang
together, I know not: if the Heathen knew their way, why did they conceal it?
Neither is there any ground to think that they concealed their Mysteries, the
Knowledge of which was the mean of convincing Heathens. Yea, the design of his
Apology was to make their Mysteries known, that it might be seen how excellent
they were. And to say that Justine had no occasion to speak of the Hierarchy
here, is a mistake; for he did mention some of the Church Officers, and because
he mentioned no more, it is like he knew no more He seems now to be weary of
his undertaking (and no wonder, it has succeeded so ill with him) and
therefore p. 60. he tells us how nauseous it is to repeat more: and hudleth
up some other Citations cited by Blondel in a general Answer; that it is a
silly Quible to found an Argumen^ on Dichotomies: and tells us, the Names, as
well as the Offices, were distinguished in the earliest Monuments of the
Church, and for this he cites Usher, mentioning Acta Martyrii S: Ignatii: but
is not pleased to name Book, nor Page, of that learned Author; who has written
many things. The same he does with Clemeus, Alexandrinus, Tertullian, and
Origin; but neither words nor place he mentions: such arguings are to be
neglected. Blondel also cites Papias, calling all the Ministers of the Word,
Apostles, and others from whom he had learned what he wrote, Elders or
Presbyters. This Author will have it to be meant of their Age, not Office. I
lay not much weight on this Testimony, more than he does. But that Papias does
not mean the Age only of them whom he mentions, may be gathered from what he
says of the second John, whom he mentions (for after he had named John among
the Apostles, he names another, John after Aristion) and him he calls (...).
This cannot be meant of his Age, when he says John the elder; for John the
Apostle was older than he. It must then be understood of his Office. And Eusebius:
lib: 3: c. 35. tells us that there were two John's buried at Ephesus, and that
the Monuments of both remained in his time. Being now weary with arguing, and
it seems fretted with what he could not well answer. He falls to downright
Railling, p. 61. he puts on a Confidence beyond ordinary: this is the way of
some when they are most at a loss. This Conduct will not take with wise and
considering Men. He tells of the unconquerableness of Prejudice (in the
Presbyterians no doubt; because they will not yield to his Dictats, and what he
looks on as an Argument) and of their miserable Condition in reading the
Ancients, with no other design than to distort their words. Before he taxes us
for not reading them, now we read them, but with an ill design. I must tell
him, it is too much for him, either to judge how we are employed in our
Closets, and what Books we read, or what inward designs we have in our reading.
We think he distorteth the words of the Ancients (we judge not his designs in
reading them) he thinks we distort them, let the Reader judge. Next he
represents us as having sold our selves to the Interest of little Parties;
and shut our Eyes against the express Testimonies of these Fathers, whose
broken Sentences we torture and abuse, to support Novelties, and more of this
Stuff; which it is not fit to answer, because of the Wise Man's Advice, Prove:
26: 4.

10. Now he will p. 62. have the Reader to make an Estimate of the Presbyterian
Candor from two Instances. The first is, Blondel cites the Gallican Church
sending Irenaeus to Rome, and calling him a Presbyter, when he was Bishop of
Lions. Our Author contendeth that he was not then Bishop; and that Photinus his
Predecessor, was not then dead. This piece of Chronology, though maintained by
Eusebius, and Jerome, Blondel disproveth, by many Authentic Records, as he
thinks. And now where is the want of Candor in this case? Is every man who
after diligent search into History, does mistake in Chronology, about a Matter
of Fact so disingenious; and that to such a Degree as this Author's Clamor
would represent. This I say, supposing that Blondel does mistake in this
Matter. I think it not worth the while to examine the large Discourse he has,
and the manifold Citations to confirm his Opinion, finding that Debate somewhat
Intricate (whether Photinus was then alive or not, when Iraeneus was sent to
Rome, and called a Presbyter) and the Matter of it is of no great Consequence.
It seems our Author has been at as little pains as I am at leisure now to
take, about this Debate, but refers you to Dr. Pearson for satisfaction; and
yet he has the confidence to charge so great a man as Blondel was, with
perplexed Conjectures, and affected Mistakes: we think it neither Christian,
nor Manly, nor Scholar like, so to treat the learned Men of his opposite Party.
The other Instance, whereby he thinks to prove want of Candor; yea Impudence,
in the Presbyterians, is p. 63. that we sometimes cite Cyprian on our side; and
can name nothing plausibly, but that wretched Quible of the bipartite Division
of the Clergy. He thinks it needless to bring Testimonies against us out of
Cyprian, there are so many: he calls us also Schismatics, and supposes that
we have not read Cyprian. Who can stand before such potent Ratiocinations? He
refers the Vindicator of the Kirk to a Book then expected. I suppose he
means I. S. his Principles of the Cyprianick age; which I saw long before I
saw this Book of his: where indeed all that can be drawn from Cyprian (and much
more) is carefully gathered together. And I refer him for satisfaction about
Cyprian's Opinion in the point of Church Government, to the Answer to that Book
under the Title of the Cyprianick Bishop examined. In which Book I shall take
this occasion to confess a Chronological Mistake, (this Author would have the
Charity to call it the want of Candor, or what else he pleases to impute to
his Adversary) it is p. 20, near the end, Basil, and Optatus, are said to live
in the same Age with Cyprian; whereas they lived in the next Century: this was
occasioned by an over hasty Glance into the Chronological Tables: I hope the
Reader will pardon this Digression. Thus my Antagonist leaves Blondel in quiet
possession of the far greatest part, and most evident Testimonies, that he
brings out of the Fathers for Parity: some will think he had better not begun
this Work, than thus leave it imperfect; if others have answered all Blondel's
Citations, what he has done was needless, if not, he does his Work but by
halves.

11. I shall add some other Testimonies out of the Fathers; which our Author,
at his leisure, may consider Chrysostom: on 1 Timothy 3. asks the Question, why
the Apostle passes from giving Directions in, and about, the Qualifications of
Bishops, immediately to Deacons, omitting Presbyters: and gives this Answer,
that there is almost no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter: and the
care of the Church is committed also to Presbyters, (which makes it evident
that Chrysostom: did not think that Bishops ruled alone) only he makes the
difference to be in Ordination; which he is so far from looking on as of Divine
Institution, that he maintains, says Durham, that, in the Apostles time,
Presbyters ordained Bishops. This same Author on Tit. 1. Homil. 2. by the
Elders whom Titus was to ordain in every City, understands Bishops; because
(says he) he would not set one over the whole Island: and after; for a Teacher
should not be diverted by the Government of many Churches; but should be taken
up in ruling one: where he makes the Teacher and Ruler to be the same person:
also assigns but the Government of one Church to one man: both which are
inconsistent with Diocesan Episcopacy. Ambros: in Tim: 3. 9. has this Passage;
qui tanta cura Diaconos eligendos praecepit, quos constat esse ministros
Sacerdotum; quales vult esse Episcopos, nisi, sicut ipse ait,
irrepraehensibiles: where he plainly supposes all the Church Officers, who are
not Deacons, to be Bishops: and a little after, Post Episcopum tamen Diaconatus
ordinationem subjecit, quare? nisi quia Episcopi and Presbyteri una ordinatio
est; uterque enim Sacerdosest; Episcopus tamen primus est; ut omnis Episcopus
Presbyter sit, non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus; hic enim est Episcopus, qui
inter Presbyteros primus est: Denique Timotheum. Presbyterum ordinatum
significat; sed quia ante se priorem non habebat, Episcopus erat. All this
seems to be a Description of a Presbyterian Moderator: for he gives the
Bishop no Prelation but that of Precedence, or Priority, to a Presbyter: and
that, not by a new Ordination, which should give him a superior power; but a
Seniority, or Priority of Ordination, which was the way of a Moderator's being
set up at first; but was after changed into Election; when it was found, that
sometimes, the oldest man was not the fittest man for that Work. From all this,
it is clear, that in the time of Ambros: (which was in the fourth Century)
Majority of Power in a Bishop above a Presbyter, was not looked on as Juris
Divini; nor that a Bishop must have (after he is ordained a Presbyter) a new
Ordination, or Consecration; whereby he gets Jurisdiction over his fellow
Presbyters, and their Flocks: I do not deny but that Ambrose does, in some
things, mistake the primitive Order of the Church: and misunderstand the
Scripture account that is given of it, wherefore he ingeniously confesses on
Ephesians 4. 11. thus, ideo non per omnia convenient scripta Apostolica
ordinationi quae nunc est in Ecclesia: yet he gives ground to think, that even
then, the Distinction between Bishop and Presbyter was not arrived at a
Majority of Power, or sole Jurisdiction. I observe here also, obiter, that
ordinatio, in the primitive times, did not always signify authoritative
setting apart one for a Church Office; which our Author else where does with
much zeal plead. If the Reader please to add to these, all the Testimonies
cited by Blondel (which out Author thought not fit to meddle with) he may see
abundant cause to think, that our Opinion about Paritie is not so Novel, as
this Enquirer fancieth it to be. Though I lay little weight on the Opinions of
the Schoolmen, in the controverted Points of Divinity; and especially, in the
Point of Church Government: yet considering, that they owned the Roman
Hierarchy, a Testimony from them, or other Papists, seems to be a Confession
of an Adversary, extorted by the force of Truth, Lombard: lib: 4: Sententiar:
did: 4: after he had asserted seven Orders of the Clergy, when he comes to
speak of Presbyters, p: 451. Edit: Lovan: 1567, apud veteres (says he) idem
Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerunt, and p. 452. cumque omnes (nempe septem ordines
Cleri) spirituales sunt and sacrae, excellenter tamen Canones, duos tantum
sacros Ordines appellari consent; nem^^ Diaconatus and Presbyteratus; quia hos
solos primativa Ecclesia legitur habuisse; and de his solum praeceplum Apostoli
habemus. Cajetan, on Titus 1. 5. 7. has these words; ubi adverte, eundem
gradum, idemque officium, significari a Paulo nomine Episcopi and nomine
Presbyteri; nam praemisit, ideirco r^liqui te in Creta, ut constituas
Presbyteros; and modo, probando regulam, dic^ oportet enim Episcopum, etc.
Estius, lib: 4: Sententiar: did: 24. when he i^ proving Episcopal Jurisdiction
above a Presbyter, does not refer it to Divine Right: quod autem (says he)
Jure Divino Episcopi sint Presbyte^is superiores, and si non ita clarum est e
sacris literis, etc. And he provet^ it by the Authority of some Popes, and
Councils. As also Lombard. (...) supra, fetches the Original of the several
Degrees of Bishops from the Heathen Flamins, Archi-flamines, and
^roto-flamines; not from Scripture Bellarm: cites Medin: condemning Jerome as
erroneously holding the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter: this Bellarm: has
lib. 1. c. 15. de Clericis: Object: 6. Medina does there affirm, August.
Ambros. Sedul. Prima^^us, Chrysostom. Theodorat. AEcumen. and Theophylact. to be
of the sam^ mind: and he adds, alque ita illi viri alioqui sanctissimi, and
sacrarum literarum consultissimi; quorum tamen sententiam prius in ^erio,
deinde in Waldensib^^, postremo in Wiclefo damnavit Ecclesia, etc. It is here
evident that others as well as the Scots Presbyterians, held the Opinion about
Parity to be no Noveltie. Also Sixtus Senens. Biblioth: Sanct: lib: 6:
Annotatio: 324: looks on Jeromes Opinion as being for the Identitie of Bishop
and Presbyter; and cites as agreeing with him, Ambros: Chrysostom, Sedul: An
selm: Thom: Valdens: against Wiclife: who refuteth him as being of Jeromes
Opinion in this: and of Alfonsus Castrensis he says, non veretur fateri
Hieronimum hac in part errasse: to these Schoolmen I shall add some of the
Canonists, as plainly against this Jus Divinum of Episcopacy. Gratian: did:
60. cap: ult. Ad verbum Papa; sacros ordines dicimus Diaconatum and
Presbyteratum: hot quidem solos primitiva Ecclesia habuisse dicitur. Joan:
Semeca: Gloss: in Jur: Can: did: 95. Dicunt quidem quod in Ecclesia prima
primitiva commune erat Officium Episcoporum and Presbyterorum, and nomina erant
communia. Ibid. c. olim. Et officium erat commune: sed in secunda primitiva
coeperunt distingui and nomen and officia. So Owen of ordination p. 108. who
also cites to the same purpose, Council: Aquisgr: can: 8 Council Hispal. c. 2.
Canon. 7. and Council. Constantiens. where Presbyters were determined to have
decisive voices with Bishops; because in the Law of God Bishops were no more
than Presbyters. I am far from inferring from what has been said, that all
these were Presbyterians. But it is evident that some of them did not hold
Episcopacy to be Juris Divini, as this Enquirer does: and that none of them
looked on Paritie as so late an Invention as he does.

SECTION VI.
His Answers to our Citations from Jerome and Augustine, examined.

THis learned Author has singled out the Testimonies brought by Presbyterians
out of these two Fathers, and promises p. 65, to examine them more narrowly,
as being the chief strength of the Presbyterians, that is to be found in the
Writings of the Ancients. I shall adventure to examine his Examination. He
taxes Blondel for inscribing his Book, Apologia pro Sententia Hieronimi, as if
the Presbyterians Doctrine had been certainly espoused by Jerome; and brings
this Argument against this Conduct of Blondel. At this rate (says he) his
Contemporaries were very much to be blamed who placed Aerius among the
Heretics, and yet on all occasions make honorable mention of Jerome, if he
taught the same Doctrine for which Aerius was condemned for a Heretic. This
reasoning is of no weight: for it is well known on how small grounds some in
the fourth or fifth Centuries were listed among the Heretics. 2. It is no rare
thing in the World, to heighten the same Action, or Opinion in one person,
which they excuse or extenuate in another: We know how the Pope condemns the
same Principles as Heresy in Calvine, which he passes no such Censure on when
they are taught by the Jansenists: and how Alvarez charge Calvine with
Heresy, for the same things that he himself holds: and is at much pains to
show the difference, where indeed there is none. Jerome was a man of great
esteem, so as it seems Aerius was not. 3. It is thought by many, that Aerius
managed his Principle more unpeaceably than Jerome did: that he opposed himself
more fiercely to the growing Usurpations of that time; and made a Schism about
the Matter. And it is evident that many of them who are by Epiphanius called
Heretics, were at most, but Schismatics. Neither do I by this yield, that
Presbyterians now may be called Schismatics; for I know not that Aerius was
justly so branded, on account of that Opinion. Nor do I think that Episcopacy
was come to that intolerable height when Aerius opposed it, that it is come to
in our days, and came to^ soon after his time. 4. Magdeburg. cent. 4. c. 5. p.
399, 4^0. edit. Ba^ 1560. shows that Epiphanius makes him an Arian. So
August: a^ Basil^ say he was the Author of the Heresy of the Syllabici; which
w^ indeed Arianism: from which Magdeb concludes, that we have litt^ certainty
about him. 5. Some men of great worth excuse Aerius: (...) Whitaker, Reinolds:
and affirm, that he was innocent of these Heresies they charge him with, only
he had angered some great men of t^ Age; by questioning some of their
Usurpations; and also by zealou^ opposing some of the Superstitions that were
then creeping into t^ Church; and had too much Countenance from some eminent
Men: such as Praying, and offering for the dead, and Praying to Saints. (...)
Aerius was not esteemed a Heretic by all the Fathers of that, or t^ following
Age: none call him so but Epiphanius; and Augustine, w^ implicitly took it
from Epiphanius. Neither Theodoret, nor Socrat^ nor Sozomen, nor Euagrius, have
any thing of the Aerian Heresy.

2. He makes a Collection of the Citations we bring out of Jerome, and then
gives us his Remarks on them. I must also transcrib^ them, that the Reader may
have them before him, while he is upon this Debate about them. The first is out
of Hieron: on Tit. 1. Diligenter (says Jerome) Apostoli verba attendamus,
dicentis, ut constituas per Civitates Presbyteros, sicut ego disposui; qui
qualis Presbyter debeat ordinari, (...) sequentibus disserens, hoc ait, si quis
est sine crimine, unius uxoris vir, etc. Postea intulit, oportet enim Episcopum
sine crimine esse tanquam Dei dispens^ tor: idem est ergo Presbyter qui and
Episcopus; and antequam Diaboli instinct^ studia in religione fierent; and
diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae; communi
Presbyterorum consilio Ecelesia gubernabatur. Postquam vero unusquisque quos
baptizaverat suos putavit esse, non Christi: in toto orb decretum est, ut unus
de Presbyteris electus, superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura
pertineret, and Schismatum semina tollerentur. Of what follows in Jerome the
Enquirer gives but a lame account; telling us that Jerome proves the Identity
of Bishop and Presbyter from Phil. 1. Acts 20. 1 Pet. and Epistle to the
Hebrews. But I shall give a more full account of his words; He adds to what
goes before, putet aliquis non scripturarum sed nostram esse sententiam,
Episcopum and Presbyterum unum esse, and aliud a^atis, aliud esse nomen
Officii; relegat Apostoli verba ad Philipp: dicentis, Paulus omnibus sanctis in
Christo Jesu qui sunt Philippis, cum Episcopis and Diaconis: Phili^pi (these
are Jerome's words) una est urbs Macedoniae, and certe in una civitate plures
(ut nuncupantur) Episcopi esse non poterant; sed quia eosdem Episcopos illo
tempore, quos and Presbyteros appellabant, propterea indifferenter de Episcopis
quasi de Presbyteris est locutus. Adhuc alicui hoc videretur ambiguum, nisi
altero testimonio comprobetur, in Actis Apostolorum scriptum est, quod cum
venisset Apostolus Miletum, miserit Ephesum, and vocaverit Presbyteros
Ecclesiae ejusdem; quibus postea inter catera sic locutus, attendite vobis and
omni Gregi in quo Spiritus Sanctus vos posuit Episcopos, etc. Et hic
diligentius observate, quomodo unius civitatis, Ephesi, Presbyteros vocans,
postea eosdem Episcopos dixerit. Si quis vult recipere eam Epistolam quae sub
nomine Pauli ad Haebreos scripta est, (for that Epistle in Jerome's days was
controverted, whether it were canonical Scripture or not) and ibi, aequaliter,
inter plures, Ecclesia cura dividitur, siquidem ad plebem scribit, parote
principibus vstris (behold, Jerome calls the Presbyters, principes, from
their ruling power; from which Title given to Bishops, our Brethren often argue
for their sole Jurisdiction) and subjecti estote, etc. Et Petrus, qui ex fidei
firmitate nomen accepit, in Epistola sua loquitur, dicens, Presbyteros ergo in
vobis obsecro, compresbyter, etc. pascite gregem Domini, etc. Haec propterea ut
ostenderemus (this our Author cites) apud veteres eosdem fuisse Presbyteros,
quos and Episcopos; paulatim vero (ut dissentionum plantaria evellerentur) ad
unum sollicitudinem esse delatam. Sicut ergo Presbyteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae
consuetudine, ei qui sibi praepositus est esse subjectos, ita Episcopi noverint
se magis consuetudine, quam dispensationis Divinae veritatis Presbyteris esse
majores; and in commune debere Ecclesiam regere: imitantes Mosen; qui cum
haberet solus praeesse populo Israel, 70 elegit, cum quibus populum judicaret:
videamus igitur qualis Presbyter sive Episcopus ordinandus sit.

3. He brings also Jeromes Epistle to Oceanus, where I confess I find nothing
for our purpose, but what is more fully and clearly said by Jerome in the place
cited; and which follows. Next he brings Jerome's Epistle to Euagrius,
(which is next to that to Oceanus) in which he cites the same Scriptures; but
to them he prefixeth (which this Author passes over) audio quendam in tantam
erupisse verecundiam, ut Diaconos Presbyteris i. e. Episcopis, praeferret: nam
cum Apostolus perspicue doceat, eosdem esse Episcopos quos Presbyteros, quis
patitur ut mensarum and viduarum Minister supra eos se tumidus eff^rat, ad
quorum preces Christi corpus sanguisque consicitur. Quaeris autoritatem, audi
testimonium; and so he cites Phil. 1. and Acts 20. And then, ac ne quis
contentiose in una Ecclesia plures Episcopos fuisse contendat; Audi and aliud
testimonium, in quo manifestissime declaratur, vel comprobatur, eundom esse
Episcopum aut Presbyterum: and so he cites Tit. 1. and also 1 Timothy 4. 14.
where Timothy is said to be ordained by laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery: and 1 Pet. 5. and takes notice of the Emphasis of the Charge
given to Presbyters in the Word (...), unde, (says he) and nomen Episcopi est
tractum: and then he cites Joh. Ep. 2. and 3, where that Apostle calls
himself Presbyter, or Elder. After all this, the words that the Enquirer
cites, do follow. Quod autem postea unus electus est qui cateris
praeponeretur, in Schismatis remedium factum est, ne unusquisque Eeclesiam ad
se trahens, Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. Nam and Alexandria a Marco Evangelista,
usque ad Heracleam, and Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum ex se
electum, in excelsiori gradu collatum, Episcopum nominabant. Quomodo si
exercitus imperatorem faciat, aut Diaconi eligant de se quem industrium
noverint, and Archi-Diaconum vocent. Quid eum facit Episcopus, excepta
ordinatione, quod Presbyter non facit: nec alt^ra Romanae urbis Ecclesia,
altera totius orbis aestimanda est; and Gallia, and Britannia, and Oriens, and
Persis, and Judaea, omnes barbarae nationes, unum Christum adorant, unam
observant regulam veritatis: Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis major est urbe.
Ubicunque fuerit Episcopus sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive
Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Thanis, ejusdem meriti est, ejusdemque
Sacerdotii: potentia divitiarum and paupertatis humilitas, vel superiorem vel
inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caterum omnes Apostoli successores sunt. After
this he proposes an Objection against himself, from the practice that then was
at Rome, that a Presbyter ordinabatur ad testimonium Diaconi: which seems to
make for the preference of a Deacon before a Presbyter: which is that he
opposes through that whole Epistle; and having answered that Objection, and
condemned that Practice, he proceeds thus, sciant quare constituti Diaconi;
legant acta Apostolorum: recordentur conditionis suae Presbyter and Episcopus:
aliud aetatis, aliud dignitati^ nomen est: unde ad Tit. and ad Tim: de
ordinatione Episcopi and Diaconi dicitur, de Presbyteris omnino reticetur, quia
in Episcopo and Presbyter continetur. Qui promovetur de minori, ad majorem
prove^itur. Aut igitur ex Presbytero ordinetur Diaconus, ut (not aut as our
Author says) Presbyter minor Diacono comprobetur, in quem crescat ex parvo:
aut si ex Diacono ordinetur Presbyter, noverit se lucris minorem sacerdotio
esse majorem. Et ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri
Testamento; quod Aaron and filii ejus, and Levitae fuerant in Templo, hoc sibi
Episcopi and Presbyteri and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. There is yet another
place of Jerome which this Author has not mentioned (I shall not say he has
not read Jerome, though he cite him; which he imputes to these on our side, on
less occasion given) it is Ep: ad Heliodor: Tract: 3. tertiae partis, fol.
(mihi) 284, 285. This person being Jerome's intimate Friend, it seems was
averse from an Eremetical Life, and desired rather to be in the Ministry.
Jerome takes much pains in this Epistle, to persuade him to go to the Desert,
and there serve Christ; and having occasion to speak of the Clergy, he says of
them, without Distinction; absit autem ut quicquam de his sinistrum loquar; qui
Apostolico gradui succedentes; Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt: per quos
and nos Christiani sumus: qui claves regni coelorum habentes, quodammod^
judicii diem indicant. Qui sponsam Dei sobria castitate conservant. And a
little after, mihi ante Presbyterum sedere non licet (it seems neither he, nor
Heliodorus were then ordained, though they both were afterward) Ill^, si
peccavero, licet tradere me Satanae, in interitum carnis, ut spiritus salvus
(...) in die Domini Jesu.

4. Let us now see how my Antagonist answers what he thought fit to cite out
of Jerome. To which I premise that our present Debate is not whether what
Jerome writes be true or false, sound or unsound but what was Jerome's Opinion
in the Matter now controverted; and consequently whether Jerome be on our side,
or on the opposite side. I observe also that our Author denies not that Jerome
thought there wa^ a time when the Church was governed communi Presbyterorum
consili^ But he thinks Jerome mistook in this, and in that Period (which he
takes to be in the Apostles time, before Bishops were settled in the Churches)
the Apostles governed the Churches which they had planted, by their personal
and Apostolical Authority I must examine this before I proceed It is not to be
denied, that when the Apostles, by their preaching, had converted a Company of
people to Christianity while they were not formed into Societies, and had no
Officers to teach and govern them, they managed the Affairs of these people, by
their own Authority; and it could not be otherwise But here are three mistakes.
1. That the Apostles first settled Teaching Presbyters in these newly converted
Churches, who might teach them, but not rule them; and afterward set Bishops
over them to rule them: this is a groundless Fancy, nor can any shadow of
Authority be given from Scripture for it: if he shall offer any thing as a
proof of this, we shall consider it. We think that the Apostles settled
Presbyters among the new converted Societies, both for teaching them, and
ruling them; and that the Apostles gave these Elders Direction, by the
infallible Spirit, both what they should teach, and how they should govern: the
latter needs no proof: the former we prove from Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. where
we read of ordaining Elders (...), and (...); and the other Scriptures above
cited Sect. 3. 12, 14. by which it is made appear, that these Elders ruled the
Church, as well as instructed her, as at Corinth, and at Thessalonica, and else
where. Another mistake is, that the Apostles by themselves governed any
particular Churches that were settled, and had Presbyters among them. The
contrary is evident from what has been proved of the Elders governing the
Churches: and from this, that our Adversaries can produce no such Instance.
Paul had indeed the care of all the Churches on him, whether they had Officers
or none: but it does not thence follow, that he ruled them all, or any of them,
personally: his care was that they might be well taught and well ruled, by them
who were appointed to that Work; over all whom he, and every one of the
Apostles, had a Superintendency. A third mistake is, that the Apostles in their
time, made a change of the Government that they had settled in the Church; by
setting up Bishops, where formerly they had settled Teaching Presbyters, and had
ruled the Churches themselves: and particularly that at Corinth upon the
Divisions mentioned 1. Ep. Chapter 3. a Bishop was set up there, as this Author
hinteth, p. 69. Can he, or any man else, give any thing that looks like a
Warrant for this Imagination? Surely if such a Change had been made by the
Apostles, we should have had some hint of it in their Writings, or in the
History of their Acts.

5. This Author has an other observe, in the same page, as wild, and wide
from the Truth: that Jerome thought that the Superintendency of Bishops above
Presbyters, was occasioned by the Contentions at Corinth; so he thought that
this Remedy of Schism, was appointed by the Apostles themselves; and that it
was not the Invention of after Ages: but the Apostles by their own experiance
immediately found the Inconveniency of Paritie; and therefore appointed, that
unus praeponeretur caeteris. This is strange Confidence, and little Evidence of
that Candor which he so much desiderateth in Blondel, and other Presbyterians.
Can he produce any Word, or Passage in Jerome, from which this may be inferred?
Yes, he pretends to prove it: after he has stated this as the present
Debate, whether it was Jerome' s Opinion that the Apostles themselves set up
Episcopacy as the Remedy of Schism; or that Parity continued sometime after the
Apostles; and the Church in after Ages set up Prelacy, because Parity was apt
to breed Schism. The former he maintains, we hold the latter. That Blondel
saw, that Jerome thought that the Apostles turned the Government from Paritie
to Prelacy, is a strange Assertion, when the great design of his Book was to
prove the contrary. And the proof of it is yet stranger; Blondel enters a
Caveat, that none should think that the Apostles themselves appointed the
Remedy of Schism mentioned by Jerome. Is it not a good Consequence? This is an
absurd Thought, says Blondel, ergo, I believe it was Jerome's Opinion. Blondel
maintains, and so do I that not only it is not true that the Apostles in
their time appointed the Remedy; but that Jerome was not of that Opinion.

6. His first proof, that such was Jerome's Opinion, is p. 7. Jerome thought
that the occasion of the change that was introduced into the Ecclesiasti^^.
Government, were the Disputes in the Church of Corinth; and therefore (...)
change made must needs be Apostolical: they only had power to erect the
Ecclesiastic Fabric, and they were zealous to prevent Confusions. No other
Decree could be meant by Jerome' s toto Orb decretum est, for no other De^
could oblige all, nor would have been so universally received: neither was the
any Council that had so decreed. This Apostolical Constitution Jerome calls
(...) his Commentaries on Titus, consuetudo Ecclesiae; which he distinguishe^
from dispositio Divinae veritatis, meaning that the Prelacy of one Priest abo^
many, was introduced rather by Apostolical practice, than the personal mand^ of
our Blessed Savior. Such Discourse from a Presbyterian, would be exposed by
this Author, with great scorn: but I shall show the absurdity of it by Reason.
1. That Jerome did not say, nor mean, that the Apostles made this change in
Church Government, is manifest. For (...) He says it was done paulatim;
whereas apud veteres, ^idem fuer^^ Presbyteri qui and Episcopi: so on Phil. 1.
as we cited 2. These veteres cannon be the Apostles; but they who lived in the
first Ages after the Apostle are so called; but whatever he in that; an
Apostolic Decree for Bishops, and bringing them in, paulatim, do not well
agree. It is henc^ plain, that Jerome thought, in the first Ages after the
Apostles, the Church was governed communi Presbyterorum consilio: but Schism
arising in process of time, like that in Corinth, while the Apostles lived;
tha^ Paritie was by degrees and first in some Churches, after in others, turned
into a Prelacy. Certainly if the Apostles in their Lifetime, had made a Decree
for Prelacy, all the Churches would presently have set up tha^ way, in its due
Height, and not brought it in paulatim. 2. The very design of Jerome, in the
places cited, which he laboriously prosecuteth is to prove, by Testimonies of
the Apostles, that Bishop and Presbyter are one: how is this consistent with
his thinking that the Apostles decreed the contrary? this were to make the
learned Jerome to speak, yea to think, the most palpable contradictions. 3. Is
it imaginable, if Jerome had thought that the Apostles first for a time settled
Paritie, and then by degrees (or otherwise) changed it into Prelacy, that he
would be at so much pains to tell us where the Apostles did the former, as in
all the places he cites: and yet not point to one place in all their Writings,
where this Decree for a Change should be found? He may believe what he will,
who can be persuaded of this? If Jerome had thought that the Apostles then
decreed Prelacy when the Debates arose at Corinth; and that it was done on
occasion of these Debates, and as a Remedy of them, he had been very absurd,
and pleased himself with a groundless Fancy: for when the Apostle was reproving
these Schisms, and laboring to cure them, and prevent the like among
Christians, he has not one word of Prelacy as a remedy of them: but on the
contrary, reproves the Presbyters of that Church, for being defective in the
exercise of their Church power, cap. 5. of that same Epistle; and cap: 12. 28.
tells them what Officers were to continue in the Gospel Church, and no
mention of Bishops among them.

7. Another thing in this Answer is most absurd; that he calls this
Apostolical Decree, consuetudo Ecclesiae: a Decree and a Custom are two
different things: nor was it ever heard of (till this new Master of words
arose) that a Decree was so called: Custom may follow on a Decree; and the
same thing may be decreed which has antecedently obtained by a Custom; but to
say a thing (ex: gra: the setting up of Bishops as the remedy of Schism) had
its Original from Custom, and to mean it had its Rise from a Decree, is to
speak non sense: which no wise man will impute to that learned Father.
Wherefore it is evident that Jerome, by consuetudo Ecclesiae, means the
practice of the Church after the Apostles (for to say it was the practice in
their time, is inconsistent with what he confesses to be Jerome's Opinion,
that the Church was then governed by Presbyters) which came in by degrees,
paulatim. 3. It is an unaccountable Absurdity, to make an Apostolical Decree,
or Practice, so opposite to dispositio Dominicae veritatis, as are Parity and
Prelacy. Were not the Apostles guided by the Spirit of Christ? Is it then
imaginable, that He appointed Parity, or did not appoint Prelacy; and the
Apostles finding Parity inconvenient, would appoint Prelacy. Neither could
Jerome mean, that Bishops were not appointed by any Command given out
personally by Christ while he was on earth; but by the Apostles after his
Ascension: for that had been impertinent, and nothing to his purpose. For what
different influence could that have on Bishops, to keep them from undue
exalting themselves above the Presbyters (which is manifestly Jerome's Scope in
these words) whether they were instituted by a personal Command of Christ; or
by his Apostles guided by his infallible Spirit; for the Sense would be,
Bishops are not above Presbyters by Christ's appointment; but they are above
them by the Apostles appointment: which either sets these two Appointments in
opposition the one to the other, or makes the words to be ridiculous and
absurd. 4. That the Apostles only had power to erect the Ecclesiastic Fabric,
and that there was no other obliging Decree at that time, is true but it does
not hence follow, that Jerome's toto orb decretum est, is meant of such an
Apostolic Decree. It is rather meant of a Resolution (decretum est does not
always signify an authoritative Sentence passed) through the several Churches,
in most parts of the World (so toto orb may we^ be restricted) to set up a
constant Praeses, whom they particularly called the Bishop. The Phrase toto
orb decretum est, cannot be understood of a Decree made in one place (as that
of the Apostles must be) though for the whole World; but of what was done in
the several places of the World.

8. That Jerome only alludeth to the Divisions at Corinth, and did not look on
them as the immediate occasion of the Change that we made, I further prove. 1
The Schisms that Jerome speaks of, (...) introducing the Change, were made by
the Presbyters; who had baptized the people, and every one set up a Faction
with these whom he had baptized: his words are plain; postquam autem
unusquisque quos baptizaverat suos putavit esse, non Christi, toto orb
decretum est, etc. Now the Divisions at Corinth were among the people, not
among the Pastors I hope he will not say that Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, fell
out about dividing the people among them, as their Followers disagreed.
Wherefore Jerome could not mean this Schism, though he allude to it 2. It is
not to be imputed to the Apostles that they would setle one Church Order, and
so quickly change it into another, as they must have done, if the change were
on occasion of the Schism at Corinth, which fell out soon after the settling of
that Church; and while other Churches were not yet settled. They no doubt
foresaw the Divisions that would be, and did, at the first setlement of
Churches, provide what Remedy the Holy Ghost thought fit for that Church
disease. Especially, is it imaginable, that after they had found how ill
Paritie succeeded at Corinth, they would setle other Churches on that Lubrick
Foundation, which must quickly be razed, and a new one laid. The Apostle wrote
his Epistle to Corinth, wherein he reproves their Schism, from Ephesus, in the
year of Christ 51. as is commonly thought: and about that time (for he stayed
at Ephesus two years) he was settling that Church in Paritie (for we find many
Bishops or Presbyters in that one City; as Jerome observes: calling them that
were called from Ephesus to Miletum by the Apostle, Presbyteros Ecclesiae
ejusdem) now can any man think that he would have thus settled the Church of
Ephesus, and not presently settled a Bishop in it, if at the same time he had
found the want of a Bishop to be the cause of the Tumuits at Corinth; and a
Bishop to be the proper Remedy of them.

9. The next Attempt that my Adversary makes on Jerome, is to prove that he
held Episcopacy to be as old as the Apostles days, from his words, Epistola ad
Luagrium; Nam in Alexandria, a Marco Evangelista, usque ad Heracleam, and
Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri unum ex se electum, etc. Here he says,
Salmasius leaves Jerome, and doubts of the Truth of this History: which he
need not think strange; seeing himself also charge Jerome with a Mistake, p.
69. And I think none of us ever judged Jerome to have had an unerring Spirit to
guide him in all that he wrote. But I shall not question the Truth of what he
relates; it may be the peculiar Name of Bishop to the Moderator, or primus
Presbyter, began at Alexandria, as the Name of Christian did at Anti^h. And no
more but that can be gathered from Jerome's words. What^er may be said of the
Evangelist Mark, who founded the Church of Alexandria, and it is like, by his
extraordinary power, ruled it at first by himself; and that but for a small
time; for he left Alexandria, and preached and planted Churches in Lybia,
Marmorica, and many parts of Egypt, as Beronius shows. That Jerome did not
include Mark (as Dounam absurdly says) among the Bishops so chosen at
Alexandria, is evident: for how could the Presbyters choose him to be their
Head, who had an extraordinary Commission, and had been the Instrument of
converting them, and who by his extraordinary power, had settled them in a
Presbytery, for the rest, if our Author will draw any thing from Jerome's
words for his purpose, he must make him flatly contradict all that he had said,
and laboriously proved, concerning the equality of Bishop and Presbyters:
wherefore, they who came after Mark, and were chosen by the Presbytery, were
only set in excelsiori gradu, they had the (...), were Moderators, and had the
Name of Bishops given them usually, whereas the rest were called Presbyters:
but that they had, so early as Marci tempore, Jurisdiction over their Brethren,
the Presbyters who chused them, Jerome does not say, nor can it be gathered
from any of his words. And I do not question, but that in other Churches, as
well as Alexandria, the Presbyters chose a Moderator, and, may be, he continued
during Life; only Jerome thinks that the Distinction was more taken notice of
there than elsewhere; or sooner had the Note of a peculiar Name given to the
Praeses. If this Sense, that our Author dreameth of, were put on Jerome's
words, they must either contradict the whole of his Epistle, which is to prove
that Bishop and Presbyter were one, till Ministers contended among themselves,
and a Superiority came in paulatim, upon that; or it makes Jerome to say, that
Parity was observed in all other Churches till these Dissensions arose; but at
Alexandria was Prelacy: which we cannot impute to Jerome, without making him
absurdly contradict all Antiquity; which does represent Uniformity in the
Church in this Matter; and not such Discord. It is further evident, that Jerome
did not mean, that there was a Prelate, with sole, or superior Jurisdiction,
set up at Alexandria; in that he was chosen by the Presbyters from among
themselves; and ordained also by them: he had no Prelation above them, but what
they gave him: whereas a Bishop must be ordained by other Bishops: again, this
is not spoken of by Jerome as a thing that the Presbyters must do, as being of
Divine Institution; but what themselves chused.

10. He has another Exception against our Argument from Jeromes Authority, p.
74. that he asserteth that the Apostolical Traditions were taken from the Old
Testament. Where says he, two things are asserted. 1. That the Hierarchy of
the Christian Church is founded upon Apostolical Tradition. This is an absurd
Inference. Jerome did indeed think that the Government of the Church at first,
was founded on Apostolical Tradition, contained in the Scripture: but he is so
far from making it to be a Hierarchy (in the Prelatical Sense) that he opposes
that, and pleads for Parity. The second thing he observes is, that the
Apostles had the Model of the Temple in their view, when they erected this
Platform and Polity in the Church; the Bishop was the same with the High
Priest in the Temple: and our Savior made no Change but what was done did
necessarly result from the Evangelical AEconomy which he was to stablish in the
room of Levitical worship. Hence the Ancients so often reason from the Jewish
Precedents to regulate the practice of the Christian Church. Here are diverse
things to be examined, 1. How far Christ and his Apostles had respect to the
Jewish Model, when they framed the Government of the Gospel Church, I shall not
now determine. I suppose they did as a man does when he pulls down an old
House, to build a new one: he does not tie himself to the Dimensions, the Form,
nor number of Stories, or Rooms: yet what was in the old House that was for his
design in the new, he will readily observe. We are sure the Gospel Builders
neither intended to reform, or patch, the old Jewish Church Fabric. Such
methods in Building, use to impare the Beauty, as well as usefulness, of the
Fabric. It is certain that they did wholly demolish the Fabric to the
Foundation; (I mean, as to what was instituted, and not of the Law of Nature)
as the Apostle shows Heb. 7. 12. where he tells us of the change of the
Priesthood, and also of the Law. And it is certain that the use of Priests, and
of Levites to (whose Work was to serve the Priests in their Sacrifices) ceased,
as soon as Christ offered up his Sacrifice once for all. Wherefore, as there
was a new Priesthood (to speak in his Dialect) to be set up; which had another
sort of Work to do; to offer up spiritual Sacrifices: So our Lord and his
Apostles accommodated their Institution to what was needful, and convenient for
that design; and had no further regard to what had been in the Jewish Church.
Hence if he can show that there is the same use of Bishops under the New
Testament, that there was of the High Priest under the Old Testament, he
gains this Argument: but this, I hope, he will not attempt. The High Priest
was a Type of Christ, as He is the Head of the Church, and as He offered up
that one Sacrifice, which all the inferior Priests under the High Priest's
Conduct and Authority, were especially employed in. Must we therefore have a
multitude of Bishops in the Christian Church, to represent a Savior for every
Diocese, under whom the Presbyters offer up spiritual Sacrifices? 2. That the
Bishop is the same with the High Priest, is not only said without all Scripture
Warrant; but is most absurd: for the High Priest was one in the whole Church of
God; but the Bishops are many in the Gospel Church of Christ. And indeed this
way of Reasoning will either establish the Pope as Head of the Universal
Church, or it is wholly insignificant. 3. That our Savior introduced no Change
but what was necessary for the Evangelical AEconomie, is first said without
Book he used his Liberty, nor did he tie himself to the old Pattern. Next, the
new AEconomie did require this change that there should be no High Priest:
because one man could not so manage the Affairs of the whole Christian Church,
as he could do of the Jewish Church. 4. Jerome does not here infer a Prelacy
among Presbyters, from the Subordination of Priests in the Temple: his whole
purpose is to show that Deacons, the Servants of the Church, were inferior to
Presbyters, the Rulers of it; and this he sets forth by the Similitude (not
binding Pattern) of the Levites being inferior to the Priests, whom they served
in the offering of Sacrifices: wherefore he does not tell us that the Bishops
were what the High Priest was; and the Presbyters what Aarons Sons were, and
the Deacons what the Levites were; but he sets Aaron and his Sons on the one
side, and compares them with the Bishops or Presbyters (whom he had been
proving to be the same) and the Levites on the other side to whom he compares
the Deacons. 5. If he can show us that any (...) the Ancients do so reason from
the Jewish, to a Christian Hierarchy, (...) to infer that they should be
alike, or that they infer any more from (...) than diversity of Degrees of
Church Officers, we shall consider what they say.

11. A further Effort he makes against what we bring out of Jerome: he takes
notice p: 74, 75. That, Jerome cites the genuine Epistle of Ignatius; in which
the Divine Original, and Institution, of Episcopal Eminence and Jurisdiction
above Presbyters, is frequently and plainly expressed And after, when we find
him citing the Epistles of Saint Ignatius as the genuine words of that holy
Martyr, it must be acknowledged that he never dreamed of any Interval, after
the Apostles, in which the Church was governed by (...) Parity of Presbyters.
This is a strange way of reasoning: Jerome says that Ignatius wrote such and
such Epistles, Ergo, though he teaches Doctrine flatly contradictory to what
they contain, yet he takes for certain Truth all that is said in them: neither
will this follow from Jerome's believing that Ignatius was a good man, and a
holy Martyr good Men may have different Apprehensions of things, and yet own
the Writings of one another to be genuine. All that Jerome says is, that
Ignatius wrote an Epistle to the Ephesians, another to the Magnesians, etc. He
does not cite one word out of them for Episcopacy, nor can any man assure us
that these Epistles now Extant are the same that Ignatius wrote, and that
Jerome mentions; or that they are not vitiated. (...) will not digress to
debate about Ignatius's Epistles, whether they be spurious or legitimate;
whether they were by Ignatius the Martyr, or by an other of that Name, long
after: but I much question what our Author confidently asserteth, that the
Divine Original and Institution of Episcopal Eminence or Jurisdiction above
Presbyters, is, in them, frequently and plainly expressed. When he shall think
fit to produce the places where this is done, we shall consider them. He
brings another Evidence, as he thinks, of what was Jerome's Opinion in this
Matter, p. 77. out of his Commentaries on Mat: 23. Quod fecerunt and Apostoli
per singulas Provincias Episcopos and Presbyteros ordinantes. I do not find
that Commentary among Jerome's Works, and therefore cannot judge by the Thread
of his Discourse, of what he designed by that Expression: but the words contain
no Argument; for bare mentioning of Bishop and Presbyter does not prove them to
be distinct; especially out of the mouth of one who had taken so much pains to
prove them to be the same. Jerome might well say, in the Dialect of his Age
that the Apostles ordained Church Rulers, whom we now distinguish by these
Names. What he brings next is wholly against Sense and Reason; that this
Constitution (setting Bishops over Presbyters) followed immediately upon the
Confusions and Schisms that arose in the Apostolical Church; because Jerome in
Epistola ^d Titum, says, priusquam vero unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat suos
puta^it esse, non Christi, in toto orb decretum est, ut unus, etc. The
absurdity of this Fancy I have above showed: if he would prove what he
designeth from this Testimony; he must assert that Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, 1
Cor. 2. thought that they whom they baptized were theirs, not Christ's; and that
they were the Authors of the Schism at Corinth. which I hope he will not say:
It is evident that Jerome speaks of a Schism made by ambitious and selfish
Church men: and after that Schism Bishops were set up; which no man will say
was in the Apostles time. He has yet another proof of Jerome being for
Prelacy: p. 78, 79. out of his Catalogus scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, where he
gives account of several Bishops ordained and fixed in places, by the Apostles
themselves. The Answer is plain and easy: the Apostles did indeed fix Bishops
in Churches; that ^s Ministers, who were to teach and rule them: but that these
Bishops who are also called Presbyters) had Jurisdiction over other Presbyters,
^s the question, and is not determined by this Argument.

12. He next cites Jerome, Epistola ad Nepotium. Esto subjectus pontifici ^o,
and quasi animae parentem suscipe: quod Aaron and silios ejus, hoc Episcopum
and Presbyteros esse neverimus. This Citation is lame: between the two
Sentences which our Author conjoineth, there is, besides other things, this
Passage; sed Episcopi Sacerdotes se sciant esse, non Dominos: honorent Clericos
quasi con-Clericos: Ut and ipsis a Cloricis quasi Episcopis hon^ deferatur:
scitum est illud oratoris Domitii, cur ego (inquit) te habe^ ut Principem, cum
tu me non habeas ut Senatorem. Then follows, qu^ Aaron, etc. And he adds,
unus Deus, unum Templum, unum etiam (...) Ministerium: and he cites to this
purpose, 1 Pet. 5: 2, 3. and adds, pessimae consuetudinis est quibusdam
Ecclesiis tacere Presbyteros, and praesentibus Episcopis non loqui; quasi aut
invideant, aut non dignentur audire. It is evident that Jerome is here speaking
of what was the way and practice in his time, and not of what was the Apostles
practice, or what was Divine Institution: and therefore nothing here said can
serve my Adversaries purpose: for our present Debate is, whether Jerome thought
the Episcopacy was of Divine Institution. Next, it is also manifest, that
Jerome is here reproving the height that some Church men were the^ aspiring to;
not approving the way of that time. We deny not the in that Age, the paritie of
Presbyters had begun to be encroached upon; in some places more, and in some
less; though we see no cause to think, that Church Domination had then arrived
at the height that my Antagonist pleads for. 3. It appears by a strict and
unbyassed View of all that Jerome here says, that no further Prelation is here
hinted at, than that of any Minister of the Gospel, or of the Moderator of a
Presbyterio: for every Minister may be called Pontifex, and Parens anime, (as
the Dialect then was) and may clame Subjection from the people in the Lord.
What is said of Aaron and his Sons, imports no more but that all Ministers
have Authority, as all the Priests had: it is a Similitude, and it must not be
stretched to an exact agreement in all things 4. That Jerome makes a
Distinction between Episcopos and Clericos, ca^ be drawn to no more but this;
that in his time, there was an observable Prelation in matter of Dignity; it no
way proves a Superiority of Jurisdiction; though I deny not but that some were
then aiming at i^ His Citation out of Ep. 54, Hieron. I find not, he has not
told us to whom that Epistle was written. It seems these Epistles are not the
same way ranked in my Edition and in his. That he says there, Episcopi apud
nos tenent locum Apostolorum; cannot prove his point: for the same may be said
of all Presbyters; and Jerome says so expressly of them, Ep. ad Ocean: as I
cited 3: they succeed to the Apostles in that part of Church power that is
competent to them: and he cannot prove that Bishops succeed to them in all the
power they had: but the Dispute about this will fall in afterward. That Jerome
speaks about an Ecclesiastical Prince, or Governor, is also inconcludent:
for the Fathers sometimes speak as big words of Presbyters. He cites also Ep.
ad Paulinum, Episcopi (says he) and Presbyteri habeant in exemplum Apostolos
and Apostolicos viros, quorum honorem possidentes habere nitantur and meritum.
All that he can draw from this is, that there was such a Distinction in
Jerome's time; which is not denied: but Jerome does not here define what power
the one of these had above the other. He had been telling Paulinus, how Men of
other Professions labored to imitate them who had excelled in their way; and
instanceth the Roman Captains, Philosophers, Poets, Orators; and this he
applies to Church men; that they also should follow the best Examples: it were
ridiculous to strain it to this sense, that Bishops should imitate the
Apostles, and Presbyters the Apostolic men: especially seeing our Author will
say that many of these were Bishops. His exors and ab omnibus eminens potestas,
he mentions by so indistinct a Citation, that I know not where to find it;
and therefore shall say nothing of it. To his Recapitulation of all that he had
said on Jerome p. 79, 80. I oppose the Answers I have given to the several
things he there mentions; which duly considered, let the Reader judge what
ground there is for his Triumph that he concludes this Discourse with.

13. Our Author proceeds p. 80, and seq: to vindicate Augustine, that he was
no Presbyterian. And, pray, who ever said he was one? That way was past its
Meridian in the World a little before his time: only we bring his Authority to
prove, that some great Lights of the Church did not look on Episcopacy as of
Divine Right; or to have been in the Church from the Apostolic Age. He
prefaceth this Dissertation with a Digression (as himself calls it)
containing insolent Contempt of, and Reproach against the Presbyterians;
calling all that have written, beside Blondel and Salmasius, the little
Bouffoons of the Party: he must here understand the London Ministers. the five
eminent Men under the name of Smectymnus, Rutherford, Didoclavius, Gersom
Bucer, and many others. If Presbyterians did incline to act the part of
Bouffoons, this Book, and many others like it, might furnish them plentiful
Matter. He charge them with Impiety, p: 82. calls them factious and
unmortified Men: their Opinions, Dreams: says, they have nothing more in their
view than to gratify their Revenge, and other Passions: imputes Impudence and
Irreligion to them, on account of this their Opinion. And his Confidence
swells so high as to tell us, how astonishing it is that so much is written
for Parity: If we believe the Ecclesiastical Records, there remains no Debate
that Episcopacy is Divine, Apostolical, received without Interruption, and that
by the Universal Church. That Skepticism will (by natural Consequence) pull
down things more sacred, than the outward Hedge of Government: If his Arguments
prove to bear any Proportion to his big Words, there can be no standing before
him. He had been wiser if he had asserted less, and proved more: and if he had
managed this Controversy with a more sedate Mind, it may be his success had
been no less. I will not contest with him in Railling, nor huffie and bold
asserting what is in controversy: but am willing to reason the Matter fairly
and calmly. The Passage out of Augustine which Blondel and Salmasius bring is,
Ep. 19. which is ad Hieronymum: quanquam secundum honorum vocabula quae jam
Ecclesiae usus obtinuit, Episcopus Presbytero major sit, tamen in multis rebus
Augustinus Hieronymo minor est. I freely yield to my Antagonist, that the
design of that Epistle is to invite Jerome to use all freedom in their
Epistolary Conversation: and I add that this was needful, considering the
higher Character (in the common estimation of that Age) that Augustine
sustained, above Jerome, a Presbyter; and therefore I lay not the stress of our
Argument on his owning Jerome to be in some things above him; nor do I think
that Augustine looked on himself and Jerome as standing on a Level, in respect
of Dignity, as then it was esteemed: but I place the force of our Argument on
these two; the one is, Augustine insinuates no Prelation that he had above
Jerome, even according to the Sentiment of that Age, but what was secundum
honorum vocabula: he had a higher Title, he gives no hint of a Superior
Jurisdiction, that he, a Bishop, had above Jerome, a Presbyter: which had been
much more pertinent, and full as consistent with the Modesty and Humility that
he expresses. The other is, that even that superior Honor, he does not derive
from Divine Institution, or Apostolical Tradition, or constant Practice from
the beginning; but from the Custom of the Church that then (that is in that
Age) prevailed.

14. After setting down at length this Testimony from Augustine, he undertaketh
to show that the latter Sectaries (so he is pleased to dignifie the
Presbyterians) mistake his meaning, and that Augustine never thought that
Parity obtained in the Christian Church. He endeavors then to prove, that by
usus Ecclesiae, Augustine meant no other thing, than the universal Practice of
the Christian Church from the beginning: and that this Notion is very familiar
to him, that Catholic and universal Customs had their Rise from Apostolic
authority. Before I consider what he says on this Head, I shall suggest one
Consideration that will make it wholly unserviceable to his Design: viz. that
our Argument is not built simply upon the Phrase usus Ecclesiae: but partly in
his distinguishing Bishops from Presbyters in respect of Dignity, not
Jurisdiction; partly on his mentioning usus Ecclesiae not which semper
obtinuit, sed which jam obtinuit. He speaks not of universal Practice, nor of
perpetual Practice; but for a Practice that in his time had become common. I
shall now attend to what he pretends to bring for his Opinion about Austines
meaning: he tells us p. 85. that this Father complained that many Usages had
crept into the Church that were burdensome and uneasy, of which they knew the
Original; but for such Customs and Constitutions as were received universally,
in all Churches, from the very first preaching of the Gospel, these he always
considered as Sacred, and inviolable, and of Apostolic Authority: and of this
sort, he says, Austine thought Episcopacy to be: and he brings in Augustine
reasoning thus: that what was confirmed by universal Custom in the Christian
Church, could have no beginning latter than the Apostles: his words are, quod
universa tenet Ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum, non
nisi authoritate Apostolorum traditum rectissime credimus. He tells us again
p 87. to make his Assertion surer, as much as repeating it can do; that usus
Ecclesiae in Austine's Language, signifies nothing else than the universal
Practice of the Christian Church, which obtained in all Ages, and in all
places, and therefore must needs spring from no lower Original than Apostolic
authority. And hence he pleads, that unless we can show what Council,
Provincial or AEcumenick, introduced Episcopacy, it must be purely Divine. To
all this I oppose a few Considerations. First, that upstart Customs of whose
Original we can give account and these that are immemorial, are not only to be
distinguished, but differently regarded, I think it is very reasonable: and
this learned Father did wisely observe it; but that so much weight is to be
laid on this Distinction, that every thing is to be accounted Divine, the first
Rise of which we cannot account for, I cannot assent to that; nor do I find
that Austine was of that Opinion. There were Customs, even in the Apostolic
Church, which he will not say were of Divine Institution, and yet he cannot
tell when and by whom they began: such as the Love Feasts; to which I may add
the osculum pacis, which though the manner of it was enjoined by the Apostle,
that it should be done holily, without Hypocrisy or Lasciviousness; yet I
think few will say, the thing was enjoined; for then all the Churches should
sin in neglecting it. And if there were such Customs that then crept in, why
might it not be so afterward?

15. I observe 2. From his Discourse, that there is no ground to think that
Augustine thought every Custom Apostolical, of which the Original, or time of
beginning, could not be showed: because that were to make Custom, and not
Scripture the Rule of our Faith and Practice: and it would likewise infer the
Infallibility of the Church, not only in her Decrees, but in her Customs:
which is a stretch beyond the Papists themselves. If this Doctrine be true, no
Custom of the Church can be contrary to, yea, nor without Warrant from
Apostolic Tradition: it is not to be thought that Austine thought so, who
every where pleads for having Recourse to the written Word of God, where
there is any Controversy about our Faith or Practice. The words cited cannot
be so far stretched; but are to be understood, in Subordination to the
Scripture; where a Custom has always, and universally obtained; and it is not
inconsistent with the Scripture Rule; that may be indeed looked on as of Divine
Original, if it be in a Matter that Religion is nearly concerned in. If we
should yield this Doctrine about the Influence of Customs, as a Rule of Faith
and Practice; yet it must be understood to comprehend the Custom of the
Apostolic Age, together with that of after times: for to say that after the
decease of the Apostles no Custom could creep in which was not Divine, is a
bold Assertion. If while the Apostles watched over the Church, some Weeds might
grow; much more after their decease, while men slept, it might be so: 4. If his
Doctrine about Customs in general, were never so unexceptionable; how will he
prove that Episcopacy is such a Custom, or that Augustine looked on it as such?
Herein lies our present Debate; and he fancieth Austine is on his side,
because he extolleth Custom; if he can prove that Austine thought that
universa Ecclesia semper tenuit, that a Bishop has Jurisdiction over
Presbyters, we shall part with this Argument, and lean no more to Austines
Authority. This he has not attempted, and we are sure he can never perform it.
5. We are not obliged to tell what Council introduced Episcopacy. But we can
prove, first; that it might come in an other way, as the Tares grew when Men
slept; he might with as good Reason, when we see Tares growing among Wheat,
prove that these Tares are good Wheat, because we cannot tell when, or by what
particular Hand, they were sown. Did not our Lord foretell that Corruptions
would insensibly creep into the Church, by this Parable of the Tares? Sure
Decisions of Councils are not the only way of corrupting the Church. 2. If we
prove that Episcopacy is contrary to Apostolic practice, and to Scripture
rule, it must needs be evil; though it have come in by no Council: if we find a
Thief in the House, or a Disease in the Body, we may look on them as such,
though we cannot tell how the one got into the House, nor give account of the
procatartick Cause of the other: now as to what we contest about, if we do not
prove that it is not the way that Scripture commends, or that the Apostles
allowed, we must yield the Cause. Before I proceed to what he further offers,
I must take notice of a word that he seems to smother, and yet it looks
like an Argument, p. 86. about the middle he says, Austine intended no more,
but that now under the Gospel, by the constant and early practice of the
Church, from the days of the Apostles, the Character and Dignity of a Bishop,
was above that of a Presbyter. He puts, now, in a different Character, and
expounds it by, the days of the Gospel. This Interpretation is a doing
Violence to the Text; for if now be so understood, he must tell us when the
time was, that the Distinction of these honorum vocabula, Episcopatus and
Presbyterium, were not in use. Were they one and the same under the Law? Or is
it imaginable that Austine would after 400 years, or there about, speak so of
that Distinction, if it were no newer? He cites also 1 Cor. 11. 16. We have no
such Custom, nor the Churches of Christ: does he think this Scripture so clear
and express an Assertion of his Conclusion, that he says not one word for
bringing it to his purpose: the Apostle is there speaking of things wherein
Custom is indeed the Rule, as having the Head bare, or covered, wearing long
or short Hair: it does not thence follow (if the Apostle did there make it the
Rule) that it must also be the Rule in other things, p. 88. he pretends to
convince us further, that Austine distinguished the Custom of the Universal
Church, from the Custom of particular places, and he makes the one mutable,
the other not so. He needed not be at pains to convince us of that Distinction.
I know no body that doubts of it, nor that reject the Customs that are truly
Universal, unless they clash with Scripture. But he should rather have tried
his Skill in convincing us, that Episcopacy has been so used in the Church, or
that Austine meant such a Usage, by his usus Ecclesiae.

16. Another thing our Author undertaketh, for vindicating Austine, is, to
prove that he does positively assert that the Succession of Bishops in the Sea
of Rome, did begin at Peter; and thence argues against the Donatists; that
their Error was a Noveltie, because in all this Succession of Bishops there was
no Donatist: if (says my Antagonist) there was a Period in the Christian
Church after the days of the Apostles; in which the Church was governed without
Bishops, by a Paritie of Ecclesiastical Officers, the Donatists might evite
that Argument, by denying such a Succession. This is one of the silliest of all
Arguments: it is captio ab homonymia: there was a Succession of faithful Men,
who taught and ruled the Church of Rome for so long a time, among whom was no
Donatist: it follows indeed that the Opinion of Donatists was a Noveltie; but
does it follow that in all that Interval, that Church was governed by Prelates,
with Jurisdiction over Presbyters? unless he can prove that every one named in
that Succession ruled the Church by himself, without the joint Authority of the
Presbyters, he says nothing to the Purpose in hand. He cannot be ignorant,
that the word Bishop, signified in the Scripture Dialect, and in the Age that
followed, any Church Ruler: and therefore that these men are called Bishops,
cannot prove their sole, nor superior Jurisdiction. Austines Argument from this
Succession, is equally strong against the Donatists, whether these called
Bishops, were such as do we now distinguish by that Name from other Presbyters,
or were the Ministers of the Church of Rome; or were Moderators of the
Presbytery there. If he had taken his argument from Austines naming but one
Bishop in Rome at one time, it would have seemed to have more of sense. But
even so, it would not be so concludent; for naming of one who might be the
oldest, the most eminent, or the primus Presbyter or Praeses in the Meeting,
does no ways infer that he had Jurisdiction over the rest. From this our Author
infers, p. 90. that usus Ecclesiae, in Austines sense, is the practice of
the Church from the days of Peter. I think none else can see this Consequence;
for in the one place he is distinguishing Bishops and Presbyters; in the other
place (and they are different Books) he has no occasion to take notice of that
Distinction: nor is there any Affinity between the one Passage and the other.
He further argues, that Austine reckons Aerius an Heretic, on account of
his Opinion about the Identitie of Bishop and Presbyter. This I have taken
notice of above, 1. It is no way to our present purpose, Austine disliked the
Opinion of Aerius, as contrary to the Sentiments that then prevailed, Ecclesiae
usu: does it thence follow that he thought Episcopacy was Juris Divini? Whether
his unseemly Reflection on Mr. Andrew Mellvil, be a better proof of our Authors
Christian Temper, and Veracity, or of his Skill in close reasoning, I leave it
to the Reader to judge. His repeating the Argument from Succession of Bishops,
p. 91. does not make it stronger. When he can say no more that looks like
Argument, he (according to his laudable Custom) concludes this part of the
Debate, with Railling and abusive Reflections; and confidently asserting his
Conclusion, ad nauseam usque. Few of the Scots Presbyterians read any of the
Ancients: they consult Blondel and Salmasius, and go no further than
Smectymnus: he tells us of their incurable Peevishness: they think to
understand the Fathers by broken Sentences, torn from their neighbor places,
when they have neither the Patience, nor good nature, to consider what the same
Author says else where: he calls them, bauling People, and their way
Confusion, and aequality. It is not only new but absurd; supported by Dreams
and Visionary Consequences: their Doctrines contradict the common Sense of
Mankind, as well as the universal and uninterrupted Testimony of all Christian
Antiquity. Thus he bantereth his Adversaries, when he cannot beat them out of
their Principles, by the force of Argument, in this way of Debating I am
resolved he shall have the last word: which uses to be a pleasant Victory to
Men, or Women, who fight with this Weapon.

SECTION VII.
The Authors Arguments examined, which pretend to prove the Succession of
Bishops to the Apostles.

MY Adversary has hitherto acted defensively. In his second Chapter p. 94.
and seq. he begins to assault us with his Arguments for Episcopacy. He
places his main strength in this, that the Bishops were Successors to the
Apostles; and that when the Apostles went off the Stage, they left Diocesan
Bishops to rule over the Presbyters and People, as themselves had done. And now
he pretends to fix the true state of the Controversy: which he should have
done before he had so largely debated it: we might for him been fighting in the
Dark all this time: and neither understood against whom, nor about what we
contend. He shows his wonted Benignity, and good Temper, in his Preamble to
his stating of the Question; when he says, such as design no more than
Confusion and Clamor, endeavor to darken the true State of the Controversy
That the Presbyterians have such Designs we disown, (and it may be presumed we
know our own Designs better than he does) neither shall we take upon us to
judge his design in this Book, but leave that to the unbyassed who read it, and
consider his Strain and his Arguments. To his stating the Question he premiseth
two things agreed on; that (...) Government is not ambulatory. I am glad that
we are agreed about this it was not so when the Magistrate was on their side;
we were alway^ of that Opinion, but so were not they generally; otherways Dr.
Stillingfleets Irenicum had not got such universal Acceptance among their as it
did. He says we are likewise agreed that there was a Hierarchy und^ the Old
Testament: whence this Conclusion is necessary, that the Subordination of one
Priest to another is not simpliciter unlawful. If I were a Papist, and
disputing against A. M. D. D. for the Popes Supremacy, I would likewise pretend
to this Concession from him, that under the Old Testament there was one Priest
to whom the whole Church of God, Priest and People were subject; whence this
Conclusion is necessary, that or single person be Head of the Universal Church,
is not in its self simplic^ter unlawful. This Author is in a great Mistake, if
he imagine that (...) say that Episcopacy is simpliciter, and in it self
unlawful: we think that Christ might have set up Bishops, yea a Pope (with such
limited Power (...) his Wisdom might have seen to be consistent with the
Churches good in the Church, if so it had seemed good to Him. And if He had
(...) done, we should cheerfully have submitted to the one, or the other
wherefore our Question is not, what was lawful antecedently to Christ
Institution, but what He has appointed, as the way how He will ha^ His Church
governed. The other thing that he premiseth to his stating of the Question, is
an Enquiry into the nature of the Apostolic Office: where he labors to
separate the ordinary permanent, essential Pow^ of the Apostles, which he
makes to be perpetual; from the extrinsick, a^ extraordinary Privileges, and
Advantages of that Power, suitable to the fi^ Plantations of Christianity; which
he maintains to be Transitory, and (...) have ceased when they died.

2. The Essence of the Apostolic Office he will have to be in the Rectoral
Power, or spiritual Jurisdiction that they had over other Ecclesiastic and not
in their extraordinary Gifts, nor Infallibility, nor in their immed^ Call; nor
in their being Witnesses of our blessed Saviors Resurrection: and h^ proves
of each of these, that others beside the Apostles, had these Privileges. These
things are asserted Dictatorie: but I see not from what Grounds he draws
these confident Decisions. It is not any where told us in the Word, what is
precisely the Essence of the Apostolic Office, and what is accidental or
extrinsick to it; and therefore we must be very Wa^e in determining so
positively in this Matter. It might be expected that this Gentleman, who when
the Presbyterians hold Paritie to be of Divine Right, requires of them plain
Proofs, else they must be looked upon as Impostors, p. 13. should give us very
plain and positive Evidence for what he does thus magisterially Dictate; and
which he lays for the Foundation of his Opinion concerning the Divine Right
of Episcopacy: but here we are disappointed. He has not attempted to prove
that the nature of the Apostolate is not an Aggregate of all these, preaching
Power, with Administration of the Sacraments, Supreme Jurisdiction in the
Church, and that with Rule over all Churches, an immediate Call, extraordinary
Gifts, Infallibility; to have seen the Lord. If one should assert that they who
have all these are Apostles, and none else are Apostles; and so that these are
the Properties of an Apostle, which agree to Apostles, omni, soli, and semper;
and consequently they complexly taken, are the most essential Attribute of an
Apostle, by which we must judge of the Essence of that Office (for we know not
the Essences of things, but by their first, and essential Properties) how will
our Author disprove this Opinion to establish his own?

3. I shall set before the Reader the Opinions of others (on both sides) about
the Matter of the Apostolate; or the distinguishing Characters of an Apostle;
that he may be the better able to judge of this Authors Opinion about it; which
yet is not his, but is borrowed from the Papists. But I first observe, that
Christ's twelve Disciples, who are by way of Eminency called Apostles, arrived
at that height of Church Dignity and Power, by degrees: they were first called
to be Believers: and afterward were sent forth as Preachers; Christ having bred
them to that Work by their Converse with Him, for some time: in neither of
these Degrees, had they any Church Power, except that of Preaching, and
Baptizing: they were no Church Rulers; for there was as yet, no Gospel Church
to be ruled, but they were still subject to the Government that was exercised
in the Jewish Church: at last our Lord, after his Resurrection, gave them their
Apostolic Commission; by which they were clothed with the Authority that
belonged to that Office; and sent them out, both with Authority to Teach,
gather, and setle, and to govern Churches; and their complete Ordination, or
solemn setting them apart for that Office, by which also, they were furnished
for the Discharge of it, above what they had been before, was when the Spirit
was poured out on them, on the day of Pentecost: they got their Commission Mat.
28. 18, 10, 20. but the pouring out of the Spirit on that day, was as it were
putting the Broad Seal of Heaven to their Commission; as may be gathered from
Act: 1: 4, 5. Luke 24. 44. It is true, others, beside the Twelve, got some
Drops of that heavenly Shower, but they had not the same Commission with them,
and therefore the Measure that they got did neither authorize them, nor fit
them for Apostolic Work. Another thing that I here observe is, that though the
Name Apostle be given to others in Scripture, yet there were some to whom that
Name was given in a peculiar manner; though the Word is sometime used at large,
yet it is applied to them, so as by it they are distinguished from other Church
Officers: hence the Apostle not only takes that Designation to himself, in the
Inscriptions of his Epistles, but takes pains to prove that he was an Apostle
2. Cor 9. 1, 2. Now our enquiry is, wherein consists the nature of that
Office that they had, who by way of Eminence were called Apostles; or what are
the Characte^ that they may be distinguished by from other Church Officers? If
we can arrive at any Light in this, it will help us to understand whether the
Bishops be Apostles, as some plead, or their Successors, as others imagine.

4 I begin with the learned Bishop of Worcester Iren. p 209. where he
discourses of the common use of the Word, but p. 210. he tells us, that the
Twelve were called Apostles, from their immediate Commission that they had from
Christ, and that our Lord made use of the word Sending (as applied to them) in
the proper and peculiar sense. And he is so far from making Apostles and
Bishops to be the same, that he maintains, that (...) Argument can be drawn
for the Form of Church Government from Christ's Actions toward his Disciples.
Whitaker, against Bellarm: de Pontif: Roman^ (who has the same Notion of the
Power given to Peter, that our Author has of that given to the Apostles, and
makes the Pope to succeed to Peter, not in his extraordinary, but his ordinary
Power; exactly as this Author says of the Bishops, compared with the Apostles)
Whita^ I say, brings his Proofs against the Popes being an Apostle, from
these Characters of an Apostle: and this he borrows from the Apostle himself,
proving his own Apostleship: that he was not called by men, Gal: 1. 1. Now
says he, the Pope is called by men; so say we of Bishops; that he had his
Doctrine, not by men's teaching, but by Revelation, Gal. 1. 2. Ephesians (...). 3.
This agrees neither to the Pope, nor Bishops: that he had seen Christ; 1 Cor.
9. 10. That the Apostles were Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, Acts 1. 22.
You see then how our Writers maintain the Protestant Cause against Papists:
that they gi^e other Characters of an Apostle, which they make essential to
him: and that this Enquirer has the same Notions of this Matter that the
Papists have. Calvin: In^ lib. 4: cap: 3. 4. gives these Characters of an
Apostle: his universal Charge, and not being tied to a particular Church: and
for this cites Mark 16. 15. and Romans 15. 19, 20. where he observes, that
there was no bounds set to their Labors, but the whole world was given them to
labor in: and that when Paul would prove his Apostolate, he does not tell us
of his gaining one City to Christ: but how he had traveled through a great
part of the World, preaching the Gospel. He mentions also another Character,
that the Apostoli were tanquam primi Ecclesiae Architec^^, qui ^jus ^und (...)
in (...) or be (...): They were the first Planters of Churches, of which
afterward. If it be objected, that these things belonged to the first, and
extraordinary Apostles, not to these that are secondary, and permanent, or
ordinary Apostles. This is to suppose what is in Question the Scripture gives
us the Characters of the Apostles that were the first Founders of the Church;
but gives no account of other Apostles; therefore these other are not
Apostles, except in the general Notion, as they are sent to do Church work:
Gersom Bucer: dissert: de gubern: Eccles. Episceps: 70. p. 269. proves, that
the Apostolate was a distinct Office from all other Church Officers, from 1
Cor: 12. 29. are all Apostles? so that it cannot be confounded with the
Episcopal Office, nor differ from it only in these accidental things that this
Author speaks of: and Episceps 98. p. 383. he cites both Whitaker and
Polanus, making the Apostles such a distinct Office, to which there was no
Succession in respect of their Degree, and making this a distinguishing Mark of
that Office, that their Calling was (...), immediate. The same has Paul Bay^,
Dyoces: ^ryal, p. 52. Didoclav: altar: Damascen: C. 4. p. 141. cites Whitaker,
and Junius, to this purpose: and even Tilenus, who was no friend to
Presbytery, Petrum (says he,) unius loci aut urbis Episcopum facere, est
Apostolicam dignitatem ei detrahere. de. Pontif: lib: 2: C. 4. Not: 6. and lib.
1. C. 25. Not* 7. he has these words, neque eam Apostolus ullus uni civitati,
tanquam globae, ascriptus fuit, quod Gregarli est Episcopi, non Apostoli. Also
lib. 2. C. 12. ^

5. I have seen a Manuscript of a learned Minister of this Church, now
deceased, which, by an accident, has stuok in the Birth, (I mean the Press)
for some time: the design of which is to prove (and I think he does it solidly)
that the proper distinguishing Character of an Apostle is, he was commissioned
by Jesus Christ in an immediate way, to gather and to plant Churches; and to
institute all Christ's Ordinances, in them: to teach them to observe all that he
has commanded. So he, p: 61. That Apostles were appointed for the erecting and
building of the Church, as ordinary Officers are for the constant care of it,
and administering the Ordinances of it. And p. 64. he makes the Power of the
Apostles, to be instituting the Ordinances of the Church, Ministerially, under
Christ, whereas the Power of all other Officers lies in executing what is by
them instituted. the Apostles Power of Executing these Institutions arose from
this, that every superior Church Officer has the Power of all inferior
Officers. He further shows, that the Office of an Apostle differed from all
the extraordinary Offices that were in the Church, in the beginning of the
Gospel, particularly, the Evangelists (whose Office had the most Resemblance of
the Apostolate) in that 1. They had not the same Mission with the Apostles (the
one was immediately from Christ, the other was from Him, by the Apostles: though
their Gifts were sometimes immediate, and extraordinary.) 2. They were not
under the infallible guidance of the Spirit, as the Apostles were; but were
directed and ordered by the Apostles. 3. They had not their particular
Instructions from Christ immediately, as the Apostles, as appears from the
Epist to Tim: and Titus 4 They had not the Power of conferring the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost by laying on of Hands, as the Apostles had. My design in all this is
to show, that we have little reason to take this our Authors Doctrine about the
nature of the Apostolic Office, how ever confidently asserted by him, on his
bare word; seeing so many of all sorts of Protestants are against him in this:
for his talk of the uniform Testimony of Antiquity for what he says, we look
on it as a groundless Fancy; that he can never make out. I find indeed that
some of the Ancients call Bishops, and some of them call Presbyters, Apostles,
in a large sense; that is Christ's Ambassadors: but that some of them think, or
say, that the Office of them who now rule the Churches, is the same with that
of them who at first planted them, I find not: when he shall please to produce
some of these Testimonies that he pretends to be uniform, they shall be
considered.

6 I cannot pass over without correction, an Argument he has p. 99. to prove
that it was not necessary to make up an Apostle, that he be immediately called
to the Apostolate by our Savior; for Matthias was not immediately ordained by
our Savior, but by the Apostles; who had power to continue that Succession to
the end of the World. A. It is most absurdly said, that Matthias was ordained
by the Apostles; for if they had had power to ordain an Apostle, why made they
use of Lots? They did not so in the Election or Ordination of any other Church
Officer. I think Lightfoots Opinion will find more to assent to it, his words
are, Apostoli non poterant Apostolum ordinare impositione manuum, prout
Presbyteros ordinabant, sed sort utuntur, quae erat veluti immediata manuum
Christi impositio in eum. Nor does it make against this, that it is said (...);
for Dr. Hammond (who was as great an Asserter of Episcopacy as this Author can
pretend to be, and understood as well what could be said for it) says, constat
Matthiam sort delectum fuisse, non per hominum suffragia. And Corn: a Lapide
in locum, verbum hoc loco Catachrestice usurpatur de qualibet electione;
idemque significat quod eligi, accenseri, annumerari. Not only Beza, but Corn a
Lapide, expounds it, q. d. hic sortis eventus communi omnium sententia
comprobatus fuit. And it is certain, that a Lot is a Divine Determination,
Prove. 16. 33. Cartwright, Mellis: Hebraic: has this Note on the Text, quod
sortem appellat judicium, docet, non nisi in rebus gravioribus ad sortem esse
recurrendum; maxim cum per sortem Deus ipse in judicio sedeat. It was not then
the Apostles, but Christ himself, who chose Matthias to the Apostleship: nor
was ever any Apostle chosen or called by Men; which the Apostle Paul denies of
himself, as not agreeing to that Office, Gal. 1. 1. He tells us, p: 100. that
the ordinary and perpetual Power that Christ gave to his Apostles, was derived
by them to their Successors. Here he supposes that the Apostles had an
ordinary and perpetual Power; which is that we now contend about; for we
maintain that their Power was extraordinary, and ceased with them; and that it
was an inferior sort of Power which their Successors got. He tells next, that
the name also was derived to others beside the twelve. That has been already
granted, that that Name, in a large sense, was given to others: yet in another
sense it was restricted to the Twelve. But he is very unhapy in his Proof of
this uncontested Truth; by Instancing Phil. 2. 25. where Epaphroditus is called
the Messenger, (...), of the Church of Philippi: for it is plain from the Text,
that he is so called as being sent by the Philippians to Paul, and not as sent
of God to them (tho we deny not but that in that sense he might be called an
Apostle) for in that he is said, with the same Breath, to be he that Ministered
to Paul's wants; and seeing it is as evident from the Text, that he was then
with Paul and not at Philippi; it appears that he had been sent by them to
Paul with some token of their bounty, for the Apostles subsistence. Thus
Grotius expounds this Place: who says, that they who gathered and carried
the sacred Money were called (...): and likewise, he says, that the
Philippians had sent Money to Paul by Epaphroditus, which he received, because
being in Bonds, he could not then work with his hands For the same
interpretation are Beza, Piscator, Zanchius, Uorstius; yea, Estius, who cites
Thomas Aquinas for it; and Cajetan. But he undertaketh to prove his sense of
the word, by this Assertion, that an Apostle, in the New Testament, never
signifies a Messenger sent by men to men; but always a Messenger sent from God
to men. This he extends to other places, as 2 Cor. 8. 23. This assertion is
wholly groundless: yea, it is false, as I have already proved with respect to
Epaphroditus. Phil. 2: 26. for 2 Cor. 8. 23. The word is not so to be taken
there neither; for all his confidence in saying that our Translation is
certainly a mistake. Grotius is here also against him; and says, they were
called (...), because of their carrying Aims to the Churches of Judea. And it
is evident from the Context, which tells us of Paul's sending Titus about this
Affair v. 27. and v. 18, 19. Another Brother is chosen by the Churches to
travel (viz. to Judea) with this Collection: and v. 22. Yet another Brother is
sent with Titus and that Brother formerly mentioned. Now the Apostle gives a
Character of these Commissioners; as for Titus, as well known to the Apostle,
being in high Station in the Church, and an Evangelist; he tells that he was
his Partner, and Fellow Helper; as for these other Brethren, he insinuates
that they must needs be very commendable persons; being chosen by the Churches,
and so entrusted by them; in that they made them their Messengers. What he
excepteth against this is frivolous; for they are not called the glory of
Christ on account of this Employment; neither could they be called the glory of
Christ, simply, on account of their being sent by him to the people; yea, or
being Bishops: but they are so called, because of their holy conversation, and
faithful discharge of their Office, what ever it was, in the Church. Another
Scripture he brings Rom: 16: 7. where some are called (...), where says he,
the Greek Phrase may be rendered, inter prima^ios Apostolos. This is a Blunder
that he would have thought sufficient to ruin the Credit of a Presbyterian for
ever, as ignorant of the Greek, and of good sense: for neither can the word
(...) signify Primarius. or Chief; but may well be rendered, of note, noted,
or eminent: nor can (...) and (...) agree, as Substantive and Adjective, as
this learned Author makes them to do; contrary to all Rules of Grammar. The
meaning is plain, that these men were noted, or eminent in the Church, and so
esteemed among the Apostles, or by them; nor does it at all import that they
themselves were Apostles. So not only Beza and Piscator; but Toletus, Vatablus,
Grotius. The falsehood of his Assertion, p. 100. That the word Apostle never
signifies a Messenger sent by men to men, but always one sent by God to men;
is evident from Joh. 13. 16. Neither is he that is sent, (...), greater than
him that sent him; where the word is taken at large, for any one that is sent
by another. And the Verb whence it is derived, is often used for a Man's
sending; as Mat. 2. 16. and 21. 3: and 27: 19: 2 Timothy: 4: 12 and passim.

7. He took notice, it seems, that his Adversaries make Universality of
Apostolic Jurisdiction to be one distinguishing Mark of their Office, which
Bishops cannot pretend to; and therefore Bishops have not the Substance of the
Apostolic Office. Hence he labors to take this Scruple out of the way, p.
101, 102, 103, 104. And 1. He tells us the narrowness of the Limits of these
Provinces assigned to the secondary Apostles (he means the Bishops) did not
alter the nature of their Office, from that of the twelve Apostles; more than
the Kings of Juda lost the Honor of sitting on the Throne of David, after the
Revolt of the ten Tribes. Here is a gross Mistake of the Question, which is
not, whether the largeness or narrowness of the Charge that a Church Ruler
has, do alter the nature of his Office; but whether a limited and particular
Charge do not so differ from that which is universal and extended to the whole
Church of Christ, as that he who has the one Charge and he that has the other
is not in the same Office. Will any Papist say, that the Univers^^ Bishop who
sits at Rome, has the same Office in the Church, and no higher than any
poor Bishop in Italy or elsewhere? The Similitude brought from the Kings of
Juda is impertinent to this purpose: if one had the Empire of the whole World,
and lost that, and got the Crown of one particular Kingdom; I think his Office
is not what it was. Beside, if we should yield all that he here alleges, it
were no loss to our cause: for we do not make universal Jurisdiction the only
Character of an Apostle; but that complexly, and in conjunction with others: as
is above showed. Another Consideration that he has, is, the Apostles
themselves had not equal Bounds and Provinces for their Inspection, but some
traveled further than others; yet this did not change their rectoral Power, or
Jurisdiction: no more did the confining Bishops in the exercise of their Power,
to narrower Limits, make their Power to differ from what the Apostles had:
that Restriction not being by the nature of the Power it self; but from the
various Necessities and Circumstances of the Church, the Rules of Order, and
the multitude of Converts, which obliged them afterward to more personal
Residence. I reply to this, 1. Here is a wide Door left for his Holiness of
Rome to enter into the Church by: and it is observable, how naturally, and
frequently, this learned Author, and some others of his Gang, do show their
Bias to that side. If nothing but Order, and Circumstances, and not Divine
Institution, do confine Bishops to their Sees, whether larger, or less
extended; and every one of them have, actu primo (as may be deduced from this
Doctrine) universal Jurisdiction; why may not the exercise of it be committed
to one of them; and the rest be subject to him? Some think that this belongs
to good Order, (though ordinary Pastors be related actu primo, to the Universal
Church; yet they have not that Jurisdiction that the Apostles had, who needed
no more but their intrinsic Power to warrant its Exercise in any particular
place.) 2. It is without all warrant to suppose that every Bishop has
universal Power over the Church of Christ, as every Apostle had: they have not
that Commission, go teach all Nations: this was the peculiar work of Apostles,
to travel and plant Churches: the work of Bishops (if such an Office be in the
Church) is to stay at home, and feed that part of Christ's Flock which is
committed to them. 3. It is falsely supposed that the Apostles had so their
several Provinces as that they were confined to these: the World was the
Province of each of them; though by mutual Consent, or by the immediate Conduct
of the Holy Ghost, who guided their Motions, (as may be gathered from Acts 17.
7, 9, 10.) they went into several places of the World; yet so as they observed
not that Division very critically; for we find them meeting sometimes; and
though Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision, yet Paul often preached to
the Jews 4. The confinement of the ordinary Pastors to their several Charges is
not the effect of Prudence, and Agreement of them among themselves, alone; but
it is Gods Appointment, (though the setting of the Bounds of their several
Districts in particular, be a work of men) for Christ has not only set Pastors
in the Church, but he has set them over their particular Flocks, Acts 20. 18.
so as they have the charge of them, and must give account of them; and not of
the Souls in all Churches.

8. His Notion, p. 103. that the Apostles divided the World among themselves by
Lot, I know is to be found in Eusebius, Dorotheas, and Nicephorus, and some
others of the Ancients; and some latter Writers have taken it on trust from
them, as this Author does: neither shall I be at pains to disprove it; it is
done learnedly and fully by Dr. Stillingfleet, Iren: p. 232. and seq. by eight
Arguments, that this Author will not easily answer: and particularly he
shows, that Acts 1. 25. (...), cannot be understood of a District appointed
at first for Judas, and he falling from it was alloted to Matthias: which our
Author takes for an uncontested Truth, p. 103. Another thing I observe is, p.
104. that he says, neither the Apostles, nor their immediate Successors, were
so confined to particular Sees, but that proportionably to the Exigencies of
the Catholic Church their Episcopal care and Superintendency did reach the
whole, as far as was possible; and as Christian charity did require or allow,
notwithstanding of their more fixed and nearer Relation they might have to
particular Churches: which he proves by their Epistles to other Churches, and
by their Travels: and he concludes, that the confinement to a particular See,
does not proceed from the nature of the Priesthood, but from the Rules of
Prudence, Ecclesiastical Economy, and canonical Constitutions. I first take
notice, that this is still beside the Purpose, for it can never evince that the
Bishops are Apostles, unless he make it out that no other Mark can be assigned
in respect of which they differ. We say, that though Bishops and Apostles were
Universal Officers in the Church, there are other things wherein they differ,
as has been showed. 2 That the Apostles had a fixed and nearer Relation to one
particular Church more than another, is denied, and he can never prove it. The
contrary is proved abundantly by the Author last cited. It is true, some of the
Fathers do sometimes call James Bishop of Jerusalem: but that is with respect
to his Residence, not to the confinement of his Authority: he was determined to
stay there, as the place which Christians did resort to from all parts of the
World (not in Pilgrimage, but on many other Occasions) that he might there
superintend the Affairs of the Universal Church. Eusebius. lib: 2. c: 23. and
Jerome de viris illustribus, say, he was by the Apostles ordained the first
Bishop of Jerusalem; but this they take out of Egesippus (as themselves
confess) a most Fabulous Writer, and both of them relate out of him, several
things concerning the same James, that all do look on as idle Dreams. 3. It is
also without warrant, that he asserteth, that the first Bishops were not
confined to their Sees, more than the Apostles were. If he understand of the
Evangelists, we shall debate the case afterward. If of ordinary Pastors of the
Church, I deny not but that they had a regard to neighboring Churches, which
were not furnished with Pastors, or otherways had need of their help (so do
Ministers at this day, and ought to do) and this is all that can be inferred
from their Epistles, or their Travels, which he mentions: but that they had
universal Jurisdiction, as every one of the Apostles had, we deny, and he has
brought no Proof of it. 4. Who ever thought that the Confinement of a Pastor to
a particular Charge, does proceed from the nature of the Priesthood? if one
Pastor could feed Christ's Flock, more were superfluous: neither does it proceed
from men's Prudence, and Church Canons; but from Christ's Institution, built on
natural necessity. He directed his Apostles to ordain Elders in every City, and
in every Church.

9. He comes now p. 105. to discourse of Succession to these Apostles, whose
Office he had taken so much pains (to what purpose let the Reader Judge) to
describe: and fixes the Debate in this Question, Whether the Apostles
committed their Episcopal Jurisdiction and Apostolic Authority, which they
exercised in particular Churches, to single Successors, duly and regularly
chosen, or to a College of Presbyters, acting in the Administration of
Ecclesrastical Affairs, in perfect Parity and Equality? And this he takes to
be the genuine State of the Controversy, and so do I; if some of his
Prejudices, and unwarrantable Suppositions be cut off from it. For correcting
this State of the Question, let it be observed first; that we will never own
that the Apostles had any Successors in the whole of what was essential to the
Apostolic Office: particularly, that rectoral Power that every one of them had
over all other Ecclesiastics: we deny that this was transmitted to Church
Rulers who came after them. This our Author supposes; whereas he should have
proved it. That all that Power that was necessary for the Church, was
transmitted from the Apostles to their Successors, we acknowledge: such as
Power of Preaching, Administering of Sacraments, Ordaining Ministers, Ruling the
Church: this they left in the Church; whether they left this Power to one in
every Church to Rule the rest in these Administrations, or to many equally, is
the Question. I join all these Powers together; because our Brethren with whom
we now debate, our Jure Divino Prelatists, put them all in the Bishops hands
alone, to be parcelled out to his Curats as he pleases. So that Presbyters may
not preach, baptize, nor do any thing else in the Churches, without his
allowance; they make the Bishop the sole Pastor of the Diocese. Wherefore our
Author to this Question should have premised another, viz. whether the Apostles
have any Successors at all, in the plenitude of that Power that they had over
the Churches? He takes it for granted, we deny it: and prove what we say. 1.
The Apostles had their Power both as to its being, and extent, and that toward
persons and things or actions, by an immediate Call: The Lord by himself,
without any act of the Church interveening, pitched on the persons, made them
Church Officers, and told them their work, and set the bounds of their Power.
Now if any pretend to succeed to them in the plenitude of this Power, they must
instruct the same immediate Call, or show that the Lord has left Directions in
his Word, for clothing some persons with all that Authority: but this neither
the Bishops, nor none else can pretend to. Not to an immediate Call; for then
they must show their Credentials. Nor to Scripture Warrant for all the Power of
the Apostles; where is their Warrant for going through the World, in their own
personal and intrinsic Authority, to order Affairs in all Churches where they
come, or for instituting Gospel Ordinances; and appointing new Officers in the
Church, that were not in it before: or even for ruling over their Brethren?
This last I know they claim: and we shall debate it with them; but these others
also belonged to the plenitude of an Apostolic Power. We have indeed
sufficient warrant in the Word, for Men to Teach and Rule the Church; and these
things are necessary to be, and a Power for doing that was needful to continue
in the Church to the end of the World; but for other Powers that the Apostles
had, they were only needful for planting the Gospel; not for Churches planted:
neither have we Directions about propogating such a Power in the Church.

10. Another Argument. The Apostles in their own time, divided their Power and
Work among several sorts of Church Officers: they appointed Elders, some for
Teaching and Ruling, as has been proved; some for Ruling only, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
They appointed also Deacons, to have a care of the Poor; which was also a part
of their Power but they appointed none to succeed in the whole of their Power.
This Conduct they could not have used, if they had been to have such
Successors. If they made diverse sorts of Church Officers to succeed them,
every one in his share of that work that is alloted to him. All which was done
by the Apostles: and if they have not told the Church, that every one of these
Officers must act in dependency on one, who is over them, as the Apostles were
over all: how can we imagine that there is one Officer in the Church (by divine
or Apostolic appointment) who has all the Power that they had, and to whom
all must be subject as to them. 3. The Fathers do not only make Bishops to be
Successors to the Apostles, but they say the same of all Church Officers, Ergo,
they did not think that any person succeeded to them in the plenitude of their
Power. The consequence is evident, for parcelling out their Succession, and one
enjoying it in solidum, are inconsistent; the Ant. I prove by several
Testimonies. Ignatius Ep: ad Trall: Presbyteros vocat conjunctionem Apostolorum
Christi: and jubet, ut eos sequamur tanquam Christi Apostolos. Ep: ad Smyrnen:
and Ep: ad Magnes. he says expressly p: 33. edit: Vossi, that the Presbyters
succeeded (...), in the place of the Council of the Apostles. Irenaeus advers
Haereseslib: 3: c: 2. says, traditionem quae est ab Apostolis per successionem
Presbyterorum custodiri: and lib: 4: c: 43. enjoineth, ut Presbyteris qui in
Ecclesia sunt, and ab Apostolis successionem habent, auscultemus. And c: 45.
Uhi (says he) charismata Domini posita sunt, ibi discere oportet veritatem,
apud quos est ea quae est ab Apostolis Ecclesiae successio. Cyprian lib: 4. Ep
4: affirms, omnes praepositos (and it is known that he gives that Title also
to Presbyters) vicaria ordinatione Apostolis succedere. Jerome (who was no
Bishop) owneth himself for one of the Successors of the Apostles, did: 35:
cap. Ecclesiae in Apostolorum loco sumus, non solum sermonem eorum imitemur,
sed and seorsum abstinentiam. And ad Heliodorum: absit ut de his quicquam
sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui succedentes, Christi corpus sacro ore
conficiunt; and per quos nos Christiani simus. August ad fratres in eremo,
calls them expressly, among many glorious Epithets, Apostolorum successores.
And Ser: 33. He has these words, non Laicis spiritualia dona tradita sunt; sed
vicariis Domini, vicarii domini sunt qui vicem Apostolorum tenent: which ye see
he says of all the Clergy.

11. Another thing I dislike in this state of the Question is, that he
supposes the Apostles exercised their Jurisdiction in particular Churches. I
have above showed, that this they did not ordinarily, in Churches already
planted, and furnished with Officers. A third thing is, that he supposes us to
maintain a perfect Parity among Presbyters in the administration of
Ecclesiastic Affairs. This I also cleared, S. 2. 5. that we own a temporary
Disparity, though not a Jurisdiction, in our ambulatory Moderator. These things
being cleared, the Question is to be understood of that ruling Power that was
in the persons of the Apostles, and is now necessary to continue in the Church.
The Question is, whether, when the Apostles settled Churches, and committed the
Government of them to Officers who were to continue in Succession in all the
Ages of the Church, they committed that ruling Power to a single person, or to
a College of Presbyters? He says it was committed to a single Bishop, I
maintain it was committed to a College of Presbyters, without any Disparity of
Power, or Jurisdiction among them. And I further add, that neither did the
Apostles give more of this Power to one of the Presbyters above the rest,
neither did they allow them to transfer that equal Power into the Hands of
another, and suffer him to rule over them. Some light Velitations he has
(before he came to his main arguments) for proving his Point. And 1. From
Christ's promise, that the Apostolic office shall endure perpetually; and this
promise was made to them, not in their Personal, but in their Spiritual
capacity I suppose he aims at Mat: 28: 20. where there is not one word of the
Apostolic office in the Plenitude of that power they had. It respects their
power of Teaching, Baptizing and Ruling; and the promise implies that there
shall be some to the end of the World who shall be employed in that work; and
it ensureth Gods presence to them who are so employed; but it says nothing,
directly nor indirectly, how much of the Apostolic Power these Successors
shall have. His second Hint of an Argument is, that Christ loved the Church as
much after the decease of the Apostles as before. A. It thence follows that
he did not let them want whatever spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction was
needful for them: but it no way follows, that the Apostolic Power, in all
its Latitude, must continue; because though that was needful for planting the
Church, it is not needful for her watering, and her continuance. That the
Testimonies he is to bring were universally received, and the Church knew no
other Government for 1400 years; as he says, p. 106. is one of his bold
affirmations, which must stand for Argument, to his easy Believers.

12. He undertaketh to prove that the Apostles transmitted their Rectoral Power
immediately to single Successors, both by Scripture, and by the Ecclesiastical
Records. The first Scripture Proof is, from Timothy being Bishop at Ephesus,
and Titus at Crete. This his Argument he prosecuteth somewhat confusedly: but
we must follow whether he leads. He brings nothing for proof of their being
Bishops there, but that the Apostle besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, when
himself was going into Macedonia, 1 Timothy 1. 3. with Acts 20: 3, 4, 5. And then,
after taking off (as he fancieth) one of our Exceptions against his Argument,
he proves, that the work that they did was competent to a Bishop. The
Exception that our Writers commonly bring, is from Timothies non residency at
Ephesus, and traveling with Paul. His refutation of this, p. 107, is, that
Timothy after he was established Bishop at Ephesus, did often wait on the
Apostle Paul, his spiritual Father, to assist him in the Offices of Religion
but such occasional Journeyings cannot infer his being disengaged from his
Episcopal Authority at Ephesus: Philip was as much a Deacon when he went and
preached at Samaria, as when he served Tables at Jerusalem. The Presbyterians
have not lost their Title to their particular Flocks, when they are employed to
visit the Court, or Foreign Churches. The Ancients laid no weight on this
Objection, for Council: Chalcedon: Act: 11: reckoned 27 Bishops from Timothy to
their own days. The Reply to all this is easy. 1. He does not propose our
Argument fairly, nor in its full Strength: for then; this his Answer would
appear trifling. We plead, that it cannot be made appear that ever Timothy was
fixed at Ephesus, as Pastor of that Church; but that he was only sent to it, as
Paul's Deputy, for a small time, to do some Work there. I besought thee to abide
still at Ephesus, 1 Timothy: 1: 3. cannot import a fixed Charge: but on the
contrary; that his being first sent to that Place was looked on as a Temporary
Employment; and the Apostle finding need of his being longer there than he at
first thought, does now lengthen out his Commission for some longer time. If he
had been fixed at Ephesus as his particular Charge, and in a Pastoral Relation
to that People, that was to end only with his Life, such a Desire for his
staying longer in that Place had been very impertinent. Again, the Strength of
our Argument lies in this; that we find Timothy not only now and then in other
Places, Laboring in the Work of the Gospel (that I confess is consistent with
a fixed Charge) but the Course of his Ministerial Labors was, to be employed
else where, and we have little, or no more of him at Ephesus than what is
mentioned in this place. We find that as soon as Paul returned to Ephesus from
Macedonia, that he sent Timothy thence to Achaia, himself staying at Ephesus,
Acts 19: 22: After Paul came from Ephesus to Macedonia again, and returned
thence unto Asia, we find Timothy with him; not at Ephesus, Acts 20: 1, 4:
After which we never read that Timothy wrote, came, or returned to Ephesus. We
find that Paul sent him to Corinth, 1 Cor: 4: 7: and 16: 10: 2 Cor: 1: 19. And
to Philippie, Philip: 2. 19. And to Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians: 3: 2, 6. Also he
joyneth with Paul in Writing his second Epistle to the Corinthians, which was
written at Philippie, and was sent, as also the first, from the same Place: and
in that to Philippie written from Rome; and in the first to Thessalonica from
Athens: and in the second. He is also mentioned in these Epistles, as being
elsewhere: but we read no more of his being at Ephesus. He joyneth with Paul in
his Epistle to the Colossians, from Rome. He was at Corinth when Paul wrote his
Epistle to the Romans, Rom: 16: 21: with the Postscript of the Epistle. He was
in Italy when the Epistle to the Hebrews was written, Heb: 13: 23: But in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, which was written from Rome, long after the time that
Timothy was supposed to be made Bishop, no word of him, neither as being at
Rome, saluting them; nor as being at Ephesus, saluted by Paul. And it is
strange, if when Paul speaks so much to the Elders of Ephesus at Miletum, Acts
20: 17, -- that he takes no special notice of him their Bishop. Beside, he
tells Timothy that he had sent Tychicus to Ephesus, 2 Timothy: 2: 12. and that
about the same Work that he had enjoined Timothy to do there; and mentions
him as sent to them, Ephesians: 6: 21, 22. So that there is full as much ground to
say that Tychicus was Bishop of Ephesus, as to assign that See to Timothy: and
more ground to make Timothy Bishop of several other Churches abovementioned,
than of Ephesus.

13. I hope, 2. These Reasons against Timothies being Bishop at Ephesus, are
not taken off by telling us of Philip the Deacon Preaching at Samaria: for it
is probable, that Philip was now Called to an higher Office; and so might leave
his Deaconship to another: or, he might return to his Work at Jerusalem, seeing
we read not of such a constant Course of his being elsewhere, as we find in
Timothy. Neither is it parallel to a Presbyterian Ministers visiting the Court,
or Foreign Churches. If they be constantly Abroad, and especially, if they
were never more settled in a particular Place, save that such a Man was sent to
Preach, and do other Ministerial Work there for a time, we think it a good
Argument against their Pastoral Relation to that Place. If the Council of
Chalcedon, Act 11. mention twenty seven Bishops in Ephesus (which I find not in
Caranza, nor is it said by the Council, Bibthoth. Council. but by one Man,
Obiter. Leontius Bishop of Magnesia, Tom. 4. p. 700.) it signifies no more
than that Timothy settled that Church (which he might do in the short time he
stayed there) and from that time there had been so many Bishops, that is,
Ministers, or Chief Ministers who were Presidents in their Presbyteries, during
that time. This can neither prove Timothy's fixed Pastoral Relation to that
People; nor the sole, or superior Jurisdiction of them who came after him. He
next labors to prove that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, from the Power he
was to Exercise, and the Work he was to do there; which he asserteth to be, all
the Power and Work they claim for a Bishop. And he insisteth at length, from
the Epistles written to Timothy, to show what was his Power and Work. We do not
contest with him about this; as himself confesses, p. 104. surely Timothy
could do as much as any Bishop can lay Claim to: only we deny his being fixed
there; and we deny that he Acted as an ordinary fixed Officer; but as the
Apostles Deputy, set there for a time, to do what the Apostle might have done,
if he had been personally there. He was an Evangelist, and as such Acted in
Ephesus, and wherever else he was employed. That these Epistles were Directed
to Timothy; only with Respect to his Work at Ephesus, is by some imagined,
without all ground. He was employed here and there by the Apostle, and
wherever he had Work, he was to manage it according to these Directions. It is
an inconsequential Argument that our Author brings, p. 108. to prove
Timothy's particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus, that 1 Timothy: 3: 14, 15:
It is told him, that the Apostle gave him these Directions, that if he should
tarry longer from coming to him, he might know how to behave himself in the
House of God. For all this may agree to any Church, as well as to that of
Ephesus: and it cannot be said (which follows) of Ephesus alone, that that
Church was the Pillar and Ground of the Truth: Wherefore, the Apostle intended
these Injunctions not for Timothy alone; but for all Pastors of the Church: far
less for Timothy only while at Ephesus; but for him in whatever part of the
Lords Vineyard he should have Occasion to Labor. Neither do we now Debate,
whether Timothy had a particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus (which may
be granted while he abode there) but whether he had a fixed Relation to it, so
as he had not afterward to other Churches whereto the Apostle sent him: or
whether he was Related to it as an Itinerant Evangelist, or as as an ordinary
and fixed Bishop.

14. He argues also p. 109. that his Power was not temporary or transient, but
successive and perpetual, and derived to others in solidum, as he received it
himself: and this he proves, because he is enjoined to commit it to faithful
Men who should be able to Teach others also. Here is still a Mistake of the
Question; which is not about the Perpetuity of Timothy's Power; which I believe
he had wherever the Apostle sent him about the Work of the Gospel: but the
Question is about the Perpetuity of his Abode at, and Pastoral Relation to
Ephesus: which is not proved by his Power of Ordaining Ministers. He demands
p. 109, 110. somethings to be granted to him: some of which I freely yield. 1.
That this Power of Timothies was lawful. 2. That he exercised it at Ephesus;
viz. for a time. 3. That it was committed to him alone, and not to a College
of Presbyters. This I yield so far, that Timothy had a Vicarious Apostolic
Power, that was superior to that of the Presbytery: but it is no Consequence,
Timothy had such a Power at Ephesus for a time, Ergo, the Presbytery was not
ordinary Rulers of that Church. I proved. 7. That the Apostle settled a College
of Presbyters for the ordinary Government of that Church, and that from Acts
20. 28. 4. That there is no mention of a College to which Timothy was
accountable for his Administrations. The first part of this I deny: the grounds
are mentioned in the place cited. Beside, it is like there was no such College
at Ephesus then; for Timothy is Directed about Choosing and Ordaining them: 1 Timothy 3. 1 etc. The second part I freely yield, that Timothy could not be
accountable to any College of Presbyters, nor to any Man, except the Apostle
who sent him: but this makes nothing for such Exemptions to a Bishop; unless
he could prove, each of them that they have a Personal Mission from an Apostle,
or immediately from Christ. 5. That the great Branches of Episcopal Power was
lodged in Timothy's Person: this I yield, understanding it of that Power that
Bishops pretend to. 6. That this Authority was (...) in it self temporary,
transient, or extraordinary; but such as the necessities of the Church do make
necessary in all Ages. This also, sano sensu, I yield: it must always be lodged
somewhere: but that there must be a single Person endowed with such Power, I
know no lasting necessity for that. I Answer to his Question p. 110. Why do
they say, that in the discharging of an ordinary Trust, there is need of an
extraordinary Officer. A. We say an extraordinary Officer was needful at first,
till ordinary Men were by him Authorized, and Empowered to propagate this
Trust; but that being done, we plead for no such need; but Debate against it.
Against Timothy's Episcopal Relation to Ephesus further Arguments may be
brought; from the Apostles putting the Government of that Church in the hands
of Elders, acts 20. 28. 28. which must be after they were settled by Timothy,
and that in his presence, he being then with the Apostle. Also, from the
Apostles declaring to these Elders all the Council of God, Acts 20. 27. and yet
he told them nothing of so important a point, as of the chief Pastor whom they
must obey: a point that our Brethren lay so much stress on, as that they make
the Being of Ministers and Churches to hang on the Succession of Bishops. From
the Apostles not mentioning Timothy when he writes to Ephesus. From his
telling them that they should see his Face no more, Acts 20. 25. and yet not a
word of leaving Timothy to take care of them, but laying it on the Elders, but
I shall not enlarge on these.

15. He alleges, with the same Confidence, and as little Strength of
Argument, that the same power was committed by Paul to Titus, in Crete. And
here p. 111. he makes a very faint Attempt against our Plea, that Titus (we
say the same of Timothy) was an Evangelist: which he very discretly, more suo,
calls a ridiculous Subterfuge. I shall examine what here he brings to back
this Confidence; and then show that Timothy and Titu were Evangelists. (...).
Says he, It is no where said in Scripture, that he was one of them who were
called Evangelists. A. He should have described to us them who in Scripture are
called Evangelists: The word is diverse ways used in Holy Write: neither do we
argue from the Name, that either he, or Timothy (to whom this Name is expressly
applied, 2 Timothy 4. 5.) were Evangelists: but we argue from their Work and
Circumstances, together with the mention that is made of such an Office being
in the Church, in the beginning of Christianity. There are others beside them,
whom we can prove to have been Evangelists, who, may be, get not that Name
expressly given them in the Scripture. Next he argues, the Work of an
Evangelist has nothing in its nature opposite to, or inconsistent with the
Dignity and Character of either Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon. What if all this
were yielded? what gains he by it? Titus being an Evangelist might do all the
Work that our Adversaries ascribe to him; tho he were no Bishop, and tho his
being a Bishop were not inconsistent with being an Evangelist; what we design
is, that doing such Work does not prove him to have been a Bishop; seeing he was
an Evangelist; who has all that power that Titus is said to have. Beside,
Saravia (who has said more for Episcopacy than this Author has) de Ministr.
Evang. grad. C. p. Says nam quemadmodum major Apostoli authoritas fuit quam
Evangelistae, and Prophetae and Evangelistae major quam Episcopi vel
Presbyteri, ita Titi and Timothei, qui Presbyteri and Episcopi erant, major
fuit authoritas quam Presbyterorum quos oppidatim Apostolica authoritate
crearant. He makes Evangelists to be a higher degree than the Bishops; if then
Titus was an Evangelist, is it imaginable that he was afterward degraded to be
a Bishop? Do we ever read that an Apostle was turned to an Evangelist; or a
Bishop to a Presbyter; or he to a Deacon: unless some of these were degraded
for some fault. Wherefore if Titus had the Character of an Evangelist, it is
not like he was settled at Crete as an ordinary Bishop. Further he describes an
Evangelist; out of Eusebius. lib. 3. C. 37. hist. Eccles. That he is a person that
preached the Gospel to such as had not before heard of it; at least were not
converted by it. Eusebius is not by him fairly cited, C. 33. (not 37.) he is
giving account of such as builded the Churches planted by the Apostles (as his
own words bear; therefore they did not only preach to them who had not heard
the Gospel) he says they fulfilled the Work of Evangelists, that is (says he)
they preach Christ to them who as yet heard not of the Doctrine of Faith; and
published earnestly the Doctrine of the Holy Gospel. Which shows that
Eusebius calls them Evangelists, whom the Apostles employed to Water their
Plantations (as Apollo did after Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 6.) also whom they sent to
preach to the Unconverted; or any way to preach the Gospel. His at last is his
own addition to Eusebius, not the words of that Historian. It is evident then,
that Eusebius has said nothing that can exclude Titus from being an
Evangelist. I do not deny that any ordained Minister may preach the Gospel to
Infidels, and on that account be called an Evangelist, in a large sense; as may
also every on that preaches the Gospel: but we now speak of an Evangelist in
the more restricted sense, as it signifies a Church Officer whom Christ had
set in his Church, distinguished from Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers,
etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. That it is no where insinuated that Titus was such an
Evangelist, he alleged p. 111. but we prove from the Work he was employed
about, that it is more than insinuated. He proves that one may do the Work of
an Evangelist who is much higher than an Evangelist (which is a Truth, but very
impertinent to his purpose) because Daniel did the Work of the King; who was no
King but much lower than a King: a very wise Consequence indeed; That Philip
the Evangelist had no power to confirm, or ordain, he affirms, p. 112. which
is both false; he had power to ordain when any of the Apostles sent him about
that Work: and Timothy and Titus had it not otherwise. (For the power of
Confirmation, we know none had it: there being no such Ordinance, in our
Authors sense, in the Apostolic Church) It is also wide from this purpose, for
the Apostles might send the Evangelists clothed with what power they thought
fit to impart to them. Paul might send Titus to Crete to ordain Elders, and
Philip might be sent elsewhere, on another Errand; and yet both be Evangelists.
That most of the Primitive Bishops were Evangelists, is true, in the large
sense, as before: but not in the strick sense: neither is this to our present
purpose: for he says nothing unless he can also make it appear that all the
Evangelists, in the Primitive Times, were Bishops. But what follows is wholly
false: that any Bishop or Presbyter, who now adays converteth any Jew or Pagan,
are as properly Evangelists as any of them who were so called in the Primitive
Times. If it were so, every such Minister should be a Church Officer of a
distinct ^m all other Church Officers: for there were whom the Scripture does
particularly call Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. 11. as so distinguished.

16. That we may more fully and distinctly take off what our Adversaries
pretend to bring for Timothy and Titus being Bishops; and not Evangelists; I
shall show what is the true Notion of an Evangelist; whence it will appear
plainly, that Timothy and Titus were such: and that there is no ground from
what is said of them in Scripture to think, that they were ordinary Officers in
the Church, or Diocesan Bishops. I deny not that the word Evangelist is
sometimes taken for any Preacher of the Gospel, who brings the good News of
Salvation to Men's Ears. Yet it is often taken (...), for, 1. One who wrote the
History of the Life and Death of Christ; and that by the infallible Guidence of
the Spirit; and so Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John are called Evangelists. 2. For
an extraordinary Officer who was employed by the Apostles for planting
Churches, and propagating the Gospel. That there was such an Officer distinct
from all others, both extraordinary, or temporary, and ordinary, or permanent,
is evident from that place already cited, Ephesians. 4. 11. Our work is then to
enquire what is the distinguishing Character of this Church Officer, from all
others. Also that some are called Evangelists peculiarly, and by way of
Distinction from other Officers of the Church, as Philip, Acts 21. 8. Of whom
Grotius in locum, says, qui cum olim de numero Diaconorum fuisset, factus est
Presbyter (...), nulli certae Ecclesiae affixus; quales Evangelistae
vocabantur, Ephesians: 4. 11. 2 Timothy 4. 5. i. e. (...) Esai. 40. 9. and 51. 7. Ita
solent promotiones fieri (...), 1 Timothy: 3: 17. Let us then see what Light we can
get in this matter from Scripture, or from Antiquity, or by the help of later
Writers. The Scripture not only gives us account (as has been said) that
there was such an Officer in the Church; but that some were sent hither and
thither by the Apostles, and that about such a Work as could not be done but by
Apostolic Authority; as is evident in Timothy (as is showed. 12.) and Titus;
whom Paul made his Companion in his Travels, Gal: 2. Whose Journeys and
Employments the Reader may satisfy himself about, from Smectym:: 3: p: 38.
(That I may shun the pains of Transcribing) Tichycus, Softhenes, Luke, etc.
several of them are mentioned by Eusebius: hist: lib: 3: C: 33. It is evident that
these Men can be Ranked into no other Class of Church Officers, neither
ordinary nor extraordinary. Wherefore they must be Evangelists: and from the
account that we have of them, we must gather what was the Power, the Work, and
the Characteristick Note, of an Evangelist, that he was an extraordinary
Officer in the Church, needful for the first planting and settling of the
Churches, who was employed by the Apostles, and by them authorized to do what
ever work, or exerce what Acts of Power, the Apostles themselves, who employed
them, might have done.

17. For what account of them is to be found among the Ancients, it is to the
same purpose: they make them no fixed Officer, but itinerant. They ascribe to
them Apostolic Power; and make them subordinat to, and delegated by the
Apostles; for this see Eusebius: hist: lib: 3: C: 33: (or as some editions have it
37:) who tells us of some who (...): being sent Abroad, performed the Work of
an Evangelist: and this Work of Evangelists he shows to have been, preaehing
the Gospel, planting the Faith in strange Places, and ordaining other Pastors,
committing to them the Laboring ((...)) of them who were newly brought in: and
he adds, that they themselves went to other Countries and People, (...). Can
there be a more lively Description of Evangelists, in the Notion that
Presbyterians have of them: Eusebius: also hist: lib: 5: C: 9: speaking of
Pantaeus, that he was sent as far as Judea, he has these words (...), etc.
There were many of the Evangelists, who had a great Zeal after the manner of
the Apostles ((...)) to promote the Heavenly Word, and to plant it, and these
Evangelists, he says, they were prepared of purpose, which relates to the
Divine Institution of this Office. Augustine de tempore, Sermon. 14 (...) calls
the Evangelists, suppares Apostolorum: which sets them in very nigh degree
to the Apostles, and far above the ordinary Bishops: with which if we compare
council: Chalcedon: which says, that it is Sacrilege to set a Bishop in the
degree of a Presbyter; they should more count it Sacrilege so to degrade an
Evangelist, as to set him in the degree of a Bishop, or an ordinary Pastor in
the Church, Chrysostom: in Ephesians. 4. (...) -- 3ly, Evangelists who went about every
where preaching the Gospel, as Priscilla and Aquila. Later Divines, both of the
Episcopal and Presbyterian side, tread in the same steps. Grotius not only is
clearly for this Notion of Evangelist, on Acts 2: 8: above cited; but on 2 Timothy:
4: 5: he calls them, adjutores Apostolorum; quae (says he) magna sane
dignitas, Scultet: and Piscat: in 2 Timothy 4. Evangelistae proprie dicti erant,
tempore Apostolorum, qui itinerum eorundam and laborum socii erant, qui ad
diversas missi sunt Ecclesias, ut fundamenta jacerent, quales Philippus,
Sylvanus, and alii. Estius in Ephesians. 4. 11. says, they were praediti singulari
dono Evangelium predicandi. Grotius, and Hamond on the same Text, they were
adjutores, vel comites Apostolorum. From all this it may be concluded, that
Timothy and Titus were Evangelists in the strict sense of that word: and
considering the nature of their Office, and their Travels mentioned in the
Scripture, they were not fixed to any particular Charge: and consequently were
not Bishops, in the sense that we use that word. If my Adversary will prove
them to be Bishops, he must bring Arguments to prove their Office to have been
ordinary and permanent in the Church; and that they were fixed in a particular
Pastoral Relation, each to some Flock: which is no ways done by what he has
yet said.

18. I now proceed with my Antagonist, who p. 112. brings a new Argument,
viz. That James the Just was Bishop of Jerusalem, and he says, it is not
material to his design, whether he was one of the twelve Apostles, or not: One
would think that this is more to his purpose than he is aware of: for he is
proving the Succession of Bishops to the Apostles, and if James was an Apostle,
this instance can never prove such Succession. But I pass this. I think he was
one of the twelve, because he is so called, Gal. 1. 19. and 2. 9. Paul speaks
there of the Apostles in the strickest sense; for he cannot mean he had seen no
Preacher of the Gospel at Jerusalem, save Peter, and that he speaks of that
James, who abode at Jerusalem, when the rest of the Apostles left it, is not to
be doubted. That James stayed at Jerusalem, and did not travel as the rest of
the Apostles, I have acknowledged,. 4. and there have given account how it came
to pass. That he had all the Power that our Brethren give to their Diocesan, we
deny not: The Apostolate included that, and more. That he might be called a
Bishop, and was sometimes so styled, we may easily grant: for that word is
sometimes used generally: for all Church Rulers, and not only Apostles, but
their, and our great Master is so called, 1 Pet. 2. 25. But none of these
Concessions, nor all of them in Conjunction, will prove that James was Bishop
of Jerusalem, in the sense of the word that is now current; that is, that he
was an ordinary Ruler of the Church, inferior to an Apostle, and an Evangelist,
whose Jurisdiction was limited to one District, and not extended to all the
World. Let us now hear his Proofs for James's Episcopacy at Jerusalem. 1. It is
uniformly attested by the most ancient Witnesses, particularly, Clem. Alexandr.
and Hegesippus. I can easily yield him a great many more Witnesses; and persons
of more Credit than Hegesippus, and of more Antiquity than Clem. Alexandr. tho
I will not yield, that all his Adversaries grant it, in his sense. Salmasius
(whom he cites) says nothing, but that he abode at Jerusalem. The Answer to
this Argument is easy, the Ancients called James Bishop of Jerusalem (as they
also called some other Apostles who abode not so long in one place) because of
his Apostolical Authority which he there exercised; which included in it all
that Authority that any of the Ancients (or Moderns either) ascribe to a
Bishop: and usually they began their Catalogues of Succession with some
Apostle, or Apostolic Man: as Peter at Rome; tho it is certain he did not
reside there: and it is a Question whether ever he was there. And indeed it was
usual with the Ancients to speak of things long before their time, in the
Dialect that was current among themselves. His Argument from this Denomination
is naught, unless he can make it appear, that James had his Authority, not from
his Apostolate; but by his being ordained a Bishop. I wonder to find that such
a Learned Man as Downam asserteth that James, before his Ordination as Bishop,
had Authority as an Apostle; but had no Jurisdiction over that particular
place; but was a Pastor sine titulo: for this strange fancy will infer, that
Paul and the rest of the Apostles never had Jurisdiction any where; seeing they
were no where ordained Bishops: nor does the Scripture give account of any such
Ordination of James.

. 19. We have further Argument from p. 113. Peter when he was delivered out of
Prison commands that these things be made known to James, Acts 12. 17. Where
(says he very wisely) the deference paid to Saint James is visible: and taken
notice of elsewhere frequently, as Gal: 1: 19: and 2. 1, 9. Truly the Papists
have many Arguments that have a fairer show than this has for its Conclusion,
for Peter's Supremacy. I wonder that a Man pretending to Learning, is not
ashamed of such an Argument. Was not all this respect due to James as an
Apostle; how then does it prove him to have been a Bishop: is there any thing
that looks like Jurisdiction (which yet we deny not to James at Jerusalem)
cannot Men be civil to a Person so eminent for Grace, Gifts, and his Character,
but they must make him a Diocesan Bishop? but the strongest Argument is yet
behind: Act. 15. He pronounces the Sentence by his Episcopal Authority. A. He
might far rather do it by his Apostolic Authority: but there was no need of
either of them; he did it as being chosen Moderator of that Meeting: and that
he exercised no Episcopal Authority in this Case, is evident; for the rest of
the Apostles were present, Act. 15. 2, 4, 6, 22. And it was never heard of (but
among Papists) that one Apostle had Authority over another, or over all the
rest: much less that a Bishop should have Authority over Apostles. I am afraid
this Author unawares does so stretch the Episcopal Authority, that he will make
it break, and be contemptible. He tells us, Calvin holds all that he says,
on Gal: 2: 9: in saying that James was preferred to Peter, because he was
Hierosolymitanae Ecclesiae praefectus. He disingenuously leaves out Calvin's,
fortassis; which shows that he was not positive in that matter. But I shall
positively yield him what Calvin does but doubtingly, and let him make his best
of it. Let it be granted that James was chosen Praeses of that Meeting, because
of his Residence at Jerusalem, and being the chief Governor of that Church
where the Meeting was held, (not as Bishop but as Apostle) this can prove no
Preference to any of the Apostles; Presidency in such a case does not infer a
Superiority of Power. It rather shows that the Apostles did not there act in
their Apostolic Capacity, but in a Parity with the other Elders; with whom
they are always joined in that Chapter, when spoken of. Our Author now making a
Transition to another Head of Arguments, cannot go out of his Road, in
concluding with insolent Contempt of his Adversaries. I do not (says he) now
insist on these imaginary and superficial Exceptions that are made by our
Adversaries. If they were such, they were well suited to some of the Arguments
he has last used.

20. Another Argument he begins, p. 114. and prosecuteth it in some Pages
following, is taken from the seven Angels of the seven Asiatick Churches; by
whom he understands the Bishops of these Churches: if they were so, the
Consequence is, that Bishops were settled in the Churches by the Apostles: and
that these Churches were not by Divine Right ruled by a College of Presbyters.
This Argument has been much tossed; and in my Opinion, urged with more
Strength, by others of his Party, than he gives to it. For clearing the Truth
in this Matter, I shall give my Opinion, and lay down the Grounds of it; and
then Examine what he says in Enforcing and Vindicating this his Argument. I
find three Opinions among the Presbyterians about these Angels. The first is,
that by Angel is meant the Collective Body of the Church; for this our Author
cites Salmasius, Walo. Messal. p. 184. Ambrosius Ausbertus, is also cited by
Smectym: and Aretas Caesariensis by Turret. his Words are, (...), etc. Also
Ticonius was of this Opinion, as is said by August. de Doct. Christian. lib. 3.
c. 30. And it is certain, that not only all the Members of the Churches were
concerned in what is written in these Epistles; but John was commanded to write
them to the Churches, Rev. 1. 11. And in the Conclusion of every Epistle, all
the Church Members are excited to hear what the Spirit says to the Churches,
and not to the Ministers only, which yet does not prove that by Angel is meant
the Church: their Concernments in these times were entrusted to the Angel; not
that they were the Angel. Another Opinion is that of Beza, Reynolds, and
others; who take Angel (...); for a single person; but maintain, that not a
Diocesan Bishop is to be understood, but the (...), or Moderator of the
Presbytery, by whom the Epistle was to be communicated to the rest of the
Pastors, and by them to the People: and indeed it is certain, that the Word may
be so taken; and if we should yield this to our Brethren, it cutteth the Nerves
of their Argument, unless they can prove; that these single persons had
Jurisdiction over the rest of the Pastors of these Churches. Which they can
never do from the Epistles themselves; for all the Reproofs and Commendations
may be intended for the College of Presbyters, tho addressed to them by the
Praeses. Nor can the Direction of the Epistle to a single person prove what
they intend: there is nothing more ordinary than to address a Community by the
Praeses of their Meeting: if a Letter be Directed to the Moderator of a
Presbytery for the use of the Presbytery, does this Entitle him to Episcopal
Jurisdiction? The third Opinion (to which I most incline) is, that Angel is
here to be taken (...), o^ Collectively, for the College of Presbyters; so
that to the Angel is (in our Phrase) to the Moderator and remanent Brethren. In
the Contents of the old Translation of the Bible (which expresses the sense of
the old Church of England, in this matter) they are called Ministers So it was
understood by Aretas, Primasius, Ambrose: Gregory the Great Beda, Haymo; and
many others, says Owen of Ordination, C. 2. p. 35.

21. I shall first prove that it may be so taken: next, that it mu^ be so
understood. For the former, it is usual in the Scripture, and particularly in
the Mystical Parts of it; in Types and Visions (and the most of the Book of
Revelation is written in that Style, every one knows) to put the Singular
Number for the Plural; or to mean a Multitude when but one is expressed: how
often is a People or Nation expressed by the Virgin or the Virgin Daughter of
such or such a Place? The Ram, Daniel 8. 3. is interpreted to be the Kings of
Media and Persia, (...) 20. The whole Succession of the Apostate Bishops of
Rome, is calle^ Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition. The
Antichristian Church consisting of Priests and People, is called a Beast, the
Whore: So an inferior Number is put for a great Multitude; the Enemies of the
Church are called four Horns, and her Deliverers four Carpenters, Zech. 1. 18,
20. The Directions given to Judges are often in the singular number, thou shall
do so and so: hundreds of Instances of this nature may be given Whence it is
easy to conclude, that there is no Absurdity, nor is any Violence done to the
Text, if by Angel we understand the Rulers of the Church, or the College of
Presbyters. My next work is to prove that Angel must be so understood, for
which I bring these Arguments, 1. The Lord here uses a Title that does not
signify Rule, or Jurisdiction; but Gods Messenger to the People: as also, Rev
1. 16, 20. These Angels are called Stars, which imports their Teaching, or
holding forth Light to the People; both which are common to the Presbyters:
seeing then he does not use a word of Authority, whereby the Bishop is pretended
to be distinguished from the Presbyters; but of Embassy, and giving Light;
whereby the Presbyters are distinguished from the people; this word cannot be
taken for a Ruling Bishop, but for Teaching Presbyters. It were a strange
thing, if our Lord designing to single out one person from all the rest of the
Church, would design him by that which is common to him with many others, and
not by that which is peculiar to himself. It does also strengthen this
Argument, that both in the Old and New Testament, they whom God sent to his
People to reveal his Mind to them, are called Angels, Jud. 2. 1. Hag. 1. 13.
Mal. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 10. Yea the Legions of Angels who are employed to Encamp
about the People of God for their Safety, are called the Angel of the Lord,
Psalm: 34: 7.

22. Argument 2. It is not without a Mystery, that Rev: 1: 20: our Savior in
opening the Mystery of the Vision, speaks twice of the seven Churches; but
shunneth calling the Angels seven: he says not, the seven Stars are the seven
Angels of the Churches; but the Angels of the seven Churches: as by the seven
Spirits, Rev: 1: 4: and 3: 1: is meant the Spirit of God, sufficient for the
needs of all the seven Churches; so here, the Angels of the seven Churches must
be the Pastors whom the Lord has provided for the use of his Churches; tho
they were not one only for every Church, but more. Argument 3. It is manifest
from Acts 20: 28: (and I have evinced it 3. of Sect. 3.) that there were more
Presbyters, or Bishops at Ephesus than one: If then Christ wrote to the Rulers
of the Church of Ephesus under the Title of Angel, he could not mean a single
person. It cannot be denied, that they who are called Overseers of the Church
of Ephesus, Acts 20: 28: are they whom Christ here calls Angel: the same
thing is expressed in the one Place in a more plain Style, in the other in a
more Obscure and Mystical Style. Argument 4. Our Brethren will not deny, that
there were more Church Officers employed in Teaching each of the Churches than
one Bishop. Now these must either be comprehended under the Candlestick, or
under the Star: they cannot be a part of the Candlestick; for they give Light,
as the Candlestick does not, but by the Candlestick is meant the People to whom
the Light shines: they must then be comprehended under the Star, and
consequently under the Angel; whence it follows that the Angel is a Plurality
of Persons. So that we may conclude, that as by Candlestick i^ understood the
Collective Body of People, so by Star, or Angel, is understood a Body of Church
Officers, and not a single Bishop. Argument 5. Many things are said in these
Epistles, which cannot be Expounded with respect to a single person: as at
Ephesus, the Angels forsaking his first Love is threatened with removing the
Candlestick: that is, Unchurching that People: can we think that such a fearful
Judgment could be threatened for the Sin of one Bishop, if the rest of the
Elders and People were free: and this we must say, unless we acknowledge that
the Angel to whom the Epistle is Directed is not a single person, but a
Community. The same may be said of several other Churches; would the Lord spu^
out all the Presbyters and People of Laodicea, for the Hypocrisy of one
Bishop. Argument 6. There are several Passages in these Epistles wherein a
Plurality is expressed; as that which is meant by Angel, to whom the Epistle is
addressed: as the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison: can that be
Expounded, some of thee Bishop of Smyrna, or some of your Pastors, and People?
and unto you I say, (...), and the rest in Thyatira: is not there a plain
Intimation of a Plurality, under the Name of the Angel? by the rest in Thyatira
must needs be understood them who are distinct from the Angel, and the Angel
must be who ever is distinct from these who are called the rest? and yet beside
the rest, there is a Plurality, you. My Antagonist has an Answer to this
Passage, such as it is; which I shall consider, when I come to Examine his
Vindication of his Argument. Smectym. Sect. 13. out of Fox, Meditation on the
Revelation (which I have not seen) cites August. Ep. 132. Sic enim (says he)
in Apocalypsi legimus, Angelus, etc. Quod si de Angelo superiorum Coelorum, and
non de praepositis Ecclesiae velit intelligi, non consequenter dicat habeo
adversum te, etc. And Homil. 1. in Apocaly^. Quod autem dicit Angelo Thyatirae,
habeo adversum te pauca, dicit praepositis Ecclesiarum. And Greg. moral. lib.
34. in Job 4. Saepe sacra Scriptura praedicatores Ecclesiae, pro eo quod Patris
gloriam annunciant, Angelorum nomine solere designare: and hinc est quod
Joannes in Apocalypsi septem Ecclesiis scribens, Angelis Ecclesiarum loquitur,
id est, praedicatoribus populorum. Also Primasius, Haymo, Beda, Richardus,
Thomas, and others are cited by Mr. Fox, to this purpose.

23. I shall now examine what my Adversary brings, offensively, or
defensively, for his Opinion about these Angels, 1. He falls on Walo
Messalinus, who p. 184. interprets Angel, by Church: calling V. G. the Angel
of Ephesus, the Church of Ephesus; and he gives the reason, because the
Christians in each of these Towns were purior and sanctior pars urbis, atque
adeo magis spiritualis; therefore that part was compared to an Angel. Tho I do
not own this Notion of the Learned Salmasius, yet I judge our Authors calling
it a silly Subterfuge, and his ridiculing of it, to be pretty ridiculous: he
makes the meaning be, the seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches,
that is, the Churches of the seven Churches. By his favor, it has no such
sense (Salmasius can hardly be Taxed with Nonsense, even by Men of more
Critical Skill than this Author is) it should be thus Paraphrased, the seven
Angels are the Churches of the seven Towns: and it is evident, that according
to the Opinion of that Learned Writer, the Angels are not distinguished from
the Churches, but from the Towns wherein they were. Also, when the Epistle is
addressed to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, the meaning is not, to the
Church of the Church of Ephesus; but to the Church which is at Ephesus: even as
the Virgin Daughter of Israel, is not the Nation of the Nation of Israel; but
that Nation which is called Israel. Mystical Expressions must not be strained
by Critical Wits: some Atheists, by this method, have endeavored to draw
Nonsense out of the most Profound, and Instructive Parts of Scripture. Our
Author has not dealt very fairly with Salmasius, in this matter; for he
understands by Angel, the Church Guides signanter, and also the whole Church;
his words are, per Ecclesiam (having said that Angelus was Ecclesia) non tantum
Ecclesiasticum ordinem intellexit Joannes, sed universum in quaque civitate
fidelem populum, ut mo^ est Apostolis loqui. And if he will ridicule Salmasius,
the same Censure must fall on Aretas Bishop of Cesarea Cappadociae, whom
Salmasius cites, p. 183. Discoursing at large to the same purpose. I cannot
understand what he designeth by telling us, p. 115. That the Church cannot be
called a Company, a Multitude, or a College of Angels; but one single Angel
praesiding in their Ecclesiastical Meetings. For no Man does so sense the word;
but by Angel some understand a Multitude of People, others a Plurality of
Elders; but none of them make Angel to be a Multitude of Angels.

24. He next tells us, that tho there be Instructions in these Epistles, in
which others are concerned, yet the Epistles are no less to single Angels, tha^
the Epistle to the Philippians is to the whole Church there, tho particular
Compellations he used, as, I entreat thee true Yoke Fellow, Chapter 4. Here is an
odd Consequence, there is an Apostrophe used to a single person, in an Epistle
expressly Directed to a Community, and that in plain and proper Language, Ergo,
when in a Mystical Speech an Epistle is Directed in the singular Number, in a
borrowed Term, we may not understand a Plurality, tho when the Writer of the
Epistle speaks more properly, he speak expressly to a Plurality. What tho the
Conclusion of the second Epistle to Timothy had been to a Plurality; does it
thence follow, that a Mystical Word in the singular Number, may not be Plurally
taken? the contrary would seem to follow more natively. But he is guilty of a
double Mistake here, one is, that the Conclusion of that Epistle is to all the
Faithful; the last words are, The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit; grace
be with you Where he is mentioned expressly as the Person to whom the Epistle is
Directed: and the People of God with him are remembered also expressly: it is not
alike, when the Word is used in the Direction of an Epistle, which, tho
singular, is capable of a plural Sense; and in the Epistle a Plurality is
expressly spoken to. His next Fancy is most groundless, that the Bishops of the
Asiatick Churches are called Angels in Imitation of the High Priest, who was
Dignified with that Name: and for this he cites Mal. 2. at the 7. v. For tho
we should grant that (...) may be Translated Angel, as well as Messenger; yet
this is a Description of the Priests Work and Authority, telling us what he is;
it is not a Name by which he used to be Designed. Again, what Warrant is there
to say, that this is meant of the High Priest peculiarly? it is evidently to be
understood of Priests in common: the Priest, that is, every Priest. For Deuteronomy.
27. 9, 10, 11. (whence that Axiom seems to be taken) Ascribes this
Privilege to a Plurality of Priests; and not to the High Priest alone.
Further, it is a bad Consequence, the High Priest was called an Angel, and the
Church Rulers are called Angels, Ergo, every one of them had the same
Jurisdiction that hehad: this is a loose way of Reasoning; and either will fix
the Pope in his Chair, or is Insignicant. He hinteth (very superficially, and
obscurely) an Answer to one of our Exceptions, p. 116. That the Faults of the
Churches are imputed to the Angels, because they had Spiritual Power to reform
them. Reply, it cannot be so understood; for some of the Faults are such as no
Church Discipline can reach, nor any Ministerial Care prevent, or amend: as
having a name to live when they are dead; Hypocrisy is not properly the Object
of Church Censures: but such Scandal as are the Symptoms of it: nor are
Ministers always to blame when the Word does not make People sincere. That this
Hypocrisy was the Fault of the People as well as of the Angel, may be gathered
from v. 4. where a few, and only a few, in that Church, are excepted from that
blame. I add, that not only the Angel is blamed for the Faults of the Church;
but the Church is threatened for the Fault of the Angel: if the Epistle be
Directed to him in his single Capacity.

25. He has a peculiar Answer to what we allege from Rev. 2. 24. To you, and
to the rest in Thyatira. 1. He borrows an Answer from Doctor Hamond against
Blondel, who not only blames our Translation, but the Greek; which he
alleges to be corrupted, by adding (...): he would have it read to you, the
rest of Thyatira. His ground is, the most ancient Manuscripts; particularly,
that of Alexandria, preserved in the Royal Library, has not this (...). Ans.
It is Confidence enough, if it be also Candor, to pretend to the Countenance of
the most of the ancient Manuscripts, when but one can be instanced. Grotius,
Ribera, and Beza, mention but three, which is far from the most part; and Beza
proves the ordinary reading out of Aretas. I oppose to this bold Pretense, the
Collections of various Readings made by Curcellaeus (who has, with no good
Design toward the Scripture, gathered together what he could meet with; and may
be more than ever were extant) where this is not to be found. Also the
Laborious Work of the Learned and Industrious Walton, who in the Appendix to
his Biblia Polyglotta, has gathered the various Readings out of most ancient
Manuscripts: (which he there names) and not a word of these in any of them.
Likewise the Operose Notes of Lucas Brugensis, (in the forementioned Appendix)
where nothing of this appears. If his one Manuscript, be enough to
Overballance all the Manuscripts, and Printed Copies extant, let the Reader
judge. Because he could not but jealous this Shift as insufficient to his
purpose, he has a second Answer, which supposes our Reading of the Text to be
right: that (...), you, relates to all the Churches of Asia, which had been
spoken of in the former v. This is his own Invention, and let him have the
praise of it, (Doctor Ham. in loc. makes the rest to be the other Cities under
Thyatira the Metropolis, which is better sense: but without all ground, unless
what is in Question be yielded to him:) his Party may applaud his Zeal, which
will rather Distort the Scripture, and turn it to Nonsense, than not defend the
Dignity of Bishops. For what sense could it make, I will make all the Churches
of Asia to know that I search the Reins and Hearts; but to you, the Churches of
Asia, and to the rest in Thyatira, I say: these of Thyatira were a part of the
Churches of Asia; how then can they be called the rest, as distinguished from
them. Beside, he had been speaking of the Churches of Asia in the third person:
It were then strange, if with the same breath he should speak to them in the
second person. I insist not on his calling Beza's sense of the Angel, that a
Praeses is meant, ridiculous, and contrary to the sense of all Antiquity; such
Confidence and Contempt are the Flowers of his Rhetoric. Neither does Beza
speak of a Weekly, or Monthly Moderator, but pleads against his being
perpetual: which this Author should have opposed with Reason, or Scripture, not
with Taunts. We make no Argument of the seven Angels not being called Bishops:
his refuting of it is idle work. That Polycarp was then Bishop of Smyrna (as he
says p. 118.) is no more certain than that Timothy was then Bishop of Ephesus:
and if the Good that is said of Smyrna, suit to the one History, the Ill that
is said of Ephesus, will as ill agree to the other. He tells us of the
Explications of the Sectaries (the Presbyterians) being spoiled by comparing
the Epistle to the Angel of Smyrna with the most ancient Acts of the Martyrdom
of Polycarp. But has not thought fit to point at the Arguments that arise from
this Comparison; wherefore he cannot expect that we should Answer them: which
might easily be done, if they be no stronger than what he has hitherto brought
from Antiquity.

26. He has now fallen on an easy way to determine the whole Question, p.
118. It is pity it came not sooner, that all this Labor might have been saved.
But it may be this Birth also may miscarry. Parturiunt montes, -- the Question
seems to me to be in the same State, and his Opinion to labor under the same
Difficulties, as before this Invention was hatched. His easy way lies in
three Enquiries. Whether the Ancients affirmed that the Apostolical Power was
derived to the Bishops as their Successors. 2. Whether they insist frequently
on this Succession of single Persons to the Apostles in Particular Sees, when
they reason against Heretics. 3. Whether we may not with Safety and Confidence
lean on their Authority, and Tradition, in an Affair of this Consequence? If ye
will give our Enquirer leave to Dictat magisterially the Answers to these three
Questions, our whole Debate will soon, but not soundly, be at an end: but if we
contest every one of them (in his sense) with him, we cannot so soon conclude
this Dispute as he imagines: For his first Enquiry, it must not be made, nor
the matter determined so indistinctly as he does. It is not denied that Bishops
succeeded to the Apostles; but the Question is, whether these Bishops had the
same Jurisdiction over Presbyters and People, that the Apostles had? The
Ancients sometimes, with the Scripture, called all Presbyters Bishops;
sometimes, by a Custom that early crept into the Church, they restricted that
Name to the Praeses in the Meeting of Presbyters: and the Question is, whether
this Praeses had the Apostolic Power in his single person, or it was diffused
equally among the Members of that College in which he did praeside? This being
premised as the state of this Question about Succession to the Apostles; I
hold, that all that Apostolic Power that was needful for the Churches once
planted, and must be continued to the end, was communicated, not to the Praeses
alone, but also to the rest of the Presbyters: and that all of them were the
Apostles Successors, in that respect: he is for the contrary Opinion.

27. Let us now hear his Reasons, Two things he brings for Arguments, or what
else I do not well know. One is, It is evident that the Ancients affirmed that
the Apostolical Power was derived to the Bishops as their Successors, from the
Catalogue of Bishops in the Apostolic Sees, by the most ancient Records of the
Church. This is no dreadful Argument: for, 1. Among all the Sees he mentions
(I need not transcribe them) there is not one in which an Apostle was said to
sit, but that of Jerusalem: the rest indeed were excellent Men who first
praesided in these Churches: but not Apostles; and therefore their Sees can no
more be called Apostolic, than that of Canterbury or York, etc. whose Bishops
this Author reckons to be the Apostles Successors, tho not so immediately as
those mentioned. 2. These Catalogues that he mentions, were not so early made
as he would insinuat: they do indeed begin with early things, and guess at what
past in, or near, the Apostles Times: but we do not find that such Co^ion of
the Succession of Bishops was made for near three hundred years ^er Christ;
except some little account by Irenaeus: and these that are ^nt, are so
perplexed, and do so disagree with one another, that nothing can be concluded
from them, with any certainty: particularly in the Succession at Rome, there is
no certainty that Peter was there, nor who were after him; the same might be
showed of others of them. 3. No more can be proved from these Catalogues, but
that in the first Ages of the Church, there were such men who Ruled and Taught
these Churches, whom after Ages called Bishops: but the Catalogues neither tell
us what Power they had; nor whether they ruled these Churches alone, or in
Parity with the rest of the Presbyters. As Gers-Bucer expresses it, p. 423.
Non queritur an Episcopi continua successione usque ad Nicenum Concilium
Ecclesias gubernaverint, sed quales Episcopi suerunt; and quid imperii aut
potestatis in Ecclesiam aut Presbyterium habuerunt. That one only is mentioned
is no proof of sole power: for, 1. That is not always done, Irenaeus lib. 3. C.
3. begins the Succession at Rome with Peter and Paul. 2. In their Catalogues
they mentioned the Eldest, or the Praeses of their Meeting, or the Man of most
Fame for Grace or Gifts. For their Design was not to number all the Pastors of
the Churches; but to show a Succession of Pastors, and of sound Doctrine.
Neither do we find such Records of Succession in all Churches, but in some that
were of most Note.

28. His second Enquiry and Observation, p. 119. is, In what Language the
Ancients spoke of Bishops, who are said to have succeeded to the Apostles:
where he brings a number of Citations little to the purpose in hand. His first
is Irenaeus: Et habemus annumerare eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi
in Ecclesiis, and successores eorum usque ad nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt,
neque cognoverunt, quale ab his deliratur. What can be hence inferred, further
than that there were Sound and Orthodox Men, whom Irenaeus calls Bishops,
from the Apostles time: which is not to our Question. That Irenaeus Reasons
from this against the Valentinians, is not probative of our Authors point: what
he adds out of Irenaeus, Quos (Episcopi) and successoru relinquebant, suum
ipsorum locum Magisterii tradentes; is not concludent: for, 1. This is not
spoken of a single Bishop in one place; but of all the Pastors of the Churches:
whom we maintain to have been a Plurality. 2. Or this Magisterium may well be
understood of their Teaching Authority; for that was to his purpose; that they
whom the Apostles Authorized to Teach the Church, Taught not the Doctrine of
the Valentinians. For what he says that Irenaeus carefully distinguishes
between Bishops and Presbyters, he has cited no place for it: and if he had,
it imports no more, but that special notice was taken of the Praeses, beyond
the rest of the Presbyters: it can never prove sole, nor superior Jurisdiction.
Another Citation out of Irenaeus (that I may not transcribe all the words) is
no more, but that Apostoli illis tradiderunt Ecclesias: which we deny not:
seeing it may be understood of all Presbyters: and indeed Irenaeus says the
same of Presbyters, lib. 4. C. 43. Only our Author will have it understood of
Bishops, because of their Age: on the contrary, I plead, that it should be
understaod of Presbyters by Office? because Preaching Power was committed to
them, and not to Bishops only: and it is of that he is speaking; as that by
which the Valentinian, and other Heresies were condemned. Another Testimony out
of Irenaeus, we must obey them qui successionem habent ab Apostolis -- qui cum
Episcopatus successione Charisma veritatis certum, secundum placitum Dei
acceperunt. I see nothing to prove that all this may not be applied to every
Presbyter, or Pastor of the Church; nor is there any Shadow of Ground for his
Inference, viz. Ye see here, that the Episcopal and Apostolical Dignity are one
and the same, in the Language of Irenaeus. None can see this, unless the Eyes
of his mind be Tinctured with prejudice. For 1. Episcopatus successio is
competent to all Presbyters, in our Opinion: which he should refute, not
suppose it to be false. 2. Here is not the Apostolical Dignity mentioned by
Irenaeus, but a part of it, to wit Charisma veritatis certum; which I think he
will not say is peculiar to Diocesans: the Church would be ill served, if they
only had the Gift of Preaching the Truth: seeing they cannot preach to all their
People: and in our days seldom preach to any of them. He brings another
wonderful Argument, which he speaks of as what may supersede his insisting on
what he is discoursing: the Prophesy (says he) which threatened that the
Bishopric possessed by a notorious Malefactor should be given to another, was
literally fulfilled when Matthias was advanced to the Apostolate, in the Room
of Judas. I am so slow as that I cannot perceive what he aims at by this,
unless he would infer, Matthias succeeded to Judas, Ergo, the Bishops, and they
alone, succeed to the Apostles: which is much more ridiculous, than what he a
little before he charged Beza with. If he lay stress on the word Bishopric, it
is captio ab homonymia.

29. Cyprian is the next Father whom he adduceth, as a Witness that the Bishops
succeed to the Apostles. All that he brings from the Writings of that Learned
Father, and Holy Martyr, I have lately Answered, in a Debate on this Subject,
with I. S. I am not willing to repeat: yet I shall point at Answers to what he
cites. Cyprian says, Apostolos, id est, Episcopos and Praepositos, Dominus
elegit. His Objection has its own Answer; Cyprian distinguishes between
Episcopos and Praepositos: the President Bishop and the Presbyter; and he
calls them both Apostles; because they succeeded to the Apostles. I hope he
will not make Praepositos to be Exegetick of Apostolos, least he make Cyprians
sense to be, Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos, i. e. Praepositos. Another Citation,
quod enim non periculum metuere debemus de offensa Domini, quando aliqui de
Presbytery, nec Evangelii, nec loci sui memores, neque futurum Dei judicium,
neque nunc sibi Praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub
Antecessoribus nostris factum est, totum sibi vendicant. This may seem
plausible to such as know not the occasion of these words; which was: while
Cyprian was retired from Carthage, because of the Persecution, some of the
Presbyters, without the rest, took on them to absolve some of the Lapsed: this
Cyprian complains of, as justly he might; yea, he had cause to complain, that
their Bishop (that is, constant Moderator of their Presbytery) was neglected in
this matter; for that cause should have been determined in consessu
Presbyterorum; which should have been called together by him; as Praepositus
illis, that is, by their Choice, made the constant Praeses of their Meeting:
There is no proof here of a solitude of Power: nor of Cyprians Succession to
the Apostles (which is the thing that our Author cites it for) more than the
rest of the Presbyters did. The special notice that is here taken of his being
neglected, proceeded from the Genius of that Age, wherein perpetual Presidency
had set the Bishop a little higher in Dignity above the Presbyters, than they
had been from the beginning. Another Citation (which also misseth the mark,
viz. Succession to the Apostles) is, that Cyprian says, Ecclesia super
Episcopos constituitur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem gubernatur; and
says, this is Divina lege fundatum. All this may be understood of Scripture
Bishops, that is, all the Presbyters: and if ye will take it of the Cyprianick
Bishop, that is, the Praeses, we assent to it as truth; provided we understand
not these Bishops in their single Capacity, but in Conjunction with their
Presbyters: the Church is set on all Pastors who teach sound Doctrine, with
respect to her Soundness in the Faith, and Edification in Holiness: on the
Presbytery, or ruling part, (among whom, in Cyprians time, the Praeses, or
Bishop, was specially taken notice of, tho he did not rule by himself) with
respect to her good Order: and that all this is Juris Divini, I no way doubt.
If our Author can make out sole Jurisdiction from these words, he must bring
better Arguments than I have yet seen. Again, Cyprian says, the Bishops
succeeded to the Apostles vicaria ordinatione. This is also granted, and may be
understood of all Pastors of the Church; and we deny it not of the praesides
Presbyteriorum, who were peculiarly called Bishops: they succeeded to the
Apostles as Ministers of the Gospel; but that they either had the Plenitude of
Apostolic Power, or that their Presidency, as a distinct Office, or superior
Degree, was by Succession from the Apostles, we deny; and it is not proved from
Cyprians words. Their ruling power they have, with the rest, by Divine, or
Apostolic Institution: that there be a Presidency, is of the Law of Nature;
and has Scripture example; the person who should preside, is to be chosen by
common consent; nor do we find any warrant from Scripture, either that he
should have power superior to the rest, or that this Presidency should always
be in one person. He brings also Tertullian, saying, percurre Ecclesias
Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc Cathedrae Episcoporum suis locis praesident:
habes Corinthum, habes Ephesum, habes Romam. This Testimony imports no more
than that there continues in the Churches, planted by the Apostles, a
Government to this day. Gathedrae cannot be strained to signify a Bishop with
sole Jurisdiction: the Notion of that word is sufficiently Answered by a
Judicature in the Church, where one presideth: which we say should be in every
Church. He is so consident of his Conclusion, that he desires us to read
Cyprian himself (we do it, Sir, and think not fit to take all on Trust that is
cited out of him by your Party) and he thinks the Disingenuity of Blondel,
and his Associats will appear to the highest Degree. I desire, on the other
hand, that he would read him with an Unbyassed Mind, and then all this Airy
Confidence will evanish. That he asserteth, p. 123. that the Authority of
Bishops over Presbyters, Deacons, and Laity, will appear to them who read
Cyprian, is denied, except in the sense that I yielded in the Book above
pointed at: they have joint power with the rest of the Consistory over one
another, and over the whole Church.

30. I proceed with him p. 123. to his second Enquiry: Whether the Ancients
insisted frequently on this Succession of single Persons to the Apostles in
particular Sees, in their Reasoning against Heretics. I acknowledge that they
frequently Reasoned from the Doctrine that had been taught by persons
succeeding to the Apostles in particular Churches: and that they named
particular Men, or single Persons in that Succession: but that they laid any
weight on their being single Persons whom they so named; or that they looked on
these as the only Successors of the Apostles in these Churches, we deny; and
have not yet seen it proved. It is the same thing, as to the Strength of their
Reasoning, whether one Minister, or more, had the Power of Governing these
Churches. Wherefore, if we should yield him all that he is here enquiring for,
it does not advantage his Cause, nor hurt ours; unless it be made appear that
the single persons so named, were the sole, or supreme Rulers in these
Churches: which I am well assured is not proved by any of the Testimonies that
he brings. His first Citation is out of Tertull. whose Argument is plainly
this, that the Heretics could not show the beginning of their Churches, as the
Orthodox could do, from persons placed then by the Apostles; as Polycarp was by
John at Smyrna, and others in other places: and he adds, perinde utique and
caeterae exhibent, quos ab Apostoli in Episcopatum constitutos Apostolici
seminis traduces habeant. Here is no one word of Singularity of Power: and it
is certain, that the Apostolici Seed of sound Doctrine might be transmitted to
Posterity by a Plurality of Presbyters, as well as by single Bishops: yea, and
better too; for if one erred, the rest might correct him; but if the Bishop
erred, there w^ none in that Church that might oppose him. That Polycarp in
Smyrna and none else, is named, does not prove that he alone Preached the true
Doctrine, and far less that he Governed that Church by himself And indeed the
Zeal and Unanimity that he mentions p. 125. was (...) good mean of keeping
the Doctrine of the Church pure: but as this Unanimity could not be in one
Church, but among a Plurality of Tea chers, so the Unanimity of a few Bishops
in several Diocesses, could not be so convincing in this matter, as that, with
the Unanimity of Presbyters among themselves in these several Churches that
they were to instruct. Another Testimony of Tertull. he brings, Ordo tamen
Episcoporum ad originem recensus in Joannem stabit authorem. There is nothing
here but what has been already Answered: there was an Order, or Succession of
Bishops, whereof John the Apostle was the Appointer of the first of them: but
he does not tell us of their sole Jurisdiction. He argues p. 126. that if the
imaginable Interval of Parity had been known, after the Apostles, and the
Succession of single Bishops interrupted, this Argument had been weak, and the
Heretics might have insulted. A. I deny that either he, or the Heretics could
have any such advantage: because the Fathers did not argue from the Singularity
of the Persons succeeding one to another, they had no occasion to consider
that, in this Debate; further than to instance in one person so succeeding in a
Church, where there were more: it was enough to confound the Heretics, that
such Doctrine was constantly taught since the Apostles days, and they could
tell them by whom. What follows p. 126, 127. is a Repetition of the same
thing: about which I shall trouble him no more, let him tell it over again as
often as he will. He needed not tell us p. 128. that the Successions of single
Persons Governing particular Churches, and their Jurisdiction and Pre-eminence,
is acknowledged by some of the Gallican Church; we know there are Worthy Men in
that Church; but we never thought them all infallible.

31. His third Enquiry is, Whether we may safely lean on the Authority of the
Ancients, in an Affair of this Consequence? he says, no doubt we may; and
ought. I affirm that this matter may admit both of further Distinction, and of
some Doubting: and that it is blind Confidence to be so positive, without
clearing the State of the Question. And there is the more need of
distinguishing in this Case, because our Author seems, in pursuing this his
Enquiry, to confound two different Questions: one is, whether we may lean to
the Accounts they give of the Succession of Bishops since the Apostles days?
Another is, about the Antiquity of Episcopal Government, as he wordeth it, p.
131. It is one thing to own a Succession of Teachers in a Church, whom some
Men will call Bishops; another to own that the Government of the Church was
managed by them alone. I shall here propose and apply five Distinctions. 1. The
Ancients and their Writings are to be distinguished. Some of them lived in, or
near to the Apostolic times: others of them some Ages after: the Credibility
of the former, caeteris paribus, is far greater than that of the later: Because
they had better causam scientiae; and because, tho Tradition, without Writing,
may, at first, and under the best advantages, soon, and easily be corrupted;
yet by length of time, and passing through many hands, it is more apt to be
depraved; and that even without design. For the Writings ascribed to the
Ancients, some of them are Spurious, and only bear the Names of Famous Men.
Others of them are corrupted, and interpolated; tho they were really done by
them whose Names they bear: others of them are Dubious; so that it is sub
judice, whether they be credible Testimonies, or not. A second Distinction is,
of the things about which we debate: our Author indeed does distinguish, in the
Progress of the Debate, between Matters of Fact, and Matters of Opinion, or
Principle: of which afterward. I distinguish things on which our Faith, or our
Duty does depend; from these things that we are not so concerned in, being
merely Historical Passages, or Debates about Natural or Politic Things; in
Matters of Fact of the later sort, we are to believe the Fathers as credible
Historians; and regard them (at least some of them) as Men of Learning; yet so
as not to believe their Histories, nor receive their Conclusions against Sense
and Reason: for the former sort of things, I look on their Testimony as
insufficient, to persuade the Mind, or clear the Conscience: Scripture, not the
Fathers, must be the Rule of our Faith, and Religious Practice. Distinction
third, These things that we Debate about, are either determined in Scripture,
or not: if not, much regard is to be had to these Holy and Learned Men; who had
much of the Mind of God in many things: yet, as was said before, we must not
blindly follow them, over the Belly of Sense or Reason. If they be, Scripture
light must be our Guide, not the Opinion of the Fathers. Listinction fourth,
The Testimony of the Fathers is either Unanimous, or they are Divided: in the
later case, we cannot follow them; but must examine which of their Opinions is
best founded. In the former, their Testimony may occasion a great prejudice,
and may readily bias the Mind; yet it should not determine us against
Scripture Light, they all being fallible Men. Distinction fifth, The Opinions
of the Fathers are either clearly delivered, or we must guess at them, from
dark Hints. As the one sort can no way command our Faith: so neither the other
is to be received implicitly.

32. Out of these Distinctions, this State of the present Question resulteth,
whether the Testimonies of the Fathers be a sufficient ground on which we may
determine, whether Episcopacy or Parity be the Government of the Church that
Christ has instituted. My Antagonist is for the Affirmative, I am for the
negative: for which I give these Reasons, 1. We have no concurrent, nor
unanimous Testimony of the Fathers on either side; for all the noise that is
made of the Universality and Perpetuity of this Tradition, and Unanimity about
it. If they can prove what they confidently affirm in this point, we shall quit
this Argument. Many of the Fathers have said nothing on this head: few of them
have have written on it directly, and of purpose; and what they have said, is
but indirectly, without considering the State of our Controversy; which I am
persuaded, was not brought into Debate in the Primitive Times: many of the
Excellent Men of the first Ages have written nothing: many of the Writings of
that time are perished: there are different Opinions in this Debate among them,
whose Writings we have; which arose from the Change of the Practice that had
been in the Apostolic Age: whence then should we have this Harmony that they
talk of? for this last (the rest are certain enough) I refer the Reader to what
has already been said in this Disputation. 2. What most of the Fathers say on
this head, is obscure, and hard to be understood: their Expressions being suited
to the Customs and Dialect of that time, which was plain enough to them who
then lived; but not so to us, who know not their Idioms, nor the Customs that
they relate to, as then known things: they also used words in a far different
sense than we do: As Merit, Penance, Bishop, and such like. It is sometimes
far easier to clear the Point in Debate from Scripture, and Reason, than to
clear the Expressions of some of the Fathers about it. 3. The Uncertainty that
we are at about the Genuine, and Spurious; the Pure and Corrupted Writings of
the Fathers, make their Testimony unsafe to be the solitary ground of our
Faith, or Practice, even in this matter. Who knows not what Debates are among
Learned Men on this Head? and how Conjectural all the Knowledge is that can be
attained by the most diligent Search? And surely it is no Wisdom to build our
Opinion in a Matter of Religion, wherein we either please God, or sin against
him, on such a Sandy Foundation: Of this Opinion was Theophilus Antiochenus who
flourished about an. 130. and is said to be Sextus a Petro, in the Church of
Antiochia, lib. 3. ad Autolycum, near the beginning: he is showing the
Certainty of what Christians believed; compared with the Stories about the
Heathen Gods, and has these words, (...), etc. i. e. It was needful that
Writers should be Eye Witnesses of what they affirmed: or that they have
exactly learned the truth of things from them who were present when they were
done: for they who write Uncertainties that they themselves know not, do as it
were, beat the Air: his work is to be found Biblioth. Patr. T. 2. This Passage
is, p. 151. of the Cologn Edition 1618. 4. It is acknowledged by the best
Antiquaries, that the History of the Ages of the Church next to the Apostles,
is defective, dark, and uncertain: This is not only found now, at this distance
of time; but it was early complained of by Eusebius, who had far more help to a
certain and distinct knowledge of these things, than we have, lib. 3. C. 4.
(...) -- But how many, and what sincere Followers (or Successors) have Governed
the Churches planted by the Apostles, it cannot be confirmed, but so far as may
be gathered out of the words of Paul. Where he lays the Certainty of our
Knowledge of what concerns the Government of the Church, on Scripture, and
not on the Fathers. And in his Preface to his History, he tells us, he had
gone in a Solitary and Untroden Path, and could no where find so much as the
bare Steps of such as had passed the same Way; having only some small Tokens
(...) here and there, as it were. Also, that he had not found any
Ecclesiastical Writer, who unto this day (and it was the Interval of three
hundred years) have in this behalf (he is speaking of the Succession of
Bishops) employed any Diligence. Is there not then great Certainty to be
expected from this, or any other Writer, concerning these times; that we should
look on their Accounts as sufficient ground to build our Faith on, in a matter
that Religion is so nearly concerned in? The Learned Scalliger has this
Observation to our purpose: Intervallum illud ob ultimo capite actorum
Apostolorum ad medium Trajani imperium, quo tracts Quadratus, and Ignatius
florebant, plane cum Varrone (...) vocari potest, is quo nihil certi de rebus
Christianorum ad nos pervenit, praeter admodum pauca, quae hosts pietatis
obiter delibant, Swetonius, Tacitus, Plinius; quem hiatu^ ut expleret Eusebius,
(...) Clementis, nescio cujus, (non enim est ille eruditus Alexandrinus, (...)
Hegesippi, non melioris scriptoris, sine delectu ea deprompsit. Tilenus (no
Friend to Presbytery) says full as much; he tells us of the Lacunae and
Hiatus of these times: and that a fine actorum Apostolorum, ad Trajani tempora,
nihil habemus certi. Shall we then take the broken and uncertain Accounts that
we find of these times, for a sufficient Foundation of our Faith, about what is
the Will of God concerning the Government of his House.

. 33. Our fifth Argument we take from the Fathers disowning each himself, and
all others, beside the Prophets and Apostles, from having sufficient Authority
to determine in the Controversies of Religion; not exempting that about Church
Government. This our Writers have made so evident against the Papists, that it
is a wonder that Protestants should use such a Plea. And indeed the Papists get
much advantage by this Conduct: for the same Arguments that our Author, and his
Accomplices, use in this Debate, they improve in the other Controversies; and
with the same advantage. For if the Scripture be not sufficient Light to us in
this, I see not how it can be thought perfect in some other of our Debates: if
unwritten Traditions be found necessary in the one case, it will be hard to lay
the same aside in some others. I have adduced some Testimonies of Fathers to
this purpose, Preface to Cyprianick Bishop Examined: to which I shall now add,
August. lib. 2. contr Manichae. of the Scriptures he says, 161. Si quid velut
absurdum noverit non licet dicere, author hujus libri non tenuit veritatem; sed
aut codex mendosus est, aut interpres erravit, aut tu non intelligis. In
opusculis autem posteriorum, quae libris innumerabilibus continentur, sed nullo
modo illi sacratissimae Scripturarum Canonicarum excellentia conquantur, etiam
in quibusdam eorum invenitur par veritas, long tamen est impar authoritas.
Jerome is much, and often in this strain, Ep. 62. ad Theoph. Alexandr. Scio me
aliter habere Apostolos, aliter reliquos tractatores: illos semper vera dicere,
istos in quibusdam ut homines errare: Et Ep. 76. Ego Originem propter
eruditionem sic interdum legendum arbitror, quo modo Tertull. Novatum, Arnob.
and nonnullos scriptores Ecclesiasticos, ut bona eorum eligamus, evitemusque
contraria; juxta Apostolum dicentem, omnia probate, quod bonum est eligite. The
same he says also of his own Writings, in Hab. and Zech. Si quis melius, imo,
verius dixerit, and nos libenter melioribus acquiescemus. Ambros. de
incarnatione, C. 3. Nolo nobis credatur; non ego dico a me, quia in principio
erat verbum; sed audio, non ego affingo, sed lego, etc. Cyril. Hierosol. Cat.
12. Meis commentis (...) non attend; possis enim forte decipi: sed nisi de
singulis Prophetarum testimonia acceperis ne credas dictis, etc. Yea, the
Papists themselves reject the Authority of the Fathers when they please, and
teach in general, that they are not always to be followed: as Dally and
Turretin show, out of Cajeton, Canus, Maldonate, Petavius, and Baronius, who
often reprehendeth the Fathers, even in the Historical Accounts they give of
Matters of Fact: and does not this very Author so far forget himself, as to
say, that Jerome erred in his account of the practice of the Apostolic Age, p.
73. as I above observed: and if Jerome did mistake, why might not the rest also,
the Opinion of the Learned and Excellent Bradward. de Causa Dei, lib. 2. C. 3.
corroll. p. 601, 602. is consonant to what I have said. He shows, that the
Fathers did often seem, at least, to favor Heretics: particularly Pelagius:
and p. 602. E. Et quis theologus nesciat alias scripturas quorumcunque
scriptorum non tanta firmitate semper muniri, sed posse quandoque ab hominibus
emendari, and instanceth in Origin, Jerome, Cyprian, and Augustine. Our Authors
Exception against this, in his Distinction of Matters of Opinion, and Matters
of History, that the Fathers might mistake in the one not in the other, I am
afterward to consider.

34. For further Confirmation of this Truth, I shall transcribe a few heads of
Arguments, out of a Manuscript written by a Learned Divine of this Church;
Entitled, Some Propositions collected out of the Writings of Divines about
Church Government: because few can have access to read the Manuscript it self:
He proves, 1. That the Testimony of the ancient Historians is not in every
thing, and particularly in that point of the Hierarchy, probably true, because,
1. Even Episcopal Writers of the best Note, deny their Testimony to be
universally true: Sutliv. de Pontiff. lib. 2. C. 11. p. 148. Multa de Petre and
Paulo and aliis sanctis hominibus narrantur fabulose, quibus nemo necessario
tenetur credere: ibid. p. 153. About Peter's being at Rome, Ad testimonia Patrum
quod attinet expedita est Responsio: quae fama acceperant, narrant, sed dubia
and incerta. Whitaker of Peter and Paul's being buried at Rome, Hoc totum
nititur fidei humanae, and ex historiae veritate pendet: at fides and Religio
nostra certiori fundamento nititur; testimonio, scil. spiritus sancti: Baron
Pref. p. 3. Nulla res hactenus in Ecclesia magis negligi visa est quam
Ecclesiasticarum rerum narratio: quod si Historias consules, magnam eorum
classem ess^ intelliges, quae absque delectu perceperunt, and aniles fabulas.
2. They relate many things that are generally disbelieved, as the Letter of
Abgarus to Christ, and Christ's Answer: Peter being twenty five years at Rome,
as Bishop of that Church, is questioned by most Protestants; Sutliv. says,
Credo eum Romam nunquam vidisse. Reynold, Colla: with Heart, brings strong
proofs that Mark was not Bishop of Alexandria. 3. Many of these old Histories
are lost, as that of Egesippus, as Bellarmine confesses: others are vitiated,
some carelessly written, as Socrates testifies of Eusebius's History, lib. 1.
C. 1. That he took more care to praise the Emperor, than to describe the Acts
of that time. Also several things are in Eusebius which he did not write, for
he cites Sozomen, lib. 3. C. 20. who lived an hundred years after him. 4. The
Testimony of most Ancients about the Hierarchy, is in causa propria. 5. Many of
them whose Testimony is brought, lived an hundred years after the Apostles
times: and therefore had things by Tradition, which uses to grow by being
often rehearsed; for, says Socrates, lib. 5. C. 9. Nulla fabula narratur bis
quin duplo major evadat. 6. The Testimonies of the Ancients in this are not
harmonious. He further proves. 2. That these Testimonies cannot found a
Theological Conclusion: For, 1. They are no part of the Canon of Scripture, on
which ground Protestants reject Testimonies from Apocrypha. 2. Their Writings
contain some things that neither Party assenteth to. 3. Their Sayings were not
probative in their own time, Ergo, neither in ours; seeing we and they have the
same ground of Faith. 4. A Theologick Conclusion must be built not on Topic,
or uncertain grounds: Reynold Colla. with Heart, C. 6. Praeter authors sacros
nullus Historicus certus esse potest, i. e. Idoneus ad faciendam fidem in
Theologia. Sarav. de Pontif. l. 2. p. 151. Quis Ecclesiae status fuerit
antequam Apostoli tradiderunt rationem gubernandi Ecclesiam, nemo dicere
potest, nisi ex sacris scripturis. Sutliv. 12. T. Probatur nostra sententia
(that Peter was not at Rome,) 1. Quia nusquam ex scripturis probatur, nihil
ejus seripsit in Epistolis suis Petrus, nihil Paulus, nihil Lucas, qui res
Apostolorum diligenter prosecutus est. A Theologick Conclusion must either be
founded on some evident and clear Demonstration, or some infallible Authority:
neither of which is in the Sayings of the Ancients for the Hierarchy.

35. Let us now hear what he brings for this his Opinion; where in he is so
positive and confident: one might here expect strong Reasons; but behold, pro
auro paleas. He tells us, p. 128, 129. The Apostolical Churches had their own
Fasti, in which were recorded the Succession of their Bishops, and the Names of
the Martyrs: and that there are many Apostolical Monuments beside: in which
Egesippus, etc. could not be mistaken. A. 1. Eusebius. was of a contrary Opinion:
he could find none of these Fasti: but was forced to go in an untroden Path, as
I showed. 31. 2. He should have given some evidence for this confident
Assertion: for we know not where to find these Fasti, without his Direction. I
deny not that in some after Ages they began to keep Records in Churches; but
that in the Apostolic and next succeeding Age, they had them, we find not* and
these are times of which we, with Eusebius, and others, complain of, as to the
Uncertainty and Defectiveness of History. 3. The Memory of the Martyrs was
early Recorded: we do not find that the Succession of Bishops was so. 4.
Suppose the Records of both had been early and exactly kept, this can give no
Light in the present Debate, unless they had Recorded what Jurisdiction they
whom they called Bishops did exercise: which he does not so much as allege out
of these Fa^^i. 5. It is confessed by all, that Hegesippus was a very Fabulous
Author, and took many things on Trust, which he neither found in the Fasti, nor
any Apostolical Monuments. For Irenaeus and Tertull, they say nothing for his
Cause but what we are ready to contest with him; even supposing their Authority
to be as great as he will make it. For Clement, he is mistaken about him, as I
showed before, out of Scalliger.

36. Next he advances a Distinction (and ingeminateth it) of Theorems and
Matters Fact: he confesses, in the former that the Ancients might mistake; but
not in the latter: that it is impossible that they should mistake, and they
would not impose upon Posterity; seeing such things were obvious to the
Knowledge and Observation of the meanest Christians: we must not think that
they Lied in these, or Conspired to propagate a Lie to Posterity: for they were
Men of such Sanctity, defended the Truth with their Blood, many of them had
miraculous Gifts; they were Unanimous in delivering this their Testimony. A few
Considerations will easily dissipate this Mist, 1. He supposes the Unanimity
of the Ancients bearing Testimony to Episcopacy being the way settled by the
Apostles: which is utterly denied: he takes it also for granted, that that was
universally practiced in, and since the Apostolic Age, till of late: which is
also said without all ground; if he will prove either of these, we shall insist
no more on either Arguments, or Defenses from Antiquity. If he will take it for
certain, and despise all that we bring out of the Fathers, and all our
Exceptions to what he and his Party bring; we must leave it to the Judicious
Reader to believe as he sees cause. 2. He does most unreasonably suppose,
that, if we think the Testimonies of the Fathers was insufficient to determine
us in that matter, that therefore we impute Lieing to them; or that they
designed to impose upon Posterity. For one may mistake, and misrepresent a
History, and yet not lie, or design to deceive others: because he speaks as
he thinks; the Error is in his Understanding, not in his Will. Does this
Author think that Jerome told a Lie, or designed to impose on others in that
wherein he imputes Error to him, as is above said; I suppose he will not own
such Thoughts of that Holy and Learned Person: wherefore it is most absurd to
impute to us that we count some of the Fathers, yea, or all of them, Liars,
because we think they might err, even in Matter of Fact: It is well known that
Matters of Fact are frequently misapprehended, and thence misrepresented, even
by them who would be loath to tell a Lie: if this were so; I could prove him,
and some others of his Party, to be notable Liars; which (...) will be far from
asserting: is there not much false History of things done in the time when they
are reported or written; much more it may be so at great distance of time, when
Reports pass through many hands, viresque acquirunt eundo. Wherefore the
Sanctity, Zeal for Truth, and other Excellencies of the Fathers are no ways
impeached by rejecting them as insufficient to be the Rule of our Faith, or
Practice, in the things that concern Religion. 3. For the Miraculous Gifts of
the Fathers, about whose Testimony we now Debate, I think he will find it hard
to prove them. I deny not that some extraordinary Gifts did continue in the
Church some time after the Apostles, but can this Author tell us who had them,
or that the Fathers who have left Writings behind them were so Gifted? Beside,
their Gifts, if they had such as he alleges, could not prove what he
intends, unless he could make it appear that they had such infallible
assistance as the Apostles had: which I think he will not attempt to prove.

37. I fourthly observe on this part of his Discourse, that his Distinction is
wholly impertinent to this purpose; and that the Fathers were capable to be
deceived in this Matter of Fact, no less than some Theorems, or Matter of
Principle: because, 1. This matter does contain in it a Principle, or Theorem,
viz. That Episcopacy was instituted by the Apostles: now this might arise from
misinterpreting some Passages of the Apostolic Writings: if they say the
Church was governed by Bishops in the Apostles time, which is Matter of Fact:
they must also say it was appointed by the Apostles, which is Matter of Jus or
a Theological Theorem: and this must depend on their understanding some
Passages of Scripture, as holding forth that Truth. For Example, I left thee in
Crete, unto the Angel of Ephesus, and such like: now they might misunderstand
some other Scriptures as is confessed; why not these also. None of the Fathers
is so positive as to say that he saw a Bishop exercising sole Jurisdiction in
the Apostles time: wherefore their Assertion of the Factum (if any such there
be) must have been built on their Misapprehensions of the Jus: and if they be
not infallible in the one, they could not be so in the other. 2. This Factum,
that Bishops alone governed the Church, and not Presbyters with them, (for that
is our Question) and that in, and next after the Apostles times, must come to
all, or at least to most of the Fathers by Tradition: for none of them could
see the Practice of the Church in all these Ages, about which we dispute: but
Tradition is very liable to lead People into Error, as every one knows: if
the Fathers might mistake about what is written in the Scripture, as is
confessed, how much more might they err in that which they have but by
Tradition; which their Fathers have told them, and which is not so Recorded in
Scripture, but that they might misapprehend it? 3. Whereas our Author, p. 130.
ascribes Fallibility to the Fathers in Doctrines and Theorems, because these
might depend on their Ratiocinative and Intellectual Faculties, and they had no
Privilege against Error of that Nature: may not the same be said of this
Matter of Fact that we now debate about? the Management of Church Government is
such a thing as a Man cannot understand, nor rightly apprehend merely by Sense,
and without the use of Ratiocination. How can we understand what is the Power
and Jurisdiction of one Man over others, without inferring it from the Acts we
see him do, with respect to them? I find my Antagonist often out in his
Reasoning in this very thing. He reads of a Bishop set in a higher Seat than
the Presbyters; Church Acts spoken of as done by him, without mentioning the
Presbyters: he finds in Catalogues of Successions in Churches one mentioned
and no more; and such like: here his Intellectual and Ratiocinative Faculty
infers, that one Bishop ruled these Churches, and the rest of the Presbyters
had no hand in the Government, further than advising: here is ill Logic, and
false Reasoning: and in that he will not say that he is infallible. It cannot
then be denied, but that the Fathers behoved thus to reason from what they saw
and heard: if then they might err in the use of their Intellectual and
Ratiocinative Faculty, what should hinder but that they might err in this
matter: which makes his Distinction wholly void. He says, p. 131. We must
either receive this Historical Truth, or say that no Age, or no Society of Men
in any Age, can transmit the Knowledge of any Matter of Fact to the next
Generation. A. 1. It is not absurd to say, that no Humane History about Matters
of Fact can so transmit what was done in former Ages, as to be a sufficient
Foundation for our Faith or Practice, in any part of Religion, without, or
contrary to Scripture; tho it may give ground for a Historical Certainty in
things that are not of that Concernment. To apply this, we maintain that
Episcopacy is beside, and contrary to the Scripture (and if he will beat us out
of that Hold, we shall yield him the Fathers) wherefore, if all the Fathers in
one Voice, and that plainly and positively, would say (which yet they have
never done) that Episcopacy is of Divine Right, we are not obliged to believe
it, because we know they may err, and the Scripture cannot err. 2. The
Consequence is naught. There are Matters of Fact that are purely such; that Men
see, or hear; and cannot mistake about them, if their Sense be sound, and other
Requisits to right Sensation be not wanting: these may be so transmitted by
Humane History, to Posterity, that we need not fear to be deceived about them;
but have a Moral Certainty: but it does not hence follow, that such Matters of
Fact, as must be known, not only by Sensation, but Conjoined Reasoning, can be
so transmitted to Posterity, by mere Humane Testimony, as that we are obliged
on that Testimony alone, to build an Opinion, or engage in a Practice, that
Religion is so nearly concerned in, as it is in the Matter under Debate. The
Ordinances that we own, must have surer ground than is necessary for many
Historical Truths, that we do not, nor ought to Question.

38. He affirms, p. 131, 132. that Episcopacy was from the beginning, by
Divine Authority, a Copy of the Jewish AEconomy, transmitted from the Apostles
to single Successors, perpetually to be preserved in all Ages: that it was
uniformly settled by the Apostles in all Churches. All this he has said over
and over again: but has not proved one word of it. Neither is any thing here
said to our present purpose, unless he prove that the Testimony of the Fathers
alone, is a sufficient ground for us to believe all this: for that is the
present Debate. He says, nothing is answered to all this, but that they (the
Presbyterians) say the Ancients were Erroneous in several things. And is that
nothing? I have showed that they were no more under infallible Conduct in this,
than in other things. That they who transmitted to us the Knowledge of the
Polity settled by the Apostles, were sufficiently acquainted with the
Apostolical Constitutions, and that these Customs and Constitutions were not
only preserved in the Ecclesiastical Records, but conveyed to their Eyes in the
daily Practice of the Church: this he affirms, p. 133. I suppose to prove
that the Testimony of the Fathers alone is sufficient ground for our Faith,
that Episcopacy is Juris Divini. Most of this is already Answered, being but a
Repetition of what he has said before. I further A. 1. These Fathers were
acquainted with the Apostolical Constitutions by their Writings (for he will
not say that they were Eye Witnesses to Apostolic Practices; tho it is
alleged that one of them saw John the Apostle; that will not prove such
acquaintance with his, or other Apostles way) we have their Writings, as well
as they had; and seeing it is confessed, that they were not infallible in
Understanding and Expounding Scripture, it is reasonable that we should see
with our own Eyes, and not with theirs, and we should not implicitly believe
the Fathers in telling us that the Apostles meant so and so in their Writings.
2. We think the Apostolic Constitutions are best preserved, and most purely,
yea infallibly, in the Apostolic Writings, these are the Ecclesiastical
Records that we lay more weight on than the Fasti of the Churches that he
says, were in the after Ages. 3. That the daily practice of the Church did
convey to the Eyes of the Fathers the Constitutions of the Apostles, we utterly
deny: for Practice and Institution are two different things: for the one is not
always a good commentary on the other* even in the Apostles times, the Mystery
of iniquity began to work, Practice began to vary from Institution: and in the
very thing we now speak of, there were Efforts to carry Practice beyond the
Rule; when Diotrephes did (...), affected to be primus Presbyter: and we may
rationally think, that this Ferment did (when the Apostles were gone off the
Stage) gather strength among Men who were not so humble, nor mortified as they
should have been. Practice does often degenerate from Principles (as we see in
daily Experience) and it is probable that this very thing might deceive some of
these Holy Men, and make them judge a miss of the Apostolic Constitution; and
consequently make their Sentiments no safe Rule for our Guidence in this
Matter. Beside all this, we cannot yield that the Practice of the Church was
such as our Author fancieth, in the times of the first of the Fathers: or, that
they do so represent the Practice of the Church as he imagines. He insinuates
another Argument, p. 134. That the Fathers found the Series of single
Successors in all the Apostolical Churches, governing Ecclesiastical Affairs,
and this Succession not asserted as a thing that was then opposed, but rather
supposed; and infers, that a Tradition so stated, and conveyed, is as
Authentic and Infallible as any thing of that Nature can be. A. That the
Fathers found this, or that they a^^erted it, is denied: what he else where
brings for proof of this is answered. Again, if the Fathers had found this,
they had erred: we maintain that they were Men capable to mistake, and to find
what was not to be found. Further, it is not probative, that the Fathers did
not find this way opposed, but supposed: both because the Degeneracy from the
Apostolic Constitution that there was in the Primitive Church came in
insensibly; it wrought as a Mystery, unobserved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. (I do not
understand that Scripture exclusively of other things, but inclusively of this)
and were as the Tares, when Men Sleep. Also because, if there were Opposition
made, it might be suppressed, and not transmitted to Posterity, by the
Influence of the Party which had the Ascendent. Yet for all this; we deny that
the Fathers of the first Ages had that Jurisdiction of Bishops that he talks
of to oppose, or that it was in their days.

39. What follows, p. 134, 135, 136. seems to be designed as a Herculean
Argument: it is brought from the dangerous Consequence they run upon, who
derogate from the Authority of this Traditional Conveyance, in a Matter of
Fact: for by the same reason, we must question the most Sacred things in our
Religion. And for an Instance of this, he shows that the Canon of the
Scripture was not universally received before the Death of the Apostles, but
some Books questioned, these Books were received upon Search made by the
Church, and finding that they were agreeable to the Apostolic Standard; and
that the Original Conveyance of such Books was supported by the Testimony of
Apostolical Persons, or Holy Men who Conversed with such. If we receive some
Books of Scripture on the Testimony of the Ancients, how dare we dispute their
Fidelity in a Matter of Fact, relating to the Polity of the Church? So that, on
the whole Matter, either we must receive their Testimonies in this, or we must
question the Authority of some Books now received into the Canon: for it may be
objected against this last Tradition, that it was so opposed by Men of great
Name, but the other was always universally received: I have heard that A. M. D.
D. has been jealoused as inclining to Popery, tho his Accusers failed in their
Probation: he here (and in some other Passages of this Book) seems to prove
what they could not make out. This Medium Stapleton, and many others of the
Romish Doctors, use, to prove that the Church, not the Scripture, is the Ground
of our Faith, because without the Church we cannot know which Books of
Scripture are Genuine, and which are Spurious: just as this Author tells us,
we cannot know this but on the accurate Search made by the Church; upon which
Scrutiny some books are received into the Canon which at first were doubted of.
I advise him to read Whitaker against Stapleton; especially his Duplicatio:
lib. 2. C. 26. where this Controversy is solidly handled, as it is also in
many other Protestant Writers. It is observable that Popery and Prelacy must be
defended by the same Arguments: and that this Author has no better Evidence
for, nor firmer Faith of the Divinity of the Scriptures, than he has of
Episcopacy: that his Faith in both is built on the Authority of the Church. I
mention the Divinity of the Scriptures, because the whole of it is made up of
its Parts, the several Books; and if our Belief, that this Book is a part of
the Canon, Ex Gr. Ruth; be built on the Churches Authority, so it must be with
another Book, and another, and so of them all. I must here then digress a little
from defending Presbytery to the Defense of Protestantism, against this my
Antagonist. Let me not here be mistaken, as thinking that our Certainty of the
Christian Doctrine in general, were no greater than that we have about this or
that Book of Scripture being Canonical: We have sufficient, though not equal
Certainty of both: Or as holding that the Authentickness of the several Books
of Scripture were alike evident: some of them bear more manifest Marks of
Divinity, or Motives of Credibility, than others do: And yet in them all, there
is what may satisfy us, that they are from God. Or thirdly, As of Opinion that
the Testimonies of the Christians of the first Ages are of no use, not
Conducive to our Certainty in this Matter: I own with Chemnit. exam. Council.
Trident. pt. 1. p. 86. That as Scriptura habet authoritatem principaliter, a
spiritu sancto; deinde a Scriptoribus, so, postea a Primitiva Ecclesia tanquam
test. No doubt the Concurrent and Harmonious Testimony of the first Ages is a
strong Plea: but we rest not on that Ground alone: for if we did, our Faith
should be resolved into the Authority of fallible Man: Yea, we should reject
some of these Books, which we now receive as Canonical; which were for some
time questioned: we affirm then against this Author, that the Books of
Scripture were not received by the Church, upon the Testimony of Men singly:
Which he either must mean, or his Argument is not to the purpose. I argue then
against him out of his own words; the Church having made an accurate Search
into the Doctrine of these Books, and finding it was agreeable to the
Apostolic Standard, and that the Original Conveyance of such Books was
supported by the Testimony of Apostolic Persons, or other Men, etc. Here
himself does not make the Testimony of the Fathers a sufficient ground of our
receiving these Books: but what the Church found in them by Searching: So that
indeed he overturneth the Sufficiency of the Foundation that he would have us
build on, by laying another beside it. If he will let us see Episcopacy to be
suitable to the Apostolic Standard, we shall embrace it; but cannot own it
without that, tho all the Fathers in one Voice, should plead for it. Again, the
Church after her Scrutiny; and these Apostolic and Holy Men who bare Testimony
to the Conveyance of these Books, either had some ground for owning them as
Divine, or none; but because they thought so, the latter I hope he will not
say: if he say the former, we shall receive these Books, not on their sole
Authority; but on these Grounds that they went upon. If he say the present
Church received them from the Church of former Ages, he must needs sist
somewhere, and not proceed in infinitum. Whatever Person or Church he sist in,
the Argument recurreth with respect to them. Further, if we receive the Books
of Scripture because of the Testimony of the Church, our Faith, both of their
being from God, and of the Truths contained in them, must be resolved
ultimately into the Veracity of fallible Men; and not into the Veracity and
Authority of the Infallible God: unless he will make the Church infallible, as
his Accomplices in this Opinion do: and even that will not help him, seeing this
Infallibility cannot be proved. And if it could, I ask whether these infallible
Persons, who, after the Apostles, searched what Books were Authentic, had the
Knowledge of this by Means, or by Revelation? the latter the Papists do not
pretend; the former will serve us, using the same Means for this Knowledge.
Lastly, I ask, whether they who conveyed these Books to us could be deceived,
or not? The latter he will not assert, for he has told us they may be deceived
about Theorems, and that such a Book is Canonical, is such: if they could be
deceived, it is not fit for us to build our Faith of a thing of so high
Concernment on their Opinion. I conclude, that the Books of Scripture are
(...), and our Faith that they are Gods Word is built, not on the Testimony of
the Church; but on the Veracity of God who speaks: and we know that God
speaks in them, from the Motives of Credibility that the Scripture it self
affords; of which our Writers against the Papists bring not a few. If he can
give as good ground for Episcopacy as we can give for the Books of Scripture
being the Word of God, we shall receive the one as well as the other.

40. His next Work, which begins p. 136. is to consider the Concessions of
the Learned Presbyterians in this controversy: which yield some Propositions
that not only shake, but quite overturn the whole Fabric of the new Doctrine.
It is well that there are some Learned Men among them: he sometimes speaks of
them, without Exception or Discrimination, in another Strain: and even here,
what he gives with the one hand, he takes away with the other: for it is no
great Evidence of Learning for to overturn the whole of what one takes pains
to build. I, in the Entrance of this Contest with him, must enter my
Protestation, that I will not own any Proposition, tho advanced by the
Learnedest of the Presbyterians, that has a mischievous Tendency: and if any
such Assertion should happen to drop from me, upon Admonition and sufficient
Instruction, I shall retract it; errare possum, haereticus esse nolo. He
begins with Salmasius, Walo, Messal. p. 7. confessing, that even the ancien
times (except the Apostolic Age) distinguished between Bishop and Presbyter: I
acknowledge the same, and require this Author to show how this overturneth the
Fabric of Presbyterianism, which he reckons the (...) Doctrine. The Ancients
early made difference in the Name; reserving that of Bishop to the (...), or
Moderator; soon after, there was a difference made in their Dignity: but we
deny that there was, in the first Antiquity, any difference in the matter of
Jurisdiction: and so our Principle stands firm, for all this Concession. What
he next cites, out of the same Author, p. 17. is so far from his purpose, that
it shows little Skill, or Consideration at least, that he mentions it:
Salmasius says the Apostles sometimes called themselves Bishops and
Presbyters, that they might put the Honor on them to whom they committed the
care of the Churches, to seem to be equal to them. May not this be meant of
Presbyters, as well as Bishops, that the Apostles so honored them. For our
Argument from the Confusion of Names of Bishop, and Presbyter, which he thinks
is here overturned: the Reader, before he come this length, will see this
Cavil to be groundless; if he consider how we manage that Argument. He cites
him also saying, that the Ancients called Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and
Apostle. I have above showed in what sense both these are spoken, without any
Inconveniency to our Cause, see Sect. 2. 3. It is as little to his purpose, that
he further cites from Salmasius, that he says James, whom the Ancients say
was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, was over the lesser Bishops, as now one
Bishop is over many Presbyters. He was over the Bishops that is Presbyters, in
the Quality of an Apostle: that the Ancients called him a Bishop, I have showed
how that is to be understood, in the place last cited. He is at him again, in
his p. 181. of Wall. Messal. that he confesses the Form of Government was
changed after the Death of Peter, and Paul, tho not soon after; yet in the end
of the first Century, and beginning of the second. If Salmasius mean (as I am
confident he does) that a Change unto perpetual a Praesidency, and Majority of
Dignity and Notice, did then begin to creep in, I confess the same: let our
Author make his best advantage of it: if he think that Bishops were then set up
with sole or superior Jurisdiction, I dissent from him: tho even this would not
overturn our Cause, which is built on Scripture, not on the Opinion or Practice
of the Ancients that were after the Apostles.

41. He next, p. 138. brings some concessions of Blondel, apol. p. 3. that
Episcopacy of one over many Presbyters did not prevail before the year, 140,
This is a foul misrepresentation: Blondel is there speaking of the Divisions,
in which one said, I am of Paul, etc. after the manner of the Corinthians; that
this could not be proved to be before the year 140. Now it is probable that
Episcopacy, as the supposed remedy, was not presently applied on the first
appearance of the Malady: but that other means were used. Blondel says, Pref.
p. 76. that in great Cities, where were many Thousands of Christians, they had
but one Church; this says our Author, could not be without a Bishop over them.
Which I deny: the contrary is ordinary at this day: all the Congregations may
be under one Presbytery, and their Moderator; which in that place he calls
unicum concessum. in some places many Meetings are counted one Parochial
Church; which I cannot so well understand. Yet neither way overturneth
Presbytery; nor does necessarily infer Episcopacy. He next Cites Bocharti
Phaleg. which is a Mistake; the Words are in his Epistle to Dr. Morley P. mihi
34. nor are his Words fully Cited: he expressly assenteth to Jerome, Apostolorum
aetate inter Episcopos and Presbyteros nihil fuisse discriminis; and communi
Presbyterorum Concilio Ecclesias fuisse administratas: then follow the Words
Cited by the Enquirer, asserting the antiquity of Episcopacie. And a little
after, proinde tam qui Presbyterialem, quam qui Episcopalem ordinem juris
Divini esse asserunt, videntur (...). So that it is plain that Bochart says as
little for his Cause as for ours; Seeing both are for a jus Divinum. So that if
all whom he has mentioned were sitting in Council (it is his own conceit) we
should have two for his one, and allow Bocharts suffrage to be, non liquet. And
let him raise what Batteries he will on this ground, which he says the
Adversary yields (supposing fondly four men who lived in Presbyterian
Churches, to be the whole Party; and that some of them said what they never
thought.) His first Battery is, a Question P. 140 and seqque Seeing that
Episcopy was the Government all over the Christian Church toward the beginning
of the Second Centurie, quo molimine, quibus machinis, was the Ecclesiastical
paritie of Presbyters (which the Apostles left the Church in Possession of)
changed from that aequality into Prelacie, and here he has a long harangue,
and many tragical words, setting forth the impossibility of this Change, and
the absurdity of asserting it. To all this the Answer is plain and easy, and
I hope will be convincing to such as do not look on things with the prejudice
that this Gentleman seems to be under the power of.

. 42. I Answer then 1. This his Supposition we will never yield, unless we see
more reason for it than yet has been proposed: we deny that the Authors he
has cited have made such concessions as he supposes: and if any of them have,
let him answer the Absurdity that follows on it, we are not concerned, we
cau yield no further than, the Apostles, having settled the Government of the
Churches in paritie among Presbyter, and Nature having made a reses necessary
in their Meetings; soon after (the remains of the History of these Ages causes
that we cannot t^ how soon) this Presidencie being constant in the same person,
began (...) be taken more notice of than was fit, and more deference to be
paid (...) the Praeses than was meet: and that after some Ages, some, in some
places did Usurp, or grasp at more Power than was due: but that either the
Solitude of Church Power, or the Superiority of it, was owned, (...) practiced
avowedly, for the first three Centuries, we deny: yea, we (...) not find that
it became Universal for some time after. Wherefore, (...) ground he builds his
Battery on failleth; and so, his roaring Canon will prove but bruta fulmina;
and we are not obliged to account for neither so sudden, nor so great a Change,
as he mentions. 2. We can easily give a rational dilineation of such a
Change, as was indeed made from the Apostolic constitution, and practice of
the first times. We do not ascribe it to a general Council, nor to a
Conspiracy of all the Presbyters in their scattered and Persecuted State, to
make that Change. Nor do we derogate from the Holiness and faithfulness of the
first Pastors of the Church who were settled by the Apostles: let him please
himself with all he says to prove the Absurdity of thinking that a Change
could be wrought that way. But 1. We are persuaded that a great Change there
was, by compareing the Practice, and some Canons of Cent. 5, 6, 7. etc. with
the Apostolic Writings. 2. We think there is no impossibility in such a
Change as I have acknowledged: considering the corruption of Men, yea the
sinful infirmities of good Men; some of whom may be apt to Usurp; and others to
overlook evils that are not easily observable in their Progress. And
considering how suddenly Changes to the worse have fallen out in the Church,
see Moses Prae^icti^ Deuteronomy. 31. 27, 28, 29. see also Exodus 32. 8. and the
frequent Apostacies of Israel after the death of their good Kings made this so
evident, that it can never be denied, nor ought to be wondered at. 3. This
Change did not come suddenly, nor all at once, and therefore was not so obvious
to every ones Observation: that it was not complained of by any we cannot say;
not having the complete and distinct Records of the first Ages: far less can
it be affirmed that it was not observed by some who might Lament it in Secret;
but for Peace sake, and because the things they had to Complain of were dark
and doubtful, and but small, and almost insensible Declensions from what had
been before, they would make little noise with their dissatisfactions. It is
well known that thus Degeneracie has grown in latter Ages of the Church: and I
wish it be not at this Day. Very often a well Reformed Church does thus
degenerate, whose Malady is like latent Diseases which are little observed
till they be past Remedy.

. 43. I add 4. The true Account of this Change of the Church is given by way
of Praediction, by our Lord himself on the Parable of the Tares of the field,
Matthew. 13. 24. etc. this with other Corruptions, grew while the Guids of the
Church slept, which case, in some degree or other, is incident to the best of
Men; and as, in process of time, the Ministers of the Church grew more remiss,
this evil had the more advantage to grow. Of this I have Discoursed elsewhere;
Rational Def. of non conformity. I shall now attend my Antagonist,
endeavoring to Run down this apprehension of things with many hard Words:
which amount to no more but this, that it was impossible to be brought about,
because of the observablenss and suddeness of the Change, and the Faithfulness
of the Guids of the Church that then were set over her. All which is already
Answered. His ingeminating his Question about the possibility of this Change,
P. 142. his saying, that this cannot be imagined, if we believe the other parts
of Evangelical History; are but words that evanish into nothing, on supposition
of the Account that I have given of it: for we deny that the Evangelical
History, whether Sacred, or Humane, gives us Account of such a constitution of
Episcopacy as he imagines, in the first Ages. That no Historian took Notice of
it, though it was most memorable, p. 143. is still his rotten Hypothesis, that
this Change should have been made suddenly, and all at once: and I add the
History of the time of the Rise and Progress of this is defective, and
uncertain, as I have showed, Sect. 32. We do not say that it was Agreed upon by
some ambitious Ecclesiastics, as he P. 144. such Men might carry it on in
their several places, without Consultation; Nature, and a corrupt Heart,
prompting them to it, and the World and Satan tempting them: yea, it might in
some degree, be promoted by better Men than these, unawares; taking that for
their Due which was not so: for its being submitted to tamely (which he
mentions ibid.) that was not to be wondered at, because of the Humility of
some, and minding other work for the Peoples Edification, leaving the the
Ruling part too much to them who inclined to it; and their not observing this
Change, which by in insensible Degrees, made its Progress so in the dark.

. 44. He p. 145, etc. draws some absurd Consequences, by which he labors
to load our Assertion, that the Apostolic Government of Paritie, was in after
Ages, changed into Prelacie. The 1. is, that they who were marked for the
Sacred Function by the Lord Christ, after some Experience, Judged it necessary
to Change Parity for Prelacy. 2. That this Change was brought about, not in any
of the ordinary Methods by which things of that nature are transacted among
Mankind, but instantly, and in a miraculous manner. 3. That the immediate
Successors of the Apostles were all Presbyterians (this we hold) but that these
Presbyterians (most of them Martyrs for Christianity) preferred Prelacy to
Paritie. 4. That in their Opinion, there was no other Remedy againstSchism and
Confusion. He says, these Conclusions are evident, and necessary, if their
(the Presbyterians) Hypothesis be allowed. Such Consequences from our Opinion
we utterly deny; and Challenge him to Prove their Dependence on it. The
judicious Reader will easily see, that they all are Grounded on his fond
Conceit, that we hold that this Change was made suddenly, openly, and all at
once: if he find us Maintaing that, let him load our Opinion with as many
absurd Consequences, as he can devise. And we neglect his triumphant Repetition
of his continual Cant, p. 145, 146. about the Universal Consent of the
Christian Church, and its being received without Contradiction. But to
establish this last Notion, he tells us, that none before Aerius, opposed
Episcopacy; of whom, and his Actings, he takes the liberty to give such
Account as he thought sit for his design: that his Motive was Ambition, and
missing of a Bishopric: was dull, had no Parts: This (in this learned Authors
opinion) must needs be the native Consequent of his being a Presbyterian: for
he reckons them all such. I have given a more true account of Aerius,. 16.
of. 6. Established on better Authority than he in this Narrative pretends to,
which is none but his own. He needed not to spend a whole page to tell us what
he means by the Impossibility that he ascribes to the Change we speak of,
let him understand it as he will, we are not concerned, who have given account
of that Change which makes it both possible and easy to be understood. p.
148. He has another Argument (if it be different from what he has said
before) we must not say that the primitive Church immediately Succeeding the
Apostles so soon Apostatized from their Original Establishment, else we have no
certain Standard to know what is Genuine, and what is Suppositions in the whole
frame of our Religion: This he enforces by telling us, they might Change other
things; and if the first and best Christians were not to be trusted in matter
of Fact, they are less to be trusted in matter of Opinion. Here we have yet
more plainly expressed, the Popish Principle, that the Churches Authority is
the ground of our Faith: we do not so Trust the first and best Churches (except
the Apostles) as to make them the rule of our Religion, either in their
Historical, or other Writings: We give that Deference to the Scripture alone.
Again, we impute no such Apostacy to the first and best Saints; but to them
who, at some distance, Succeeded them; as has been declared: and we know, that
in after Ages, even among them who go under the name of the Fathers, other
things were Changed, as well as Church Government.

44. That our Reformers from Popery (whom he calls the first Presbyterians,
p. 149.) did not plead a Jus Divinum, is no Argument against us: for few of his
Party, to this day, plead for a Divine Right to be on their side, as he and
some few others do. And himself and his Accomplices, made no noise with it, when
the Oath of Supremacy, and the Test were in Fashion: our Reformers did not
disowne it, and they had not the Occasion, and may be, not the Light, to assert
it, that aftertimes had. Whereas it is palpable, that Interest makes some of
his Side to change their Note. If Beza wrote smoothly to the English Episcopal
Clergy, and some more freely to Mr. Knox, and Mr. Melvil; I know no blame in
that piece of Civility (unless he can say, that Beza ceded in many of his
Principles, to please the English Church; which cannot be alleged. His
imputing Force and Violence to us, and fancying that no Records can be true or
genuine that are against us, we pass, as angry and empty Words, but no
Arguments: we own all genuine Records that can be made appear to be such;
whether they be for us, or against us: but build not our Faith on any of them,
except such as are contained in the Scriptures of Truth. And here he brings
in, p. 150. the Controversy about Ignatius's Epistles; and imputes to Dally
and others, that they reject them on no other ground, but because they own
Episcopacy. It is not fair dealing to impute such Prevarication to a Person of
Monsieur Daillies Worth, after he is laid in the Grave. He will not pretend, p.
156. to debate the matter about the Authority of these Epistles; but p. 150.
and what follow, runs out in a high Commendation of Doctor Pearson, on that
Subject, and many confident Assertions, that what he has said cannot be
Answered. I shall be far from derogating from the Learning and Critical Skill
of that Author. But am not convinced by his Arguments. I am sure there is not
that Evidence, nor Certainty in them, that is sufficient for us to build on, in
a Matter that Religion is so nearly concerned in, as is the Government
appointed by Christ in his Church. He tells us Monsieur L'Arroque attempted
to Answer the Bishop of Chester, but not to the Satisfaction of his own Party:
and his Collections are Answered by Nourry. The truth is, L'Arroque was
prevailed upon by some of the Episcopal Party, (as witnesses the Translator of
L' Arroques History on the Eucharist, in his Life, p. 5.) by some specious
Arguments, from the Unseasonableness of Debates among Protestants, to desist
from that Work, and it never was perfected: therefore it might be the more
easily answered: and we cannot judge what Esteem it would have obtained: it
seems they dreaded the Strength of it. Whether we ever were able to bring one
plausible Argument for that Cause; the Reader must judge; we will not in this,
stand to his Decision, which he confidently makes p. 141. he declineth (ibid.)
renewing the Debate about these Epistles: wherefore I hope I may be excused if
I do so too. And he asserteth that their Cause loses nothing by their being
laid aside: as I also affirm, that our Cause may be maintained, if they be
allowed to be really what he would have them to be. Some Citations out of them
I have answered Cyprianick Bishop Examined. And if he had thought fit to
produce more, it is like they might be found to do no hurt to our Cause. Or if
he had cited what he talks of out of the Acts of the Martyrdom of Ignatius,
he might have received what should satisfy about it. A Distinction between
Bishop (that is Moderator) and Presbyter, and Deacon, we own, as well as these
Acts do, which is all he mentions as making for him, in these Acts. He cites
Wall. Messal. p. 153. asserting, that these Epistles were written in the
beginning or middle of the second Century (this is but the Guess of the Learned
Salmasius) but our Author does not tell us that Salmasius, in the same place,
sets forth, that they could not be written by Ignatius; from some
Absurdities that he makes appear to be contained in them. This Gentleman
mistaketh, when he says, he that wrote thom could not represent Ecclesiastical
Policy different from what it was in the days of Ignatius, that is to say, he
could not mistake. He should have proved this, by demonstrating that that
Person, tho he knows not who he was, had the Gift of Inerrability: and if he
ascribe that to a Person whose other Characters he knows not; he might as
well say, that no Writer of that Age could misapprehend what was the Principle
and Practice of the former. Is it not possible, that this Person might be
another Diotrephes; who, while there was some Tendency to a Declension from
Parity, did zealously forward it; and run a little before the soberer and
better Men of that time; and that his Zeal for the Opinion he had taken up
might make him misapprehend, or misrepresent, what was the Opinion of the true
Ignatius? it is a Dream, that it follows from the Concession, or Guess, of
Salmasias, that that Author gave (...) a true Idea of the Ecclesiastical Policy
of the beginning of the second Century: and another, that he must represent
Church Policy as those in his own days thought it to be in the days of
Ignatius: there was nothing in all the Presbyterian Writings so visionaire (to
use his own word) as this is. For could not this unknown Person differ in the
Apprehension of this Matter, from most, yea, from all his Contemporaries? and
it is strange that our Author should suppose that this personate Ignatius was a
Martyr, or a Bishop; as he does p. 154. He pleads next for the Epistles of
Ignatius, from the Diligence and Authority of Eusebius; and says, that he
hardly could be imposed upon in an Affair of this Consequence. A. This is to
beg the Question, to say that the Church was in this imposed upon: he should
prove that the Churches then thought these Epistles to be written by Ignatius.
for Eusebius, I think few, who are versed in Antiquity, will lay so much weight
on his Historical Authority as this Author does. Himself gives ground to
suspect some things that he wrote; as I showed before: and others have observed
yet more ground for it. It is a pleasant Argument, the Church was careful to
gather up some hard Bones of Ignatius, that the Lions had left, Ergo, they were
more watehful over the Remains of his Mind, viz. his Epistles. If we have no
more Certainty about the Epistles, than we have about the genuine Bones of that
Holy Martyr, and other Popish Relics; few wise Men will be much moved by
Arguments brought from them. That Polycarp made a Collection of these Epistles,
and Irenaeus cited them, proves no more but that good Men may be imposed on by
Forged Writings. Eusebius rejected some suppositions Books, after accurate
Enamination; were a good Argument, if it could be made out that he rejected all
such: the contrary whereof is well known. For his Belief that the Orations of
Cicero are genuine, let him enjoy it; but if he build his Faith on any Article
of Religion, or his Practice of Piety toward God, on that Certainty, I cannot
do so too. Whether Cicero wrote these Orations or not, is neither a Matter of
such Moment, nor so contested by plausible Arguments, as what we now Debate is.

45. What remains of my Antagonists Discourse on this Controversy about
Episcopacy, is a Recapitulation of what he has already said; in nine
Questions: which he seems to set down as so many Trophies of Victory over all
his Adversaries; and a few other Hints for strengthening his Cause. His
Questions need little Animadversion: all that is contained in them being already
Answered, and his Opinion in these things disproved: whether concludently and
solidly or not, the Reader will judge. His first three Questions do all suppose
that we are against Prelacy, merely from the Dichotomy of the Clergy used in
Scripture, which is a false Supposition: I have proposed our Argument with more
strength, Sect. 4.. 5. so as it is no way touched by what he here says:
wherefore it is no loss to our Cause if we give a negative, or affirmative
Answer, to these Questions, whether he shall choose. To his fourth Question I
Answer, that Apostolic Power, as to its permanent Branches, was perpetual and
successive (my Answer must be Tautological, because his Question is such) but
not so, as to all its Essential Branches. As to its necessary Branches; if he
mean what is necessary to the Being, or Idea of an Apostle, I deny these to be
Perpetual and Successive. To the second part of this Question, I Answer
negatively; that this Power was not transmitted, in solidum, to single
Successors in particular Sees; but to a College of Presbyters. Question fifth,
Where Superiority is forbidden; is most impertinent to our Debate: seeing he
pleads for a Jus Divinum for it; he should bring either a Command for it; or
what is equivalent. The Popes Monarchy over the Church is not more forbidden,
than the Superiority of one Priest (as he speaks) over another; both of them
must be Juris Divini, in his Opinion. I retort his own Argument, if Parity be
not plainly forbidden (which I am sure he cannot show) then the Fancy of a Jus
Divinum in favors of Episcopacy (such as is exclusive of all other Forms of
Ecclesiastical Government) is Groundless and Chymerical. It is enough to us,
that Christ has instituted Parity, and he has not allowed Men to change it:
we think this a sufficient Prohibition of the Superiority that he pleads for.
His sixth is a heap of Questions, to which I Answer, we deny the universal
Tradition for Prelacy that he fancieth, and say, a more universal Tradition
might be demanded. We deny also that the Argument from universal Tradition
(exclusive of Apostolic Tradition; if he can bring that he has done his Work)
is in this Case, either the most proper, or most necessary. Scripture Command,
or Example, is both more proper, and more necessary. For the seventh, we do not
pretend there was such a great Change so suddenly, as he fancieth we do; and
therefore are not concerned to Debate the Possibility of it. I have said enough
on this head, 41. To his eighth, we affirm, that Jeroms Opinion is fairly and
truly represented by Presbyterians: and have answered what he says to the
contrary, Sect. 6.. 7. and seq. His last Question about Ignatius's Epistles may
be retorted on himself, whether there be any solid Argument brought for them:
sub judice lis est. Himself declineth that Debate, as I also do. It is enough
to us, that even the Testimonies out of these Epistles are not concludent: and
if the Epistles were Authentic, their Authority is but Humane and Fallible:
and cannot be a Prejudice against Divine Institution: and indeed cannot make
Faith where the Question is de Jure Divino, as here it is.

46. I now proceed to consider some immethodical and incoherent Notions, with
which he concludes this Chapter. He tells us, p. 160. Presbyterians own a
Praesidency since the days of the Apostles (he might have added, and in their
days too) so that the Quarrel is not so much against Episcopacy, as against the
Extent of their Diocese, and Increase of their Power; over what it was in the
Primitive times. Now he will prove their Power over Presbyters to have been
much more absolute, than now it is pretended to be: for nothing was to be done
without the Bishop; a Presbyter might not Baptize without his express
Indulgence: as Tertull witnesses. This Testimony of Tertull. I have answered,
Cyprianick Bishop Examed,. 49. By Bishop may either be understood the
Moderator, not in his single Capacity, but with the Presbytery: none might act
within their District, but by their Allowance: or a Parish Minister, none might
Baptize, etc. in his Parish, but by his Consent. He next cites Dyonisius
Bishop of Corinth, writing to the Gnossians, exhorting Pinytus, their Bishop,
not to lay the heavy burden of Caelibacy (I suppose that he means by (...))
on the Brethren, that is the Clergy: whence he wisely infers the Power of
Pinytus to have done this. And cites on his Margin, Eusebius. hist. Eccles. but
neither Book nor Chapter, nor the place of Dionysius where the words may be
found. A. Eusebius. hist. lib. 4. C. 23. has a part of an Epistle of Dionysius to
Pinytus, and his Answer to him, where he checketh Dionysius for that Advice to
him. But nothing of all this imports the Power of Pinytus to forbid Marriage:
he might say on this burden by preaching the necessity of Caelibacy, without
Authoritative imposing it. Yea, he might impose it as Praeses, by the
concurrent Authority of the Presbytery, without sole Jurisdiction. He
mentions likeways the Canon. Apostol. and Ignatius's Epistles, but cites
nothing out of them: so that he cannot expect an Answer. As to the Extent of
Diocesses, we no further make an Argument from it, than we maintain that a
Pastor of a Church should have no larger Charge, than he can dispense the Word
and Sacraments to; and that he should not do this by Deputies under him. We lay
no Stress on the word Diocese, nor on the unequal Extent of a Pastors District,
provided he pretend to no Power over his Brethren; nor have a Charge that he
cannot manage without such Superiority over others. What he says of Greg.
Thaumaturgus proves nothing, unless he can evince that the Presbyters, who
were necessary for the growing Charge, were his Underlings, not his Colleagues.

47. A strong Argument for Diocesan Episcopacy (as he thinks) he manageth, p:
164: and seq: from James Bishop of Jerusalem; who was over many Congregations;
for the Increase of Christians was such, as that they could not meet in one
place. The Answer has been before given; James was no ordinary Bishop, but an
Apostle: and had Jurisdiction, not only over the Christians in Jerusalem and in
Judea; but in all the World. He tells us, that we use many Evasions; but he
thinks it then only seasonable to Answer them, when he knows which of them
we most trust to. If I had dealt so by his Book, no Answer had been given to
it. I know neither which of his Arguments he most trusts to; nor which of
them does best deserve that regard. If he had answered all that we say, he
could not have missed what we most trust to: he should deal with our Arguments
and Exceptions, not according to our Esteem of them; but according to the
Influence they may have on the Debate now in hand. As for the Debate between
Clarkson and Maurice, we are not much concerned in it; it is not material
whether there be more or fewer Congregations in a City, provided their Pastors
be not subject to one, but Coordinate among themselves. His Information to him
whom he calls the Vindicator of the Kir^, was needless: he knows Attempts
have been made to Answer Blondel, Dally, and Salmasius, yet that Author might
modestly put him in mind, how unfit it was for him to pick out here and there a
word occasionally spoken; and when he had (in his own Apprehension) baffled
that, triumph over Presbytery, as if never more had been said for it; while he
has neither out of his own Store, nor from the Answers of these Books, brought
any thing against our main Arguments.

SECTION VIII.
Animadversions on the Book called the Fundamental Charter of Presbytery.

I Had resolved not to meddle with the ill Natured Author of the Fundamental
Charter of Presbytery, further than I have done in answering his malicious
Preface; Appendix to Cyprianick Bishop Examined; judging it more proper for
some States Man, or one who is versed in the Law: his Book being a direct
Refutation of an Act of Parliament, which he treats very saucily: but
finding, that they neglected his Book, and think it below them, unless they
could also find his Person; and considering the affinity of what he treats
with what I have been now controverting with another (if not the same) Author,
here speaking more dareingly, from behind the Curtain, on second thoughts, I
judged it not amiss to take notice of what he says, in some short
animadversions (such as I have already made upon his Preface) in so far as he
opposes Presbyterian Government. I intend not to explain an Act of Parliament
(I know the hazard of that from the experience of others) but I design to show
how far the Presbyterians own what he opposes: insisting only on what seems
to be argumentative in his Book, and overlooking the Virulent Sallies of his
Pen; which touch not this matter. He divides his discourse into eighth
Enquiries: I shall consider what he says on each of them.

2. His first Enquiry is, Whether the Church of Scotland was Reformed solely by
Persons Clothed with the Character of Presbyters. I observe two Mistakes (to
give them no worse Names) in thus stating the Question. First, it is enough to
us, if our Reformers were mostly, though not solely Presbyters: if a Bishop or
two joined in the Reformation, it does not hinder that Persons of inferior
Degree in the Church that then was, were the Men on whom lay the weight of this
Work. Secondly, it is not so much material what Character our Reformers bare
when they were yet Papists, as what Station they had in the Reformed Protestant
Church in this Nation: or what Order they endeavored to set up in this Church,
when they had withdrawn from Subjection to the Roman Hierarchy: for our
Concernment is to know what were the Principles of our Reformers, being now
Reformed, (for before their Conversion they were all Episcopal) and how they
settled this Church with respect to her Government. But to gratify my Adversary
a little, I so far yield to the State of his Question, as to maintain, that
few, if any, had an Active Hand in the Reformation, who had been Popish
Bishops: but they moved in a lower Orb in the Popish Church, who were helped
of God to be Instrumental in that blessed Work. If he would have cleared the
Question, he should have told us what he means by Presbyters in the Popish
Notion of that Word: For that Antichristian Society had left scarce either Name
or Thing of the Order and Offices that Christ had appointed in his House, but
confounded all, and builded a Babel of their own devising. To prove that our
Reformation was not by Presbyters, he tells us of eight Prelates in the
Reforming Parliament 1560, who all turned Protestants: this is little to the
purpose; for 1. The Reformation from Popery had made some Progress before that
time, Preachers, and some private Men, did more for the turning Persons to the
Truth, than Parliament Men did. 2. Eight in all Scotland was but a small
Number: if there had been no more Hands at the Work, it had gone slowly on. 3.
Among all these eight, there were but two Bishops, the rest were Prelates
indeed, in the Popish Sense; Abbots, and such like; but I hope this Author will
not say they were such as Protestants count Prelates; or that they have
superior Power in the Church, to Presbyters. 2. He tells us, that they who
labored most in the Reformation, were not in Holy Orders, and names some of
them. Ans. Then I hope they were no Bishops. It is true, many of these worthy
Men had no Ordination in the Popish way, nor were they Presbyters in that
Church; but when they turned Protestants, they were made Presbyters, and not
Bishops. Yea, Claud. historic. def. of the Reformation, part 4. page 15. says,
that in many Nations (among whom he names Scotland) the Reformation was made
by the Consent of the greatest part of their Pastors: to wit Monks, Preachers,
Priests, Curats, Canons, etc. And it is as certain as History can make it, that
not a few of the inferior Clergy turned Protestants; whereas himself confesses
there were but two Bishops, Argyle and Galloway. Some of them, and these of
good Note, and who were eminently blessed with Success, were but Laymen, (as
he frazeth it) who by their private Labors converted many, and were at last
Authorized to Labor in the Gospel more publicly, by such Ordination as then
could be had; but they were never exalted to be Bishops. Let me digress a
little, to observe that the Lord of Dun (by this Authors account) was after
made a Superintendent; but never received into Holy Orders, by any thing that
appears: whence I infer, that in the Opinion of that time, a Superintendent
was not the same with a Bishop: which our Brethren use to plead for. I shall
not insist on the further Proofs he brings of his Answer to the first
Enquiry: they amount to no more, but that there were but few Ministers: and
many Reformers were Lay Men: to all which I Answer; this shows that
Presbyters, and Persons of an inferior Rank to Bishops, had a far greater Hand
in the Reformation than Bishops had. It was far otherwise in England; where the
State carried on the Reformation; whereas in Scotland, the greatest, both in
State and Church, opposed it as long, and as much as they could: and even the
two Bishops whom he mentions, did rather comply with the Reformation, than
actively promote it: notwithstanding of all which, it is unbecoming a
Protestant, to call our Reformation violent, and disorderly: as he does, p. 7.
out of Spotswood.

3. The second Enquiry is, Whether the Scots Reformers, what ever were their
Characters, were of the present Presbyterian Principles? whither they were for
the Divine Institution of Parity; and the Unlawfulness of Prelacy among the
Pastors of the Church? here he takes a great deal of Liberty to Comment, and
try his Critical Skill, on the Article of the Act of Parliament which he had
undertaken to baffle. In which it is not my Province to interpose: I am little
concerned in this whole Enquiry: if it be granted that Parity, and not Prelacy;
was the Church Government that they chused. If this Debate have any Influence
on the Controversy between us and our Brethren, it will make more against
themselves than against us: for not only our Reformers were further from owning
a Divine Right of Prelacy than of Parity; but they chused this, and rejected
that: notwithstanding that they had been bred in the owning of it, under
Popery. We think it was a great Testimony given by them to Parity, that they
showed so much Zeal for it, as they did, though they had not that Light about
it, that after times afforded. It is certain, that that Dispute which had so
long, by the Tyranny of the Bishops, been buried and forgotten, (except among
the Church in the Wilderness, which few knew of, the Waldenses) could not at
first be so fully understood, as by further Enquiries it came to be.
Notwithstanding, it is evident that our Reformers looked on Parity as Juris
Divini, though they did not much insist on the Debate about that: for in the
Book of Policy, Chap. 1. they have these words, this Ecclesiastical Authority
is granted by God the Father, through the Mediator Jesus Christ, unto his Kirk,
gathered (not to a single Bishop) and has ground in the Word of God, to be put
in Execution by them, unto whom the Spiritual Government of the Kirk, by lawful
Calling, is committed. Here it is plain, that they are not for Indifferency of
the form of Government: and chap. 2. There is this Article; and to take away
all occasion of Tyranny, he (that is God) wills that they should rule with
mutual consent, as Brethren, with equality of Power, every one according to
their Function. And after, there are four, ordinary Functions, or Offices, in
the Kirk, the Office of the Pastor, Minister, or Bishop; the Doctor, the
Presbyter or Elder, and the Deacon. Where it is evident, that they own no
Bishop Superior to any ordinary Minister; but make the Identitie of them to be
of Divine Right.

. 4. I think it not worth the while to make a strict Examination of the Proofs
he brings, that our Reformers were not for a jus divinum of a Paritie, for if
it were yielded, it does not hurt our Cause. And his Arguments are verbose,
tedious, and insignificant. I shall only point at them, and the Answers that
may be made to them. There is, p. 9. etc. no such Controversy was then
Agitated in Europe; the Popes Supremacy was Debated, but not Prelacy; Ans.
nihil sequitur, our Reformers assert the Conclusion as I have showed: but they
and others were taken up in debateing greater Matters with the Papists: He does
falsely assert, p. 10. that Churches, when they are Reformed, set up a Church
Government suitable to the Model of the State, as in Geneva, which was a
Commonwealth, they set up Paritie. For who reads Calvin's Writings may see,
that they built on another Foundation; even Divine Institution, and our own
Country is an instance to the contrary: Paritie was in the Church, and
Monarchy in the State. He calls it impudence to cite Calvine for this jus
Divinum: but if the Reader be at the pains to look into the Citations that this
Author has scraped together, to show Calvin to be for Indifferency of the form
of Church Government, he will soon see on whose side the impudence is. He
confesses that Beza foundeth upon Scripture: 131. but alleges that he no
where calls Episcopacy absolutely or simply unlawful. If Christ has
instituted a Form, as it must be if one Form be built on Scripture; I see not
what is further necessary to prove an opposite Form, inconsistent with that, to
be absolutely or simply unlawful. He tells us, ibid. that Beza says, that
humanus Episcopatus is tolerable, if duly bounded, by the pure canons of the
ancient Church: and I say the same: for then it would be no more but a
Presidencie; which does not destroy Paritie. He cites also a number of seeming
concessions out of Calvine: but they amount to no more than the lawfulness of a
(...) in the Church; which is not our Debate. If Beza was not for separating
from a Church because it was Episcopal; no more are we: unless that Episcopal
Church impose unlawful terms of Communion on us. His second Proof is, our
Reformers had no peculiar Motives, or occasion for adverting to the evil of
Prelacy: nor interest to determine them to Paritie: nor were more sharp sighted
to see the evil of Prelacie than other Reformers. Ans. a thousand such
Arguments as this cannot conclude against a plain Matter of fact: I have showed
that they were for the Divine right of Paritie; wherefore it is in vain to tell
us that they had no Motive to be of that Opinion. He falsely supposes that
other Reformers were not of the same Sentiments; seeing most of them except
England, set up the same Government. Thirdly, He argues thus, none of the
Confessors, or Martyers, or they who had most hand in bringing the Reformation
to perfection, have given that as their Opinion. And here has a long Discourse
of some other Opinions that several of them vented, they Declaimed loudly
against the Bishops of these times; but what is that to the Order, p. 8. they
Declaimed against the Shavelings as well as against Bishops; against Presbyters
as well as Bishops, p. 19. And he has a long Debate, with some of our
Historians, about the Opinion of John Knox in this matter, which, merely to
save time, I shall not concern my self in. Ans. It being evident, that in our
first Setlement of Discipline, our Church declared for the Divine right of
Paritie, negative Arguments from the Writing, or sayings, of private Men are
insignificant: and it is less to the purpose, to tell us of their other
Opinions which have no relation at all to this Matter. He cannot so much as
allege that any of them have said, or Written any thing to the contrary,
directly or indirectly. For his Debate about John Knox, I judge he has said
nothing that can satisfy any imbyassed Reader, that these Historians had not
ground to think that Master Knox looked on Prelacy as a sinful thing, and
against Christ's Institution; That imparitie was Established by the first Book
of Discipline, is falsely supposed, p. 22. Superintendencie is no sufficient
Proof of it; of which after.

. 5. His next Proof begins p. 38. and is managed in a large Historical
acount, of what influence England had on our Reformation from Popery: whence he
infers, that our Reformers proceeded on the same Principle with the
Reformers of England. Here he undertaketh two things; 1. To show what influence
England had on our Reformation. 2. That our Reformers were generally of the
same mind with the Church of England, in several momentous instances relating
to Constitution and Communion, the Government and Policy of the Church. For
Ans. to this Argument; it is wholly inconsequential, if he never so fully Prove
all that he has mentioned; except the last, about the Government and Policy of
the Church: and even that signifies nothing, unless he Prove that by the
influence of England our Reformers were for prelacy; and not for Paritie; and
that as Instituted by Christ. Wherefore I pass over the laborious proofs he
brings of the other things, and shall consider his last Article; and what he
says for what he has asserted about it. The Reader, without my Animadversion,
will take notice of his unmanly depressing of his Native Country, and fawning
on another Nation. This assertion that we oppose is not proved by our Reformers
Communicating with the Church of England (which he insisteth on from p. 7.) it
only proves that they thought Episcopacy did not unchurch a Society that was
otherwise sound in the Faith. And if some three or four of them did serve in
the Church of England under Bishops (for which we have no more but Archbishop
Spotswoods word) this might either be by the Indulgence of the Reforming
Bishops, not requiring of them these Terms of Communion that the late Bishops
did of these who got Places under them: or it signifies no more but that one
or two Men of a Party were of more Latitude in their Principles than the rest
were. For what is said of some of them approving the English Lyturgy, is less
to his Question, which is only about Government. We never thought that our
Reformers, at first, were all of the same Principle with us in all things: I am
sure they were far from being of all the Sentiments of the present Episcopal
Church. Yea themselves had afterward, other thoughts of some things, than they
had at first: as Luther held many Popish Opinions at first, which afterward he
rejected. I observe further, that in many of his Historical passages about some
of these Reformers, his best ground for what he affirms is, it is not to be
imagined, that they did so and so: or it is to be presumed. We must then
believe the Truth of Matter of Fact on his fancy, that so it must be. If I
thought it worth the while, I would Examine these Histories more narrowly. But
I could easily yield him all, without prejudice to our Cause: seeing the
Principles of our Reformers are better known by their public Deeds, than by
the private Sayings, or Practices of two or three of them; and these not
sufficiently attested. These good Men did much rejoice in the Reformation of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, as also in her casting off the load of
humane Ceremonies, by which she had been burdened; but that all, or most of
them, were satisfied with their Government and Discipline, is the Question; and
is not Proved by what he has said. It is least of all Concludent, that these
of the Church of England had good Opinion of the Church of Scotland: which he
labors to Prove, p. 80. and it is unaccountable, that p. 81. he lays on so
much stress on our Reformers saying of England, that they were of the same
Religon with us: which he puteth in majusculis: we say the same of them at this
day: and I hope they think not otherwise of us: and yet we think Paritie to be
juris divini. If he can find a Contradiction here, let him try his Skill to
discover it. It is an odd method that he uses, p. 85. he will prove that the
Scots Reformers were for Episcopacy, because it was natural for the English,
who had assisted in the Reformation to demand it. And I Prove they were not for
it, because, de facto, they did not setle it, but a way inconsistent with it.
Let the Reader judge whether of these two Arguments is most concludent. We do
not find that the English made such a Demand, and if they did not, they acted
like discreet Neighbors, not to impose on their Brethren, who had other
sentiments of the Matter, and who agreed with them in the main points of
Religion. And if they made such a Demand, the Event showed that it was not
listened to. For his Citation of Buchannan, p. 88. that Scoti ante aliquot annos
Anglorum auxiliis e servitute Gallica liberati, Religionis cultui and ritibus
cum Anglis communibus subscripserunt: himself confesses that no other
Historian has mentioned it; and he has taken care that we shall not be able
to Examine Buchannans words, by mentioning Buch. 7. 14. in a Book of so many
diverse Editions: who can hope to find the place? I know not what Buchannan
could mean by it; but it is evident, if the Scots did so subscribe, they did
not act accordingly; which was no Sign of their Inclinations that way: It is
nauseous to repeat, with him, so often, the Godly Conjunction, the Unity,
Peace, and Christian Concord, that was then made between England and Scotland;
and to set forth this as a Demonstration: Yea, a Set of Demonstrations, that
the Scots Reformers were Episcopal: nothing can be more ridiculous than to talk
at this rate, in the Face of Matter of Fact, that they settled Parity as soon
as they could settle any Order in the Church.

6. He undertaketh, p. 96. and forward, to prove, that at the Reformation, the
English Lyturgy was used in this Church. If this should be granted, it cannot
prove that the English Church Government was used also: they wanted qualified
Ministers, so that there was need of some help to them, in Praying and
Instructing the People publikly; and it may be, there was no other that they
could, at that time, use, and they had not so fully discovered what might be,
and afterward was, excepted against in it; and therefore used it for a time:
but I think he will not deny, that as soon as they could, they laid it aside;
and made use of that more Unexceptionable Form of Geneve; till at last, that
was difused also, as a Man lays by his Crutches, when he gets Strength to
go by himself. He shows wonderful Skill in Logic. p. 98. Calderwood had said
that the English Lyturgy, which was read in the new College in Saint Andrews,
was not of any continued Practice in time by past, since the Reformation; Ergo,
it was practiced at the Reformation. Whatever may be said of the Consequent,
the Consequence is no better than this, I never used to smoke Tobacco in any
continued Practice since I was born, Ergo, I did it when I was born, p. 101,
etc. he tells us of another Principle, wherein our Reformers agreed with them
of England: that the Church had a great Dependence on the State: that it
belonged to the Civil State to reform the Church: that the People might appeal
from the Church to the Civil Magistrate, etc. this is still, extra oleas vagari.
I shall not so far digress from the purpose in hand, as to consider what the
present Presbyterians hold as to these Assertions: nor need I compare the
Opinion of our Reformers with ours in this matter: if he can charge us with
Hetrodoxy on this head, we shall Answer him when he will. This whole Discourse
is impertinent: it does not prove that our Reformers were for Episcopacie: and
if it did, it is no good Consequent; that we should be for it too. I have
already said, that we never thought our Reformers were, in all things, of the
same Opinion with the present Presbyterians: and I am sure, that he has far
less cause to think that they were for all that the present Prelatists hold.
Another thing more he shows; that the Scots and English Reformers agreed in
this, p. 105. that they took for the Rule of Reformation, the Word of God,
interpreted by the Monuments and Writings of the Primitive Church. And here he
enlarges in the Commendation of this Rule, and obliquely charge the
Presbyterians with all the Horrid Rebellions, and Unchristian Divisions,
unaccountable Revolutions, both in Church and State, which have Unbinged all
the Principles of Natural Justice and Honesty, and Disabled, nay eaten out, the
Principles of Christianity among us; that now we are not so much disposed for
any thing, as for Atheism. Which Strain I find is common with Men of his Stamp:
but it is most disingenuous Dealing: for the World knows where the Fault of
our Divisions dothly: and whether Atheism, Immoralitie, and Injustice have
thriven more under the Influence of Prelacie, or of Presbytery. For the
Revolution that he seems to be so angry with, the Presbyterians think it
their Glory to have Countenanced it: and the Body of the Prelatists (in
England I mean, not in Scotland) will not disowne their Accession to it; nor
will they look on it (as this Author and some others do) to have Unbinged the
Principles of Natural Justice and Honesty. The Rule of Reformation that he had
mentioned, he says he will bring in again by and by, where we shall attend him.

7. He tells us, p. 106, etc. of his Performances, which he recapitulateth;
and concludes, in the highest Measure of Confidence that Words can express,
that our Reformers were not for the Divine Right of Parity. I am so dull that I
cannot see this Point proved, for all that he has said: and if it were proved,
it is nothing to our main Cause; we never said that they were in all things,
either as Presbyterians, or as Prelatists are now, in their Opinions; all that
we assert is, that they were for Paritie, and practiced it as the Government of
the reformed Church of Scotland, and it is more than probable, that they were
for its Divine Right. In what follows, his Confidence arises yet higher, and
that in the Entrance of what now he is attempting, and about which he makes
very large Promises, p. 108. where he pretends to give plain, positive,
direct, and formal proofs of his Assertion, to as high a degree, as the nature
of the thing is capable of, or can reasonably bear. For performance of this;
his first Attempt is, in a Petition of the Reformers to the Government; this is
one Article, as it is set down by Lesly, de rebus gestis, Scotor. lib. 10. p.
504. Ut Episcopi deinceps and Pastores, illi Dominorum ac Nobilium cujuscunque
Diocesis, hi parochorum assentione, ac voluntate ad beneficia cooptentur. There
is nothing Answerable to the Evidence so confidently promised by him: it is no
positive, plain, etc. Proof: the matter could bear more, viz. if Lesly had
said, that however, the Schismatics, (as he calls them) were for abolishing
the old Doctrine, that they were for keeping up the ancient Hierarchy. But
that this is no sufficient Proof of his Conclusion; I show, 1. Supposing
Lesly's Veracitie, and fair Representation of the Address that the Reformers
made, no more can be concluded from it, but that it is supposed, that the
Revenues of Bishops could not quickly be alienated, and that some must be
chosen to enjoy them, that they might be so and so chosen: here is not a Word
of choosing Bishops to Exercise that Office over, or among the Protestants: and
it is well known, that the Rents of Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other
Dignitaries of the Church of Rome, did continue; and Men were chosen to the
Name, and Rent, of these Places, who did not Exercise the Power that Men under
these Names had in Popery. 2. Himself confesses, that this Article of the
Petition is otherwise rendered in Buchannan, and Spotswood; viz. Ut Ministrorum
electio juxta antiquam Ecclesiae consuetudinem penes populum esset. Here is no
Word of Bishops: and one may think, that we have more Cause to Credit these two
Protestant Historians than Lesly, a Papist; who, on all Occasions, shows his
Spite against Protestants: especially Spotswood, an Archbishop, would not have
neglected to make use of this seeming Countenance to his Cause. This Author
has no other Shift to take off the Edge of this Exception, but to tell us,
that Buchannan minded Matters of State most in History: and Spotswood is very
defective in many parts of his History: which is indeed to say, that neither of
them is to be much regarded: but Lesly is the Man: if it be so, we must look on
the whole of our Reformation, with a very unfavourable Eye. Whither this will
seem absurd to this Author, or not, I know not. He is at a great deal of Pains
to prove, that Lesly did not Forge this Article; and brings no fewer than six
Arguments to prove it: which I judge not worth my Labor of Examining them:
only this Reply I return to them all: what if he Misworded the Article, though
he did not Forge it? the other Historians have the same Article, only they have
not the Word Bishops, in which lies the whole force of our Authors Argument.

8. His next Argument, which bears positive, plain, etc. Evidence, is from
another Petition of our Reformers, set down in the History commonly ascribed to
John Knox, p. 131. a large Portion of which he Transcribeth; I shall Compendize
it, without taking any thing from its Strength on his Side: they require that
the ill Lives of Prelates, and the State Ecclesiastical, may be Reformed; and
Declare that they envy not their Honors, nor covet their Possessions; but
desire their Reformation: and they add, that we are content, that not only the
Rules and Precepts of the New Testament, but also the Writings of the Ancient
Fathers, and the Godly and Approved Laws of Justinian the Emperor, decide the
Controversy betwixt us and them: and they earnestly desire, that
notwithstanding the long Custom they had to live at their Lust, they may be
compelled either to desist from Ecclesiastical Administration, or discharge
their Duties as becomes true Ministers. Let us now hear what Improvement he
makes of this Passage to his purpose: he tells us, that here our Reformers
lay down a Complex Rule for Reforming of the Church: and we refuse not to try
it with our Opposites, in the Controversy about Prelacy, by this Complex Rule:
but with these two Limitations, which cannot be made appear to be inconsistent
with what is there expressed by our Reformers: one is, that all the Parts of
this Complex Rule, be not looked on as of Co-ordinat Authority; but that the
rest be subordinate to the Holy Scripture: we are not afraid of the Verdict of
the Fathers of the first Ages; but if they should be found in any thing to
recede from Scripture, we reject them. The other is, that the Laws of
Justinian, which our Reformers mention, be rather looked on as a Rule concerning
the Temporalities of Church Men, than their Spiritual Jurisdiction. He next
says, that our Reformers were content that the Clergy should live and rule,
and discharge their Trust, as they did in the days of Justinian: and now, says
he, if they who so Petitioned, were for Parity, and not for the Continuance of
Prelacy, I must confess my Ignorance to be very gross. Ans. I shall not
determine whither Ignorance, or somewhat else has led him into a gross Mistake
of the Meaning and Design of these Petitioners: but a Mistake seems to be
evident. They were not so absurd, as to make the Roman Civil Law the Rule of
Religion: we know how that has been altered, and reformed oftener than once;
whereas the Rule of Religion is unalterable by the Authority of Men; wherefore
they can mean no more, but that they are willing that Prelates should enjoy
their Benefices, (this for Peace sake they yielded too) as they were settled by
the good Laws of Justinian: (where a Limitation even in that is insinuated) and
that the Lives and Authority of the Pastors of the Church, should be regulated
by Scripture and the Writings of the Fathers in Subordination to that,
Justinian lived in the sixth Century, when Prelacie was far advanced in the
Church: wherefore they had Acted very absurdly, if they had been for that way,
and yet so quickly settled among themselves (contrary to the Inclinations of
their Friends in England, to whose Assistance they owed very much) a way so
opposite to that. Our Reformers, the Nobility, Gentry and Ministers, were
neither so unfaithful, nor so changeable, as to be influenced by one or two Men
to such an absurd Course. I add to all this, that it is most absurd to say,
that the Church of England took the Writings of the ancient Fathers for the
Rule of the Reformation, or for any part of it: for indeed, by that Rule, there
will be found a Canonical Nullitie in the Power of all their Bishops; on
account of their being chosen by the Magistrate, and sitting in Parliament: for
Canon. Apost. (confirmed by Council. Constantinop. 6. Canon 29. revived by Con.
^il Nicen. 2. Canon. 3.) condemns the one, and Can. 6. and 80. the other.

9. After mentioning another Petition of the Reformers, which contains no new
matter, he comes from p. 119. to prove, that the first Church Government that
our Reformers settled, was not Paritie, but Superintendency: All that he says
on this head, has been often answered; and it has been made plain, to the
Conviction of them who will see, that Superintendency, as set up in Scotland,
was nothing like Episcopacy, that it was never intended to be continued; but
used for the present Necessity: and that it was never looked on as inconsistent
with their being for Paritie in Opinion: but we must submit to the Drudgerie of
Repetitions; seeing he will have it so. I take notice of his forgetting what he
had said a little before (as I observed. 2.) viz. that the Lord of Dun was
made a Superintendent, though it does appear that he was never in Holy Orders:
whence it evidently follows, that on this Authors Supposition, the Reformers
looked not on Superintendency as a Government any otherwise warrantable, but by
the Force of Necessity. Two things he undertaketh about Superintendency. 1. To
show their Power and Disparity from other Ministers. 2. To dissipate the Mists
cast on this matter by Presbyterians. For the former, he tells us of a
considerable Stock of Prerogatives, or Preheminencies above other Church Men.
As 1. They had larger Districts. 2. They were to be Nominated by the Council,
and Elected by the Nobility and Gentry, etc. within their District. 3. They
were not to be Censured, but by the Ministers and Elders of the whole Province,
over which they were Appointed. 4. They were to be Admitted (which our Author
calls Ordination) by other Superintendents. 5. They were to be Translated by
the whole Church. 6. They must be two years, at least, in the Ministry, before
they be Superintendents. 7. He had a greater Benefice than other Ministers. 8.
Every one of them was a constant Member of the General Assembly. 9. He was to
try Candidats for the Ministry, and ^eaders. 10. He had the Power of Collation,
on Presentations. 11. He had Power to plant Ministers in the Churches where the
People were negligent. 12. He had the Power of Ordination. 13. Ministers were
subject to him, in all lawful Admonitions; he was to be obeyed. 14. He had
Power of Visitation of Churches. 15. He might depose Ministers. 16. He might
translate Ministers. 17. He might nominat Ministers to be Members of the
General Assembly. 18. He had Power to hold Diocesan Synods. 19. To appoint
Fasts within his own Bounds. 20. To modifie Stipends. 21. To receive Appeals.
22. He had Power of Fineing, in case of undue Appeals. 23. To determine
intricate Cases of Conscience, or Government. 24. To judge of Divorces. 25. To
enjoin Penance to greater Criminals. 26. To restore Criminals. 27. He had the
Power of Excommunication. 28. To delate attrocious Criminals to the Civil
Magistrate 29. They had great Power over Schools and Colleges. 30. They were
the Licensers of Books.

10. Quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant; here is a large Muster Roll, to
Fright the Reader with a numerous and long Train, that might have been, to as
much advantage, drawn into a narrower Compass. I shall first, Make some general
Observes on all this Heap of Prerogatives. Next, Examine them particularly,
but very succinctlie. For the former, I observe, 1. That the Power of
Superintendents was at first more absolute, and independent on the rest of the
Ministers, than afterward; because at first there were hardly any qualified
Ministers; but only Readers, or such as could Catechize the People, newly come
out of Popery; but when there was a better Stock of qualified Ministers, and
yet the Church but meanly provided, the Superintendent was obliged to rule
with their Concurrence; and was little other than a constant Moderator: and his
Power was by every General Assembly, abridged, till that Office was at last
abolished, as no longer needful in the Church. 2. It is not denied, but that
there was an Imparitie between a Superintendent and another Minister: but this
was looked on by our Reformers, not as a standing Office, nor as having any
Foundation, but that of present Necessity: so that it did no way derogate from
that Paritie, that they looked on as the Way that the Church should be Governed;
and as what they intended, when their Case should allow it. But of this more
afterward. 3. All this cannot make the Superintendent and the Bishop, to be the
same Officer in the Church; because the one is pretended to be an Officer
appointed by Christ, and his Sovereign power over the Presbyters, is by Divine
Appointment* the other is set up by Men, and more or less Power is given to
him, as they think fit. The one is accountable to none but Christ, the other is
accountable to the Presbytery, and may be Censured, yea Deprived by them. The
one is looked on as what should always continue in the Church; the other was
designed but for that Exigency of the Church, to be laid aside when that was
over. 4. Not a few of these Prerogatives are either asserted, without Ground;
or Misrepresented. To make out which, I proceed to the second thing I proposed;
viz. To Examine them particularly: for the first, The Extent of their District
is no Argument for such Disparitie as he pleads for: they had each of them,
their proper Charge, as other Ministers; where they were ordinarily to Labor;
but had larger Districts for Visitation. 2. Their Nomination by the Council,
and Election by the Nobility and Gentry, is asserted without Ground. Neither
does he Cite any Authority for it, nor do I find any thing to that purpose in
any of our Historians. 3. A Superintendent could not be deposed, but by the
Ministers of the whole Province: This necessarily followed upon his Charge, or
Power of Visiting, being of that Extent. In that he was deposeable by the
Ministers, it is evident he was no Bishop, in the Notion that our Brethren have
of a Bishop. 4. The same reason was for his being Elected by the Ministers of
the Province. What our Author says of the Ordination of the Superintendent, is
a foull Misrepresentation; as any one may see in the place he cites, Spots.
hist. lib. 3. p. 159, 160. Nothing is there mentioned, but Election and Trial;
but on the contrary, it is expreslie said, other Ceremonies than this
Examination, the Approbation of Ministers and Superintendents, with the public
Consent of Elders and People, we do not admit. Whence it is evident, that he
had no new Office, nor Ordination, above a Presbyter.

11. His fifth Prerogative is, He was not to be Translated from one place to
another, but by a Council of the whole Church. This is no Episcopal
Jurisdiction. The Extent of his District, to a Province made this necessary:
there being no Judicature above his Province, but a General Assembly. 6. It is
least of all Argumentative, that he was to give good proof of his
Qualifications, by being some time in the Ministry: because the want of due
Qualifications in the Generality of the Ministry, was the Rise of his Office:
therefore he must be the best qualified that can be had. 7. His greater
Benefice is no Argument: he had more Work, and Occasion for Expense, by
Traveling to Visit Churches, than the rest had. It is falsely alleged, that
Spots. p. 210. says, it was agreed, 1567. that the Superintendent should
succeed to the Beneflces of the Popish Bishops deprived: there is not such a
word in that place: only there, and in the former page, it is agreed, that the
Church should be restored to her Patrimony. 8. There being constant Members of
the General Assembly, says no more, but that there being so few qualified
Ministers, these few choice Men were needed in the Assemblies of the Church. 9.
His trying Ministers and Readers, was from the present necessities of the
Church, when Presbyteries could not be had to do it: 10. His giving Collation
did follow on the former Power. 11. The jus devolutum for planting a Minister
fell to him, and his Council. He could not place a Minister by himself, as our
Bishops pretended to do: but by the assistance of such Ministers as were
fittest to judge, these were his Council; this also was for the present
necessity, and want of Ministers to make a Presbytery. 12. His power of
Ordination, our Author passes very slightly, and with a general alleging of
several Acts of Assemblies. It is like a Superintendent might Ordain by
himself, when no other Minister could be had to join with him: but as soon as
Presbyters could be had, it was not so. Our Reformers used no other Ceremony
in Ordination, but Nomination, and Trial, and Approbation; and it is evident
that these were to be performed by the Superintendent, with the rest of the
Ministers; for Spotsw. p. 155. shows out of the Book of Discipline, that this
Trial and Approbation was to be performed by the learned Ministers appointed
for their Examination, then not by one Man alone. 13. Subjection to him (which
our Author is pleased to call Canonical Obedience, was a necessary consequent
of his Office; but it is to be observed, that in the Assembly 1562, out of
which he allegeth this Passage, Superintendents were Tried and Censured by the
Assembly: and it was appointed that at every Assembly, they, and Ministers,
and Elders should be Tried, as to their Conversation; which looks not like
Episcopacy. 14. His power of Visitation was indeed his main Characteristick;
but does not prove Episcopal jurisdiction; it being delegated to him by the
Church, and he being Accountable to her for it. 15. His power of Deposing is
expressly said to be given him by the Assembly, and he is ordered to report his
Diligence to the next Assembly; which last, our Author overlooketh. 16. His
Translating of Ministers is no more, but that his Consent, or that of the whole
Church must be had to a Transportation: it was then necessary when there was
no Presbyteries to Judge of such Matters. 17. He greatly mistaketh when he
says that the Assembly Enacteth that Ministers for the General Assembly
should be brought with the Superintendents, etc. which he will have to be
Nominating them, and he allows the rest of the Synod but a Consent: whereas
Spotsw. p. 219. words it, such as the Superintendents shall choose in their
Diocesan Synods. If he could choose them by himself, there needed no Synod for
this end: that Expression can signify no less than the Synods suffrage in the
Election. My Lord Gla^ Letter that he mentions is not Authentic. 18. He held
Diocesan Synods, because he was their Moderator. 19. They might appoint Fasts
is their bounds, but with Advice of the Ministers. 20. Modifying of Stipend^ is
no Spiritual Power, and therefore, impertinently here brought in 21. Appeals
was made to him, and his Synodal Convention: here is no sole Jurisdiction. 22.
His power of Fineing is no Spiritual Power. 23. Determining Cases of
Conscience, and otheir Questions, was never committed to him alone; but in the
Synod, and to them. Yea, Questions so determined were to be reported to the
General Assembly next ensewing; so that Manuscript that he so often Cites, p.
14. 24. To judge of Divorces is a civil Power: and not to our purpose; 25. It
is clear, by his own Relation, that the Injunction of Penance (as he calls
it) is to be by the Superintendent with the Synod. 26. Restoring of Criminals,
or Absolution, did the same way belong to him. 27. Notifying Criminals to the
Magistrate is no part of Jurisdiction. 28. Excommunication was not to be done by
his sole Authority; but by his Advice. 29. His Power over Colleges. And 30. His
Licensing of Book; both of them Depend on the Civil Power: and are not to our
present purpose. These short Notes may show how little cause there is for his
Triumph, with which he concludes this his Enumeration of the Superintendents
Prerogatives. They prove a Disparity between him and other Ministers, I
confess; which the Church in that her State thought necessary for a time: but
on the other hand, it is evident that some of them Prove as much Disparitie
from, and inconsistencie with the Prerogatives of a Diocesan Bishop, which our
Brethren plead for, as belonging to him, Jure Divino.

. 12. His next Work from p. 140. is to dissipat the Mist wherewith the Paritie
Men are so very earnest to darken the Prelatical Power of the Superintendents:
he mentions Three of their Exceptions. The 1. Is, it was not intended to be a
perpetual standing Office; but was Temporary, and for the then Necessities of
the Church. For this he Cites Calderwuod, and Petrie asserting this; with whom
I do cordially join. Against this, he thus reasons. p. 142. whether it was
Temporary or not, it was Prelacy, and this is all that I am concerned for; And
to Forti^e this, he takes in by force, a Similitude from the Presbyterians
making Address to King James; a rare, but useless piece of Wit. Ans. If he be
concerned for no more than this, we are agreed: And he yields that our
Reformers were not Episcopal, but Presbyterian: who in a case of extreme
Necessity, gave, for a time, more Power to one Minister, than another, but made
them all equal as soon as that Necessity was over: It is such an Argument as if
there were but one Congregation, with their Minister, and Elders, in an Island;
they manage Church Discipline by themselves; but as soon as they increase, and
there are more People and church Officers, and more Congregations, they set up a
Presbytery, to which all the Congregations and their Pastors are Subordinate;
will any say that they are Independents, because they were forced to Act
Independentlie at first? there is as little reason to conclude that our
Reformers were Episcopal, though they were forced to use a kind of Prelacie for
a time. Beside that I have above showed some considerable Differences between
the Prelacie of Superintendents, and that of Bishops, which our Brethren plead
for.

. 13. His second Undertaking is, to show that we have no sufficient Ground in
the Records of these times, for pretending that the Office of Superintendents
was designed to be Temporal. To prove his Assertion, he says, he has seen no
more insisted on to make out this, but a Phrase in the first Head of the Book
of Discipline, at this time. He transcribeth the whole Passage out of Petrie,
Cent. 16. p. 218. and so must I, what was their (the Superintendents) Office,
says he, appears by the first Book of Discipline, wherein it is written thus,
we consider, that if the Ministers whom God has endued with his singular
Graces among us, should be appointed to several places, there to make continual
Residence, that then the greatest part of the Realm should be destitute of all
Doctrine; which should be not only the occasion of great Murmr, but also
dangerous to the Salvation of many: and therefore we have thought it a thing
expedient, at this time; that from the whole Number of Godly and learned Men,
now presently in this Realm, be selected ten or twelve. (for in so many
Provinces we have divided the whole) to whom Charge and Commandment should be
given to Plant and Erect Kirks, to set, Order, and appoint Ministers (as the
former Prescribed, to wit, the former Head) to the Countries that shall be
appointed to their Care, where none are now. Afterward it is added, these must
not be suffered to live as their idle Bishops have done, neither must they
remain where they gladly would; but they must be Preachers themselves, and such
as may not make long Residence in one place, till the Kirks be Planted and
provided of Ministers, etc. To this our Author replyeth, by giving us a Sense
of his own of these Words in the first Book of Discipline, viz. that because
there were then so few Qualified for the Office of Superintendencie, the Ten or
Twelve were, by far too few for the whole Kingdom, yet at that time they
thought it expedient to Establish no more: and though, when the Church should
be sufficiently Provided with Ministers, it will be highly reasonable that the
Superintendents should have Places appointed them for their continual
Residence, yet in that Juncture it was necessary that they should be constantly
traveling into their Districts, to Preach and Plant Churches. Before I Examine
what he says to Prove this to be the true Gloss of that Passage, I shall Prove
it to be contrary to, and inconsistent with the Passage it self. And 1. There
is nothing in that Discourse that does so much as insinuate the scarcity of
Men fit to be Superintendents, but of Ministers fit to Preach to the People;
they no way hint that this Setlement was fallen upon, because they could not
get Men to Oversee other Ministers, but because they could not get Men to
Preach to the People in every Congregation, Therefore, they resolve that the
few well Qualified Men that they had should not only each of them, have a fixed
Charge of his own, but should be obliged to Preach in other Parishes, and be
Empowered to Place Ministers in them, as soon as they could be had. 2. It is a
groundless Fancy that they thought Ten or Twelve Superintendents too few for
the whole Kingdom; for when Ministers increased they made no more: yea, when
afterward, in the times of Defection from our first Establishment of Church
Order, they set up Bishops, the Church did not think Twelve too few for the
whole Kingdom. 3. He does exceedingly Mistake the Change that our Reformers did
intend, as insinuated in that Passage: It was not that Superintendents should
be continually Resident in one Place, whereas they were at present to travel
within their District: for in this present Setlement they had their proper
Charge, where they were to Preach, and might Reside there three or four Months,
and enter upon their itinerat Visitation again: which Course, if they should
Break off, they could not do the Work of a Superintendent; which was chiefly to
Visit and Plant Churches. When this was done, and Places generally provided
with fit Pastors, their Work and Office was at an end. 4. At this time, does
evidently relate to the Peoples want of Preaching, as the Motive to this
Appointment; and to the Planting of Churches, as the End and Design of it.
Wherefore, when this End is attained, and that time no more Existent (I mean of
that Exigence of the Church) there was no more use for them: and the Event
Proved, that as that End was by Degrees attained, their Power was gradually
Lessened, till they were wholly laid aside. 5. The Words cited make it evident
that this was not intended for a lasting Prelacy in the Church; far less for an
Episcopacy standing on a Jus Divinum; For the Assembly where this Book of
Discipline was Established, do give them Charge and Commandment: they do
appoint their Work, set Limits and Bounds to their Power: they Command them in
the very Circumstances of their Work; this would be thought strange Presumption
in a Meeting of Ministers thus to treat their Bishop. 6. To say that their
Authority was designed to be perpetual, but these Injunctions about some part
of their Work was to be Temporary; is to speak at Random; and to put what Sense
we please on other Men's words; it is to tell us what this Author would have the
Reformers to mean, not what is the plain Import of their Words: For the
Commandment and Charge (these are the Words of the Book of Discipline) by which
they were made Superintendents, did include one part of what is Enjoined as
well as another part of it: and when ever this Work that was Enjoined them
ceased, their Commission behoved to be renewed: as is obvious to any who
reads the History of our Reformation: their Injunctions were often Changed,
till they had no more Work to do, and then they were Abolished.

14. Let us now hear how this Author will Prove that the Passage under Debate
must have the Meaning that he has put upon it. His first Argument: the
Composers of the first Book of Discipline (in which that Passage is) were
generally to their Dying day, of Prelatical Principles. Ans. 1. The Consequence
is naught: for however the first Draught of it might be framed by the Six
Persons whom he Names, out of Knox, p. 287. yet let the Reader turn over to
the next page, where a Formula is set down according to which it was
Subscribed, and he shall find that they Approved it conform to the Notes and
Additions thereto: and it was well known, that some Papers being Amended and
Licked over and over again, by many Persons, (as this was) have at last
Differed much from what the first Compilers intended. Another thing also may be
Observed in that Form of assenting to the Book o^ Discipline: that they were
careful to Reserve to Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, and other Prelates, and
beneficed Men, which else have Adjoined themselves to us (say they) to brook
the Revenues of their Benefices during their Lifetimes; they sustaining and
upholding the Ministry and Ministers, as is therein specified, for Preaching of
the Word, and Ministering of the Sacraments. Here the Bishops (even such of
them as were Protestants) are put in the same Categorie with Abbots and Priors;
and there is no Provision made for their Spiritual Power, but for their
Temporal Goods; and no Successors are intended for them: only they are provided
for while they live: yea the Administrators of Word and Sacraments are here
contra-distinguished from the Bishops, as well as from Abbots and Priors. Does
any thing here look like Prelatical Principles? yea is not the whole Strain of
this Passage contrary to them? therefore, whatever the first Compilers of the
Book of Discipline might be, it is evident, the Approvers of it were not of the
Episcopal Principles. Ans. 2. He sheltereth his Assertion under the Ambiguitie
of Prelatical Principles: if he mean these Men were for Superintendents, who
had a Temporary Limited Prelacie, we shall not Debate that with him: if he
mean that they were for a Jus Divinum of the Prelacie, that he and his Party
own; or for a Perpetuity of any other sort of Prelacie, we shall consider his
Proofs for that; which are, Winram and Willock were Superintendents, and so was
Spotswood; of whom his Son says, he was a constant Enemy to Paritie: this
proves nothing against what I have said; except he can assure us that
Archbishop Spotswood could not, through Prejudice, and Respect to the Cause he
had Espoused; mistake and misrepresent his Fathers Opinion in that. Douglas
(another of them) was Archbishop of Saint Andrews. That proves him an
Apostate from the Way he had owned; and we know how he, and his Way was
disliked by the rest of his former Associats: John Row, another of them,
defended the Lawfulness of Episcopacy, at a Conference appointed by the General
Assembly, 1575. Here is a pitiful Shift, and foull Misrepresentation. The Truth
of the Story is (even according to Spotswood, as well as Petrie; not to name
Calderwood, lest he allege that I have read no other Historian) a Question
arising in the Assembly about the Lawfulness of Episcopacie: six Brethren were
appointed to Debate the Question in a Conference, three were appointed to be on
the one side, and three on the other; it was Master Rows Lot to be on the side
of the Lawfulness of Episcopacie: can any Rational Man thence infer, that he
was of that Opinion. And if he were of that Opinion, there is enough said to
take off any Inference that could thence be made against us. John Knox was the
other of these Compilers, whom he will make Prelatical; now when he has been
dead a long time; though he was known to be far from such Sentiments while he
lived.

15. For a second Proof of his Sense of the Passage cited out of the Book of
Discipline, p. 145. Knox assigns a quite other Reason than the then
Necessities of the Church, for the Establishment of Superintendency.
Superintendents and Overseers (says he) were nominated, that all things in the
Church might be carried on with order and well: this reason is perpetual. Ans.
How weak is this Consequence: for this reason is perpetual, that there should
be Governors in the Church; because all things might be carried with order and
well: but it is no reason for that sort of Governors; except in so far as the
present case made them necessary; so that, compare this Passage with that of
the Book of Discipline above cited, the Sense must be, Superintendents were, at
this time, nominated, that all things in the Church might be carried with good
order and well; there being then no possibility to constitute Presbyteries, by
which things could be so managed. He cites another Passage out of the same
Book, p. 289. that John Knox, in a Sermon, asserted the Necessity (and not the
bare Expediencie) of Superintendents. Ans. Does this prove a perpetual
Necessity of that Office? it was then not only expedient but necessary? and
this was all that was asserted. Again John Knox's words are, there was a
Necessity of Superintendents or Overseers: that is, there must be a Government
in the Church, and another they could not then attain that they could be
satisfied with; and therefore they must set up Superintendents. If we duly
consider this Passage, it makes much against him: for supposing the Necessity
of Governors, they might have thus reasoned, if they had been for Bishops, we
must have Governors, nothing hinders to set up Bishops; therefore they are
necessary at this time; but this they did not do: therefore they were not for
Bishops. But they well reasoned; there must be Governors; but at this time we
cannot have Ministers to set up Presbyteries, therefore at this time
Superintendents are necessary. He brings another Testimony out of Knox, p.
110. (it must be miscited, nothing to that purpose is in that place) exhorting
England that every one of their Bishoprics might be made ten: which he says
is a Comment on the Passage in Debate: and says, hence it is clear, that he
was for many Bishoprics. Ans. Nothing but Prejudice could suggest such a Sense
of his Words: he is Writing to a People which had settled Bishops among
themselves; he did not attempt to alter their Settlement (he knew it was in
vain) but he advised them to what might make that way most useful, and what
might have brought it as near as possible to the way he was for. I could tell
him of just such another Passage in Doctor Wild's loyal Nonconformist, though
he was for no bishop at all, in our Modern Sense.

16. He brings a third reason, that this Sense of the Period accords
exactly with the whole Tenor of the first Book of Discipline: where, he says,
there is nothing more for the Temporaryness of Superintendency, but much to the
contrary. Let us see then what we can further find (beside the words at this
time) in the Book of Discipline, for Superintendents being set up early, for
the present Necessity of the Church. And first, the reason for setting them
up, which the Book it self gives, is temporary: to wit, the Paucitie of
Ministers, and the Necessity of having the Gospel preached in all the parts of
the Nation. If the Foundation be temporary, so must the Superstructure: but
this is made the Foundation of that Erection: as is expressed in these words,
and therefore we have thought it expedient, etc. 2. The second Book of
Discipline is a Proof of this beyond Contradiction: for it owneth no Officers
in the Church but Pastors, Bishops or Ministers, every one of which was to be
fixed in a particular Congregation: and Doctors, and Elders, and Deacons: and
these are said to be such as ought to continue in the Kirk, as necessary, for
the Policy and Government of it; and no more Offices ought to be received or
suffered in the Kirk of God, established according to his Word; therefore all
the ambitious Titles invented in the Kingdom of Antichrist, and (...) his
Usurped Hierarchy, which are not of these four sorts, together with (...)
^ffices depending thereon, in one word, ought to be rejected. This second Boo^
Discipline was but an Amendment of the first, and a Suteing of it to the riper
Age that the Reformed Church of Scotland had then attained: but, it is
manifest, that settling Superindents by the first Book, was not designed for
Perpetuity. I shall now Examine what he brings against the designed
Temporariness of Superintendents: the first thing alleged is, the necessity is
brought for being not so strict in examining Superintendents as afterward must
be: I see not wherein this is contrary to the Presbyterian Gloss (which he
affirms p. 145.) seeing the necessity of setting them up had been before
asserted, viz. the Pau^itie of qualified Ministers for the Parishes: and now
another necessity is alleged for taking such Superintendents as they could
get: where is the Inconsistencie of these two. Next, they appoint, that if
su^cient Men cannot be had, Provinces wait till they can be provided, rather
than set up insufficient Men (...) 3. Rules are laid down for supplying the
Vacancy, if a Superintendent die. ^ns. To both these; no more follows but
that Superintendency was to endure for some time: foreseeing that the present
necessity was like, in some degree, to continue for some years: but this is no
Argument for its Perpetuity, or necessity in all Cases of the Church. 4.
After the Church is settled, and three years past; Directions are given for
choosing Superintendents. Ans. This Passage is related only by Spotswood; whom I
might reject as an insufficient Witness, as well as he casts Petrie, or
Calderwood, when Spotswood does not concur with them: But I need not such
Defense: by the establishing of the Church the Reformers cannot mean the
complete Establishment, and being furnished with a sufficient number of well
Gifted Ministers: for what needed three years delay after that, before they
would require such Choice of Superintendents: wherefore, by the settling of the
Church must be understood the peaceable Exercise of Church Government, as well
as other Ordinances, allowed them by the Magistrate, which then they were
contending for: or the peaceable Settlement of the Superintendency; that now
they were Erecting: that though at present, they must put into that Office such
as they could find, they would after that three years, be more exact in their
Choice, hoping that, by that time, more qualified Men might be found: this
proves a Design of Continuance for some time; but not of Perpetuity of
Superintendency. 5. The Book of Discipline supposes Colleges and
Superintendents to be of equal Continuance: for the Superintendent was to have
a hand in Election of Principles and Rectors, and in Auditing College
Accounts. Ans. If this Argument had any Force, it would prove that Apostles,
immediately sent by Christ, must continue as long as Churches and Ministers;
because they were employed to Erect the one, and Ordain the other: Yea, he
needed no other Argument to prove their Continuance, but that they were to
Visit Churches, and plant Ministers; and therefore must continue as long as
that were to be done: and so they should for ever shut out, (in the Design of
our Reformers) not only Presbyteries, but the Diocesan Bishops: they were to do
that Work in the present Exigence: it does not thence follow that they must
continue as long as that Work was to be done.

17. He has yet a fourth Argument, to prove that Superintendents were designed
by our Reformers to be perpetual in the Church. It is taken from some Passages
in Knox, and the old Scots Liturgy, about the Form and Order of the Election of
Superintendents. 1. The Necessity of them is asserted: which I have answered
before: Next, The People are asked if they will obey and honor him as Christ's
Minister so long as he is faithful: not (says our Author) so long as the
present Exigence requires. The admitting of a Superintendent and of a Minister
was one: the whole Form makes the one to be of Divine Institution, as well as
the other: he is said to be called of God, and owned as a Minister of Christ,
they who will not submit to him, are said to rebel against God, and his Holy
Ordinance. In the Prayer after his ^stallment is this Petition, send unto this
our Brother, whom in thy Name we have charged with the chief Care of thy Church
within the Bounds of Lothian, etc. Thus (says our Author) our Reformers looked
on Superintendency wh^ they composed this Form. Ans. 1. This is not a Form
composed by the Reformers to be used on all such occasions: as appears by the
History it self that he cites: to which he (Knox p. 289.) prefixeth this
Inscription; The Form and Order of the Election of the Superintendent and all
other Ministers; at Edinburgh, March the 9. 1560. John Knox being the Preacher:
also because, in the Prayer, Lothidn is mentioned, which could not be in a
general Form: This Method John Knox at that time used. It i^ like it was usual
to proceed in this Method: to use these, or the like Questions, to Pray to that
Purpose: and if there was then a prescribed Form in that Infancy of the
Church, it neither helps his Cause much, nor hurts ours. 2. He
acknowledges that the Form of Electing and Admitting Ministers and
Superintendents was the same: and it is evident from the Inscription but now
mentioned: which is an Evidence that Superintendency was not then looked on as a
distinct Office from the Ministry: but it was an Application, or Modification,
of the Ministerial Wor^ which at that time was necessary. He will not say, that
a Bishop needs no other Ordination or Consecration, beside that which maked
him a Minister: which is a good Argument to prove that our Reformer did not
look on the Distinction of Minister and Superintendent as perpetual and of
Divine Right, as the Prelatists do that of Bishop and Presbyter. 3. My main
Answer is, the account that we have in the place cited is of the Election and
Admission of a Person to the Sacred Office of the Ministry, whither he be to be
a Superintendent or not: and the it is not by this Admission that he is
distinguished from other Ministers further than that his Ministerial Charge is
made larger and more extensive as to its Bounds: wherefore all the Expressions
that my Adversa^ lays hold on in this Form of Election, may fairly be
understood wit^ respect to the Persons Ministry: to this Ministry he is
called of Go^ with respect to it he is a Minister of Christ, it is that which
is called G^ Holy Ordinance: it is that Charge which is laid on him in Gods
Name: an^ indeed it was the Bounds of Lothian that the Person then admitted go^
the Chief Charge of, to be their Pastor. Now the Question is not whither this
Pastoral Charge, whither in one or more Congregations be Gods perpetual
Ordinance; but whither it be such an Ordinance, that the Pastoral Charge of one
Person should extend to so many Congregations, and whither this Pastor by
himself should have Power to Plant Ministers: we say this last was a prudent
Constitution of the Church, which that present Exigence did force them upon: by
this Admission then he was made a Minister according to Christ's Institution,
and a Superintendent too, so far as that Office includes the Ministry: but
wherein it differed from the Ministerial Office, it was of Man and not of God.

18. He has yet a fifth Agrument, p. 150. which according to his wont, of
using the highest Confidence, and biggest Words, when the Strength of his
Reasons are lowest, he calls Irrefragable. It is drawn from several Acts of
General Assemblies: some of which address to the Council for Maintenance to
them: others for Increasing their Number, and Placing them where none were
before: and that when the Church was of four years standing; and when the
Number of Qualified Men were somewhat Increased. One Petitioned, that all the
Popish Clergy should be dispossessed, and that Superintendents, Ministers, and
other needful Members, should be Planted in their Places. Whence he very wisely
infers, that Superintendents were needful Members of the Church, and that
they were to succeed to the Popish Bishops. This is mentioned by Spotswood; but
by none else, as himself observes. Some Superintendents in the year 1574.
would have Dimitted, but the General Assembly ordered them to continue in their
Function. I am so dull as not to see the Strength of this Irrefragable
Argument; I can see no Consequence that can be drawn from any thing, or all
that he has said, but that the Churches found the necessity, which occasioned
the setting up of Superintendents, not to be over in four years; nor wholly in
fourteen years: though Qualified Men Increased, yet their Number was very
unproportionate to the Necessities of the Church. I look on the Increasing of
their Number (which must be a Lessening of their Districts) not as tending to
perpetuate them; but on the contrary, it was a reducing them by Degrees, to the
State of other Ministers; by restricting them to a fewer Number of Parishes,
and so at last to one. That they were needful Members of the Church, at that
time, I doubt not; but this does not prove their designed Perpetuity: that they
were to succeed the Popish Bishops, is a wild Fancy; that is no more said of
them than of other Church Officers, who were to be Planted in the Places where
these Bishops had been, and were to be Maintained by their Revenues. He
concludes this head, as is usual with him; with Confident Rehearsing what he
has made evident. The Judicious will judge of his Performance; and mine too. I
agree with him in what follows, p. 153, 154. That the Superintendents, when
Churches were provided, were no more to travel among them; but I affirm, when
they were sufficiently provided, their Work was Confined to one Parish; and
that Office ceased in the Church: of which before.

19. He advances now, p. 154. to another piece of his Work; to consider our
Reasons for the Temporariness of Superintendency. The first of them, that he
names is, the Force of Necessity, there being so few Men qualified for the
Ministry, scarcely one in a Province: against this he brings several Replies,
intermixed with an unbecoming Confidence, and bitter Reflections. The first is,
this Reason is inconsequential, because that necessity might have been answered
by dividing the Nation in as many Parishes as there were qualified Men, and
Lessening them as more qualified Men could be had. Ans. The course that was
taken, was materially the same that he proposes: only it was necessary, that
within these great Parishes, the Minister, or Superintendent of it, (call him
as you will) should have Power over the Readers and ill qualified Ministers who
were set in the several little Parishes, and who could neither dispense the
Word sufficiently, nor govern the Church; and should have Power to plant
qualified Men, as soon as they could be found in these lesser Parishes: and
this was the Office of a Superintendent. I hope the Reader will see, that this
Reply to our Reason is insignificant, and that our Reason is not showed to be
inconsequential. His second is, this Reason destroys Parity: for that could
not be the Model that our Lord instituted, which cannot answer the ends of its
Institution; as in this case Parity could not do: for here the Church is
reduced to that State that the Governors thereof forced by necessity, must lay
it aside for a time, and establish a Prelacy. Ans. This is stranger Divinity
than what he charge in his next Reply on our Reason. It supposes, if it have
any Sense in it, that all Gods Institutions and Injunctions, do so serve for
all the cases that can fall out, that no necessity can excuse a temporal
receding from the Observance of them. Which to be evidently false, shall be
made appear in Answer to his third Reply (which upon the matter is the same
with this) the Model of Government that himself, and other Prelatists, is for,
is liable to the same Inconvenience; and according to his Logic, is none of
Christ's Institution. He, and the rest of them, maintain, that by the Laws of
the new Testament, there can be no Ordination of a Presbyter without a Bishop,
and yet they think themselves warranted by Necessity to allow Ordination
without a Bishop: Downam, in his Sermon about Episcopacy, has this Passage,
posita enim Ecclesia, aut in universum Episcopo destituta, aut conferta
Hereticis aut Idolatricis Praelatis, quales Papistici sunt, a quibus nulli
Orthodoxi Ministri ordinationem sperare debent, dubitandum non est quin prisci
Patres, in tali necessitatis casu ordinationem sine Episcopo fact a
permiserint, licet non ut regularem, ordinarii Ecclesiae regiminis regulis
respondentem, efficacem tamen, and quae justificari possit, ubi deest
Episcopus. (I have not his Sermon by me in English, and therefore use the
Latin Translation) And he cites Council. Antioch. C. 10. for it, and pleads
for it by several Reasons. Here that Learned Person, had in great Esteem in the
Episcopal Church, makes two Cases of Necessity, in which the Model he pleads
for as Christ's Institution, must be receded from. And if Prelatists may allow
Presbyters to Ordain in Case of Necessity, why may not Presbyterians allow a
single Person to Ordain under the same Force and Cogency? Also Forbes. Iren. p.
158. and seq. not only asserteth, but proves the Force of Necessity to warrant
such things: withal asserting the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy: and he insisteth
at length to prove this Proposition, from Scripture and Antiquity; that
Presbyters may Govern and Ordain in want of a Bishop.

. 20. His Third Rply is, it is strange Divinity, that Paritie is of Christ's
Institution, and yet may be laid aside in case of necessity: and here he
falls heavily on, G R. for asserting what this may be inferred from: and
takes occasion to reproach him. I find no more show of reason in this part of
his Discourse (though there be many bitter and harsh words in it) but this,
that if we may do so in one thing, we may do so in all things. Ans. I shall
show that this is no strange Divinity, and then Answer his Reason against it.
It is not rare Divinity; for I have already showed that Dounham and Forbes (Men
of the first Rank among his own Party) teach the same. That it is is not
against Scripture nor Reason (and therefore not strange) I Prove, 1. It is
taught by Christ himself: it was Gods Command that the Sabbath should be
strictly observed, the Law contains no express exeption from this Rule: yet
our Savior makes the case of Necessity to be a just Exception; in that he
Defended his Disciples plucking the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath day: and that
by other Examples, where Necessity had the same influence: Luke 6. 1, etc.
David appoved by Christ, in the place cited, thought it no strange Doctrine: it
was the Institution of God that none should eat the Show Bread but the Priests:
David and his Men were no Priests, and yet their Necessity did warrant their
eating of it. The Apostles thought it no strange Doctrine: who (though they
knew that the Jewish Ceremonies were abolished, and become unlawful to be used
after the Resurrection of Christ; and though Paul told the Galatians when the
case of Necessity was now over, that Christ should profit them nothing if they
were Circumcised; yet they enjoined the Observation of some of these
Ceremonies, and pleaded Necessity for it, Acts 15. 28. and 29, verses. Paul
Circumcised Timothy, Acts 16. 3. used the Ceremonies proper for the Jewish
votaries, Acts 21. 23, 24. enjoined forbearance to them who observed the Jewish
Ceremonies, Romans 14. 1. though out of that case of Necessity, he severely
condemns that Observation. Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11. 2. Reason, as well as
Scripture, does plead for this influence of Necessity, on humane Actions. For
1. Necessity (I mean such as the Providence of GOD without our sin, brings us
into) is a Declaration of GOD'S will; now this cannot be contrary to that
Declaration of his will that is made in his Word; when the Word and Necessity
seem to clash (for they can never be truly inconsistent, being both from GOD)
and if in that case we should sin by yielding to Necessity, we should be under
a Necessity of sinning; which no Divine will say a man can be under, without
his own fault: To take the present case for an Example: let us suppose Church
Government by Paritie is Christ's Institution; suppose also that there are so
few Ministers that there cannot be Men got to supply Places, but such as are
palpably insufficient for the Work: here is a Dilemma, either Gospel Ordinances
must be neglected, or unduely managed, by these Men; or on the other hand, they
who are Qualified must be set over these for a time, to Preach now and then in
their Places; to Direct and enjoin them what is right, to Plant the Places with
Qualified Men when they can be got: all which is supposed to be cross to the
letter (I do not say to the Meaning and Design) of the Institution; in the
first Case, the Church should sin in neglecting that which is the main Design
of all Gospel Institutions, viz. Edification, and Saving of Souls; therefore,
she does not sin on the other hand, by crossing the Letter of the Institution:
otherwise she should be under a Necessity of sining, without her own fault
bringing her under that Necessity. 2. Although our LORD did forsee all the
Cases and Circumstances, in which his Church was to be unto the end of the
World, and could have fully Provided for them all, by giving distinct Laws
suited to every one of them; yet infinite Wisdom thought fit to give Laws for
regulating the ordinary cases of the Church, leaving these that are rare, and
Extraordinary to be Managed according to the general Rules of Scripture, and
sound reason, because distinct Laws for all possible Cases, would have swelled
the BIBLE to a bigness which would have made it less useful to us; and of this
it may be said, as of a Case not unlike to it, John 20. 30, 31. The World could
not have contained, at least Men could not have Read, and Retained, the
Contents of all the Books that should have been Written; no doubt, when GOD
made the Law forbidding that the Show Bread should be eaten by any but by the
Priests, he forsaw what case David and his Men would be in: but he thought it
not fit to provide for that Case by an Express Exception from the Law; but left
it to be Ordered by his more general Laws: Even so it is in the Case that we
Dispute about.

. 21. I shall now Answer his Reason brought against this yielding to
Necessity, in cases of Divine Institution which is, that if Necessity can
oblige Christians to forsake, or to cross Institution in one Case; why not in
all Cases. The Consequence that this his Question implies, we simply Deny. And
I may Confidently say, that himself, in his cooler thoughts, will be ashamed of
it at least he will have few Men of Sense, whether Learned or unlearned, that
will allow such a Consequence. Farless, that will Join wit him in what
follows, viz. that crossing Institution when forced to it by the Law of
Necessity; what is it else than to open a door to Gnosticism, to Infidelity, to
Apostasy; and to all imaginable kinds of Antichristian Perfidie, and Villainy?
To clear this Matter, and to still this Noise, and that the Reader may
understand this Debate about the Force of Necessity better than this learned
Author seems to do: I shall show when Necessity may warrant an Action, which
without such Necessity were unwarrantable, and when not. 1. It is not feigned
or pretended Necessity that can have this Force: we are far from thinking that
it is a sufficient Excuse when on has done an evil thing, to say there was
Necessity for it, I could not shun it; if our Reformers did but pretend
Necessity for setting up Superintendents, or if we do but pretend it for them;
if my Antagonist can prove (as he has alleged) that there was no Necessity
for it, but that if they had been for Paritie; they might have Promoted the
Gospel without thus diverting from it, for a time; we shall quit this Argument;
GOD is Judge in that case, whether the Necessity be real, or only pretended;
And in many cases, Man may Judge, and Punish them who break the Law, and
pretend Necessity for their Action. 2. It must be a Necessity of GOD'S
making, not of our own bringing on; as I hinted before; If either a Church, or
a Person, do sinfully bring themselves under a Necessity of Transgressing the
Law; the sinful Cause makes the Action sinful which is consequential to it. 3.
The Necessity that we shelter our Actions under must not only be of the Means,
nor only of the End, but of both. I suppose a Man cannot save his Life, his
Liberty, or Estate, but by doing what is sinful, or omitting what is a Moral
and perpetual duty, or is such hic et nunc Here is the Necessity of Means, but
it cannot excuse him because there is no Necessity of the End, it is not
necessary that we should Live, be at Liberty, nor that we have Estates; there
is neither an absolute Necessity of these nor comparative Necessity: none of
them is so necessary as it is to keep a good Conscience, and to please GOD;
and shun sin. Again suppose the End be necessary V. Gr. to advance the
Interest of Religion; but this End may be attained to by means that do no way
cross any of GOD'S Institutions; to do what is cross to Institution, in that
case is no way Excusable: For there is no necessity of the Mean. If my
Antagonist can show that either the End of setting up Superintendents, was
needless; or that that could be attained without encroaching a little on
Paritie, for a time; then shall we no more plead Necessity for what they did;
but judge that they were not for Paritie in their Principles. 4. We
distinguish, with respect to the Force of Necessity, between these Actions
which are Moral from their Nature, and these that are Moral only by
Institution. How far Necessity may Warrant, or not Warrant an Action against
the Moral-Law, I shall not now Dispute; our present Debate, not being concerned
in that Question: it is evident that there are some cases in which Necessity,
even in such Actions, has place, as Adam's Sons Marrieing their Sisters; of
which Lyra and Menochius in Genesis 4. 17. say, Initio mundi necesse fuit Sorores
Fratribus nubere. And it is also certain that no Necessity can dispense with
some other Actions that are naturally Moral; such as Blasphemy, Lying, etc. but
in Matters of Institution, the LORD has not so strictly bound his People, nor
made his Institutions to clash with the natural and indispensible Commands that
he has laid on them: as is evident, in David's case abovementioned: If
Institution, in some Circumstances that the LORD has cast his People in, do
clash with the Moral Duty of saving Life: this Moral Duty superceedeth the
Obligation of Institution, in that time, and in that case, much more when
present Circumstances make Institution to clash with the great End of
Institution; as in the case in hand: without dispensing with Paritie in this
case, the End of Church Government had been lost; viz. the Edification of the
Church, and Promoting the Reformation. If any should object, that this is a
dispensing with the Law of GOD: I Answer, it is not Man's dispensing with GOD'S
Law; but his Judging that GOD, in that Case, dispenses with his own Law; or as
Aquinas 2. 2. Q. 88. Art. 10. Fit ut hoc quod erat lex non sit lex, in hoc
casu, and 1. 2. Q. 96. Art. 6. Qui in casu Necessitatis agit praeter verba
Legis, non judicat de ipsa Lege, sed judicat de casu singulari in quo videt
verba legis observanda non esse. And indeed, to deny all Influence of true,
real, and innocent Necessity, to change the Morality of some Actions,
especially these that relate to Instituted Worship, were to put Men's
Consciences on such a Rack, as there were some times, no possibility to attain
to well grounded Peace. And on the other hand, I hope what is said will Defend
this Opinion from the horrid consequence that he is pleased to draw from it:
especially when we consider, that this influence of Necessity must be but for
a time; not perpetual: because it is not to be thought, that any of GODS
Appointments are so contrived, as to be always unpracticable: or that the LORD
will bring his Church, or any Person, under such a lasting Necessity, that
they never can do what he has Commanded, they using their utmost endeavors to
observe all that he has Commanded, as is enjoined Matthew 28. 20. I shall not
Determine what Necessity of Omission one may be perpetually under; but I
understand not how this can be with respect to possitive Acts contrary to
Institution.

22. He deals with a Second Plea that he imputes to us, p. 157, etc. why our
Reformers are not to be thought Episcopal in their Principles, notwithstanding
of their setting up Superintendents, which is; that these Superintendents did
very much differ from Bishops, in the Notion that our Adversaries have of
Bishops: The Author of the Ten Questions calls that a New Model of
Episcopacy. To take off this Calderwood brings some Differences between them
and Bishops: and Vindicat: in Answer to the Ten Questions, mentions also some
of them, and Adds what after he confesses to be Material. All which he is
pleased to ridicule, with his wonted Insolency: but I am consident the
judicious Reader will easily discern who is most Ridiculous; he that Proves a
Superintendent not to be the same with a Bishop, from his Election,
Examination, and Admission: that he had no new Consecration, as Bishops must
have, and so was in no Superior degree to a Presbyter: that there were no
Arch-Superintendents as there were Archbishops, etc. or he who compares these
to the ordinary Habit of the one, with the State and Grandeur of the other in
their distinguishing Marks: which yet, if not set down in such scurrile terms,
as he uses, may make a great Difference between the Temper of the one sort of
Men and that of the other; though not of their Office or Power. If our
Reformers had intended to continue that sole Jurisdiction of Prelates in the
Church, which they found settled in it under Popery, this Change that they
made, even in these things, is unaccountable: nor can a Reason be given why
they kept not to the old District that the Bishops had before Governed. It is
as evident, as any thing can be made at such a distance of time, that the
Superintendents never had that absolute Power in the Church that our Episcopal
Brethren now allow to their Prelates. Though we deny not that they had a
Frelacie, and more Power than We now give to single Presbyters; and have given
the Reason why it was so, and of its Consistence with the design of our
Reformers, that the perpetual Government of the Church should be by Paritie.
The main Difference between the two sorts of Church Rulers which we insist on,
and which himself acknowledges to be Material, he falls upon, p. 159. and
says he must be serious in it; is, Superintendents were made obnoxious to the
Trial and Censures of Ministers within their own Dioces. The Truth of which,
and that it neither was so with Bishops in the Primitive Church, nor should be
so now, he does freely Profess. But he puts his Wit to its utmost stretch,
to get a fair Answer to it. He brings no less than Five Answers, whereas one
good one had been Worth them all. His first Answer has some what of Ingenuitie
in it. He condemns our Reformers in this; and says, it was a great Error in
their Constitutions, and declames against it with great Vehemency, that
Governors should be Subject to the Censure of their Subjects; and shows a
great deal of Zeal for absolute Government, both in Church and State: into
Debate about which I shall not now enter: only I take Notice, that here he
fairly gives up that part of our Controvesie, that he has been at a vast deal
of pains about; that our Reformers were Episcopal in their Principles. With
which I am sure, this is wholly inconsistent. If he had thought of this sooner,
and Acted consequentially to it, after this Thought came into his Head, he he
might have saved a greas deal of pains to himself, and Me: and near the Half of
his long Book might have been spared. His second Answer is, this was put in
their Constitution from a Principle about civil Government owned by them, that
the King is Major singulis, but Minor omnibus: which he also Ridiculeth.
Neither am I concerned to Debate this Principle, it does not belong to our our
present Controversy. But what he asserteth is a groundless Conjecture; we have
better ground to think that they looked on this as according to the Laws of the
Gospel; which forbids Church Domination. His Third is, they made also
Ministers Censureable by their Elders; and from thence takes occasion to
Reproach them, as having little Skill in Church Policy: nor will I degress into
these Debates; only I take Notice, that what he says is no Answer to our
Exception, but rather a Confirmation of it: if both a Superinintendent was
Censureable by the Synod, and the Ministers by the Eldership; it does
evidentlie follow, that the Superintendents and the Bishops power were not the
same. A Fourth Answer is, this was never put in Practice. Reply, It will be
very hard for him to Prove this Negative: but whether it was or not, it shows
that our Reformers did not intend Episcopacy when they set up Superintendents.
His Fifth is, this Constitution does not infer Parity. Reply, We do not say
that Superintendents were in absolute Parity with other Ministers; we confess a
disparity of Power, for that time. All we plead is, that our Reformers were not
for Episcopacy, even in that case of Necessity: and the Imparity that they were
then forced to; they did not intend should always continue.

. 23. The other Plea he mentions has its Rise from his own fancy: it was
not used by us: what he cites for it, was not used either for its Advantage,
or disadvantage, but an occasional Observation cast into a Parenthesis, to show
that it was merely the Deed of the Church; however, it might afterward be taken
notice of by Parliaments. Our Author now, p. 166. imagining that he has
dispelled all the Mists cast by Presbyterians on what he pleads for, about
the Principles of our Reformers, with respect to Church Government; proceeds
to give us Account of a second Model that Church Government was cast into: But
as an Introduction to this, he falls on the Mistakes and weaknesses of the
Reformers, with the Preface of a pretended unwillingness to expose them so; the
sincerity of which pretension the Reader may Judge of, if he consider that the
whole of this Discourse is wholly Impertinent; for we are to consider their
Actions rather than guess at their Motives: if the Reader also reflect on his
page 7. where he reproacheth our Reformation as a violent and disordered
Reformation. Their weakness he exposes in two things: one is, that they went
on this Principle, that the best way to Reform the Church was to recede as far
from the Papists as they could: to have nothing in Communion with them but the
essentials, the necessary and indispensible Articles and Parts of Christian
Religion, what else was in its nature indifferent, and not positively and
expressly Commanded in the Scripture, if it was i^ fashion in the Popish Church,
was therefore to be laid aside, and avoided as (...) Corruption, as having been
abused, as made Subservient to Superstition and Idolatry. Here is a false
representation of our Reformers, and that in three things. 1. This Principle
was never held nor Practiced by them, in the Latitude nor extensiveness that he
mentions: they indeed were against Religious Ceremonies devised by Men, as on
other Grounds, so on Account of their being Symbols of Idolatry and
Superstition, and having been so used: but there were many parts of Religion
that were not fundamental, but of inferior Note that they did not so deall
with. 2. They never Rejected any thing that was truly a part of true
Religion, and was peculiar to it, whether it were of greater or lesser Moment,
only on the Ground he mentions: but always were able to give other Reasons
for their Opinion or Practice. 3. They always were willing to receive what
could be, by good consequence, proved by Scripture, though it were not
positively and expressly Commanded, I advise my Adversary, if he have little
regard to the reputation of the Reformers, that he would be more careful not to
Wound his own, by speaking what is not Truth. For the Principle it self, duly
stated according to what I have said, I am willing to Debate it with him; but
that is not his business, but rather to expose it by Invectives. The next thing
that he Represents them in as weak, is, they were for the Revenue that had
belonged to the Church in Popery, to be Employed still for the Churches use. I
think, this Debate is little to our purpose, and therefore I wave it,

24. His next Attempt is, to prove that there was a second Model of the
Government of the Church of Scotland, after the public Establishment of the
Reformation; and that this was Episcopacy. And here he brings a Labyrinth of
History, in which it is hard for any Man to follow him: rejecting what ever
disliketh him; and casting Dirt on all that have written the History of our
Reformation, not sparing Spotswood himself, when he does not please him: only
he has had the hap to light on a Manuscript, out of which he alters, adds, and
contradicts all the other Accounts that we have of the Affairs of our Church;
whence that Manuscript came, what Authority it has; whither it be his own, or
any other Man's, he is not pleased to tell us. He calls it his Manuscript,
whether he would have us take him for the Author, or for the Owner of it, I
cannot determine: nor do I see what Title he has to it on either Account; I
have the present use of a Manuscript, which (as I am credibly informed) is the
very individual Copy that he had, which now belongs to the University of
Glasgow: Whether any other Copies of it be extant, I am uncertain: It was
Transcribed by William Laing Reader of Ebdie Kirk, in the year 1638. It
contains the Acts of the General Assemblies from 1560 to 1616 inclusive, and
other things relating to Church Affairs. I shall in a few Words show how little
Advantage he has by this Manuscript, by showing that it is far from setting
forth our Reformers as inclined to Episcoprcy: and by pointing at some of his
false Citations out of it; for the former, it will be evident to them who
without Bias, consider the following Passages: Assembly 1562 p. 6. not the
Superintendent alone, but they with the Ministers and Elders, are to expone to
the Kirk, the State of the Kirk among them, and note Offenses; that the Kirk
may find some Remeed for them; p. 7. Superintendents as well as other Ministers
are removed, and tried in Order to Censure by the Assembly: so also p. 8. and
almost every where: This looks not like Episcopal Jurisdiction; p. 7. Sess.
4. the Assembly gives Power to Superintendents, to transport Ministers, but
with this express Limitation; that it be done in the Synod, and with Consent of
the most part of the Ministers and Elders. Ibid. Sess. 3. Speaking of
Inhibiting such as have unduly entered into the Ministry, it is said, this Act
is to have strength as well against them that are called Bishops, as others,
pretending to any Ministry in the Kirk: Where even the Name of Bishops (as then
used) seems to be disliked, and their Prelation disowned, and their
Subjection to the Ministers met in an Assembly supposed, so far were they from
owning sole or superior Jurisdiction in them. Assembly 1565. p. 21. Ministers
must be tried (at their Entry) by Learned Men of the Kirk, such as are
presently the Superintendents appointed thereunto: where the Perpetuity of the
Superintendents Office, and Power is disowned: they for the present, not
always, were to do that Work: also that their Power is derived from the
Assembly, not Divine Institution, is plainly insinuated. Assembly 1566. A
Petition to the Council with Expostulations against the Queens restoring the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews to his Jurisdiction: where they affirm that the
Causes for the most part judged by his usurped Authority belong to the true
Kirk, Ibid. Bishops, Abbots, etc. warned by Superintendents within whose
Jurisdiction they lived, to compear before the Kirk to answer for not waiting
on their Flocks. Assembly 1567. Sess. 4. p. 44. The Bishop of Orkney deprived
of all Ministerial Function of the Ministry, for Marrying the Queen to the Earl
of Bothwell, a Divorced Adulterer: On his Repentance he is restored again to
the Ministry of the Words No mention of restoring to Episcopal Jurisdiction.
The Manuscript gives a very short account of the Convention at Leith 1571.
Jan. 12. where our Author begins his new Model of Episcopacy. Of the
Assembly at Saint Andrews, in March 6. it has but little. Assembly 1572. at
Perth, a Determination against the Names of Archbishops, Deans, etc. as
scandalous: Also that the Articles at Leith be received but for an Interim.
Assembly March 1. 1572. Bishops appointed (as well as others) to be at the
first Meeting of every Assembly, under the Pain of Tinsel of half a years
Stipend: Assembly March 6. 1573. Bishops admonished to join with the Kirk, in
her Assemblies, which it seems some of these Aspiring Men thought below them.
And it is Enacted, that the Power of Bishops should not exceed that of a
Superintendent: And that Bishops should be subject to the Discipline of the
General Assembly. Assembly 1574. The Bishop of Dunkel rebuked for Ministration
of the Lords Supper on Work days. They were then so Shy of a fixed and
perpetual Prelation among Ministers; that it was Enacted, Anno 1575. p. 70. at
the end, that to shun Ambition and Inconveniency to the Kirk, Commissioners for
Visiting Provinces should be Changed every year. In the beginning of that
Assembly, when the Trial of the Doctrine and Conversation of Bishops,
Superintendents, and other Ministers was mentioned, John Dury one of the
Ministers of Edinburgh, Protested that the Trial of Bishops prejudge not the
Opinion, and Reasons that he, and other Brethren has to oppone against the
Office and Name of a Bishop. This is the highest Pitch that his new Model of
Episcopacy (as he calls it) came to from 1571. to 1575, when (we deny not)
there was a Declension from the Purity of Church Government, endeavored by
some Courtiers, and Ambitious Church Men, their Tools. But from this time
Presbytry began to Revive, and gather Strength, till at last it was fully
settled: For in the Assembly 1575. it was questioned whether the Office of
Bishops was Founded on the Word of God, p. 71. and some appointed to Debate on
either Side. Bishops are appointed to choose a particular Flock, where they must
ordinarily Labor. Assembly 1576* p. 71. Adamson Presented by the Queen to the
Bishopric of Saint Andrews is called by the Assembly to be tried, p. 77. The
Bishop of Glasgow is required to take a particular Charge. Assembly 1577. p.
79. Adamson Summoned before the General Assembly for Usurping a Bishopric,
without the Kirk: Commissioners are appointed to Examine the Matter, and to
Discharge him to Visit any more, till he be Admitted by the Kirk: Assembly
1578. p. 83. Ordained that Beshops he called by their own Names, and called
Brethren, p. 84. The Assembly discharges Creating any more Bishops till the
next Assembly; because of great Corruptions in the State of Bishops. Assembly
1578. held in June, extends the foresaid Act to all time coming, till the
Corruptions of the State of Bishops be wholly taken away; And Commands all
Bishops that now are, to Submit to the Assembly under Pain of Excommunication.
Assembly at Dundee, July 12. p. 96. After Liberty to all to Reason, The whole
Assembly in one Voice, did declare the Office of Bishops as now used in
Scotland, to be unwarrantable in the Word of God, and unlawful in it self, and
to the great Overthrow of the Kirk of God. All Bishops are Charged to Dimit,
and to use no part of the Office of Pastors, without new Admission by the
Assembly: Synods appointed within a Month after to Summon them, and proceed to
Excommunication against the Refusers. Assembly 1581. Declared the
abovementioned Act to mean, that the Government of Bishops, as now in
Scotland, is wholly Condemned. After which, Presbyteries were Erected through
the whole Nation. For his false Citations out of the Manuscript, I shall
mention but two (tho the Reader may observe many more, by Comparing his Book
with the Manuscript.) One is p. 127. that the Manuscript says it was Ordained,
Assembly 1562. that no Minister leave his Flock to come to the Assembly, unless
he have Complaint to make, or be Complained of, or be Warned to it by the
Superintendent; whereas the Manuscript has not a Word to that Purpose in that
Assembly: The other is p. 128. out of the Assembly 1563. That none Vote in
Assemblies but Superintendents, Commissioners, and Ministers brought with them,
together with Commissioners of Shires, Burghs, and Universities: And that
Ministers Commissioners be Chosen at the Synodal Convention, with Consent of
the rest of the Ministers, and Gentlemen Conveened at the Synod. Whereas the
Manuscript (it is p. 10.) says, that every Superintendent within his own
Jurisdiction, cause warn the Shires, Towns, and Parish Kirks, to send their
Commissioners to the Assembly, declaring to them the Day and Place. Here is
nothing like what he Cites: and if it were so as he says, it could not infer
the Superintendents Nominating the Commissioners to the Assembly* but it is
plain that they were Chosen by the Synod: and that the Synods Consent was no
less an Act of Authority, than if it had been said, it must be done by their
Vote. These things out of that Manuscript, I have here cast together, because I
had finished this Work before it came to my hand, and therefore could not so
conveniently dispose them in their several Places.

25. I shall not any further take notice of this Historical Controversy, than
to make some short Remarks on it, hoping that a History of these Affairs may
ere long be ready for the Press, from which we expect a full Account, with more
Truth and Candor, than what is to be found in his Discourse. 1. I deny not (nor
do I know any that ever denied) but there was so much ground for his telling us
of a second Model of the Government of the Church; that the first Endeavors of
the Reformers, for shunning the old Hierarchy that was under Popery, met with
some Interruption and Opposition; the Causes were evident, the Covetousness of
some Courtiers, and other States Men; and the Ambition and Unfaithfulness of
some Church Men: there were Attempts to set up Episcopacy, and they had some
degree of effect; but they were always opposed; and the Designs of the
Prelatical Party could never succeed, as they wished; but at last, after much
Wrestling, Presbytery was settled in its Vigor, in the year 1592. Wherefore
his tedious Citations to prove that the Church did some things that cannot well
be reconciled with Parity, in that Interval of her Declension and Confusions,
was needless Labor, which I do not envy him the Pleasure of, seeing he was
pleased so to employ his Leisure Hours; I have elsewhere Debated some of these
Passages, with the same Author (if I mistake not) nor do I find any thing that
now he brings which is new, save insolent Contempt, and ill Words; which I
can easily beat from a Man of his Temper; nor will I make equal Returns to
these his Complements. 2. I observe, that when p. 143. he is giving account of
the Alteration that was endeavored, toward the setting up of Episcopacy; he
brings Reasons for the States Men, and Reasons for the Church men, that might
move them; and that with as much Confidence, as if he had been at the Consult;
the States Men considered that Episcopacy was still established by Law; the
Ecclesiastics made one of the three Estates; and to take it away was to shake
the Civil Constitution; and they might have been called to an account for it,
when the King should come to Age; who was then Minor: But this is a pure
Fallacy: the Bishops were still by Law possessed of their Temporalities,
Revenues, and Parliamentarie Privileges; but not of their Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction: it was the preserving of these, not of this, that the Courtiers
were accountable for, with respect to the Civil Constitution. That this was the
best way to preserve the Right of the Church; is said without Book; unless he
can prove that Christ gave her such Rights; her Civil Rights might have been,
and afterward were, otherwise preserved. It was very evident, that many of the
States Men were Acted by other Motives, (I do not say all of them were for a
Jus Divinum, or Acted Conscienciously) even to get the Revenues in their hands.
Which he does plainly enough confess, while page 189. he tells us of their
Playing their Tricks, and Robbing the Church. For the Reason that he makes the
Clergy go upon, viz. The ill Effects of the former Scheme, laid in the first
Book of Discipline, that had arisen to the Church: there is no Hint given by
him of any such ill Effects, as apprehended by the Men of that Time; except
that they who designed a Change for their own Ends, would readily pretend some
such thing; neither he, nor any else, can prove that any Detriment to the true
Interests of Religion, did arise from it: It is evident, that some Church Men
had a design to advance themselves; though they were disappointed, as to the
advantageous part of their design, they got the Titles, and the great Men got
the Revenues; which he would fain deny or dissemble: but it is so evident, that
he must contradict our plainest Histories, if he deny it. 3. That another was
Moderator in the General Assembly, than a Bishop, is brought as an Argument
that Prelacy was not got to its height, even by the greatest Efforts the Party
could make at that time. All he says to this is, that George Buchannan was
chosen Moderator in the General Assembly 1567. which yet infers not the
Ruin of Presbytery. The Strength of this Evasion is soon taken off: the
Episcopal Church look on Bishops as so far above Presbyters; that it is
Essential to them to Rule, and the Presbyters to be Ruled by them; so that for
a Bishop to be a single Member of an Assembly, and a Presbyter to be Moderator,
is inconsistent with the Bishops Prerogative; but Presbyterians hold no such
distinguishing Principle; they think a Minister is in a superior Order above a
Non-Preaching Elder: but do not think that the one has Jurisdiction over the
other; but that both have equal Ruling Power: and therefore, though it be now
so Customary, that only Ministers preside in our Meetings, that it would be
thought odd, if it should be otherwise, yet for a Ruling Elder (such as Master
Buchannan was) and a Man of his singular Eminency, to preside in a Meeting, is
not against any Principle of Presbyterians, that I know of; (tho the Way we use
is most Rational, and Decent, and there is no Reason for receding from it.) But
to make this Observation yet stronger, Calderwood p. 56. (if I may Name him
without Firing this Gentleman's Choler; and being Charged with Ignorance, and
knowing no other History) tells us, that never one of them had the Credit to
be Moderator of the General Assembly; which is a Token (I shall not speak in
his Dialect, an infallible Demonstration) that their Episcopal Jurisdiction was
not then owned by the Church.

26. A fourth Observation I make on his Historical Debate is, that he
endeavors to prove, against Petrie and Calderwood; that the Articles at
Leith were approved by the General Assembly; that Episcopacy was s^ approved;
that it cost much Stuggling before it could be Abolished. What he gains by
all this I know not. The Opposition that was made to that Way did soon appear,
and it was soon abolished: that it is said, that it was not allowed by the
General Assembly, is only meant of the first General Assembly that sat a few
Weeks after the Agreement at Leith; though afterward the Party grew stronger
and got it approved; I know none that asserteth that it was never approved in
any General Assembly, though his Proofs that he brings for its being
approved, might tempt one to think that it was never approved, viz. That they
sat in Assemblies, and voted, and that even as Bishops: Their sitting and
voting proves that they were tolerated: what he means by sitting and voting
as Bishops, I do not well understand: that Reduplication must either import the
Exercise of the Episcopal Authority, or it is a Word without Sense, or
Signification: now that they Exercised Episcopal Authority in any of the
Assemblies, I do not find, nor does he attempt to prove it. The Archbishop of
Saint Andrews, being present, and first named in a Committee, (as p. 203.) is
such an Argument for Episcopal Pre-eminence, as the Papists use not a few for
Peter's Supremacy: that Superintendents are continued (ibid.) is a weak
Argument, for the Assemblies approving Bishops of the second Model, as he
calls it. It is another such Argument, that the Assembly declare what they
mean by the Names Archbishops, Deans, etc. and wish these changed into Names
less offensive: that the Articles agreed on at Leith (which contain his second
Model) are voted by the Assembly to be received but for an Interim. These and
some more of the same, or like Importance, are his Arguments for the
Approbation of Episcopacy by the Church of Scotland at that time. I do not say
they Acted as Men for the Divine Right of Parity: it was a time of Temptation,
and many yielded too far: but there was a Party that did not thus Comply, and
who prevailed to get this Yoke cast off at last: many of the Acts of the
Assemblies that he cites, do Direct the Bishops, and Limit their Power, and
appoint them to be subject to the General Assembly; and to have no more Power
than Superin endents had: this looks like no good Will to Episcopacy: but a
Hedging it in, when they could not, for present, cast it wholly out. But he
will prove, p. 212, etc. That all this was out of no Dislike to Episcopacy: and
that by a Petition consisting of nine Articles, drawn by the General Assembly,
1574. Wherein Bishops are several times mentioned, and that as Acting as
Bishops, in Naming Ministers for Places; (where yet Superintendents and
Commissioners are also mentioned, as equally concerned in that Work) yea in one
of these Articles, it is desired, that Qualified Ministers might be provided
for vacant Bishoprics. This proves no more, but that the major part of this
Assembly thought fit, that seeing Men, bearing the Name of Bishops (for little
more they had) were for an Interim tolerated in the Church, their Places
should neither be vacant, nor filled with insufficient Persons. All this may
well consist with a Dislike of that Lordly Power of Bishops that some were
Aspiring to, and that my Antagonist pleads for.

27. Our Author thinks he has now done his Work, and proved that Prelacy was
privately and publicly liked, from the beginning of the Reformation: it seems
he has argued himself into a Belief of it, (such is the Efficacy of Prejudice)
which few else will be persuaded of. He thinks his further Work needless (and
I think it had been more for his Credit to let it alone) it is, to prove that
Presbytery met with Opposition: and I could seldom observe that any good Design
was carried on, but Satan raged against it, and found Instruments against it:
his former Historical Discourse he justly calls Nauseous, p. 216. But what
follows is much more so; and yet worse: for he falls to downright Railing
against Master Andrew Melvil, in not only a nausebus Gingling Strain of Words,
but with such Unmanly Bitterness, as a tender Conscienced Christian would
abhor; yea a Person of common Morality would be ashamed of: and is only fit for
the Scolding Women that have lost all Shame. The foull Misrepresentation of
Matters of Fact, which have some Semblance of Truth in them, that this
Narrative abounds with, I leave to the History, that I hope may appear ere
long, to correct them: I am no further concerned than with what is
Argumentative: of which I can find nothing here: for we deny not that there was
then, as now, an Episcopal Party, who were loath to let go their hoped for, or
enjoyed Church Preferments. That after Master Melvil appeared was the first
time that any appeared for Presbytery in Scotland, or against Episcopacy, is a
daring Assertion; after which we may expect whatever he shall think to be for
his Interest; considering what has been already adduced out of the Book of
Discipline. One who reads this his Historical Discourse, may easily perceive
what Shifts he is put to, for proving the Regent Mortons Change from
Episcopacy, to favor Presbytery; and to prove his Intentions in some of his
Actings, and that by a long Train of Arguments. To prove that England, though
Episcopal, did endeavor to promote Presbytery in Scotland. To prove the
Ignorance of the Clergy of Scotland at that time. To prove Beza to be ignorant
of the Government and Constitution of the ancient Church, (p. 248.) and that
not out of his own Book, (which it seems he had not read) but out of his
Adversary, Saravia: and indeed he proves Beza's Ignorance by such Instances as
will serve for any Presbyterian, and conclude them all to be Ignoramus's, which
I know is this Authors Opinion, oftener than once or twice expressed. I pass
with a transient Observation, his bitter Sarcasm against Days of Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation, often appointed by Presbyterians, p. 254. It had been good his
own Party had used them oftener; and that they and we had improved them better.
I take notice also of his making so very great a Difference, between the
Meetings of Ministers and Elders for Exercises (that is, for Interpretation of
Scripture) and Presbyteries which were set up: on account whereof, he
represents it as a great deal of Ignorance in one who affirmed, that the real
Exercise of Presbytery, in all its Meetings, lesser and greater, continued, and
was allowed, in the year 1572. I deny not but that there was a Difference
between these two Sorts of Meetings, as there is between a Child and a full
grown Man, viz. The Meetings for Exercise, or Presbyteries, (call them what ye
will) did at first meddle with fewer Acts of Church Power than afterward: yet
they Acted with Authority. For the Ministers and Elders met to interpret
Scripture; I hope the Elders were not Interpreters by public Teac^ng, as well
as the Ministers: the People, no doubt, were also present at these Exercises,
as Hearers, but the Elders are mentioned as Constituent Members of a Meeting,
wherein the People had no Share, which must be an Authoritative Meeting. King
James the sixth was far from his Opinion about these Meetings; who in the
Conference at Hampton Court 1603. in the second days Conference, p. 78, 79.
when Doctor Reynolds moved that the Clergy might meet once every three Weeks
for Prophesying: as Bishop Grindal and other Bishops desired of her late
Majesty; the King being stirred at this, said, that they aimed at Scottish
Presbytery. He looks on it as ridiculous that G. R. had reckoned that
Presbyteries were from the beginning, and fancieth that he has no other ground
for so saying; but that Calderwood had said, that the Kirk of Scotland had four
sorts of Assemblies, ever since the beginning, of which this must needs be one.
But I can tell him of other Grounds on which he might reckon this Meeting a
Presbytery; one is the General Assembly 1579. as the Manuscript he so often
cites, has it, p. 95. did expressly determine that these Meetings were
Presbyteries: another is, what is above said: and a third is, that even in
times of Episcopacie in Scotland; these Meetings were called the Exercise, and
yet they pretended to Presbyterial Power in them; though it was in
Subordination to the Bishop. That Calderwood says that Presbytries succeeded
to these Meetings, imports no more, but that Presbytries were after set up
with more Power and Freedom than they then had under Superintendents, or
Bishops. When he cannot contradict Matter of fact, with respect to the
prevailing of Presbytrie; he falls to down right railing at the Assembly,
which condemned Prelacie, for boldness, folly, iniquity, preposterous Zeal; if
more Reproaches had then occurred to his Fancy, it is like we should have had
them; it is neither good Manners, nor a token of a good Cause thus to fall from
Reasoning to Scolding. I leave him now after he has again mistaken the
Question, to please himself with re-counting his Exploits, and to tell the
World what he has made appear, in not a few pages. After which, he brings
two Witnesses for Confirming what he had so long insisted on; The first of them
is, an Author with whom I am not acquainted, but seems to be of his own
Sentiments; So that what he says of the Opposition made to Presbytery in
Scotland; is no more to us than what A. M. D. D. himself has said; especially
seeing we have not the Reasons, but the bare Assertion, of that Author. The
other is King James the sixth, to whose Testimony brought also by the Author
of the Ten Questions, I did then Oppose, and still do, his own Explication of
what he says, in an after Edition of his Basilicon doron, that he meant none
but such as Anabaptists, and Familists: And a contrair Assertion of that same
Royal Author, whereby he highly extolleth the Presbyterian Government in
Scotland; by saying, and that frequently, that no Error could get footing there
(in Scotland) while Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and General-Assemblies
stood in their Force. He concludes his Second Enquiry, with making a great
Improvement against us (as he thinks) of our saying that the Bishops set up,
in that he calls his second Model, had no more Power than Superintendents;
whence he Argues, Superintendents had the essentials of Episcopal Power; but
the Assembly at Dundee, 1580, Condemned Episcopacie; and they Condemned also
Superintendencie; whence it follows, that they (and our present Presbytersans
follow their Steps in this) not only forsook, but condemned the Principles of
our Reformers. This he seems to hug as a triumphant Argument, before which
the Presbyterian Cause can never stand. But the Answer is plain and easy, and
may be gathered from what has been abov-discoursed. That Assembly did, (and
the Presbyterians do) condemn Superindendencie, as what ought not to continue
in the Church; nor ought to be in the ordinary cases of the Church; but they
did not condemn it as what was never lawful to be used for a time, in an
extraordinary Exigent. And we affirm (which our Author has not yet disproved)
that our Reformers were not for Superintendents perpetual continuance in the
Church.

. 28. Our Authors Third Enquire is, whether Prelacie, and the Superiority of
any Office in the Church, above Presbyters was a great and insupportable
Grievance, and Trouble to this Nation, and contrair to the Inclinations of the
generality of the People, ever since the Reformation. He has very just
Sentiments of this Matter, when he says that if his Determination of the
former Inquiry be true, this Question will soon be dispatched; for indeed it
has a great Dependence on what is already Discoursed. He might, if so it had
pleased him, saved the labor of this tedious Debate, in which there is little
else but a litigious Jangle, about what can hardly othewise be Determined than
by what has been already said; unless we could (which is impossible) have the
Vote by Pole, of all the Individuals of the Nation, and that in all the Times,
and Changes since the Reformation. The Parliament has given us their
Sentiments about this Matter, and if any be not willing to rest in the Judgment
of so wise an Assembly of worthy Patriots, come together from all parts of the
Nation to consult about its weghtiest Affairs, he may, for me, abound in his
own sense. I know this has been generally the thoughts of Presbyterians, yea,
of sober Episcopalians in some other Churches, and I could give the Opinion of
some of the greatest ^minencie for Virtue, Understanding and Rouk, (and yet not
Presbyterian) that Presbytery was the fittest Church Government for Scotland.
But if our Brethren will maintain he contrary, I judge they mistake: but shall
not think them Heretics on this account. I would have him also consider; that
what ever might move the Parliament to make use of this Motive to Abolish
Episcopacie, and Establish Presbytery; the Presbyterian Church of Scotland
never thought the Aversion of the People from Episcopacie, nor their
Inclinations to Presbytrie, to be the Fundamental Charter by which they have a
right to that Government. We rejoice that the State was pleased to allow, and
countenance, by their Authority, this Government of the Church; but we think,
it stands on a surer bottom, than either the Opinion or the Authority of
Men; and much surer than the Inclinations of the Mob: even the Institution of
Christ declared in the Scriptures of truth; which Grounds I have laid down in
this Work; if he can Beat us from these, we shall become his willing Proselyts;
and quit (though we will not Revile it as he does) this Act of Parliament, as
no sufficient Ground for our Faith and Practice in this Matter. I know not
whether it favored more of Contempt of the State, or of the Church, or was
more designed to ridicule, or to refute Presbytery, that he Choosed such a
Title for his Book as he has done? but we are in utrumque parati; to despise
his Mocking, and to Answer his Material Arguments, though we have neither
leisure nor Inclination to Blott so much Paper as he has done, about Matters
that be remote from the main Question.

. 29. His Proofs of the Peoples Inclination toward Bishops are much of a size
of strength with what we have already heard, Petrie commends the State of the
Church in the year 1576: and Spotswood speaks of the Respect that the
Superintendents had: Beza also, and Knox rejoiced in that State of the Church:
Ans. I believe, so should the Presbyterians of our days have done if they had
then Lived: There was a Glorious Reformation that was cause of great Joy, and
though Superintendencie was no desirable thing in it self, yet in that time of
the Churches great Exigence, it was no small Mercy, and Matter of Joy, that
there were a few worthy Men to manage the Affairs of the Church, when as many
as were needed could not be had; and it was just that these Men should be had
in great Esteem: yet it is no good Argument, the People Inclined to have
Superintendents when it was simply needful, therefore they inclined to have
them, or Bishops, perpetuated in the Church. Another great Argument is, even in
after times, and the more advanced State of Presbytery, when Ten or Twelve
were severely dealt with by the Magistrate and Six or Seven more called to
London, for their forwardness in that way, yet all things went peaceably in
Scotland: as if People were always well pleased with what passes when they
make no Disturbance to the Government: he must in Justice allow us the use of
the same Argument for the Aversion of all Scotland from Episcopacie, and their
Inclination to Presbytery, seeing the Nation have these years past, been in
Peace, though he, and some of his Party Complain of the hardest usage that can
be. That Episcopacie prevailed, 1610, Proves no more for the one side, than
the prevailing of Paritie, 1592, and again, 1690, Proves for the other side.
Yea, submitting to Episcopacie, so far as to sit in Synods, and Presbyteries
with a Bishop, was no Argument of Approving it, in the case of the Church that
then was; when the Judicatures of the Church were in their Integrity, and
Bishops thrust in on them: It was another Case at the last Erection of
Episcopacie, when all Church Meetings were laid aside by Civil Authority, and
were called again only by the Bishops Authority. He Charge Calderwood. (and
G. R. for the great Crime of following him in this piece of History) that he
had said, that it was Statute in Parliament, 1565, that no other Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical be acknowledged within this Realm than that which is, and shall
be, within this same Kirk, Established presently, or which flows therefrom,
concerning Preaching the Word, Correction of Manners, or Administration of the
Sacrament. If I should Confess that I find not these Words in the Act which
Calderwood cites: yet our Author should not have so much Advantage against
him, or G. R. either, as he Boasts of; unless he will Condemn his Darling
Historian Spotswood also: who says, p. 214. that the matter of Policy and
Jurifdiction of the Church was refeered to the consideration of certain Lords
delegated by the Estates: there is as little of this in the Act that he Cites,
as there is of what Calderwood had mentioned: whence these two Historians had
their vouchers for what they say, it seems my Antagonist cannot tell; nor could
I, till I met with an old Edition of King James the si^ths Acts of Parliament,
Printed by John Ross at Edinburgh, 1575. Where Parliament 1569, Act 12, the
Words are expressly set down. It seems his Party dreaded the Force of this
Citation; and have taken care to stifle it: For in Edition Edinburgh, 1682,
called the little Acts of Parliament, that Act (being the 12th Chapter,
Parliament, 1567) is wholly left out. That Superintendencie was then in the
Church; is no Argument that Prelacie was settled in the Church; as what was
intended should continue; but they were then intending another sort of
Jurisdiction, as the event did show. What he so critically carpeth at, p. 293.
about a Citation out of Leslyes History; is pure quibling; it was not denied
that Popish Bishops sat in Parliament, but rather acknowledged; yet Lesly was
cited to show that it did not long continue so. If there be any material Change
in that Citation from the Authors Words, let the Reader judge; after all the
frivolous Critticism he has made. The Reader may observe how exact a Historian
this Man is, who hussily Bantereth others with defectiveness that way: for he
tells us, that Meeting of which Lesly says, that the Ecclesiastics were
Excluded, was not a Parliament; but at most a Privy Council: Lesly supposes it
to be a Meeting that had the Legistative Power, which I thought had been in the
King and Parliament; and that they made such a Law as was the Fountain of all
the Heresies, (i. e. the Protestant Religion) and other evils that followed.
That he calls it Concilium, is nothing contrary to what I say; seeing
Parliaments are often so called in Latin,

30. For his fourth Inquiry, he manageth his Answer to it, with such undecent
Reflection both on the Church and on the State; that I judge others are meeter
to deal with him about these things than I, or any in my capacity; and the
Matter (as himself confesses) not being capable of Argument; nor any public
Deed being extant (except the Act of Parliament which he so petulantly
exposes) by which it might be Determined: I see no ground here for Debate, but
our Affirmation and his Denial; and I know he will lay no more weight on the
one, than we lay on the other. For what he is at a great deal of pains about,
to refute what G. R. and another who writ the farther Vindication, had said
very transiently, and without intending a laborious Paper combat about a
Matter so remote from the vitals of our Controversy with the Episcopalians, I
say, all that Rapsodie that he has written on this Head, I am content to refer
it to the judicious and unbyassed Reader; to consider whether our Cause, or
this Authors Reputation as a Wise Man, and one exercised in matters of solid
Reason or Learning, do more Suffer by it; it is Truth, and the Ordiances of
Christ that I am set for the Defense of, not Men, my self, nor others; unless
it were in Matters that may reflect blame on the Cause that I own. Wherefore I
shall wholly pass over this Inquiry: if any one who has more leisure than I
have; or is more inclined toward Eristick jangle, will take him to Task, and
deal with him at his own Weapon, he may do it. I say not this, as either being
convinced by his Reasons, or seeing them to be Unanswerable. I am still in the
Opinion I was in before, concerning the Inclinations of the People of Scotland;
especially the Soberer sort of them, and these of the best Lives, with respect
to Episcopacie and Presbytery. Only this I confess, that I believe there was
never a time since the Reformation in Scotland arrived at any degree of
Consistence, or Stabilitie, wherein the Inclinations of the Generality of the
People were less cocerned about any thing of Religion, either the more
Essential, or the less Substantial part of it; on the one side, or on the
other; so Fatal impressions the Floodgates of all manner of Profanness, and
Looseness that had broken out in the late Times, under Prelacie, had made on
the Minds of Men; and to such height Irreligiousness arrived. Yet I Affirm,
that the real Respect that Men had to Religion, in any of the concernments of
it, were rather on the Presbyterian, than on the Episcopal side. I shall say
less of his fifth Inquiry, for I freely confess, that neither the Inclinations
of the People for Presbytery, nor Episcopacy being a Grievance to the Nation;
nor our being Reformed by Presbyters, if all this were true, evident and
certain; none of these, nor all of them in conjunction, could by themselves,
infer that Prelacie should be Abolished: nor (I am confident) did the
Parliament ever intend to have them so considered Wherefore, if my Antagonist,
or any for him, can prove that Prelacie is the Ordinance of Christ for the
Gospel Church: we shall part with all these Arguments for its Abolition, and
shall cordially own it: but if that cannot be done (as I am sure it cannot) and
if these Propositions be true; they afford an Argument for the Abolition of
Prelacie, that he will never be able to Answer. And I shall dismiss this
Inquiry; and indeed this whole Book, after I have Noted a few things (without
insisting on Debates) out on a Discourse that he begins afresh, p. 333.
about the Principles of our Reformers: he pleads for their fallabilitie: he
is not for all they held or did: we say the same of both. Only I take Notice,
that here he overthrows the Argument that he had so much insisted upon
against us; that our Reformers were not exactly for the whole of our Way.
Though I do not pretend to Defend all the Principles that were held by our
Reformers: yet many of these which he blames them for might easily be
Defended; if it were not to Digress from our present Controversy about Church
Government. The Reproaches that he casts on Master Knox deserve Correction; I
wish, some may undertake it. His Challenge to us, p. 344. to show wherein they
have deserted the Reformers, so far as they Agreed with the Primitive Church,
or, what is an Approach toward Popery, I say, Episcopacie is an Instance of
both: but this being the Matter of our main Debate, the Decision must depend on
that. He undertaketh to make it appear that the present Presbyterians have
receded from the Principles of our Reformers, in 1. The Faith. 2. The Worship.
3. The Discipline. 4. The Government of the Church. In stead of this last, he
insisteth on their laying aside the Bishops from voting in Parliament. I cannot
now degresse to consider what here he says; though he insisteth on them at
great length; for I diverted into the Considerations of this Book, only in so
far as the Controversy I have with him (or who ever is the Author in the other
Book) is concerned. And there are some of these that are also there Debated,
which I intend to consider. I have already said, that we reverence our
Reformers; but neither thought their Reformation at first Perfect; nor
themselves Infallible. I hope some, or other will take him to Task on these
Heads, and Defend the Principles of this Church, from his insolent Obloquie: I
wish him a more temperat Spirit than appears in his Discourses; and
particularly in his Ridiculeing of the Administration of the LORD'S Supper, as
it is managed in the Church of Scotland.

SECTION IX.
Of Holy Days of Humane Institution.

I Return now to the Inquiry into the New Opinions: and proceed to his Third
Chapter; wherein he pretends enquire into several new Opinions. The first of
which is, that we are against the Observing the Holy Days, of CHRIST'S Nativity,
Resurrection, Assention; and Commemorating the Piety, Faith, and Martyrdom of
the Saints that are mentioned in Scripture. We do not deny the Charge, so far
as being against the Anniversaries observation of these Days does reach. That
this is a new Opinion we deny: though at the same time we confess the
contrary Practice is very old: yet we maintain, that no such thing was
enjoined, or practiced in the Apostolic Church; which is older than the Church
that he Appealeth to. He is too confident when he says, it is certainly a new
Doctrine; for we are certain on the other hand, that there is Warrant for it in
the Word of GOD; as there is for no new Doctrine. He says, it flies in the
Face of the whole Christian Church, Ancient and Modern, Reformed, and
Unreformed: and other harsh Words he is pleased to run us down with. This is
Passion, not Reason. A modest Dissent from a Church or a Person, though of the
greatest Veneration that is due to Men, is no flying in their Face. And if he
will needs call it so, our Apology is, if they fly in the Face of the Holy
Scripture, we choose rather to Differ from them, than with them to fly in its
Face: but we put no such Construction on the Opinions, or Practices of other
Churches, Ancient or Modern. I am not without hope that it may be made appear,
that he and his Accomplices, fly in the Face, both of Antiquity, and of the
Reformed Churches, by their Opinion about Holy Days; and Differ from them more
than we do, which will appear when we come to State the Question: which he has
never minded, though he engages in the Debate with a great deal of warmth.
This is Andalatarum more pugnare, to Fight in the dark. We are now but in the
Threshold, considering the Opinion of other Churches. He will allow us none but
the Church of Geneva, and that with Calvines dislike, For Calvines dislike of
the Abrogation of the Holy Days by the Magistrates of Geneva, he Cites two
Epistles of his; which he does not distinguish by their Numbers; so that I
cannot find them: not being willing, nor at leisure, to turn over the whole
Book for them. But I shall more distinctly point, him to other two of his
Epistles, wherein, though he does not fully declare for our Opinion, he does
plainly condemn that of our Prelatists. They are, ad Mons. Belgradenses, Ep.
51. p. 112. edit: Hanov. 1597. and Mansoni Poppio Ep. 278. p. 520. I say the
same of our Reformers, and of the French Protestants.

2. I shall now address my self to fixing of the true State of the Question.
And 1. We do not, with the Anabaptists in Germany (for some Anabaptists in this
differ from them) and with the Petro Brusiani, cited by Parae in Romans 14. Dub.
4. out of the Life of Bernhard. lib. 3. cap. 5. disowne all Holy Days. The
Lords Day we own, as of necessity to be observed, being of Divine Institution.
Pardon a small Digression: I see no ground to think that Peter Bruce was of
this Opinion: all that I find ascribed to him, Cent. Magd. 12. cap. 5. and that
even by Petrus Cluniacensis, his Antagonist, is, Die Dominica, and aliis,
putabat licitum esse vesci carnibus. The Centuriators wish, Utinam vero ipsius
Petri scripta extarent, ex quibus multo rectius facere judicium liceret, quam
ex illis qui in defensionem Pontificiarum abominationum conspirarunt. He was
one of these famous Witnesses for the Truth against Antichrist, who went under
the Name of Waldenses, Albigenses, etc. It is like he might disowne other Holy
Days; but there is no ground to think that he disowned the Lords Day. 2. We
maintain it to be unlawful, to observe the Jewish Holy Days; I should bring
Arguments for this: but I think our Adversaries will hardly contradict this
Assertion: the Lord having of old appointed these Days, and all the legal
Rites, for Prefiguring Gospel Mysteries; and the Apostle expressly condemning
this Observation: Gal. 4. 10. Col. 2. 16, 17. where they are expressly called
Shadows of Things to come. 3. We hold, that not only these Jewish Days are not
to be observed as such, or on Jewish Principles; but the Days ought not to be
set apart as Anniversary Holy Days, on account of Decency, Policy, and Order,
in the Christian Church. All the Arguments will have place here that were used
by the Primitive Christians against them who keep Easter on the same Day with
the Jews. 4. Our Adversaries are not one among themselves about observing the
Holy Days: some count them more Holy than other Days, and hold that God's
extraordinary Works have sanctified some times, and advanced them, so that they
ought to be, with all Men that Honor God, more Holy than other Days. So Hooker
Eccles. Polic, lib. 5.. 60. where he lays a Foundation for Believing that
these Days are Holy, and to be observed, antecedently to the Churches
Institution. Others of them, are of a contrary Opinion, Couper Bishop of
Galloway, in his Resolution of some Scruples, about the Articles of Perth,
which are set down in the History of his Life, p. 8. of his Works; has these
Words: in my Mind, no King on Earth, no Church may make a Holy Day; only the
Lord who made the Day, has that Prerogative: only he shows that a Day may be
set apart for Preaching, as the Birth Days of Princes are for Public
Rejoicing, etc. Our Author has not told us, which of these Opinions he owneth.
5: It is one Question, whither a Day may be set apart for Commemoration of some
Mystery of our Religion, by Men; and as a part of Gods Worship. And another,
whither such Days may be set apart for Worshipping God, merely as a piece of
good Order and Policy. The first the Papists are for: the other most of our
Prelatists own: though some of them differ little from the Papists in this
Matter. 6. The Question is not, whither a Day may be set apart occasionally for
Religious Worship: that is, when any special Providence gives occasion for
Fasting and Humiliation, or for Thanksgiving and Rejoicing: seeing in that Case,
there is a special Providential Call to that Solemn Work: but, whither a Day
may be set apart to be observed constantly, and as it recurreth every Year. The
one makes a Difference between that Day of the Year, and other Days; and
exempteth it altogether; and constantly, from Civil Use; the other does not so;
the one makes a Difference among Days; the other makes the Difference only in
the Works, or Dispensations of God, which occasioneth such Work on that Day,
and not on another. All that the Church does in the one Case, is, whereas the
present Providence calls to the Work, as it is expressed, Isa. 22. 12. The
Church only determines the Circumstance of Time; which must be done: in the
other, the Church determines more than a necessary Circumstance, viz. That
there shall be such a Solemnity: Which the Lord has not enjoined, neither do
we doubt, but that the Church may appoint recurrent Days for Solemn Worship; to
wit, while the present Providence that calls to such Work continues. Weekly,
or Monthly Fasts may be appointed under a lasting Calamity or Threatening. 7.
One Question is, whither any Anniversary Holy Days should be allowed, or may be
appointed by Man: another, whither any are to be allowed in Commemoration of
the Saints: for some are for the great Days; as they call them; which respect
Christ, and our Redemption; such as the Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension, and
some others: who are wholly against Holy Days that respect only the Saints. 8.
It is a Question, whither Days may be Dedicated to Saints: as the Papists do:
and another, whither the Commemoration of Saints may be made on set Days: this
last our Brethren are for: though it will be hard to separate these two: of
which afterward.

3. I shall now set down our Opinion, and wherein we differ from others. And
first, we maintain, that God has instituted the Observation of the Weekly
Sabbath, as a part of that Religious Worship we owe to him. I do not expect
that our Brethren will directly, and expressly controvert this: though some of
them teach Doctrine not very consistent with it: which belongs to another
Head than what we are now upon. Only I take notice, that they who are most for
observing other Holy Days, do usually show least Zeal for the strict observing
of the Lords Day, either in their Principle, or their Practice. 2. I assent,
that the Lord has not instituted, under the Gospel, any other recurrent Holy
Days, nor enjoined the Observation of them. If any think otherwise, they must
prove what they affirm. 3. The Church has no Power to institute, or enjoy the
Observation of any recurrent, or Anniversary Holy Days, for Religious Use,
without a special and present Occasion. 4. Any Days that the Church sets
apart occasionally, for Religious Work, are no further Holy, than that Holy
Work is the Design of their Appointment: they have no Sanctity in themselves;
nor can Men impart it to them. 5. Though we are far from severe Censuring,
either Ancient or Modern Churches, or Persons, who are for some of these Holy
Days; yet we cannot be of their Sentiment in this: nor look on these Days as
indifferent things, as some of them do. 6. That the Reader may be undeceived
about the Opinion of the Reformed Churches, which our Author talks so much
of, and blames us for differing from them: he may know, that our Episcopal
Brethren are at greater Distance from them, in this Matter, than we are: for
they condemn the Saints Holy Days: so Paraeus in Romans 14. Dub. 4. so Calvin, in
both the Epistles cited,. 1. The Helvetick Confession of Faith, cap. 24. in
Cor. Confess. p. 54. Baldwin cites Danaeus disowning all the Holy Days, in
these Words; Dies Christo dicatos tollendos existimo, judicoque; quotidie nobis
in Evangelii praedicatione nascitur, circumciditur, moritur, resurgit Christus.
Turretin Theolog. Elentic. loc. 11. cap. 15. Though he allow Liberty enough for
observing of the Holy Days that relate to Christ; yet he determines the
Controversy about Holy Days far otherwise than our Episcopal Brethren do: I
shall transcribe his Words: after he has told us that we ought always to
remember Christ and his Benefits, and should do it in the Word and Sacraments;
he adds, sed (question est) an ad singulorum illorum beneficiorum and
mysteriorum recordationem certi quidem dies festi, Deo sacri, annuatim
recurrentes, a Christianis quotannis celebrandi sint? quod nos negamus. he also
denies these Days to be more Holy than others, or a part of Gods Worship, or
to be Celebrated sub ratione mysterii. Markius also Compend. cap. 12.. 17. He
condemns the Difference of Days that was brought into the Church, from the
first Christians yearly Commemoration of the Martyrs. When my Antagonist has
duly considered these things, I hope he will not find cause to represent us as
so widely differing from the Reformed; and himself so near to them, as he would
now make the World believe. I do not pretend that they are generally, wholly on
our Side, in this; for many of them look on the Observation of these Days as
indifferent; in which we cannot assent to them. But I know of none of them who
imposes them with such Rigor, and talk so highly of the necessity of
observing them, being recommended by the Church; or of the Religion that is in
this Observation, as the Episcopal Party in England and Scotland do. Our
Brethren do also stand by themselves, in their keeping of Saints Days: and in
the Number of their Holy Days; which in England is greater than the Number of
these that God enjoined to the Jews; forth Primitive Church, at some Distance
from the Apostolic Times, may be they may have some Countenance there; yet
these Saints Days were not then so so enjoined, and urged, as they urge and
impose them, nor made such a Yoke to the People; as may be gathered from
Socrates histor. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 22. whose Words are, (...), etc. I am of
Opinion, that as many other things crept in by Custom, in diverse places, so
the Feast of Easter prevailed among all People, from a certain private Custom,
and Observation; in so much that (as I said before) not one of the Apostles
has any where prescribed to any Man, so much as one Rule of it; it was
observed, not by Canon, but of Custom; and afterward he taxes some, who count
Fornication indifferent, and contend about Holy Days, as it were for Life and
Death: they despise the Commands of God, and establish Canons of their own. I
shall add the Opinion of our Reformers, and the Protestant Church of Scotland,
in her first State, and that out of the hist. motuum in regno Scotiae, under
the borrowed Name of Iraeneus Philaleth. p. 264, 265. libro primo disciplinae,
cap. 1. Censetur; Festa Nativitatis, Circumcisionis, Epiphaniae, etc.
Apostolorum, Martyrum, and B. Virginis Mariae penitus abolenda esse, cum eorum
observatio nullibi a Deo in Scripturis imperetur; rogandus itaque Magistratus,
ut obnitentes civili authoritate coerceat: in Synodo Nationali Edinburgena,
anno 1566. Major illa Confessio Helvetica in omnibus comprobatur, excepto
Articulo de diebus Festis: porro cum Reformatae Helveticae Ecclesiae, licet
Festa illa celebrent, a Superstitione Ponttificia sibi caveant; evidenter
colligitur, omnem omni modo dierum illorum observationem rejectam fuisse ab
hujus Ecclesiae Reformatoribus; quorum Vestigia presserunt Posteri; nam anno
1575. in Synodo Nationale male acceptum fuit; quod Pastores quidam and Lectores
in tractu Abredonensi Populum convocarent ad Conciones and Preces publicas
diebus illis Festivis; ac in mandatis datum a Synodo Nationali, anni 1575.
Ecclesiarum Visitatoribus, ut interdicerent Pastoribus Administrationem S.
Coenae temporibus illis Festivis; quasi majoris efficaciae sint Sacramenta tum
celebrata. Denique constans haec fuit Pastorum omnium sententia; solum diem
Dominicum Festivum esse and Deo sacrum. Referebant alii Regem Jacobum in Synodo
Nationali anni 1590. public Deo gratias egisse, quod Rex esset in Ecclesia
totius Orbis purissima; imo quae Genevensem ipsam superet, nam (inquit) colunt
Genevenses Festa Nativitatis and Paschatis, qua autem authoritate id faciant,
ipsi viderint. This might allay our Brethrens fierce Zeal for their Holy Days.
We judge not others that use them without Superstitious Opinions (though we
cannot well separate the Practice of them from External Superstition) and we
desire the like Forbearance from others, if we cannot use them; for which I
shall now give some Reasons, before I consider my Antagonists further Discourse
on this Subject.

4. Our first Reason is, these Days were not instituted by Christ, or his
Apostles, nor did they enjoin them to be instituted, nor give Power, or
Allowance to the Church to do it afterward: Ergo, there is no sufficient
Warrant for them. And it cannot be rationally accounted for, that either the
Church should impose, in the Matter of Religion especially, or People should be
obliged to submit to, what has no sufficient Warrant. That they were not
instituted by Christ nor his Apostles, is beyond doubt: our Adversaries do not
pretend that they were: for there is no apparent Ground for such a Thought; and
if it could be made appear, the Case were changed: for then they were not the
Days that we Debate about. That Christ and his Apostles have given no Warrant
to the Church to make such an Institution, we must believe, unless our
Adversaries can instruct this Warrant by plain Scripture, or sufficient
Consequence from Scripture, or strong Reason, (if Reason can have place in such
a Matter of Fact) if it be Answered, the Church has Warrant from Scripture to
appoint what is for Edification, and for Decency and Order; and these Holy Days
are such. Ergo. I Reply: it is denied that the Church may appoint whatever is
thought fit for Edification; the Lord has appointed sufficient Means of Grace,
and of Edification; and the Church must not devise new Means for that End; but
faithfully use the Means that he has appointed: or if any think that the
Church may appoint Means of Edification above what Christ has appointed, both
they accuse Christ's Appointments for that End as insufficient, in the Way of
outward Means: And they are to show what Warrant the Church has for so doing.
Beside, that Means of Men's devising are not like to be effectual for
Edification, if Means of Gods Appointment be not so effectual, as is hinted,
Luke 16. 30, 31. If Moses and the Prophets, Gods Means, cannot persuade one to
believe; the Preaching of one risen from the Dead (a Mean that a Man contrived)
could not do it. As for the Decency, Order, and Policy, that they allege to
warrant the Church to institute Holy Days; these are a necessary, or needless
Decency, etc. If this last, there can be no warrant for what may effect it; if
the first, the former Argument recurreth, that God, by his own Institutions,
has not sufficiently provided for the Necessities of his Church. Again, if we
should grant that the Church has Warrant to provide for all that is necessary
to make the Worship of God decent, etc. They must also show us a Warrant to
judge what is so necessary; if it be alleged, that the Holy Days are thus
necessary, either they must instruct this, and show us that Scripture, or
Nature has made them necessary, and that the Ordinances of God are undecent,
disorderly, etc. without them; or the Church does so determine because she
will: and in that Case we require a Warrant for such Lordly Domination over the
People of God. If it be further Answered, that the Church has the same Warrant
for appointing these Days, as for appointing occasional Fasts, or
Thanksgivings. Reply, Not so. For the Lord himself, by his Providence, calls
to these Exercises, to be Solemnly gone about, on such Occasions: but does not
tell us whither the Fast shall be on Tuesday or Thursday, in this Week, or the
next: here is a Circumstance of Time, which must be determined by Men; Nature
it self makes it necessary, supposing the Providential Call of God, to the
Work on that Occasion: it is not so with the Holy Days: there is no special
Providence occurrent, which calls to these Solemnities at one time, more than
at another. Obj. Why has the Lord left the determining of the time of these
occasional Solemnities to the Church, and not of the other also. Ans. Because
the former could not be determined in Scripture, for all Times, Places, and
Occurrences, without Swelling it to a Huge, and Burdensome, and less Useful
Bulk; the latter could easily have been determined in the Bible; it is actually
done in the Old Testament; and if the Lord had thought such a Determination
needful, it had been easy to do it also in the New Testament.

5. Our second Argument: Either the Apostles had Warrant from God, to institute
these Days, or not; if they had not, how is it imaginable that the Rulers of
the Church, who came after them, had such Power granted by God: Though some
Exalt Episcopal Power to a Monstrous, and Absurd Height, yet I think none of
them have the Confidence to say, that the Bishops, in that do, what the
Apostles, in the same Case, might not do. If they allege that the Apostles had
such Power; then I propose another Dilemma; either it was for Edification, that
such Days should then have been appointed, as much as it was in after times, or
not; if it was, the Apostles were Negligent, or Unfaithful, in not appointing
them, which is Blasphemy to think, seeing in all these things, they were
infallibly guided by the Spirit of God: if it was not, our Adversaries are
obliged to show us what was the Necessity of it afterward, which was not in the
Apostles Days. I know not what can be Answered to this Argument, except they
allege there was not Occasion in the Apostles Days, for these Appointments;
many of the great Things that are to be Commemorated on these Days, falling out
afterward Reply, The greatest Things, for which these Days are kept, were then
past: Christ's Birth, Circumcision, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, the Effusion
of the Spirit, also, the Conversion of the Apostles, Stephens Martyrdom; and
yet no Anniversary Day appointed for any of these: and for the Martyrs that
came after, the Apostles could easily have given a Hint that they should be so
Honored: if they had set apart a Day for Remembering the Martyrdom of Stephen,
and of James, this had been Apostolic Example for after Ages; which is a good
Warrant for our Practice: whence we may rationally conclude, that they had not
received this Usage from the Lord, seeing they did not deliver it to the
Churches, neither by Precept nor Example: if it be said that there was less
need of Commemoration when these things were recent, and Religion in its
Vigor. Reply, The Apostles knew they would grow old things, and that all the
Means that our Lord himself thought fit for the Remembrance of them, would be
needed. Beside, Religion was fallen into some decay, and all the Means that
ever were needful, were needed before some of the Apostles went off the Stage.
Again, some of the Truths that are Commemorated on these Days, were
controverted, and violently opposed, both by Heathens, and Apostate Christians,
even while the Apostles lived: and therefore they thought of, and appointed
other Means for Preserving and Propagating these Truths, but never minded this.

6. Our third Reason is, the Apostle does expressly condemn the Observation of
Days, under the New Testament, as besouging to the Jewish Pedagogy, and unfit
for the Christian Church State, Gal. 4. 9, 10. Col. 2. 16, 17. We know the
Lords Day cannot there be comprehended, because it is enjoined by the lord
himself: therefore we must understand this Prohibition of Days that have no
Warrant from the Lord, that are the Appointments of Men. Here they have several
Answers at hand, 1. These Places are to be understood of the Jewish Holy Days:
these were not to be observed, being now abrogated, and because the thing
designed by them is already fulfilled: and the Observation was, on the Matter,
a denying that Christ is come. Reply, It is not to be denied, that here are
directly, and especially meant, the Jewish Holy Days: but that they are not the
only Days forbidden, I prove, First, The Prohibition is general, and without
Limitation: therefore no Limitation can be made by Men, but what the Lord
himself makes in the Scripture: which we do not find, except of the Lords Day.
Non distinguendum est, ubi Lex non distinguit: Secondly, Seeing the Jewish Days
are here forbidden, and no other put in their Room, we have Cause to think that
no other are allowed, more than they are: when the Jewish Sacraments were
abolished, others are substitute to them: when the Jewish Sabbath was laid
aside, another was put in its Place, by Divine Authority, as may be deduced by
clear Consequence from Scripture; because the Lord would not have the Gospel
Church to be without Sacraments and a Sabbath. But when the Jewish Sacrifices
were abolished, other Sacrifices to be offered by the Ministers of the New
Testament, are not appointed in their Place, (whatever the Papists say to the
contrary) and when the Jewish Days were laid aside, none other were brought in
their Stead: because the Lord would have no other Sacrifices, nor Holy Days
under the Gospel. Thirdly, if the Lord will not be served by the Observation of
these Days, which once had the Stamp of his own Authority, is it like that he
will be pleased with a Sort of Holy Days that he never enjoined, but are the
pure Devices of Man? Fourthly, These Days are forbidden on general Grounds,
that will reach all Days which are not appointed by the Lord; for Gal. 4. These
Days are condemned as Weak and Beggarly Elements, that is, they have no Force
to Edify, being destitute of Divine Authority, and consequently of the Divine
Blessing, And Col. 2. they are Commanded, not to let Men Judge them, that is
impose on them, enjoin such things to be Observed, and Censure them as guilty
if they observed them not. So Hamond in loc. again, their Submitting to these
things is called a voluntary Humility, and will Worship: and it is said of all
these Observations (among which these ^oly days were) that they were after the
Commandments of Men, and their Doctrines, and that the Observers of them did
not hold the Head, CHRIST; this was a receding from him as the Head and
Lawgiver of his Church, and betaking themselves to other Lawgivers. (I say
not that this Phrase imports no more than this? now all these Reasons of
condemning the Observation of the Jewish Holy Days, do also reach other Holy
Days that have no Divine warrant. Another Answer to our Argument is, the
Apostle condemns the Observation of these Days as if they were still in Force
by Divine Command, and were not Abrogated by the coming of Christ; but not
simply as if they might not be observed for the Churches Authority injoyning
them. Reply, This is to make a sense for the Text, not to find it in the Text
it self: they are simply forbidden, without any such restricted sense. Again,
if the LORD has laid aside what himself has once Appointed for a special use,
it is strange that Men should revive that again, and bring it again into the
Church for another use: especially, when the LORD himself has Appointed other
Means, and not these, for that other use: he has laid aside the Jewish Holy
days which Represented CHRIST to come: and he has Appointed the Word and
Sacraments to keep us in mind that he is come, and what he has done for us:
but our Episcopal Men are not content with that, but they will revive some of
the old Jewish days, as Easter, etc. to keep us in Memory of CHRIST already
come. Answer Thirdly, they say we must not observe these Days as the Jews did,
with a Superstitious Opinion of Worship, or as if they were in themselves
Holier than other days? yet we may Observe them for keeping up Order and good
Policy in the Church. Reply, The weakness of this Plea is already discovered.
All the Order, Decency and Policy that the LORD requires in his Church may
be obtained without them; as the Patrons of them do, on the Matter, confess;
when they tell us that these, and all the rest of the Ceremonies, are in
themselves, and antecedently to the Churches imposing them, indifferent.
Beside, not the Principle only, or the Opinion that Men have about these Days,
is condemned in these Scriptures; but the Practice it self.

. 7. Our Fourth Reason is, the imposing of the Holy Days does derogate from
that Christian Liberty that the LORD has given to his People; which the LORD
does not allow, Gal. 5. 1. They are contrary to this Liberty two ways. 1. It
is the Liberty of Christians to be under no Yoke in matters of Religion (we
refuse not civil Subjection to our Rulers in all lawful things) but that of
Christ; to have him for their only Lawgiver, James 4. 12. He has not given
Power to Men to make new Laws for his Church, but to declare his Laws; and to
Execute his Censures that he has Appointed on the Breakers of them. Wherefore,
when Christ has given us one Holy day to be perpetually Observed, and no more;
if Men will enjoin more Days, they make Laws of their own, and bring the People
under their Yoke; which is not Christ's. And the Places last Cited do evidently
Import this: The LORD had now delivered his People from the Yoke of Ceremonies
which himself had laid on them, and the false Apostles were endeavoring to
wreath that Yoke still on their Necks: and it is as much Bondage, if any will
wreath another Yoke upon them which is none of Christ's: now that Scripture
bids them beware of such Yokes. 2. The fourth Commandment allows the
People of GOD six days of the Week for their lawful worldly Employments: this
Instituting of Holy days Abridgeth that Liberty, and that merely by the
Authority of Men. It is not so when occasional Solemnities are Appointed;
because the Religious, Solemn Work (on which abstinencie from Labor does
necessarily follow) is determined by the Lord, and intimated to us by his
Providence; the Church does no more but Choose this Day, rather than that; If it
be said, that Magistrates may Restrain People from their Work for civil Causes;
why not then for Religious Reasons. Answer, Men have not the the same Power in
Religion as in Civil Things; though restraint from Work is the same in both; so
is not the occasion; the one must be chosen by the LORD; the other may by Men.
Beside, that Magistrates must have some good Ground, for such Restraint;
otherwise they will not be appointed of GOD, though obeyed by the People, I
might here add all the Arguments that we commonly use against Humane Ceremonies
in Religion; that it is an Addition to the Word or Rule that GOD has managed
the Affairs of His house by. A symbolizing with the Papists, without
Necessity. It is Superstition, being above and beyond what GOD has Enjoined,
etc. I shall only add that the Scripture calls the weekly Sabbath, the LORDS
Day, as a Name of distinction from other Days: but it could be no
distinguishing Name, if the Nativitie, Circumcision, etc. were all Dedicated to
our LORD; for every one of these were the LORDS Day, as well as it; And
therefore, when John said he was in the Spirit on the LORDS Day, we could not
know whether it was Christmas day, or Easter day; or Good Friday, or the first
of January, the Circumcision Day, or some ordinary first day of the Week.

. 8. I come now to Examine what my Antagonist brings for his Holy Days, and
against our Opinion. He says, p. 169. they were Originally appointed to
Commemorat the Mysteries of our Redemption, with all possible Zeal, gratitude
and Solemnity. If he can show us that Christ or his Apostles appointed them for
these Ends: we shall lay our hand on our Mouth, and not mutter against them;
but if they be so Appointed by Men, we ask quo warranto? CHRIST himself has
appointed Ordinances for these Ends: particularly, the LORD'S Supper is
Instituted as a Commemoration of the Mysteries of our Redemption: this do in
remembrance of Me: if he has said so of any of the Controverted Holy Days we
shall receive them. But I desire to know what Power the ordinary Pastors of
the Church have to Institute special Ordinances for commemorating the Mysteries
of our Redemption. I shall further Debate this with him, by and by. Mean while
I observe, that he is beyond many of his Brethren, who disown the Mystery of
these Days, and all Religious Worship, in the Observation of them, and set them
no higher, than that they are for Decency, Order, and Policy; And himself,
some times when it is for his purpose, seems to be of the same mind, as p.
170. he frames an Objection to himself; from the Abuse of them; which alas, is
too notour, and gross, and frequent. His Answer is, so may the most Holy
Exercises, and the highest Mysteries; and there is nothing so Sacred in
Religion, or so universally useful in Nature, against which some such Objection
may not be started. I do much wonder that a Man of his pretensions to Learning
and Reading, and who does so superciliously despise others for defectiveness in
both, should so superficially Propose, and so slightly Answer an Argument that
has been so much insisted on, and his Answer so fully refuted. Does he not
know, if he has Read any thing of the Controversy about Ceremonies; that the
Presbyterians never pleaded that Holy Exercises, Mysteries of Religion, or
things universally useful in Nature; yea, or what has the Stamp of Divine
Authority were it never so small, should be Abandoned because Abused: The
Abuse should be Reformed, and the thing retained: But this our Argument
speaks only of indifferent things, which have no intrinsic Necessity, nor
Command of GOD to enjoin them, these we say, (and have often Proved it) should
be removed, when grossly, and frequently Abused; and that the Holy Days are so
indifferent, I think he will not deny, if he do deny it, he is obliged to prove
the Necessity of them, not only against the Presbyterians, but also against
his own Party, who reckon them among the Indifferent things, the Regulating of
which, is in the Courches Power.

9. I now Consider his Debate with the Vindicator of the Kirk, (as he calls
him) about this very Matter; and particularly, about observing the
anniverssary Feast of CHRIST'S Nativity, which we call Christmas. The Reader
who is at pains to Compare that Book, from p. 27. with what my Antagonist here
says against it, will find, that the most part, and the most material
Passages, and what is most Argumentative in that Book, to this purpose, are
passed over in silence: and but a few things touched. The first thing he is
pleased to Notice is, I had said, the Question is not about the Commemoration
of it, (the Nativity of CHRIST) but whether this Commemoration should be by an
Ordinance of GOD; or by an Appointment of Men. The occasion of this State of
the Question was, he had asked; might not the Church take care that this
Glorious Mystery should not be forgotten. I Answered, no doubt it might, and
should: and I had mentioned the Word, and Sacraments, as GODS Appointment for
this End; on which follows the Question above set down. His Answer in this
Book, to that Question is long, and made up of a great many Sentences, which I
cannot well see the Connection of, nor pertinency to the present purpose (may
be another may.) He first says, what the Church does in this is agreeable to
the Will of GOD. If it be so, our Controversy is at an End: and I will crave
him Pardon for all I have written on this Subject, But it might have been
expected that this Assertion, (which is the Determination of our Question;
which he fairly beggeth) should have been Proved; but he thinks not fit to
attempt that. But instead of Proof, we have it over again, in other and more
Words, (for he wisely considered, that saying it once, and so barely was not
enough to persuade the Stubborn Presbyterians) And if (says he) the manner of
Commemoration (viz. by an Anniversarie Solemnity) be the immediate result of
Ecclesiastical constitution, the Church meddled wi^h no more than what was left
by our Savior, to her Power to determine. Still I desiderate Proof for what is
so confidently Asserted; and is indeed the (...). If he can show, by any good
topic, that CHRIST left such a Power to his Church, we shall Debate no more
with him: that should in all reason Command our hearty Assent. What follows
I cannot refute, for I cannot understand it (which, may be, is my Dullness.) It
is, things indifferent in their Nature do generally carry in them the
Advantages, and Encouragements of Necessary things. If this be true, it is
Mystical: it may possiby have a hidden Sense; If I may adventure to guess at
this Riddle, he supposes, the Appointing of Holy Days to be an indifferent
thing: I cannot reconcile this with what he says in the former page, that
they were originally appointed to Communicate the great My^eries of our
Redemption, with all possible Zeal, Gratitude and Solemnity. What is conducive
to so great Ends, and is for so necessary Uses, I see not how it can be in its
own nature indifferent; far less can I make it consistent with what he says in
his Apology for the Clergy p. 41. 42. do not we see that all Nations agree in
this, that public Solemnities, and Anniversarie Festivities are necessary to
the Being and beauty of Religion: how he will reconcile necessary to the
being of Religion, and indifferent; is beyond my Capacity. As little can I
understand how that can be indifferent in its own nature which has in it (that
is in its Nature) the Advantages and Encouragements of a necessary Thing. I
wish he had Instanced in some of the Things comprehended under his large Word
generally, which have some Advantages and Encouragements in them. Many
Instances may be brought to the contrary; as, whether he walk a Mile on foot;
or Ride on Horseback, or go in Coach: whether Tuesday or Wednesday be appointed
for the Weekly Sermon: whether Sermon shall begin on the LORD'S Day at Nine or
Ten of the Clock; whether the Pulpit stand toward the East or West; etc. what
Advantage or Encouragement of necessary Things is in any of these? If he will
show us any Encouragement or Advantage of any necessary Thing (and if that
Encouragement or Advantage to that necessary Thing be it self Necessary) to
be in the Holy Days; we shall look on them, not as the Appointments of the
Church; (for it is to be supposed that this Necessity is Antecedent to that,
and does not flow from it) but either of Divine Institution, or of Natural
Necessity: neither of which, I suppose, he will ascribe to the Holy Days.

. 10. Another mystical Sentence follows; GOD will have our Obedience approved
in indifferent Things, as well as Necessary; for Necessary Things are
approved for their intrinsic Excellency; the other are by way of Consequence
and Relation. Here also AEdipus himself might be puzzled to find out the Sense.
So far as I reach his Meaning, I shall Examine what is asserted I very well
understand that GOD will prove our Obedience to Himself in indifferent as well
as in necessary Things, (if there be any thing necessary antecedentlie to
His will) but that our Obedience to Man, must be so Proved, or that our
Obedience to Church-Rulers is approved of GOD, when they enjoin indifferent
Things, in the Matters of Religion, to that I cannot assent; and if I could, I
should not scruple the implicit Obedience that some require. Is it by Chance
or by some inward Byasse that this Author stumbleth so often into Popish
Principles? Before I assent to him in this, he must Prove that the LORD has
given the Church Power to enjoin indifferent Things which are parts of
Religion, as the Holy Days are: next that we are obliged to Obey in Matters of
Religion, what GOD has left indifferent, but Men have thought fit to impose.
What he Means when he says, the other (indifferent Things) are by
Consequence and Relation: does yet more puzle me. What is that Consequence, or
what the Relation, for which indifferent things are approved as Necessary
Things are for their intrinsic Excellencies: this I cannot guess at. He cannot
Mean that they are approved, because they are only consequential to Necessary
Things: for if that Consequence be Necessary, it makes the Things to be
Necessary, and to cease to be indifferent: if it be not Necessary, but the
Necessary Things may do well without them, it can no way make them more
approved than if there we no such Consequence. For their Relation to
Necessaries Things, how can it make them approved? if this he Mean, and if this
Principle hold, the Papists have a notable Foundation for the Holiness of their
Relicts; and indeed, on this Principle it is Built: they are therefore Holy,
because the Persons to whom they were related were so: may not relation
transfuse a Holiness into his Coat, his Shoe, or what else was about him, as
well as either the Birth of CHRIST transfuseth a Holiness into all the
recurrent Days of all Years that Answer to that Day on which he was Born: or if
he make the Relation of these Days to be to the Holy Exercises performed in
them: shall every time and every place where there has been Preaching,
Prayer, and Celebration of the LORD'S Supper, etc. be ever after that Holy and
Approved of GOD: this is strange Doctrine. He goes on: when we Commemorate the
Nativitie, we Worship GOD and adore His Love that sent His Son into the World:
and the Church Commands that this should be performed with all possible
Solemnity at some stated and fixed Seasons: all this is true: But how does
this Prove his Point; we question the Churches Power to appoint fixed and
stated Days for this Commemorating Worship, and maintain that Christ has
appointed Ordinances of his own for this Commemoration, and he tells us, the
Church has Commanded it also to be done: and there is an End.

. 11. He next brings somewhat like Reason: the Church may appoint these
Seasons (which are but Circumstances of time) as well as the Jewish Church
appointed the Hours of Prayer: at which the Apostles were present, Acts 2. 15.
and 3. 1. for which there was no immediate and express Institution of GOD, but
were kept by an Appointment and Custom of their own. Ans. 1. He does
injuriously insinuate that we require an immediate and express Institution for
the Days that we will observe; where have we ever said so? let him Prove an
Institution, either by express Words, or good Consequence, or Apostolic
example; or by any good Medium, and we shall acquiesce. 2. The Appointing Holy
Days is more than determining a Circumstance of Time. It is a sequestering of
these Days perpetually from Civil, to Sacred Use; it is to give them a relative
Holiness, as far as Man's power can reach; by making a Connection between them
and the Solemn Exercises of Religion: it is a Dedication of such a part of our
time to GOD; so as we do not Dedicate other Days of our time; and so making a
difference among Days; which we think can only be done by Divine Authority:
the Apostles, Romans 14. 5. counted it a weakness in some, who did no more than
what our Author puts off thus slightlie; what they did was, (...). They
distinguished days one from another; and that with respect to Religion; which
could not be without judging one of them better, and more Holy than another;
and so it is Expounded by Erasmus, and Vatablus: Eslius turns it, eligit unum
prae alio, is this no more but determining a Circumstance? Beside, the Lord
has not left it to us to determine Circumstances of Worship as we please, but
when it is Necessary that a Circumstance that relates to Worship must be
determined, and it is not determined by the Lord in Scripture, in that case Men
may, and must Determine it; but this is not the Case in hand: there is no need
that a stated Day be determined for Commemorating any of the Mysteries of our
Redemption; seeing the Lord himself has appointed his own Day for that End, and
his Ordinances as the Means of that Commemoration. 3. For the Jewish Church,
appointing hours of Prayer: It is to be Considered, that Prayer was joined with
the daily Sacrifice. And these Hours of Prayer were appointed by God, not the
Church. It is true, Maimnoides gives account of three times of Prayer that the
Jews were obliged to Observe every day, and on their Festivities they added a
Fourth: but this was in the degenerat times of their Church; as the Papists
have their Canonoical hours; Maimonides indeed tells us that Esdras made
Forms of Prayer, and they appointed the Number of Prayers according to the
Number of the Sacrifices: but it cannot be Proved that these Constitutions were
of that Antiquity.

. 12. He further reasons thus, p. 171. there is something Analogical in the
Christian Church to the Free Will Offerings of the Jews which are not the less
Acceptable because Voluntary: but rather the more, as long as they are within
the Circle of these things which he has Commanded. Ans. If we give Scope to
our fancy to frame Analogies, and make these a Warrant for modes of Religious
Worship, there shall be no end of devising new Ways of Worshipping God, while
yet Men keep within the Compass of what is Commanded, as to the Substance of
their Service. In this case the most fancieful Contriver, and Inventer of what
is New, fine, and gaudie, shall be the best Divine: and there shall be no end
of Contention: for what this Bishop thinks a fine way, and Anological to what
is Commanded, another shall think unfit: We have cause to bless the Lord that
he has given us a more sure Rule for our Direction, even the Scripture. 2.
These Days Invented by Men are not Analogical to the Free-will-offerings of the
Jews: for these were Commanded in general, and a Warrant given for them, and
Directions given how they should be Managed. Levit. 1. 3. and 3. 16. and many
other places: nothing of this can be said of the Holy Days; People may Pray as
often as they will, and so may the Church meet as often as she will for Religious
Service, as the Jews might Offer as often as they pleased: but the Jews were
never allowed to set up stated Days, and to separate them from other Days for
their Free-will-offerings: no more are Christians allowed to do so with respect
to Prayers and Praises. 3. If Modes of Worship, or stated Days for them, be not
less Acceptable because Voluntary, there could be no such thing as Will
Worship; which yet the Scripture condemns: and it were not Worshipping GOD in
vain to Teach for Doctrine, the Commandments of Men (viz. about Religious
Worship) which is contrary to Ma^th. 15. 9. I confess, Prayer and Praises are
not the less accepted because Voluntary: for these are Commanded Duties: but
to separate Days from Common use to these Exercises, and that without special
occasion, and constantly, when GOD has appointed a recurrent Day for that end;
this is not Commanded in general, nor in particular: nor has any Analogy with
the Jewish Free-will-offerings: this we Assert, not to be within the Power of
the Church: if he think it is, he must Prove it. He says, the Doctrine of
Presbyterians is contrary to all Christian Churches, and he tells us of
Citations to this purpose by Durellus: No doubt there may be many Citiations
brought of Churches differing from us: but such an universal Assertion cannot
be Proved by a Thousand Instances; if we can bring one instance to the
contrary: and for this we adduce the Apostolic Church: I have also. 4.
mentioned Churches, and Learned Men in them, who are as far from his Opinion,
in the Matter of Holy Days, as from ours. I shall now add some more: Luther.
lib. ad Nobilitatem Germanicam, Art. 5. consultum esse ut omnia Festa
aboliantur, praeter diem Dominicum. And lib. de bonis operibus, Utinam (says
he) apud Christianos nullum esset Festum nisi dies Dominicus. That Calvin was
really against them all, though for Peace he yielded to some few of them, I
have showed above. Bucer, in Math. 12. p. 118. has these Words, Ferias alias,
sive Dei-pari Virginis, sive Christi, sive Sanctorum Nomine commendatae sint,
optarem abrogatas universas. And he brings strong Reasons for his Opinion,
while he adds: Primum enim constat, nullo Dei verbo invectas: ubi enim in
Apostolicis Scriptis aliquid de Natali Christi, de Epiphania, and similibus?
facile crediderim Zelo Dei a veteribus introductas, qua Ferias Ethnicorum, seu
clavum clavo pellerent, sed quis dicet hunc Zelum secundum Scripturam, qui omni
adeo verbo, and Exemplo Scripturae careat; moreque rationem humanam secuta est:
Alting. in Exeges. Confess. August. Art. 15. p. 93. gives account that the
Lutherans objected to the Zuinglians, that they had no Holy Days except the
Lords Day. I hope here are some Christian Churches on our side: Danaeus (beside
what I have cited out of him before) has these Words, Eth. Christian. lib. 2.
cap. cap. 10. Nobis hodie eosdem dies observare nihil necesse est. And after,
Itaque, neque dies illos colere, aut observare necesse est, aut operae
proetium. And below, Apparet quanta superstitio postea inducta sit, and
multitudo istorum dicrum Festorum, ut omnino tolli satius sit. These. Salmur. in
a Disputation on this Subject, by Capellus, commends these Churches, which in
their Reformation, did quite abolish them, (it is evident then, that such
Churches there were: and we are not contrary to all Christian Churches) and he
gives his Reason, in religione enim, quando vel tantillum a Dei praescripto
disceditur; and homines aliquid sibi licere volunt, aut putant, omnia tuta
timenda sunt, siquidem experientia comprobatum est, a quam exiguis, and
imperceptibilibus initiis, mirus facius sit in Idololatriam, and horrendam
superstitionem in Ecclesia Pontificia progressus. And after, Ut satius esse
videatur, bono aliquo utili, sed minus necessario carere, quam ex illius usu
incurrere in grave grandis alicujus mali periculum. Here I confess this Author
does not expressly condemn the Holy Days as simply unlawful, yet he is far from
allowing them: Rivet on the fourth Command discourses to the same purpose. I
find also cited, Constitutiones Dordraci, 1578. Where are these Words. optandum
esset libertatem sex diebus operandi a Deo concessam in Ecclesiis retineri, and
solum diem Dominicum feriatum esse? What is said may sufficiently evince that
Presbyterians in this, are not so Antarctick to all the World as he imagines:
though it is their Principle to take the Apostolic Church, and none other for
their Guide; yet with due respect to all other sound Churches, both Ancient and
Modern.

13. He passes over in silence not a few of the most material Passages, and
what is truly Argumentative, in the Book that he has now under Consideration;
and pitcheth on two Instances that he had given, and I had Answered, of
Anniversary Holy Days instituted by the Jewish Church; whence he pleads that
the Christian Church may do the like; the first is the Fasts mentioned, Zech.
15. The Answer to this was given, 1. God disowned these Fasts, and if it be
alleged that they were disowned, only on Account of Neglect of Seriousness in
Managing them, that must be proved. His Reply is, He leaves us to Guess what
Word of Scripture he builds this Fancy upon. I crave him Pardon for that
Omission; himself supplieth it, p. 173. it is verse 5. Did ye Fast to me. He
says, that imports only that they were Careless, etc. in their Public
Appearance before God; and shows that as much, or more has been said of
Solemnities that Christ himself appointed; all which we deny not; neither do I
doubt that so much is imported, yea and mainly aimed at, in that Passage. Their
Profaneness and Irreligiousness did bear more Bulk in the Prophets Eye than
their Superstition. I indeed call for Proof that no more is here reproved, but
their wrong Way of going about these Fasts. And I give this Reason for that
Demand: though it is a Negative that is to be proved, as he stateth it. He
brings an Argument from a Practice which God expressly disowneth. It is
evident that there was Sinful Evil in this Action; he must then prove that
there was also some Good in the Action; otherwise he can draw no Argument from
it to prove its Acceptableness; the Management of this Solemnity was Evil; that
cannot prove these Holy Days to have been accepted; for on that account
expressly they are disowned: the Controversy is about the Authority by which
they were appointed; to wit, the Churches; we say that could never make them
Good: he says it does: here is then an Affirmative that he must prove: But to
please him, for this once, I shall prove, that these Fasts are disowned on this
account also: though it be not here expressed. This Action is simply condemned,
viz. their Fasting: the Lord looks not on it as done to Him: therefore all
the Sinfulness that is in it; is to be looked on as the Ground of this
Disowning: that want of Divine Institution was one part of the Sinfulness of
it, I prove, because in general (under which this Particular is comprehended)
all Religious Acts, or Solemnities which have no Divine Authority are
condemned, Matthew. 15. 9. and by other Grounds that I have above laid down. If
there be two or more Sorts of Immorality in one Action: no doubt both are
condemned in that Action, though but one of them be expressed; as in this
Instance, Jer. 7. 31. in that Infanticide, there was Idolatry, and most
Unnatural Murder, and also Will Worship, the Action is simply condemned; but
only the Evil of Will Worship is mentioned, which thing I Commanded not,
neither came it into my Mind: will any say that the other Evils of that Action
are not condemned; nor the Action for them, because they are not mentioned in
that Place. Wherefore, from an Action so positively condemned, he can make no
Argument for its Lawfulness, (which is our Debate about the Fasts) unless he
can, aliunde, prove, that this was no Fault in that Action, that it had no
Divine Authority; for to suppose it, is to take for granted what is the Matter
of our Debate. From all this it appears, that he has no Ground to say, that
if the Jews had had regard to the Moral Institutions, their Solemn Fasts had
been acceptable to God, though appointed by Humane Authority: neither is there
Cause to reject this Exposition as new, seeing there is such Ground for it. He
next takes notice of another Answer given to his Objection, The Prophets had
many things of greater Moment to reprove, and insist particularly on, that they
contented themselves to comprehend such things as these under general Reproofs.
Hence he infers, that these were not particularly reproved. What Advantage were
it to him, if this were granted; is it not enough that they are clearly
condemned in general general Terms. But this Consequence we will not yield: it
only follows, that other things of more Moment are, in some Places of
Scripture, mentioned, when these are not. But there are particular Reproofs of
these in other Places, as has been above showed, and will more appear anon.

14. I shall now adduce another Answer to his Argument; which might take off
its Force, supposing that these Fasts were not condemned by the Lord, (which
yet I do not grant) but approved. They were appointed under a present Calamity,
and Providential Call from the Lord, viz. the Captivity, and Desolation of
Judea, and the Temple. Here was a Call to extraordinary Fasting on that
Occasion; and they only determined the Circumstance of Time, which was not
determined by the Lord, nor any other Appointment was made by God, which might
super^^de this recurrent Solemnity. Now that the Church appointed these
Solemnities merely for that Ocasion, appears from their Enquiry about the
Continuance of them, now that Calamity was over. Some might plead long Custom
on the one hand, others with more Reason, might plead, that the Cause being
taken away, the Effect should cease; as Calvin, on the Place observes: This
cannot be said of our Holy Days, which are appointed to Perpetuity; and without
any determined End; and also for the Ends these are designed for, (I mean our
Holy Days) the Lord has appointed other Ordinances, and not left it to Men to
devise Ways to Commemorate these Mercies. I add yet another Answer, these Fasts
were appointed in a very corrupt Time, and State of the Church, which cannot
afford us a binding Example; and we have no Ground to think, that in the
Churches Recovery in Ezra's Time, these Fasts were continued: what Light we
have from Zech. 7. inclines to the contrary. I had brought two Instances of
Solemn Times of Humane Institution being condemned, which he next examineth, p.
175. etc. 1 Kings 12. 33. Where Jeroboam is condemned for appointing a Holy
Day, that God had not instituted. His Answer to this is, that this is to
Disguise Scripture History: Jeroboam is reproved for Idolatry, and Worshipping
the Calves; but if he had appointed a Feast in Honor of the true God, and
commanded the People to offer their Sacrifices at Jerusalem, he ought not to
have been blamed. To this I Reply, that this is a very surprising Answer, and I
know not that any beside himself, has ever made bold with Religious
Institutions at this Rate: for here is a wide Door opened for all the Devices
of Men that do not directly Clash with any particular Appointment of God; and
that both in the Jewish and Christian Church. And if this Doctrine be received,
no Ceremonies that either the Apostate Jewish Church, before Christ's
Incarnation, or that the Antichristian Church in the Days of the Gospel has
introduced, can be condemned; let them appoint and do what they will, only keep
from a Sinister Opinion about the Value, or Necessity of these Devices of ^^n:
And if this Principle be good, why might not Jeroboam appoint other Places for
Sacrifices beside Jerusalem, not hindering Sacrifices to be offered there too as
well as appoint Feasts beside these that the Lord has appointed, not
condemning the Observance of these of Divine Institution. Further, Jeroboams
Feast is expressly condemned on this Formal Reason, that the Time was Devised
((...) Created) of his own Heart, he made it of nothing, there being no Ground
for it by Gods Authority. Now according to this Learned Author, Men may Create
as many of these Days as they will, provided they design to Worship the true
God on them. It is a strange Dream (to use his own Word) to clear Jeroboam from
Guilt on that Account, for which he is so expressly condemned; no doubt he
Sinned highly in his Idolatry; but that he was Innocent in Devising this new
Feast, is a new Opinion, beyond these which this Author is Enquiring into.

15. The other Scripture brought to condemn these Solemnities not instituted by
God, and yet made Anniversary by Men, is, Matthew. 15. 9, In vain do they Worship
me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. We think this a plain
enough Scripture to condem all Humane Religious Ceremonies, in general, and
Anniversary Holy Days that have no Divine Warrant, as a Species comprehended
under that Genus. This my Adversary seems to Smile at, as Ridiculous; and
that from the Confidence he has in an Exposition of this Scripture, wherein I
think he is Singular; and may be more exposed than any Comment given by others:
which he superciliously rejects: it is this, Teaching for Doctrines, in the
Language of the New Testament, is affirming such a thing to be the Command, or
immediate Will of God, when it has no other Original than Humane Institution;
and nothing else but what shall bear some Analogy to that, is the Crime here
reproved. It seems his Confidence was mixed with some Diffidence of this his
Comment on the Text: when he thinks to Ward off a Blow by the uncertain Sound
of, what bears Analogy to that: what he will make to bear Analogy to
calling that God's Command, which is but Man's Device, we cannot tell, unless he
shall please, in his next Edition, to inform us. For his Exposition it self, it
is no way to be admitted, nor can he prove, by Instances, that this is the
Language of the New Testament: I am sure this Place cannot be so understood.
For the things that Christ here calls by that Name are, strict Observance of
Washing the Hands when they came from the Mercat-Place, Religious Washing of
Pots, Tables, Cups, etc. Dotations made to Corban, the Church Treasure, with
Neglect of Relieving their Necess^tous Parents; now that the Jews did ever
pretend, or Teach, that these were the Commands, or immediate Will of God; more
than our Ceremonialists Teach their Ceremonies to be such (for both pretend a
general Command for obeying the Church) I think he will never be able to prove:
all that appears that they Taught about these Things (so far as either
Scripture, or other History does inform us) is, that these Things ought to be
observed; that it is Sin, and Schism, and therefore Censurable, to neglect
them; and that on account of the Churches Authority to impose them. And do not
Prelatists Teach the same Doctrines concerning their Ceremonies, and the Holy
Days, in particular. He cites Hammond. Practi. Catechis. p. 203* but tells
us not what he says, for indeed his very Words are borrowed from that Learned
Author, in that Place he Cites; where he seems to speak in another Strain,
in his Notes on this Scripture, his Words are, My Commands are not Heeded by
them, but their own Constitutions set up in stead of them; this is far from
Teaching that they were Gods Commands immediately, Luc. Brug^^^. docentes, id
est, sequentes ipsi, and alios docentes ut sequantur. Also, Interpreters
generally, and among them Hammond himself, look on (...)* as what is meant by
(...), they Taught these Commands; their Doctrine was, that they should be
obeyed, and the Things practiced; but he gives us no account of their Teaching
that they were Commands immediately given by God. He has an incoherent Passage,
p. 277. We do not pretend that we have any express Institution in the New
Testament, for Celebrating the Christian Festivities. We know that they owe
their beginning to the Piety and Wisdom of the Apostles, or their Successors. I
gladly would know how he can know that the Apostles gave them a beginning, if
they be not instituted in Scripture; unless he will rest in uncertain
Traditions, as a part of the Rule of our Faith and Practice, to supply what the
Scripture is defective in. Neither shall we demand of him express Institution,
if he can show us Institution by good Consequence drawn from Scripture.

16. His strongest Refutation of another Citation, viz. Jer. 9. 31. is to call
it a Foolry. He makes the Argument to be Foolish enough indeed; as a Wise Man
may be exposed as a Fool, by putting on him a Fools Coat, and Hood and Bells;
but they are neither Wise, nor Ingenuous Men who Treat him so. He makes our
Argument from that Text, to run thus; God did not Command the Israelites to
burn their Sons and Daughters in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom; Ergo, to
appoint a Time for the Solemn and Religious Performance of that Worship, which
he himself commanded, falls under the same Censure. This Way of Arguing is
none of ours but his own. We thus argue, God condemns that Worship of the
Jews, as on other accounts, so on this; that he Commanded it not, neither came
it into his Mind, Ergo, no Worship devised by Men, and not instituted by God,
is allowable. And we have above proved the Celebration of Holy Days to be, not
only a determining of a Circumstance of Worship, which is not determined in
Scripture, but must be determined by Men; but to be an Addition to the Command
of God, for setting apart some of our Time to his Solemn Service. If this
Reason be Foolrie, Calvin as well as I, must be a Declared Fool, (viz. by the
Wisdom and Candor of this Author) who on this Place, has this Passage, Haec
ratio diligenter notanda est; quoniam his Deus ansas hominibus praecidit, ubi
hoc solo titulo condemnat, quicquid tent abunt Judaei, quia non mandavit ipsis;
no^ est igitur alia quaerenda ratio in coarguendis superstitionibus, nisi quod
carent praecepto Dei. And a little below, Ergo, magnum pondus est in his
verbis, ubi dicit Prophet^, Deum nihil tale mandasse, and nihil tale sibi
venisse in mentem; quasi diceret, nimium sapere homines, cum excogitant quae
ipse nunquam quaesivit, imo nunquam voluit cognoscere. That the Phrase, I
Commanded them not, has in it a Meiosis, I shall not controvert, but this
Meiosis does not hinder, but that Literally, and in Propriety of Speech, this
horrid Fact is condemned, as uncommanded Worship. No doubt, this Fact was not
only not commanded, but forbidden, yea greatly abhorred by the Lord; but it
does not thence follow, that it was not Evil, ^o nomine, because not commanded;
seeing that Immorality of it is expressly mentioned.

17. Another Scripture for Humane Holy Days had been mentioned in the Apology,
p. 42. John 10. 22, 23. where it is said, that Christ walked in the Temple at
the Feast of Dedication. Which was none of these that God appointed. It was
Answered, His walking in the Temple on that Day cannot be strained to signify
either Joining or ^pprobation: this Answer he is pleased to represent, p. 179.
as if it had been, that Christ went thither only to walk, which he calls an
Irreligious Fancy. This is not fair Dealing: it was neither said nor thought,
that Christ went thither only to walk. We think he had a higher End, viz. To
take Occasion to Discourse with the People, or to Preach the Things of
Salvation, while they were assembled in the Temple. His Refutation of this
(beside what is said) is, Christ was at the Feast of Dedication, who never
separated from the Jewish Worship. Answer, That he was at the Feast, wants
Proof; he was in the Temple on the Feast Day, Ergo, he was at the Feast; id
est, joined in that Solemnity, non sequitur: That he never separated from the
Jewish Worship; is said without Warrant; we affirm, he did, and give our Reason
for what we say, viz. he condemned all that Worship, that had not Divine
Institution, as is before proved; Ergo, he did not join in it. I think sober
Men will judge this a good Consequence. Here was (says our Author) the most
proper Occasion to reprove Humane Religious Festivities. Answer, Our Lord knew
betterwhat was the fittest Occasions for what he had to do than this Gentleman
could Teach him. He had condemned them in general: on this particular Occasion,
he had greater Things to Treat with them about, and things, that, being
uncontroverted, were not so like to irritate them, and render his Doctrine
ineffectual to them. That he quarrelled nothing in the Jewish Constitution,
merely because it was of Humane appointment; is to ^ly in the Face of a
considerable part of his Doctrine, mentioned Matthew. 15. from the beginning. He
is con^ident to say that Christ complied with such Usages, (viz. Ceremonies of
Humane Appointment) among the Jews. And he brings two Instances of it; one
is, Christ kept the Passover, not according to Institution, but according to
the Custom that then obtained in the Jewish Church, viz. With having the Loins
girt; having Shoes on the Feet, and a Staff in the Hand: and he asserts, that
there is nothing in the Original Precept, that gives the least Hint of its
being Temporary, and Relative to their Itinerary State in the Wilderness: but
rather, that it was of perpetual Force and Obligation, yet the Church changed
that Ritual of Divine Institution, into another that signified more propperly
Rest, as the other did their Traveling in the Wilderness. Here is plain
Dealing; whereby our Author gives us yet further to understand his Principles.
I shall not call this Parcel of Divinity simply New: but I am sure it is New
among Protestants: nor did I ever meet with any of the Prelatick Party, who
carried the Churches Power of instituting Ceremonies to this Height. For if
this Reasoning have any Force, it will conclude, that the Church, may not only
add to Gods Institutions; but may abolish some of them, and put others, more
sit, in their Room; and if so, why should we blame the Church of Rome, who,
though Christ's Appointment was that Bread and Wine should be given to the
People in the Lords Supper, yet have thought it sitter that they should only
have the Bread, and the Wine should be reserved for the Priest alone; and
Kings, and some others, by the Popes Indulgence: and they give as good Reason
for what they say, as he does here for his Principle, viz. That Receiving both
Elements was fit for that State of the Church; but not for her more Multiplied
and Numerous Condition, so the Council of Constance, Sess. 13. Licet Christus
post coenam institueret, and suis discipulis administraverit sub utraque
specie, panis and vini, hoc venerabile Sacramentum: tamen, hoc non obstante,
sacrorum canonum Authoritas, laudabilis and approbata consuetudo Ecclesi^,
servavit and servat, et licet haec consuetudo ad evitandum aliqua pericula and
scandal^ est introducta rationaliter, quod licet in Primitiva Ecclesia
hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie, postea a
confecrantibus sub utraque, and a Laicis tantummodo sub specie panis
recipiatur, etc. Also the Council of Trent, Ses, 21. chap. 21. Recognosceth the
Councils Power in this; that though Christ did Institute the Sacrament in both
kinds, yet they make a Law against it, which cannot be changed but by the
Church it self. Let the intelligent Reader judge, whether here be not a
harmony of Principles, in this Matter of the Churches Power, between these two
Antichristian Councils, and this Author who owneth himself a Protestant; let
it be also left to the Judgment of all who regard the Authority of Christ, more
than that of Man, whether it be not more rational to say, that seeing it is
evident, that some Rules about the Passover, which were at first enjoined to
the Israelites in the Wilderness, were afterward not observed by the Church,
and even by Christ himself (who was a strict Observer of the Mosaical Law while
it stood in Force) were appointed but for that present time, and that the
^hange that the Church afterward made was from her Knowledge of this Temporary
Institution, and not from any Power that the Church pretended to, to Alter what
GOD had Instituted?

. 18. Another Instance he brings of CHRIST'S complying with the Jewish rites
not Instituted by the LORD is, the Jews used a postcoenium, of Bread and Wine,
after the Paschal Lamb: This Christ not only complied with, but he adopted it
into his own Religion, and gave it a high Signification, and made it a Faederal
rite of the New Covenant, etc. here is another piece of his Divinity, which I
confess is not so singular as the former; for some pretenders to be
Antiquaries, and great Critics, have in this, trod the way before him.
Answer, If we should yield what they here demand, as to Matter of Fact, viz.
that the Jews used to eat Bread and drink Wine, after eating the Paschal Lamb;
and that Christ did the like; will any rational Man say, that this is an
Approving of their Adding to the Ceremonies of the Passover. For, 1. Can they
prove that Christ did this in imitation of that Jewish Custom: or that he had
any regard to it: may not we do the same Action that another does, yet do it on
other Designs than imitation of that Person? or, is it imaginable that our Lord
would build so great a Gospel Ordinance on such a Foundation, as is the
Practice of such an Apostate People as the Jews then were? sure he had a higher
Design in this Heavenly Institution. Again, if there was such a Custom then in
the Jewish Church; there is no ground to think that it was of any great
Antiquity; or that is was brought in while that Church continued in any
measure of Purity; but it must have had its rise in the time of that Apostace
that ushered in their rejecting the Messiah, and their being utterly rejected
of God, for so doing; for we read nothing of it before the Captivity; nor
after it while the Maccabees lived: Now can any Man think that Christ, who had
reproved their Religious Washings, and other Ceremonies, would be so fond of
these, which stood on the same bottom with them? I further Answer, that this
Tradition of the Postc^nium is a groundless fancy: I find no such Custom among
the Jews, of taking Bread and Wine after the Paschal Supper. Scaliger first
broached this Opinion of a Postcaenium, or two parts, or Services in the
Paschal Supper. And is reprehended by Buxtorf for it, but Defended by Capell de
literis Hebrae: p. 167. who out of Maimonides, gives a long Account of all the
rites used by the Jews in the Celebration of it: Lightfoot also, and Grotius,
give a very critical Account of their Rites out of the same Rabbi: Addison
also, in his Description of the present State of the Jews in Barbary;
describes that Feast, as Celebrated by them: but what our Author allegeth is
found in none of them: but on the contrary; I find two things that they agree
in, which makes against his Postcaenium of Bread and Wine, and Christ
imitating of it: The 1. Is, the Jews used many Benedictions at several Cups,
and Morsels they took: so did not our Lord: he Blessed the Meat that they eat,
no doubt, and we read of this Blessing Bread and Wine in the LORD'S Supper; but
to say that he repeated so many Benedictions (which were no fewer than Eight or
Nine; beside several Instructions that that they read out of the Scripture,
which Reading they called (...): and other Composers of their own) and all
these Benedictions were by a set Form of Words. If my Antagonist will persuade
us that our LORD conformed to all these Rites, he must prove it by good
Arguments, and not Authoritatively impose on Peoples Credulity. The 2. Thing
that I observe out of the Account that these Authors give of the Passover is,
that they begin with a Cup, then they take the quantity of Olive of the (...),
or bitter Herbs, and dip it in Sauce made for that Feast, then they eat what
each one lists, and after some other Observations, they take the quantity of
an Olive dipped as before, and after they may eat nothing that Night: here is no
concluding with Bread and Wine, for a Postcaenium. Yea, Capellus (who seems
to be too fond of our Authors Notion, that Christ had regard to the Passover
rites in Instituting His Supper) gives yet a quite other Account of it than he
does: for he tells us, that Christ took Bread and Wine in stead of that
Morsel of the bigness of an Olive: whence it clearly follows, that Christ did
not appoint Bread and Wine in Imitation of the Postcaenium, consisting of the
same Materials: If he have no better Argument to Prove the vanity of
Presbyterian Speculations (as he phraseth it) their Opinions will be able to
stand against all his Assaults. I add the Observation of Buxtorf Synagog:
Judaic: cap. 13. who after a full Account of the Jewish Passover, and all the
Rites of it, has these Words, p. 307. ex paucis istis facile perspici potest,
Judaeos ^estum paschatis amplius ex Mosis, vel Dei praecepto, sed juxta
Rabbinorum suorum Traditiones ^^lebrare, quas pluris faciunt quam Dei Precepta.

19. His next Work is, to Justify his high Extoling of the Holy Days: he had
said, it is certain that nothing perserveth the knowledge of the Christian
Religion among the Body of the People more than the Festivities of the Church:
and this I called raving, the Word and Sacraments being more useful for that
End. To this he Answers two things, p. 181. 182. The first is, that he did
not Attribute this effect to the Festivities without the Word and Sacraments,
to which they are subordinate: as being the fittest seasons for Christian
Exercises. I still think this is no sober Doctrine: for there is a fitter
Season for these of Christ's appointment, even the Christian Sabbath. Beside, it
is evident that he Spoke of his Festivities, though not in a separated Notion,
yet in a distinct Notion, from the Word and Sacraments; and I not only think
that GOD'S Ordinances are more effectual without, than with Man's devices, I
mean the Holy days; because having no Institution, they have not the Promise of
the Blessing, and are but vain Worship; but that GOD'S Ordinances used with the
Holy days; if any Efficacy be to be expected from that Conjunction, have a
greater Efficacy toward preserving Knowledge among the People, than the Holy
days can have; therefore, there is a more Efficacious mean for that end, what
ever notion he take the Holy days in. But the Reader may know, that this
Expression was not the only ground why raving was imputed to him; but several
others of that, or a higher strain; which were Examined, but he is pleased to
Pass what was said against them; with this shift, he is not at leisure to
follow the Vindicator every where, far less is he inclined to Examine all these
Exceptions against the Author of the Apologi^. I find him at leisure for as
needless Work, as it were to Clear to us these, and the like Passages, do we
not see all Nations agree in this, that public Solemnities, and annversarie
Festivities, and Fasts, are necessary to the Being and Beauty of Religion,
(this is a soaring flight of his fancy) they preserve and increase our
Mortification. They oblige the most Stubborn and Impenitent to think of his
Soul: and the visible Practices of the Church Preach Repentance more
effectually, and make more lasting Impressions, than the loose and definite
Homilies of self conceited Men (all the Sermons of the Presbyterians, no doubt
are here meant) the Reformation of the Greek Church is hindered by neglecting of
Fasting: the Holy days are the Catechisms of the People: all the Notes made on
the Passages for exposing of them, he passes over in silence; the Reason is,
if ye will believe him, not that he could not Answer all; but because he was
not at leisure. A second Answer he brings is, that the Festivities cannot be
considered without the Word and Sacraments; and other Exercises of Religion,
and this he takes a great deal of Pains to illustrate; as it is usual in
Disputing for one to say most when he has least to say; and he calls it
gross ignorance to think otherwise. I need not tell him how many of his Party
make more than a Metahysical Precision, either formal, or objective, of the
Holy day, from the Religious Work of it; while they Celebrate it, without going
to Prayers, in idleness or that which is worse, I know this is not the intent
of the Church; yet, it is evident that these Days are capable of such an
abstracted Consideration; I mean, in Practice, what ever be in the speculations
that Men have about them: All that he so laboriously says about the
Conjunction of the Holy days with Religious Exercise on them, will evanish, if
we consider, that our Question is not, whether the Serious and Solemn Exercises
of Religion be necessary to these Great Uses, and Effects that he speaks of,
for that we are agreed in; that these are necessary to the Being and Beauty
of Religion: they preserve and increase our Mortification: ^hey aw the most
Stubborn and Impenitent, etc. (that is, they are Means adapted to these Ends)
but that which we Debate is, whether these Ends may not be attained as well, by
the Serious and Solemn Exercises of Religion in the use of these Means and
Ordinances that GOD has Appointed; or if the Holy days be necessary, or the
Religious Exercises, as performed on the Holy days, be ne cessarie for that
End. This we deny, and we require that they may Prove it. And the Question is
not, whether the Holy days, separated from Religious Exercises, are abominable;
but whether Religious Exercise, or the times of GOD'S Appointing it, to wit,
the Weekly S^bbath's, without the Holy days, be defective? I take Notice of a
Learned distinction he has about the Holiness of these Days, p. 183. that they
are not Holier than other Days, in themselves, or because the Sun is in such a
part of the Zodiac: but such a time being separated for such an Exercise,
receives its Denomination from the Authority, and Exercise it self, by which
it is distinguished from other Days. This seems to be shuffling, and not the
distinct plainness that ought to be in Disputation; For 1. Some of his
Partisans ascribed more Holiness to them than can be in extrinsick
Denomination, even a relative Hol^ness by which Religious work on them is more
Acceptable than at other times. So Hooker, above Cited. He should have told us,
whether he understands this relative Holiness, or a mere Denominative
Holiness; that they are called Holy, but there is nothing of Holiness in them,
even with respect to the Authority and Work that they have relation to. He
does indeed tell us; that they are called Holy days by a relative, and
extrinsick Denomination, which is a Metaphysical notion not easily intelligible
(he Charge others with nonsense, and gross ignorance, on less Ground,) a
relative Denomination must be a Denomination built on a Relation; which
supposes a relative Holiness in these Days, which yet he seems to disown
again. If the Authority by which they are Instituted, and the Exercises
performed in them, can communicate a relative Holiness to them; wherein does
their Holiness differ from that of the LORD'S Days? It has no more but a
relative Holiness, resulting from Divine Authority injoyning it, and the Holy
Exercises that the LORD has Commanded to be performed in it. The Difference
then, must be only this, that it has a relative Holiness of GOD'S making:
these a relative Holiness of Man's making: and so Man as well as GOD, shall have
a Power to Communicate a relative Holiness to Days, and consequently to Places,
and other Things: and how much of the Popish Superstition, and Power of
Consecration, that will bring in, I know not; neither, I suppose, was himself
aware of it. I think it is evident, that the first Day of the Week (which we
own as the LORD'S Day) has no intrinsic Holiness of it self: the Sun being in
such a Degree of any Sign of the Zodi^k as makes up the Number of Eight, from
where we begin to Count, does not Communicate any Holiness to such a Day. Now
if he think the Church can give the same sort of Holiness to these Days that
the LORD gives to the Christian Sabbath; he must prove that such Power is
granted to her; I am sure some of his Party disown that Notion. What he
Objecteth to himself from the abuse of these Days is confirmed, and his Answers
refuted,. 5. of this Section.

. 20. The Antiquity of the Holy Days he next considers, p. 185. He had in
his Apology, required that we should tell when they began to be Observed, and
without that he will conclude that they were used since the days of the
Apostles; It was told him, this is Iniquum Postulatum; and the Consequence is
naught. Both because of the Defectiveness of History, and they came in by
insensible degrees. Next, it was showed from the silence of Scripture, and of
the History the first Age^, that Christmas (for of that was the Question) was
not Observed for 300 years after Christ; which was Con^^rmed by Easter being
much noticed, but it not; and this was Confirmed from Cent. Magd. Spanhem. and
ancient Histories cited by them: also Spondan speaks but faintly for it: all
this he thought fit to overlook; only he Examineth the Assertion; which he does
falsify, by Extending it to all Holy days except Easter. And labors to
prove out of Origin, and some others, that some of the Christian Feasts were
mentioned sooner than 300 years after Christ. I am not much concerned whether
it be so or not, for if they were then used, and enjoined by the Church,
scripture silence of them is enough to us; and laying so little weight on
humane Authority for them, I searched no further; but Trusted to them who had
made it their Business to try it. But now, when I have further considered that
Matter, I ^^nd the proofs that he brings for this Antiquity of Christmas
very Lame; he first cites Origin, contra Cel^* mentioning the Christian
Festivities: but he is not pleased to point to the Place of that Large Work,
where this Passage may be found, that it might be Examined. The like Omission
in another, about a Word of Augustine, he agregeth at great length, p. 195.
though that Sentence be most frequently cited: may not one guess that Origin
speaks of the Weekly Sabbaths, which are not forbidden, Gal. 4. 10. as some
might think them to be, because Sabbath Days are mentioned in a parallel Place.
Col. 2. 15. also of Easter, that in, and before Origins days, was observed, and
contended about. His other Citation, Origin on Math. Homil. 3. I cannot find;
though I looked over that Homily. May be he has used some later Edition which
has been interpolated, as most of the Writings of the Fathers have. His next
Author is Hippolitus, as he is Cited by Photius: all his Proof out Hippolitus
is, he wrote Homilies in Sanctam Theophaniam, and a Conjecture that himself
lays* no weight on: it is NIAC. is found in Gruterus his Ancient Inscription
of the Works of Hippolitus, the rest of the Line being defaced. The Answer to
all this is easy. 1. Hippolitus is an obscure Author; I know not what weight
is to be laid on his Testimony, if he had it. 2. Photius, who lived ^n the
Ninth Centurie, may be rejected, by an Argument Ad Hominem; which he makes use
of to invalidate the Credit of the Scottish Histories, concerning our Conversion
from Heathenism, p. 232. 3. Hippolitus writing Homilies in Theop^aniam cannot
prove his Point: unless that he can Prove that that Word, from the beginning of
Christianity was not used to signify the Incarnation, or GOD manife^^ in the
flesh (which is the proper Import of it) but only the Anniversarie Day of the
Celebrating that Mystery; which was its current Signification when Photius
wrote. For his Niac, it is so wide and groundless, and a strained Conjecture;
that few wis^, Men will be fond of mentioning it: much less of making an
Argument of it: he supplieth it (I know not by what Authority) (...). He next
cites the Canons of the Apostles, the Authority of which we cannot own; unless
he give better Evidence that they are genuine than others have yet given. For
what he says of the Natalitia Martyrum; I deny not that in Process of time,
they did degenerate into Holy Days, such as he pleads for, and becoming so
Numerous, they became a Burden to the Church; and were di^used, till the Pope
restricted the Observation of them to such as he had Canonized; but, at first
they were nothing but Commemorations of them, made after the ordinary Service
of the Church: and that Age, and some that followed, were so respectful to the
Martyrs (for Encourageing People to be Faithful in that Firey Trial) that they
gave the Martyrs extraordinary Privileges; whence it may be Inferred, that
from these Commemorations, to other Holy Days; is no good Consequence. He has
not yet Proved that the Author of Def. of the Vindication is once mistaken in
his Calculation (though I do not think it impossible that he may so mistake)
nor yet that the Centuriators have not been Accurate in their Search into
Antiquity. It is no consequence, the First Christians did Commemorate the
Martyrs, who Succeeded the Apostles; Ergo, they could not forget the Apostles
themselves; if they understand such a way of Commemoration; the Reason I have
already given.

21. He Infers, p. 190. that the Feast of the Nativity was early Observed;
because Easter and Pentecost were so. The Consequence will not hold; and the
Reason was given Def. of Vindic. p. 28. viz. many of the Christians were very
tenacious of the old Jewish Customs (among which was the Observation of Easter
and Pentecost, the Feast of Weeks may be added) but had not then begun to
devise new Holy Days of their own. He Answers an Objection that was brought,
that the Day of CHRIST'S Nativity is uncertain, nor can it be Proved that it
was December 25. He Answers, there was no need to determine that Question;
and all Christians (he excepteth some Presbyterians) are agreed that this
Determination was not Ne^essarie; and that Christians in different Nations,
make no scruple to comply with the Chronological Accounts of that Country
where they live, they Commemorate the Mystery; but do not Impose on the belief
of People in matter of Fact. He says, the Vindicator left this Consideration
al^ogether untouched. In this he is in the Wrong; and is Guilty of what he
blames another for. There were Arguments brought to Prove that if such a Day
was to be Observed yearly, it was needful that we should know what Day in
particular it is; all which he has left untouched. They are, it was never
heard of, that the Birth day of any Person was kept, but on the Day on which
the Person was Born. That if this Determination be needless, the Church might
appoint any Day of the year for this Commemoration, which none ever affirmed.
It was also told him, that others, particularly Master Hooker, pleads with
more cogencie for Holy Days (which he mistaketh as if his Ability had been
compared with Master Hookers, whereas no more was intended, but that Master
Hookers Arguments, which are looked on as the strongest on his side, are
inconsistent with his Notion) while he says, Eccles. Polic. lib. 7. 3. 69.
that GOD'S Extraordinary Works have Sanctified some times, and Advanced them,
so that they ought to be with all Men that Honor GOD, more Holy than other
times; and afterward, as CHRIST'S Extraordinary Presence Sanctifies some
Places, so His Extroordinarie Works Sanctify some times; from this the Author
of D^^f. of Vind. inferred justly that the Church in choosing another Day,
acts Arbitrarily, and unwarrantably; and Absurdly; neglecting the ^ay so
Sanctified It was also told him, that it is a probable Argument, at least, that
the LORD would not have a recurrent particular Day Observed on account of
CHRIST'S Birth; seeing He has concealed from us what Day it was that CHRIST was
Born; especially seeing He has Instituted the observation of the Day of
Christ's Resurrection, viz. the Weekly Sabbath; He has told that it was the
First Day of the Week; all this my Adversary has overlookt, as either not
worthy of his Notice, or as easily Answered. I look on his Citation out of
Austine as not to this Purpose, when he says, nos and Dominicam diem, and
Pascha Coelebramu^, and alias dierum celebritates; sed quia intelligimus quo
pertineant, non tempora observamus, sed quae illis Significantur temporibus,
this indeed Proves that Augustine thought that these were not to be Observed
for themselves; but for the Mysteries that were Commemorated on them, but it no
way evinceth that he thought there was no need of choosing the Days themselves,
on which the thingsCommemorated were Acted; but one Day of the Year might be as
fit as another, as the Church should Determine.

22. It is unreasonable to put it on us to disprove that Christ was born Dec.
25. as he does, p. 192. For that we cannot do so well as by fixing on some
other Day, and proving that to be the Day of the Nativity: which we pretend to
be uncertain: it rather is his part to prove, who affirms that our Lord was
born on that Day. And yet, if it were needful for our Cause, probable Arguments
might be brought, which may incline us rather to think, that he was born at
another Season of the Year: some of no mean Learning have been at pains to
prove that his Nativity was in September, or in October. But whatever may be
the Concernment of our Adversaries, it is no Concernment to us, what was the
Day: it is enough to us, that the Mystery it self is firm and sure. The Reader
may find this Question about the Day and Month of the Nativity, Learnedly
handled by our Country Man Master Bailly, operis historici, and Chronologici
lib. 2. quaes. 7. p. 42. and seq. where he concludes, with Spanhemius, Mensem
and Diem Natalitium a nemine determinari debere, nec posse, cum de iis
Scripturae silent, nec quicquam certi primis Ecclesiae Christianae seculis a
quopiam prolatum sit. He had been charged by the Author of Def. of Vind. with
Shu^^ling, in that he had pleaded God's Appointment for Holy Days, because God
has appointed that we should obey the Apostles and their Successors, as our
lawful Ecclesiastical Rulers: because though we are to obey the Apostles, whom
we know to have been Infa^^ibly Guided; we are not to obey their Successors
(real or pretended) further than they bring Divine Warrant; which cannot be
showed for Holy Days. He endeavors to clear himself from Shuffling, by
telling us that there was no more meant than that the church, may, by that
Power which is perpetually lodged in her, Regulate the Public Solemnitie^ of
Worship; and when she enjoyneth nothing but what is lawful, we ought to obey.
Here is Shuffling to Excuse his former Shuffling; he is entangled by Wrestling
to Extricat himself. For he supposes the whole Question, that there is a Power
perpetually lodged in the Church, to appoint Holy Days; otherwise he says
nothing to the purpose. Again, he supposes that appointing of Holy Days, is as
much in the Churches Power, as other Regulating of Public Solemnities; whereas
he should have considered, if he would have Explained, and not Confounded and
Darkened the Matter, that there is a Regulating of Public Solemnities, which
lies in determining Circumstances, which must be determined, and yet are not
determined in Scripture, such as the Time, Place, and Order of these Religious
Actions, that the Lord has appointed his Day to be spent in: there is another
Regulating, which is adding to what the Lord has appointed; more Days to his
Day, new Religious Ceremonies to these which are of Divine Institution; or
determining Circumstances, which neither are determined by God, nor need to be
deterned; such as are more Holy Days than Christ has appointed; the Churches
Power about the first sort we do not controvert: her Power about the second is
the Subject of our Question: and here he either supposes the Question, viz.
That the Church had such Power; or he says nothing to the purpose. Yet
further, when he speaks indistinctly of Apostolic Power, and that of their
Successors, as to this Regulation; if he mean no more than such Regulation as
is always in the Churches Power, he gives the Successors of the Apostles the
same Regulating Power that themselves had; the Consequence of which is, that
their Successors (I suppose he means the Bishops) may institute new Offices,
new Government, new Discipline, and all other Ordinances in the Church, as the
Apostles might: which is full as high as the Papists Screw up the Power of the
Church, and is indeed, to make the Bishops absolute Lords over God's
Inheritance. And this he confirms by telling us, that the Apostles made
Constitutions that were laid aside by their Successors; and other Usages came
in their Room, but because he saw this liable to Exception he distinguishes
betwixt greater Usages, that are variable unless they are equally subservient
to the great Ends of Discipline, in all Ages and Countries; and nisi
consuetudine Ecclesiae universae sint roboratae: and lesser Usages, whose
Continuance and Abrogation may depend on the Convenience of particular
Churches; and he gives an Instance in the Deaconesses, which he says are not
in the Presbyterian Meetings, nor any Reformed Churches. If he would have
Extricated himself from the Shuffling that was imputed to him, he should have
given us some Rules, or Characters, by which we might discern, what
Constitutions of the Apostles are to be accounted Great, and Unalterable; and
what Small, and Changeable by their Successors: if Marches be not clearly Rid
here, we are at a Woeful Uncertainty: yea, bold Men may dare to meddle with
Episcopacy it self: and pretend that it is one of the lesser Apostolical
Constitutions; if they did at all appoint it. The Marks that he has given us
are very insufficient, their universal Subservience to the Ends of Discipline
will be as much controverted, as whither they be great Constitutions or not: he
says Bishops and Holy Days are such; we deny it; and will Debate it with him;
and so we are still in the Dark, what Apostolic Constitutions may be laid
aside, or must be retained; for his consu^tudo universae Ecclesiae, first that
depends on uncertain History to know it. Next it is to set the universal
Church above the Apostles; or to make her infallible, not only in Fundamentals;
but even on Government and Ceremonies. The Instance he brings proves
nothing; if he can prove that Diaconesses were an Apostolic Constitution, I
shall acknowledge the Presbyterian Churches to be Defective through the want of
them.

23. He Vindicateth himself, p. 194. from Pleading for blind Obedience, by
telling us, that he only Pleads for Obedience in lawful Things, not for
Obedience in Things Arbitrarily Imposed, as the Papists. If he prove the
Observation of Holy Days to be lawful in it self, and that the Church has
Power to institute them; I shall crave him Pardon for what was said of blind
Obedience: but while he brings the Authority of the Church for the Ground on
which we should obey in this Matter, and makes it a sufficient Argument why
they should be observed, that the Church Commands it: I must still think that
this is either to Plead for blind Obedience, or Egregiously to Tri^^e. He has
next, a long Discourse about a Citation out of Augustine: of which before. In
the Def. of Vind. p. 30. it had been said, that it is not a Day being
Anniversary that we scruple, but that it is separated from Civil Use by Men's
Authority, and Dedicated to Religion in an Anniversary Course. This he Treats
in Ridicule, not (I suppose) because he cannot, but because he will not
understand it. We neither Scruple because the Day is Anniversary; a Day for
Civil Solemnity, appointed by men, may be such: nor because it is set apart for
Religious Use; an Occasional Day for Solemn Humiliation, when God by a special
Providence calls for the Work, and Man determines the Day, is lawful, as is
the perpetual recurrent Lords Day, appointed by God; nor thirdly, do we quarrel
these Days, merely because they want a special Divine Warrant; because
Anniversary Days for Civil Use, might be appointed by Men. But the Ground of
our Scruple is, the Complex Nature of these Days; that they are wholly
separated from Civil Use, as the Lords Day is; that they are perpetually
Discriminated from other Days in the Year; and that they are perpetually
Dedicated to Religion, and all this, not by Divine, but by Humane Authority. If
there be any Raving, or any thing unintelligible in this, I shall be content to
be Instructed by him; or any who is of his Opinion. Are there not many Actions
that are Good and Lawful; considered under several Circumstances; which if ye
consider all their Circumstances Complexly, are Unlawful; for Instance, the
Magistrate may appoint his Subjects to meet in Arms; he may also appoint that
this Meeting be Yearly, Monthly, or Weekly, if need be; yea he may appoint
this Meeting to be on the Lords Day, in Case of Necessity; yet he cannot
lawfully appoint that they should, without Necessity, meet every Year, every
Month, or every Week, on the Sabbath Day. He complains that it is called
Thrasonick Triumph, when he tells us of Danger and Impiety in separating from
the Church, in these excellent Constitutions that are received from the
beginning, and in all Countries where the Name of Jesus has been Worshipped:
such Constitutions and Solemnities have been derived from the Apostles, or
Apostolic times: These are his Words; though in his Review of them here, he
seems to Smooth them a little. He will have it only to be Thrasonick
Boasting, when a Man admireth his own Wit or Performances. I love not to
contend about Words; nor need I to write a Dictionary on this Occasion: nor
shall I judge what Opinion he has of himself; but I leave it to the Reader to
judge, whither it may not be so Termed, when one insulteth over his Adversary,
as having great and evident Advantage against him, when yet there is no Cause
for so thinking; and whither he be not guilty of this Boasting, (or whatever he
will call it) while he insinuates the Universality, the Antiquity, and the
Apostolic Authority of the Holy Days, and that with charging his
Adversarieswith dangerous Impiety, on account of their differing from them;
while all these are the things that he and I do controvert about.

24. He takes it ill that it was called a loose Reasoning, when he tells us
that the Knowledge of Christ does not extinguish the Light of Reason; therefore
such Constitutions (as the Reason of Mankind is agreed in) have nothing in them
contrary to the Purity of our Religion. This was called loose Arguing, because
he takes an Uncontested Truth for his first Proposition; and the Conclusion
that we Debate about is supposed, in place of the second Proposition. His
Defense is; No Society of Mankind ever thought Anniversary Holy Days unlawful;
but all of them thought them proper Means to Excite Religion: he tells us
that Clamours against them (so he terms our Reasons) destroy all Unity and
Order, about things not only Innocent, but Useful in their own Nature and
Tendency: here is yet more loose Arguing, while he supposes still the thing in
Question. We deny their Innocence, also their usefulness; and must do so, till
we see better Arguments for what is asserted: the Apostolic Churches did not
use them; whence we may with Confidence conclude, that they did not think them
proper Means to Excite Devotion; yea, it is no weak Consequence, if we infer,
that they thought them unlawful; being none of these things which Christ had
Commanded, nor his Apostles Taught. That they were not forbidden, is Answered
above; they are forbidden in general, and that is enough. That Reasoning
against Holy Days of Humane Appointment destroys all Unity and Order, etc.
looks more like Clamor than any thing that we have said; there was Unity and
Order in the Apostolic Church, without them; and so is there in the
Presbyterian Societies. His Syllogism that he presents us with, p. 201. does
not Retrieve the Looseness of his former Reasonings: it is, whatever is
agreeable to true Reason, is rather improved than condemned by Religion; but
such Constitutions (he must mean the Holy Days) are agreeable to true Reason;
Ergo, there is nothing in them contrary to the Purity of our Religion. I take
no notice of the Form of this Syllogism (of the Rightness of which he is
confident) it may easily be reduced to Form, by a little Change of the
Conclusion; here is indeed closs Reasoning; but it is not concludent Reasoning:
for we deny the Minor: though he attempteth its Proof, both in prosecuting the
first, and the second Proposition. I am not fond of his Method of Probation; he
concludes it after the Form of a Sorites; whereas there is nothing like it in
his Progress: but that is a small Matter: I except against his Proof in what is
more material; that all Nations are agreed in this; and this is the best
Evividence of what is agreeable to true Reason: I deny both these Propositions,
1. How will he prove that all Nations were agreed about the Necessity and
Usefulness of Holy Days? Or, I distinguish this Proposition; all Nations are
agreed in general, that there should be some Religious Holy Days: if I should
put him to the Proof of this, it might puzzle him; but for our part, we think
it of great Use, and necessary also, necessitate praecepti; whatever may be
said of the necessitas medii; we think it a Wise and Excellent Constitution of
the Divine Will, that we have recurrent Days, (I mean the Christian Sabbath)
and Occasional Times of Solemn Worshipping God: but that all Nations are agreed
about the Necessity of Holy, Religious Anniversary Days of Man's Appointing;
this is yet unproved; the Jewish Holy Days, (till that Church fell into
manifold Apostasy) were appointed by God; the Heathenish Religious Rites, (and
their Holy Days among the rest) were appointed (as they pretended) by these
whom they owned for gods; which I could prove, if it were not to digress; with
that Pretension Numa, and others gained the People to submit to their Religious
Rites. For his second Proposition; it is utterly false, that the Agreement of
Nations is the best Evidence of what is according to right Reason: this might
hold, if Men were generally Perfect in Knowledge, and Holiness; if their Mind,
Will, and Affections had no way been hurt by the Fall; but in the present State
of Fallen, Corrupt, and Sinful Men; it is a False, Dangerous, yea Pernicious
Position: if understood (as here it must be) of Matters of revealed Religion;
such as instituted Worship is. His Proof of this Assertion is most absurd;
which is, two Maxims of the Civil Law, woefully misunderstood; and misapplyed,
viz. Quod major pars Curiae efficit, pro eo habetur, ac si omnes egerint; and,
Refertur ad universos quod public fit per majorem partem. This is to be
understood, of Humane Courts in any Nation, or Society; not of the Consent of
all Nations: otherwise one Nation could not make Laws for it self; but must
peruse the Volumns of all Nations, that they may know what Laws obtain in most
Nations. Again, which is yet more to our purpose, these Maxims hold in Civil,
not Religious Matters: to make the Consent of Nations to be the Rule of
Religion, (as this Author manifestly does) has so many Absurdities wrapped up in
it, that it is a wonder that such a Fancy could fall into the Head of one who
owneth revealed Religion; and is not far from Hobbism, or Deisin, with which he
is not sparing to charge the Presbyterians, on far less Cause given. I am far
from charging him with these horrid Opinions: but I advise him to beware of
Zeal for Humane Holy Doly Days on such Principles as would lead Men into that
Snare. If we must be determined by a Pole among Mankind (as his Assertion does
plainly import) in the Matters of our Religion; Heathenism will clearly carry
it against Christianity. Yea, Turkism will bid fair for it: and Popery will
clearly Outvote Protestantism. This is a thousand times worse than what he (or
his Friend) is so angry with a Presbyterian Parliament for, having regard to
the Inclinations of the People, in settling Presbyterial Government; we must
now receive the Holy Days, because the Inclinations of the Apostate World,
Heathens, Jews, Papists, etc. incline that Way. His distinguishing of such
Constitutions, by considering their general, or abstracted Nature, and
considering them with their Ends and Objects; will not help him; for corrupt
Men will always be generally for what is worst, consider it as ye will; neither
can it be said, that this Rule of Judging of Religion holds not in the
Essentials, and great Points; but in the inferior Matters, and Rituals: for,
the instituted part of Religion lies more remote from Man's Reason, as a
Contriver of it, than other things in Religion do: because these depend merely
on Institution, and the Will of the Instituter; as ye can less give a Reason,
why Bread and Wine should signify the Body and Blood of Christ, (except from
the Will of him who appointed this) than ye can do why we should Pray to God,
obey him, etc.

25. He takes it very ill, and calls it strong Natural Nonsense, that the
Holy Days (and other Religious Ceremonies of Man's Devising) are called new
Means of Grace, which are not to be appointed by Men's Reason; but by Gods
Authority, He says they are only appointed to increase our Devotion for the
old Means of Grace; they are but Circumstances of time determinable by the
Church. All that is sufficiently refuted already: but he repeateth, and forces
me to do so; First, That which is appointed to increase our Devotion toward
Prayer, the Word and Sacraments, (which are the old Means of Grace) is a Mean
of Grace it self; for increase of Devotion is Grace; therefore, the Means
toward that End must be Means of Grace: and if these be appointed by the Lord,
as the Sabbath is, for increase of our Devotion in Prayer, etc. this is one of
these he calls the old Means of Grace, viz. Means of Gods appointing; if
appointed by Men; for the same end, they must be new Means of Grace appointed
by Men; and superadded to these of Gods Appointment. But the Holy Days are
such, ex tuo ore; being appointed to increase our Devotion, this cannot be said
of mere determining a Circumstance of Worship; as appointing a Week Day Sermon.
2. That which is necessary to the Being and Beauty of Religion: to keep us in
mind of the Mysteries of our Religion, is the Peoples Catechism, etc. must be a
Mean of Grace; but all this, and more, he has ascribed to the Holy Days; not
only to the Work to be done on them, but to it as done on such a Day; they must
then be new Means of Grace, beside what God has instituted. 3. That they are
but Determinations of the Time of Worship, is above refuted; and himself
refuteth it, by affirming that they are appointed for increasing our Devotion.
I should allow him not only to Smile, but to burst out into Laughter, if it had
been said (as he pretends) that Christmas was kept in Honor of Julius
Caesar, before Christ was born; he need never want Matter of Laughter, if he be
allowed thus to Devise what may make him Merry. All that was said is, that Holy
Day was so kept; and thence called Yule in Scotland. The Import of which is no
more but this; that the same Day being kept by the Heathens on one Account,
some Christians changed it into another Use, and Celebrated it as the Day of
Christ's Nativity; as I could show they did with many other, both Times and
Places. His Criticizing on the Word Yule, making it Noel, and then turning it
to a nouvelle; and Expounding it, a Day of Tidings, I might rather Smile at; I
think it not worthy a Laborious Examination. I need not take it very ill that
he uses me with Contempt and Scorn, when he, p. 208. puts the Excellent
Buchannan among the highest Order of Devils. It was said that our Author says
as much as that the Holy Days are the Power of God to Salvation. He Answered,
p. 209. he looks on them as the Public and Stated Seasons wherein the Power
of God to Salvation is manifested. This is far below what he had before said*
that they are necessary to the Being of Religion, etc. and this Expression he
Apo^ogizeth for, ibid. blaming his Antagonists ill Nature, because he
understood it not of the External Profession of Religion; and that it was meant
that they are very useful for it, as the Exercises of Religion must be
performed, sometimes with Ord^r, Uniformity, and Society. I confess neither is
my Nature so good as to applaud this Answer, nor is my Understanding so good as
to comprehend how this can be the Meaning of that A^^ertion. Would he have us
so good Natured as to think all is sound that he says, whither it can be
reconciled to any sound Sense, or not? I am sure he does not set us a Copy of
such good Nature. We have the Market fallen very low; from the Holy Days being
necessary to the Beauty, and Being of Religion: first, to this, that inward
Religion may do well enough without them; next, that they are not necessary,
but only very useful to the External Profession of Religion. And then, that
External Religion needs them only sometimes. Further, that it may subsist
always without them: but it will not, in that Case, be so Orderly as were
needful. Yet again, it is but for the Uniformity of External Religion, that
they are any way useful, so as the Being and Beauty of it may be kept where
they are not observed: only these Churches are not like their Neighbors. And
lastly, Religion, Internal and External, may have both its Being and Beauty,
in particular Persons, though they observe no Holy Days; only it is useful,
that if they think fit to go to Church, and to Worship God, in Society, on
these Days, that they should observe them. If he will allow us thus to
understand all his big Words, it will tend much to Compromise our Differences.
He takes it amiss, that it was said* that he Damned them all to Hell who do
not observe Christmas; and this he disowneth. The Ground of that Inference was
(for it was not charged on him, further than that it follows from his
Principles) that he makes the Observation of it necessary to the being of
Religion. I think they who are without the Being of Religion, are in the Way
to Hell; yea though they understand it of External Religion, which they are
capable to Practice; what can we think of the State of Presbyterians, who do
not, yea will not; and think they ought not observe the Holy Days, if the
Observation of them be necessary to the Being of Religion? It is not
imaginable that a Person of such Sentiments, can have any Degree of Charity to
them, with respect to their Salvation, unless he think a Man may be Saved
without all External Religion.

SECTION X.
Of Schism.

THe Enquirer falls next upon the Presbyterian notion of Schism, as one of
the New Opinions; the Opinion of the Presbyterians in this, he takes from one
Person, who never pretended to Write in the Name of all the Presbyterians;
neither did ever Write of Schism, of set Purpose, or fully; but only
endeavored to take off that odious Charge that his Party had laid on Us, by
Answering their Arguments: However, I am willing to Account for what he
Opposes in that Author, or to yield to the Force of Argument, if there be any
thing which cannot be Defended. My Antagonist has treated on this Subject so
indistinctly, that there is a Necessity to give a more clear Account of the
Nature of Schism in general; without which we may wrangle, but not Dispute. It
has been an ancient Practice, and is frequent in later Times, and in ours; for
different Parties to brand one another (and that with fierey Zeal) with the
odious Name of Schismatics; without considering, or at least Defineing what it
is that they call Schism; The bitter Epithets among the Ancients given to them
whom they imputed this Blame to, did sufficiently show their Zeal against
Schism, but did more show that there were Schisms among them; and that they
were Angry one with another, and hold ^urth some particular Causes of these
Heats; than lead us to a distinct Knowledge of the general Nature of Schism:
Some modern Authors have Written more dis^inctly of it; yet the particular
Cause they were concerned for, has distorted their Thoughts of the Nature of
Schism into one side; and wrested its Essence to serve their Hypothesis. It is
Observed by the Learned and Reverend Stillingfleet, Irenic. p. 108. that the
word Schism (though it sound harsh, it being often taken in an ill sense) as it
imports a separation from a Church, is not a thing intrinsically evil in it
self; but is capable of the Differences of Good and Evil, according to the
Ground, Reasons, Ends, and Circumstances inducing to such a Separation; the
withdrawing from a Society is but the Materialitie of Schism; the Formalitie of
it must be ^etcht from the Grounds on which that is built. He cites also
another Author, Observing that Heresy and Schism as they are commonly used,
are Two Theological Scarcrows, with which they who would uphold a Party in
Religion, use to fright away such, as making Inquiry into it, are ready to
relinquish and oppose it, if it appear either Erroneous or Suspicious.

. 2. Before I come to search into the Opinion of the Fathers, and others, about
the Nature of Schism; it is needful to premise a few things* 1. Schism is a
Breach of Unity; and therefore, there can be no Schism where there ought to be
no Unity; yea, where there need be no Unity, or where there can be no Unity.
Wherefore that we may understand what Schism is, it is needful to Consider what
Unity should, and must be amongh Churches, and among Christians. There are
several sorts of Unity, that we cannot have with all Churches, as local
Communion: some that we need not have, as Identitie of Rites: some that we
ought not to have with some Churches; as Communion in false Doctrine, or impure
Worship. 2. The Unity of the Church may be Considered in all the Notions in
which the Church is considered; or in all the sorts of Churches: In the
Catholic Church, visible, and invisible, in all the Combinations of Chur^hes
among themselves, National, provincial, classical, and in particular
Comgregatious. It is an undue Notion of Unity and Schism that Independents
have, that they are only to be Considered as in a particular Congregation. 3.
Unity consists in Joining with, and c^eaving to the Church in all these Acts
of Communions with her that the LORD has made our Duty* so that it is not
only Schism to depart from a Church (without just cause) that we have been
joined to; but not to join with some Society of Christians, when it is
possible for us; and when we can do it without Sin; the former may be called a
^ositive, this a negative Separation. 4. Schism may be also called Positive, or
negative in another Sense; the former, when a Party in a Church, does not join
with the Church; yet sets up no Church in a separated way from that Church,
whereof they were Members: the later, when they set up such a distinct
Society; there may be just Causes for both: The first, When I cannot join with
the Congregation I belong to, because of some Corruption that I must partake
of, if I join; but I partake with some other more pure Society; The second,
When a Body of People cannot join without Sin, nor can they have the occasion
of a Society, where they might join; they must either live without Ordinances,
or set up another Religious Society; on this Ground Protestants did thus
separate from the Popish Churches. 5. There may be a partial Separation, when
one Ordinance is so corrupted, that we cannot join in it, and yet can join with
the Church in all other Acts of Communion: and a total Separation, when either
the Church will not suffer us to join with her in any part of her Service,
unless we join in all; or she is so Corrupt that we can join with her in
nothing that is Religous. The former by most wise and sober Men, is not
reckoned such a Schism; as that any are to be blamed as Schismatics on that
account; but the Author I now Debate with, aggravateth that even to a very high
degree of Schism; as also do many of ^is Partisans; driving many Conscientious
and good Men from them, for the sake of some Usages, which themselves count
indifferent, and the others apprehend to be unlawful. 6. The Differences in
Opinion about Religious matters, especially when Managed with heat, and
animosities, may be called Schi^m, according to the import of the Word; yet in
the usual Ecclesiastical notion of Schism, they are not to be so reputed;
unless some kind of separation, or shuning the ordinary Church Communion one
with another, follow upon them. Diversity of Opinion, and of Affection, are
sinful evils; but it is diversity of Religious Practice, following on these,
that makes ChurchiSchism. 7. When a separation falls out in a Church, the
Guilt of it does certainly ly on the one side or the other; and often neither
side is wholly innocent; they who have cause to separate, may manage their Good
cause by evil Methods, and in a way that is not wholly Commendable: now to know
on which side the blame of the Schism ^ieth, we must not always conclude that
they are in the fault. 1. Who are the fewer Number; otherwise most Reformations
of the Church were sinful: Nor, 2. Who separate from the Church Rulers,
themselves being in Possession of Church Authority: for this should condemn our
Reformation from Poperis; Nor, 3. Who separate from that Party that has the
countenance of civil Authority, and has the Law on its side; not only because
it is the Gospel, not the Law of the Land, that is the Rule of our Religion,
and Church Practice: but also because that is variable, and by that Rule, they
who were the sound Party one year, may be Schismatics the other; without any
Change in their Principles or Practice; which is absurd. Wherefore the blame of
Schism, in that case, lies only on them who has the wrong side of that
controverted Matter about which they divide; or who, though their Opinion be
better than that of the opposite Party, yet depart from the Communion of their
Brethren without sufficient Cause; every thing that we may justly blame, not
being sufficient for making a Rent in the Church. Hence it plainly follows,
that Men's assuming to themselves the name of the Church, is not sufficient
Ground for them to Brand such as Schismatics who depart from their Communion:
Where Truth and Gospel Purity is, there is the Church, and they who have most
of these are the soundest Church.

. 3. Having laid this Foundation for Discerning what is truly Schism, and where
the Blame of it lies: I shall next enquire into the Opinion of the ancient
Church, about Schism: it is evident that they did Oppose it; and set forth its
Sinfulness, and sad Consequences, with a great deal of Zeal, and that justly;
for it is not only a sinful thing on the one side, or the other, but is a great
Plague and Judgment from the LORD on a Church, and tends to the of Ruin of
Good Order, of the inward and outward Practice of Religion, and of Men's Souls;
and herein I shall make no Debate with my Antagonist in what he Discourses, p.
211. 212. He is in a vast Mistake, if he reckon it among the New Opinions of
Presbyterians, that they think well of Schism, that is truly such; or speak
diminutively of the Evil and Hazard, and Fatal Effects of it; nay, our
Principle is, that a Man should part with what is dearest to him in the World,
to Redeem the Peace and Unity of the Church; yea, that nothing can Warrant, or
Excuse it, but the Necessity of shuning Sin. It is also evident that the
Ancients were very Liberal in bestowing on one another the odious Names of
Schismatics, as also of Heretic; and that often proceeded from a true (though
mistaken) Zeal for lovely Truth, and beautiful Unity: at other times it might
arise from some sinful Infirmities, that they (as all Men are) were Subject to.
Good Men may be Zealous for their own Opinions, because they take them to be
the Truths of GOD. The Fathers called several Practices Schism, and showed a
great dislike of them all. As, 1. They blamed Dividing from the Universal
Church, as Schism; and there are many things wherein Men may be blamed, under
this Head, which I shall not now mention; it being my Work at present, only to
Enquire into the Opinion of the Fathers in this Matter. I find they were not of
my Adversaries Opinion in this; many things he makes a heavy outcry about,
and blames People for, as Schismatics, and Sectaries, which they laid no such
stress on; They bare with one another, though they Dissered in Rites, and
several Customs. They did not fall out about what they counted indifferent, but
maintained Peace, and Concord, notwithstanding of different Practices in one
Church from another. Eusebius. lib. 5. C. 23. cites Irenaeus, reproving Victor of
Rome (where Usurpation, and imposing on others early began) for Excommunicating
other Churches which kept not Easter on the same Day with him; and he sets
before him some Differences between Polycarpus and Annicetus; so as neither
could persuade the other to be of his Mind; and yet they did lovingly
Communicate together: The Words of Iren. as Eusebius has them, are (...), etc.
Some think they should Fast one Day (to wit, before Easter) some two, others 40
hours; but yet still they retained Peace; the Diversity of their Fasting
Commended the Unity of their Faith: and in the same place (...), they
maintained Peace, and none was cast out for that Difference. Among Cyprians
Epistles, one from Firmilian, shows the same thing, i^ plurimis provinciis
multa pro locorum and nominum varietate diversa fiunt, nec tamen ob haec ab
Ecclesiae Catholicae ^ace atque unitate aliquando discessum est.

. 4. It is also very plain, that the Fathers, (I mean of the first Ages) did
not place the Unity of the Church Catholic in being of the same Opinion about
all points of Doctrine; but did bear with one another, and maintained Peace,
even when they Differed about some of the lesser Truths; yea, when some of them
would impose their Opinions on others, and Censure them who Differed from them;
they were, by the rest, dealt with, not as Maintainers, but Disturbers of the
Peace and Unity of the Church. Justin. Martyr: dialog. cum Tryphon: speaking
of these Jewish Converts who clave to the Mosaical rites; if they did it out of
weakness, and did not impose on other Christians, says of them, (...). That
we must receive them, and Communicate with them, as of the same Mind, or
Affections, with us, and as Brethren. And we find that in the Difference
between Stephen Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, about the
Validity of Baptism Administered by Heretics, Stephen was by the rest of the
Bishops condemned, as a Breaker of the Peace of the Church; because he
Anathematized Cyprian on this account. Firmilian in the Ep. above cited, has
these Words on this occasion, quod nunc Stephanus ausus est facere, rumpens
adversum vos pacem quam semper antecessores ejus vobiscum amore and honor
servabant. Irenae. lib. 4. C. 62. Condemns them as makers of Schism, who used
such Cruelty toward their Brethren; propter modicas and quaslibet causas
magnum and gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt, and dividunt, and quantum in
ipsis est, interficiunt; pacem loquentes, and bellum operantes, vere liquantes
culicem and camelum transglutientes.

. 5. But we find the ancient Fathers with a Holy Zeal, Charging such as
Apostats from the Church, and breakers of her Peace, who held Opinions
contrary to the Essential, and Fundamental, or any of the great Articles of
the Christian Faith; so that they placed the Unity of the Catholic Church, in
a Harmonious consent to these great Truths. Irenae. lib. 1. C. 3. p. 53. edit.
Colon* 1625. having given a short Account of the chief Articles of the true
Religion, has these Words, hanc igitur praedicationem, and hanc ^^dem adepta
Ecclesia, quamvis dispersa in universo mundo, diligenter conservat, a^ si in
una eademque domo habitaret, ac similiter iis fidem habet, ac si unam animam
unumque and idem cor haberet; atque un^ consensu hoc praedicat, docet ac
tradit, ac si uno ore praedita esset. Quamvis enim dissimilia sunt in mundo
genera linguarum, una tamen and eadem est vis traditionis; nec quae constitutae
sunt in Germania Ecclesiae aliter credunt; nec quae in Hispania, neque in
Galliis; neque in Orient, neque in AEgypto, neque in Lybia, aut in medio Orbis
terrarum fundatae sunt, sed quemadmodum Sol Creatura Dei unus and idem est in
universo Mundo; ita and praedicatio veritatis ubiquae lucet, and illuminat eos
qui ad notionem veritatis venire volunt. Eusseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 27.
Cites Irenae, condemning Tatianus, the Author of the Sect of the Encratitae,
and saying of him, (...)* he reckoned his Opinions a falling from the Church,
or a breaking her Unity. The same Historian, lib. 4. c. 24. gives Account of
Egesippus narrating, how long the Church remained a Virgin, Teaching and
Believing nothing but the Law and the Prophets, and what the LORD himself
taught, and he mentions particularly the Churches of Corinth, Rome, and
Jerusalem; and then shows how Heresies arose, whose Authors he calls false
Christ's, false Prophets, and false Apostles, and of them he says, (...), they
divided the Unity of the Church, by their corrupt Doctrines against GOD, and
against his CHRIST. Several other Citations might be brought to this purpose;
but these may be sufficient. I do not Question, but that there might be other
things which might be called Schism, even with respect to the universal Church,
as if any should bring in Idolatrous, or Superstitious Worship, contrary to
the Rules of the Gospel; or should violate any of the necessary and landable
Canons of general Councils, and should set up Societies in opposition, not only
to one or few, but to all the Societies of Christians, or all the Soundest of
them; But of the first, we hear little of the first Ages; neither could the
second be, because they had no general Councils; nor had the Church then begun
to make so many Canons as afterward: for the Third, we find none guilty of
that except some Heretics, who were Noted for their Heresy; and their Schism
little spoken of, as being the Consequent of the other, so it was with the
Novatian Schism.

. 6. There is another sort of Unity much regarded among the Ancients, which
though the Breach of it had as bad influence on all, or most Churches, and so
on the Catholic Church: yet it properly respected Neighbor Churches; either,
which were united by the Bond of one Government, a Provincial, or lesser Synod,
being made up of them: or only living in the vicinitie of one another, or
having frequent occasion of Correspondence; they who were not under any uniting
Bonds, but these commune to all the parts of the Catholic Church, yet had an
Unity of kind Correspondence, mutual Assistance, as occasion offered;
acquainting one another with their Affairs, so far as it was of any Advantage:
admitting the Members of other Churches to Communion with them, on occasion;
refusing Communion with such Members of other Churches, as were by them
Excommunicated: and this Unity was then broken when these Acts of Friendship
were shunned, or refused; especially when they who were cast out by one, were
received to another: or when occasional Communion was either shuned by them who
so joined in another Church, or denied to such Sojourners, if they desired it:
or, when one Church showed Rage, Fury, and Bitterness against another; because
of what they differed about. Instances of this are many: the Difference betwixt
Stephen of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage, came to that Height, that they would
not Communicate together; one of them Anathematized the other: and it spread so
far that the Churches of Europe, and these of Africa did concern themselves in
it. Eusebi^^ (cited Catal. Test, verit. p. 26.) ascribes the Persecution under
Dioclesian chiefly to the Contentions of Priests and Bishops. Basilius Magnus
cited by the same Author, p. 27. makes an Observation, that among Men of other
Employments there was much Concord; in Sol^ vero Ecclesia Dei, pro qua Christus
est mortuus, and in quam Spiritum Sanctum abunde and opulenter ^ffudit, maximum
dissidium, and vehementem multorum, tum inter ipsos, tum contra Divinam
Scripturam dissentionem obs^rvari, and quod horrendissimum est, ipsos Ecclesiae
pr^sides in tanto and Animi and Opinionum inter se dissidio constitutos,
tantaque contrarietate mandatis Domini repugnantes, ecclesicam Dei crudeliter
dissipare and gregem ipsius absque ull^ commiseratione perturbare, ut and ipsis
nunc si unquam, prodeuntibu^ and florentibus iniquis, impleatur illud Apostoli,
ex vobis ipsis exsurgent viri perversa loquentes, ut abstra^ant post se
discipulos. The Learned Owen, of Apostacy, p. 500. observes that the
Scandalo^^ Divisions among Christians, especially among their Leaders was the
first ^tep of the visible Degeneracie of Christians; and afterward because the
Sport of the Heathen.

. 7. The Unity of Associated Churches who were Governed in Common, to which
Government that of the several Congregations was subordinate, consists
especially in the Agreement of the Rules in their Meetings for Managing the
Public and Common Affairs of the Churches, and each Member submitting to what
was Determined by Common Consent of the Plurality; whether it were Injunctions,
Reproofs, or Censures. The Breach of this Unity was when any, one, or more, of
that Ruleing Society took on them to Oppose or Contradict what was Determined
as abovesaid: much more when they did that by themselves, which should have
been done by the whole, as when Foelicissimus, and some others of the
Presbyters of Carthage, absolved some of the Lapsed, neglecting Cyprian the
Bishop, or Praeses, and the Body of the Presbyters: which Cyprian did Highly,
and Justly Resent. Or when they, or any of the People, refused Subjection to
the just Decisions of the Church Rulers Assembled. This sort of Schism is much
of the same Nature with what follows, I insist no further on it: for it is
the same Thing, as to Church Unity, whether any Minister of the Church Rebel
against the Bishop; if that be the right Government of the Church; or against
the Synod, Presbytery Classical, or Congregational; if that be the way that
CHRIST has Appointed. Yea, it is the same Breach of Unity, to set up another
Bishop, beside the true Bishop of the Church; or a new Synod or Presbytery,
beside these which one was before a Member of, or Subject to; yea, or to gather
a Church, and to set up a Minister and Meeting in a Parish, beside what was
orderly there settled. Wherefore the last sort of Unity, or Schism, is that
which belongs to a particular, Congregational Church. This Unity if we take
Schi^m in a large Sense, is broken by Diversity, either of Opinions, or
Affections, among the Members of the Church; when they Disagreee, and Manage
their Differences with Strife and Contention; even though there be no
separation in their public Exercises of Religion. At Corinth there was such a
Schism; they came together, and yet the Apostle says, there were Divisions
((...)) among them. But Schisms in the Church, were of old, and now are, taken
in a more restrained Sense for a causeless separation from the Church in the
public Exercises of Religion; either by withdrawing only, or by setting up
another Religious Society also. This the Fathers Expressed, sometimes by
Rebellion against the Bishop; or withdrawing from him; that is Denying due
Subjection to the Pastor of that Church; and Obedience to him with the
Presbytery. So it is sometimes Expressed by them; but even when the
Presbytery, or Church is not named; it is so to be understood; and the Bishop
is so often Named, because he was (in these times) the constant Praeses of
their Meetings; and even this Praelation (though without sole Jurisdiction,
into which it did at last, Issue) began early to be too much taken Notice of,
as I have more fully showed elsewhere.

8. I shall first show that Schism was often (yea ordinarily) thus understood
by the Ancients. Next, that they did not always blame this Disobedience and
Separation as a Sinful Schism: but allowed it to be done in some Cases, and for
some Causes. For the former, Cyprian in many Places condemns this, as Schism:
Ep. 40.. 4. Edit. 1593. Deus unus est, and Christus unus, and una Ecclesia, and
Cat^edra una, super Petrum Domini voce fundata; aliud Altar constitui, aut
Sacerdotium novum fieri, praeter unum Altar, and unum Sacerdotium non potest;
Quisquis alibi collegerit spargit, Adulterium est, impium est, quodcunque
Humano Furore instituitur, ut Dispositio Divina violetur. Here it is evident
that he speaks of Separating from the Church; also, Ep. 55.. 6. Neque enim
aliunde nata sunt Schismata, quam unde, quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur;
nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex vice Christi
cogitatur. This also Points at Deserting the Lawful Pastor of the Church; and
Setting up a Meeting in Opposition to him, and the Church. What he says of one
Priest, and one Judge, cannot be meant, that the Presbyters were no Priests;
for that was contrary to the known Sentiments of Cyprian; but it is to be
understood of one Church Authority, in Opposition to Setting up Altar against
Altar; likewise, Ep. 64.. 4. H^ sunt ortus atque conatus Schismaticorum male
cogitantium, ut sibi placeant, ut Praepositum superbo tumore contemnant: sic de
Ecclesia receditur, sic Altar profanum foris collocatur; sic contra Pacem
Christi, and Ordinationem atque Unitatem Dei rebellatur. Other Testimonies to
the same Purpose might be brought, Ep. 69.. 7. he calls the Church, Plebs
Sacerdoti unita, and Pastori suo Grex adhaerens: and Ep. 38.. 1. says of
Schismatics, ^um Episcopo portionem Gregis dividere; id est a Pastore oves,
and Filios a Parente separare, and Christi Membra dissipare. And de Unitate
Eccles.. 10. he says of them, Conventicula sibi diversa constituunt; so also
Ignat. ad Mag* nes. p. 32. Edit. Vossii, quarto, 1646. (...), they conveened
not firmly (that is, it would not hold in Law) according to the Command; and
Ep. ad Smyrn. p. 7. (...): who does any thing (viz. in Religious Matters)
without the Knowledge of the Bishop: (that is, in a Parish without the Pastor,
or in a Presbytery, without them orderly met, with their Praeses) he serves
the Devil. The second thing abovementioned is, to show that there were some
Causes, for which the Ancients allowed People to separate from their Bishop, or
the Church, that they were Members of. I find but three expressie mentioned, 1.
Apostacy from the Christian Faith: as in the Case of Martialis and Basilides,
who Sacrificed to Idols, Ep. Synodal. apud Cyprian. quae est, 65.. 1, 3, 4.
where, after many Words to this Purpose, are these, Propter quod Plebs
obsequens praeceptis Domini, and Deum metuens, a peccatore Praeposito separare
se debet, nec se ad Sacrilegi Sacerdotis Sacrificia mis^ere; quando ipsa maxim
habeat Potestatem vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. A
second Cause was Haeresie, Irenae. lib. 1. c. 13. Opportet long fugere ab eis;
speaking of Haereticks. Origin. Homil. 7. in Ezekiel. allows one to separate
from his Bishop: Si habueris (says he) occasionem Doctrinae p^ssimae, and
aliena ab Ecclesia dogmata. Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 22. tells us that at
Antioch many of the Clergy, and People withdrew, and set up private Assemblies;
when three Arrian Bishops Eulalius, Euphronius, and Placentius were set over
them. And lib. 2. c. 24. that they did the like when Leontius, who favored the
Arians, was set up: and that Flavianus and Diodorus took the Charge. Vincent.
Lyrin. adversus Haer. c. 16 relates of Photinus Bishop of Sirmium, a Man of
great Abilities, that when the People discerned his Error, Quem ante^ quasi
Arietem Greg^s sequebantur, eundem deinceps veluti Lupum fugere coeperunt.
Thirdly, The Scandalous and Wicked Life of a Bishop: which the Words cited out
of that Synodal Ep. in Cyprian, a little above, do plainly bear; and Irenae.
lib. 4. c. 44. Qui vero Presbyteri serviunt suis voluptatibus, and non
praeponunt ^imorem Dei in cordibus suis, sed contumeliis agunt reliquo^, and
principalis confessionis tumor^ elati sunt, and in absconsis agunt mala, ab
omnibus absistere opportet. I shall not now determine whither this was sound
Doctrine; if it be understood of Peoples deserting their Pastor for his
Personal Immoralities, before the Sentence of a Church Judicatorie be
interposed. I only relate the Opinion of the Ancients. Origin. indeed says
Homil. 7. in Ezech. that they should not, for his Scandal, desert the Faith
that he Preached: But he speaks nothing of their deserting his Ministry, nor
contradicts the rest whom I have cited.

9. I now come to consider what Apprehensions Modern Writers have had of
Schism. And here were a large Field to Expatiat in; If I should Examine all or
most of them, so many have written on this Subject, and so different their
thoughts are of it. Wherefore I choose one, whom, I think my Antagonist will not
except against, the Learned Bishop of Worcester, in his Irenic. p. 109. The Sum
of whose Discourse is; all are bound to join into some Church Society; and
being so joined, should continue in that Society, till his Communion with them
becomes Sin. Now for what makes it Sin to continue in Church Communion, and
consequently warranteth Separation; he supposes, that Corruption in the
Essentials of the Constitution of the Church, may warrant it; but where there
are Corruptions crept into a true Church, yet remaining such, he says the
Question is, whither we may separate from such a Church, for purer
Administrations; particularly, whither we should separate from a Church,
because of Corruptions in the ^xercise of Discipline: he determines it, that
one may separate where there are Corruptions in Doctrine and Practice, which
are avowed; and owning them, is required as the Terms of Communion with the
Church: he allows in that Case, not only Noncommunion, but a total and
positive Separation: but he tells us, that where Soundness of Doctrine is
retained, but some Corruptions in Practice are tolerated, but not imposed,
Separation is unlawful on that Account. He says thirdly, where Doctrine is
sound, but some unlawful, or suspected Practice is required to be owned, and
conformed to, denying of such Conformity and Communion with the Church in
these things is lawful, but positive Schism, or erecting Altar contra Altar
is not lawful. These are Concessions of that profoundly Learned Writer. Against
which I have nothing to object, but what I have elsewhere Debated with him,
viz. Where some unlawful, or suspected Action is required to be done by
Ministers or People, and if the Church so imposing, will not suffer them to
have Communion with her in any of Gods Ordinances, unless they will conform in
these, both they must do (for keeping a good Conscience) and he allows them a
Negative, and Partial Separation: and the Church forces them on a Positive and
Total Separation: what shall they do in that Case? either they must live
without Gospel Ordinances; or they must set up Meetings wherein they must have
them: the former is unreasonable; the latter, is, that Positive Separation
which he condemns. I with he, or any else, would tell us what is to be done
in that Case. Let us then, improve that general, and indisputable Maxim; that
we ought not to join with any Church, however commendable she be in many
things, when our joining does engage us in any Action that is our Personal Sin:
and that other Truth, which cannot be denied; that when People are driven away
from partaking of the Word and Sacraments with the Church, unless they will do
that which is sinful, or that they, after their uttermost Diligence and
Sincerity in Searching, apprehend to be sinful; they ought not wholly to live
without the Word or Sacraments; and it will clearly follow, that a positive
Separation, even from a true Church; and setting up a Church in a Church, is
not only lawful, but is a Duty; and the Sin of that Schism does not ly on them
who so leave the Church, or are driven from her; but on that Church which
requires such unlawful Terms of Communion, and imposes them with such Rigor.

10. Having thus Prefaced to our Debate about Schism. I proceed to Examine what
my Adversary brings to prove the Scots Presbyterians to be Schismatics;
which he attempteth without making any Distinction among them: though he
knows there were different Practices among them, with respect to joining in
Communion with the Episcopal Church. He says, there is not a Church on Earth,
with which they can join in Communion, without fear of being polluted. It was
Answered, that we can join with the Churches of Holland, France, (when the
Protestants had their Assemblies there) and Geneva. etc. It was not said by the
Author whom he refuteth, that we dislike several things in these Churches; but
by him: and it was Answered, we can communicate with a Church that is not so
pure as we wish: what we dislike we shun the Practice of it; but do not, for
that, refuse to communicate with the Church where it is found. His Refutation
of this is, at this rate it will be hard to find Schismatics in all the
Records of the Church. This is most false: for some did cast off Communion
totally with the Church, and set up separate Meetings, when they could blame no
part of Church Practice: but had Quarrels with the Persons that governed the
Church. As in the Case of Felicissimus, who quarreled with Cyprians Promotion,
and several others who made Schisms, because they could not be made Bishops.
Again, he argues, we cannot be said to be Members of a particular Church, or
to hold Communion with it, if we do not join in their Worship, as it is
established among them. This is easily Answered by a plain Distinction; unless
we join in their established Worship, as to the greatest and chief Acts of it;
conceditur: as to all the parts of it, even to the least, negatur. I may join
with a Church in the Word and Sacraments; and yet if they have a Holy Day or
two beside the Sabbath, may forbear, yea I may, without this, be a Member of
that Church (if they will suffer me) which all the Reformed Churches do, except
the Episcopal Church of England. I showed before, that the Ancients did not
place the Unity of the Church in an Uniformity in these Punctilio's, (so they
who own them, do reckon them) and the Modern Churches, mostly are of the same
Sentiments, and Practice. In Confirmation of this his Argument, he has these
Words, p. 214, 215. Since he forbears the Practice of these things he
disliketh, why may he not be said to hold Communion with all visible Churches
on Earth. And instanceth not only in the Churches of France; but in the Roman
Church. This is an Absurdity beyond what he is aware of; for some Churches we
are obliged wholly to flee from; because of Fundamental Errors, Idolatry, and
horrid Corruptions of all Ordinances: so we sep^rate totally from the Church of
Rome, so the Orthodox of old refused to Communicate with, or be Members of the
Arian Churches; yet they did not shun Communion with some Churches, that
differed from them in small Matters, as I have showed above,. 4. of this
Section. And the Learned Stillingfleet (as I have observed already) allows of
a Partial Noncommunion, where Communion is not totally cast off. What he says,
of our no more coming near a Liturgy than we would Sacrifice our Children in
the Valley of the Son of Hinnom: these I say, are not the Words of Truth and
Soberness; nor have they so much of Argument in them, as of unreasonable
Sarcasm; and are not to be regarded. Cannot one dislike a greater and lesser
Evil, unless his Aversion to both be equal?

11. He falls next on the Doxologie, p. 216. and does insinuate without any
Shadow of Truth or Candor, that we turn out the Episcopal Clergy for presuming
to retain it in Public^* Worship: all Scotland knows the contrary. We do not
use it, but we never laid such Weight on using it, as to forbear all Communion
with a Congregation where it is used; I called it a Humane Composure. He says,
the Matter of it is Orthodox and Unquestionable; Ergo, it is no Humane
Composure; non sequitur; I said; there is no Warrant for constant Use of it. He
says, there is as good Warrant for it, as there is for Extemporary Prayer in
Public Worship. This is false; we read of no Praying by a Book, or set Form;
but the Spirits Help, not that of the Book, is the Help we must look for, not
only as to the Manner, but the Matter of our Prayers; what we should Pray for;
Romans 8. 26. But I insist not on this* he confesses it to be a Digression; and
but touches it slightly; I judge it a very impertinent Digression, (but I
behoved to follow as he leads) for I think neither Ancient nor Modern Divines
will call them Schismatics, who cordially join with the Church where they live
in all of her Worship, except this; and it seems he has little Ground to prove
the Presbyterians Schismatics, that he brings in this to help out his Proof
against us. It is false also, that all the Churches abroad have Humane
Ceremonies so twisted with their Solemn Worship, that Presbyterians cannot join
with them. We have often (and do when occasion serves) very cordially, and to
our Edification, joined with them; and yet partake in none of these: nor is so
much of these among them as he would make us believe. Another of his Arguments
to prove us Schismatics is, p. 215. If the present Presbyterians had lived a
hunder and fifty years before the Council of Nice, there was then a necessity
(by their Principles) to separate from the Unity of the Church; because all the
things they scruple were then practiced. It was Answered, that the Hierarchy
was not then in the Church; this he takes no notice of, nor shall I, for we
have already Debated it sufficiently. Neither do we make the Being of the
Hierarchy the Ground of Separation; but that Ministers, at least, must own it,
or have no Communion with their Church. But he tells us of a great many other
things that were then used, as Anniversary Days, Significant Ceremonies, the
Sign of the Cross, etc. And beseeches me to read some of the ancient Monuments
of the Church. I thank him for his good Advice; I have followed it, in some
degree (though I cannot Brag of my Reading, nor Vilify others, as if their
Reading were short of mine) before he gave it; and shall yet further, as I can;
and though I find that some of these crept early into the Church; (and yet, may
be, not so early as he imagines) I do not find that the ancient Church placed
her Unity in these things; and I think, by the small Reading that I have
attained, I have proved the contrary, and therefore if we had then lived, we
might have been counted no Schismatics. I further Answer, the Ancients placed
Schism, with respect to the Universal Church, in her Heterodoxy, not in
different Rites; and therefore we maintain Unity with the Fathers, while we
believe as they did; for that Unity that should be in a particular Church; we
are not capable of it, but with that Church where we converse, not with that
which was 1600 or 1700 years ago; therefore it is improper to say we are
Schismatics, because of what we would have been in that possible Case that
never was.

12. His third Consideration to prove us Schismatics is, that our Predecessors
condemned the same Practices as Schismatical; the Answer to this was given;
this Argument was used by him before, and I Answered it before: He says; I
leave him to Guess where it was brought, and Answered: and truly I thought it
was an easy Guess, being but in the end of the former page, viz. 33. If he had
read heedfully what he undertaketh to refute, he could not have been at a Loss
here. It was there told him, that as the former Presbyterians did not separate
from the Episcopal Church, so nor did all of them of late: and they who did,
were driven away by the Apostasy of his Party, from the way that they had
engaged in; and that by forcible changing of the Church Government, without her
Consent, or any Means used to satisfy the Consciences of them who scrupled. I
add, in former times Presbytery continued, only Bishops were superinduced;
therefore Ministers did not leave their Stations, till driven from them: but at
the last Settling of Episcopacy, Presbytery was razed, (so far as Men could)
and what Show of it was left, stood on the Foot of the Bishops Authority, who
Called and Empowered them to Act. This true Presbyterian Ministers could not
submit to; it being an owning of a Power in the Church, which they are
convinced is unlawful. His fourth Argument is, No Schismatics can be named in
the Records of Ecclesiastical History, to whom that Name is more agreeable,
than to the Presbyterians in Scotland. In Answer to this, the Donatists were
mentioned, as Schismatics, more justly reputed such, than the Scots
Presbyterians can be. And the Novatians might also have been brought as another
Instance; to whom I confess, what was said agrees more directly, viz. That
they separated, because the Church admitted the Lapsed to Repentance. His
Refutation of this is a long Discourse of the Original of the Donatists; in
many Circumstances, that do no way concern the present Purpose: and in which
are some Mistakes, as far from the Account that we have in the ancient Records,
as that Lapse of Memory is, ascribing somewhat to the Donatists, which agrees
better to the Novatians; and yet there was great Affinity between these two
sorts of Schismatics; they both had the same Rise; Donatus in Africa; and
Novatus a Presbyter at Rome; (together with one of the same Name, who, upon
Discontent, came from Carthage to Rome, and joined with him in making a Schism)
both of them were, (as they thought) disobliged by the Election of a Bishop,
the one, that Caeciliaenus was Elected; who (as he alleged) was ordained by a
Traditor; yea, was a Traditor himself; that is, in time of Persecution, had
given their Bibles to the Heathen to be burnt; the other, that Cornelius was
made Bishop; both of them pretended a greater Zeal for the Purity of the
Church, than the rest of the Pastors had; the one, that all the Churches had
fallen into Apostasy, through their Communion with them who had been Traditors;
the other, that they who so had fallen, or otherwise, in time of Persecution,
were not to be admitted to Church Communion again, nor get Absolution; though
he, nor his Followers did not deny, that they might obtain Mercy from God, upon
true Repentance, (the contrary of which some impute to them) both of the Sects
were called (...), Puritans; both of them separated from all the Churches of
the World; and managed their Separation with unreasonable Rigor; especially
the Donatists, and among them the Circumcelliones; who were furiously enraged
against all who differed from them* Both of these Schisms spread far and wide.
It is observed by some, that there were of both sorts, Men of strict Lives.
Though some of the Ancients tell us of their Haeresies; yet others acknowledged
their Agreement with others in the Faith: of the Donatists Cresconius said,
they confessed the same Jesus born, dead, and risen again; they had the same
Religion, and the same Sacraments, and there was no Difference about the
Practice of Christianity. Augustine confesses that their Difference was not
about the Head, but about the Body, not about Christ, but about his Church.
Augustine. de Unitat. Eccles. c. 4. and Epistle 45. says, they were agreed in
the Creed, in Baptism, and other Sacraments of our Lord; also Ep. 162. he
tells us, that Miltiades in a Synod at Rome, and his Brethren, ^ffered to
hold Communion with the Bishops that Majorinus (whom Donatus and his Party had
set up in Opposition to Cae^ilianus) had ordained; which Condescendence is also
evident, from Collat. 1. Carthag. Art. 16. apud Optat. Milevit. p. 45. 6. Edit.
Paris. 1631.

. 13. Our Author tells us, that we ought to have named Schi^maticks in the
Primitive Church; whose Pleas when Represented with all possible advantage, are
not so fair and plausible as these of the Presbyterians. I Answer the Donatists
and Novatians were Schismatics in the ancient Church; and their Pleas for
their Separation were not so fair as these of the Presbyterians, which I shall
show in these Three things. 1. They had no good, nor sufficient Ground to
separate; we declare that we will never separate, because the Church admits
scandalous Sinners to Repentance and Communion, as the Novations did: nor
because some Ministers and People, are not so innocent as they should be, as
the Donatists did: we condemn their Schism as much as he does. What the
Donatists alleged was false in matter of Fact, as was made appear. First, By
some Judges appointed by the Emperor, to try the matter* next by a Synod held
at Arles: And lastly, by the Emperor, after a full Hearing of the Matter: and
if it had been true; it was no just ground of Separation; though it had been a
great Grievance. The Novation Plea had no weight in it at all, because the
Church was not culpable in such Admission, which they did unreasonably bl^me.
Can he Charge the Presbyterians with any thing that is so unreasonable. What we
dislike is, an usurped Power set up in the Chuch; and humane Ceremonies imposed
on us; and our owning of these formally in Words, or materially in our
Practice, is made a condition of our Communion with the Church. It is true, if
he can Prove our Scruples to be unreasonable; and that what we dislike is
Warrantable; he may blame us, for none Compliance; but what is the Question
between him and us; if we Scruple without cause, the blame lies on us: if not,
the Guilt of Separation lies on them who impose such things. Wherefore the
Determination of this Point, who is culpable in the Separation that is in the
Church at Present, depends on the Question now under Debate, about
Episcopacie and Ceremonies. 2. We always were willing to unite with them, if
they will remove the Stumbling Blocks that lie in our ways; which themselves
confess to be indifferent. I mean the Ceremonies; and if they will not require
our owning of Episcopacie, directly nor indirectly. The Novations nor Donatists
never offered such terms of Peace. It is not what they do that skareth us from
them, but what they will needs force us to do. 3. We do not Exclude any of them
from our Communion; as the Schismatics of old did. Who either of their Clergy,
or of the People have been Excluded from the LORD'S Supper with us, on account
of their Opinion in the things that are matter of our Debate. 4. We do not
condemn their Church, as no Church; as the Donatists did to all beside
themselves; we condemn only some things among them that are of inferior moment.
5. It is evident that themselves are the cause of all the Schism; and they are
not of the healling temper that the Church was of, which had to do with the
Donatists: that Church was willing to forbear them, even in their most
unreasonable Separation; and to indulge such as were of a Religious
Conversation; but differed from the Church without cause, in matters of lesser
moment* The Episcopal Church had no Pity on such as differed in indifferent
Ceremonies, acknowledged to be such; but drove them away from their Communion
unless they would comply in these, which they could not do without wounding
their Conscience. If he can Prove that we deny Communion with the Episcopal
Church, on on frivolous pretenses, as he supposes, p. 222; he gains what he
contendeth for; but he finds it easier to suppose this, than to Prove it. It
was said by his Antagonist, that the Donatists forsook their lawful Pastors;
which Presbyterians do not: the Bishops being none of our Pastors. He says
this is the very Crime of the Presbyterians, in their Erecting Altar against
Altar. Answer, 1. That is not all that we plead for, as is clear from what has
been said. I have showed. 8. Cases in which, even lawful Pastors may be
forsaken; and ibid. that this may be done when they require unlawful conditions
of Communion with them. But I say, 2. That the Bishops set up in Scotland were
none of the lawful Pastors of the People over whom they pretended to Rule. And
I am willing that Matter be Determined. 1. By the strength of Argument; if he
can Prove the Warrantableness of the Power that they Claim to, we must yield.
2. By the Suffrage of the ancient Church, which was positive, plain and
unanimous in this, that the People should choose their own Bishop, and other
Church Officers; see Instances, Inquiry into the Constitution, etc. of the
Primiiive Church; c. 3. p. 63. Append. ad Catalog. Test, veritat. p. 33. The
ancient Church did never own a Pastoral relation, in any Man, to a People, on
whom he was thrust by the Magistrate, or any Power not Properly Ecclesiastical,
and without their own Consent. This is our case, the Church of Scotland was in
Peaceable Possession of Presbyterian Government, the Magistrate, not the Church,
made a Change, and set Men over the People to be their Bishops, whose Office
they could not own, and whose Persons they had no concern in: I Question
whether the Primitive Church (I mean the first Ages) would have counted it
Schism to disown such, and to cleave to their own lawful Pastors, who had been
called by them, settled by Church Authority among them, and labored among them,
to their Comfort and Edification. His denying the Donatists to have taken their
Name from Donatus a casis nigris, is contrary to Petavius, rationar: tempor:
lib. 6. p. 249. I know not what Vouchers he has for him: his Assertion, p.
220. that Presbyterians have thrown Deacons out of the Church, is so false,
that it is a wonder how he could have the Confidence to Affirm it: If he
understand it of Preaching Deacons, he should have said so: and proved such an
Officer to have been appointed by CHRIST to be in his Church.

. 14. His Fifth Reason to prove the Presbyterians Schismatics, is from the
Doctrine of Cyprian; of which he is so confident; that he makes my asserting
that a Bishop in Cyprians time was no more but a Pastor of a Flock, or a
Presbyterian Moderator, not a Diocesan; to be a plain Demonstration that I have
never read Cyprians Writings. If I had read much more than either he or I have,
I should not so often, nor so superciliously, vilisie others. If I have read
little he will find it the easier to refute what I have Written. Another
Learned Author of his Party has taken to task these few Lines in my Def. of
Vindic. which he now undertaketh to refute: Which Book I have Answered (with
such reading as I could attain, both of Cyprian, and other ancient Writers) in
a Book Entitled the Cyprianick-Bishop Examined; where I have endeavored to
Answer all that he has here Written, before I saw it. I am not willing to
Transcribe it, being the most part of that Book. He may read it, if he thinks
fit; and if he, or any other, will refute what is there said of Episcopacie in
Cyprians Age, I shall be willing to be Informed by him. His Triumphant
Conclusion, p. 225. evanisheth into smoke, if what has been said, be duly
Considered. He begineth another Debate, about Preaching Morality; which he
passes in a Word, overlooking all that had been said in Refutation of his
former Book on that Head: While it was told him that not all the Clergy, but
he, and such as he, was so blamed. Also, that Preaching Morality was never
Censured, but Applauded, and looked on as necessary; but what we Quarelled was,
that some do only Preach Morality, and neglect holding forth to the People the
aids of the Spirit, by which they should obey the Law acceptably, and the
Righteousness of CHRIST, on account of which they, and their Works that are
moraly Good, should be accepted; and a great deal more to this purpose was
Discoursed, to show his Mistakes in that Matter: to all which he makes no
Return, but that his Antagonist had seen no Sermons of his in Print, nor heard
him: and therefore could not tell what sort of Doctrine he preached. I think
there was sufficient ground for thinking that he uses to Preach in that
strain, seeing he so does Defend and Applaud it; but much more occasion was
given for so thinking, from a large Discourse in his Book; that I was then
Refuting, Vindicating their way of Preaching, in which their is nothing of that
which is the Marrow of Gospel Preaching, viz. the imputed Righteousness of
CHRIST, and the influence of his Spirit, by which we must do that which
pleases GOD. His so often Rehearsing (as he has done the Third time) an Error
of the Press, which makes a Passage that is unexceptionable to be Nonsense and
Blasphemy, after it had been Solemnly disowned by the Author; this, I say,
shows the Man's temper: I am sure this silly shift will Reflect more on
himself, in the Eyes of them who are not Malicious, than it will on the Person
whom he would Defame.

SECTION XI.
Of the Government of the first Christian Church of Scotland.

ANother Debate my Antagonist Engages in, wherein what we hold must be
reckoned among the New Opinions of Presbyterians is, what way the Christian
Church of Scotland was at first Governed; whether by Bishops, or the Pastors of
the Church, acting in Parity? We cannot give a distinct and paricular Account
of their way, in this Matter, because of the Silence, and Defectiveness of the
History of these times; and therefore, it is a Mis-representation when he
says, that we hold that they were Presbyterians; if he understand Presbyterian
Government in the the usual Sense, as made up of Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries,
Synods, and General-Assemblies; we suppose they had a Government in that
Church; and that it was Managed by Church Officers, and directed by the Word of
GOD, as they then understood it; for this we can bring no other Proof; but that
they were Christians, and we owe them that Charity, having no cause to think
otherwise of them: and I think this will not be Contested between him and me.
All the Question that remains is, whether the Teachers of the Church had
equal Power, and Ruled in Parity, or had Bishops set over them, who had the
Power of Ruling the Church; the rest having only Power to Teach. We are for
their Equality of Power; my Antagonist for Episcopal Jurisdiction to have been,
even then, in the Church of Scotland. I do agree with him that this is question
facti, and must be determined by Testimony; and that of Credible Witnesses,
who might know the Truth of what they Assert. I have brought Credible History
for what we say; all which he Rejects as fabulous; some of his Party
(particularly Spotswood) bring Instances of Bishops in Scotland, at that time,
without any to Attest the Truth of what he Writes. Which of us, then, go on
the best grounds? Our Author had in the Apology (which I take to be his)
pretended to Refute what I had Written on this Head; First Vindic. Question. 1.
p. 4. 5. all that he says in the Apology, I Answered; Deff. of Vindic. p. 36.
37. he does in the Book now before me, endeavor to Answer part of what was
said (as he had also done in the Apology) overlooking what he thought not fit
to touch. I shall now Consider what he here says; omitting nothing that is
Material: He has not yet cleared his Assertion that Blondel took that History
of the Culdees ruling the Church, from Buchanan and his temporary Monks,
Boethius and others, or such as were little removed from his own Age. For
Blondel does not mention one Monk contemporarie with Buchanan; nor any Monk
save Fordon, who was far removed from his Age; wherefore the Objection from the
Word Contemporarie is not Obviated, nor Answered, by any thing said in this, or
his former Book. It was Objected that his Rejeing the Writers whose Testimonies
were brought, as incompetent Witnesses, was to Raze the Foundation of the
History of our Nation, which he Answers, by showing that it is the
Establishing, not Razing of History, to require Competent Witnesses for what we
Believe: This is to divert into another Question; what was blamed in him was
not, that Witnesses whose Testimony we receive, must be Competent; but whether
these adduced by me, in the Debate, were such. I only Mark here; not Examine
(being aside from our present Debate) what he says, p. 230. that if History be
Destroyed, and the Moral Certainty that is conveyed by Testimony (he must
mean Humane Testimony) then the Authority of Revelation falls, and Atheism is
Introduced; at least boundless Sceptecilm, and uncertainty. Whether this
tends not to make Scripture, and all our Religion to Depend on the Churches
Testimony, let it be Considered. If the Vindicator said, that we may believe a
Matter of Fact without sufficient Evidence, let him be loaded with as many
Epithets as he can Invent; he Pleaded that Buchanan, Boethius, Major, Fordon,
Usher, the Centuriators, Baronius, Beda, and Prosper, had given Account of the
Affairs of the Scots Church, and if none of these be Competent Witnesses, our
History is lost; and cannot be made up by the Collateral Testimony of some of
the Roman Historians, who spoke of our Affairs obiter.

2. Our Author is at a great deal of Pains, from p. 231. to Prove, that no
History is to be Believed unless it be ^ttested by sufficient Witnesses, who
had occasion to know what they Affirm; I would gladly know who Opposes him in
this; he fully Proves what was never Denied by any Body, so far as I know; nor
can it be Denied by any Man in his Wits; I mean, without this History cannot be
Believed upon the Faith of these Witnesses, which are thus incompetent; for by
other Topics a Matter of Fact, done 1000 years ago may be sufficiently Proved;
as the Learned Heideggerus Proves both many Antediluvian, and Postdiluvian,
Passages, by Consequences drawn from Scripture, in his Excellent Book, Historia
Patriarcharum; Wherefore I look on Du Lamy's Work, de Authoritate Argumenti
negantis in Quaestionibus facti, to be of good use, and that the Popish legends
are by that Argument solidly refused. I confess also, that there is much
strength in Eusebius his neglecting of some Books as Spuroius, because not
sufficiently Attested. Only I shall take Notice of a few things in his Managing
of this his Discourse, though I fully assent to the Conclusion of it, viz. that
History must be sufficiently Attested: and then I shall State this Question
about the Credebility of History, a little more clearly than he has done. And,
1. I observe, that p. 233. he denies that quaestio facti can be otherwise
Determined. The contrary of which I have already showed, viz. that it may be
Determined in some cases, by Consequences drawn from uncontested Matters of
Fact. Next he says, ibid. that the Presbyterians hold the Affirmative in the
present Debate, about our ancient Church Government; this is Questionable, if
it be not downright a Mistake: it is confessed on both hands that the Culdees
taught the Church at that time; the Question is either, whether they were
Bishops, or not; we hold the Negative; or if he Word it thus, whether they were
any more than Presbyters, we say, no: or, whether there were Bishops set over
these Teaching Culdees, or not; we are still for the Negative; wherefore we
might put him to Prove his Affirmative. I further Object, that, in the end of
the same page, he insinuates, that they against whom he Debateth do believe
all things without Examining the Testimonies on which their Credibilitie is
founded. We do not so with any thing of Moment; far less with all things. Yea,
we do not so in the Case now under Debate. Another Remark I make on what he
has, page 231. and 235. If a Matter of Fact be not Attested by any Credible
Author living within 200 years of the Period in which such a Thing is said ^o
have happened, it is to be looked on as a Fable: and he adds that Du Launy
supposed that Orall Tradition could not carry any Matter of Fact further; and
to Ridicule any who might think otherwise, he has devised a Ridiculous Story
of the King of China. This may suffer a little Correction; and must not be
taken as a Principle, neither on his Authority, nor Du Launy's; more than a
Story of 200 years old can be. 1. It is hard to fix a Period, how far Orall
Tradition can hand down a Story to Posterity; especially, if it be not about
the Credenda of Religion: If I can believe a Story of 200 years old, from a
grave and wise Author, whose veracity I do not Question; I know not why the
Addition of 50, or a 100 years more, should make it incredible, if it come from
the same hand. Wherefore this is too peremptory a Decision: there are on the
other hand, many cases in which, Oral Tradition may be very doubtful in far
less time than 200 years. 2. If this Doctrine be received, what shall we think
of the Histories of Eusebius, Socrates, and others, which our Author, as well
as others, Cites often and Considently? It is true, they give us Vouchers out
of ancient Writings; but many of these may be Proved to be Fabulous, by this
same Argument: and this they do not always. 3. He forgets and contradicts
himself, in the very next page; while he shows, out of Sir George Mackenzie;
that the Bards repeated the Scottish Genealogies at their Marriages, Births, and
other Solemnities, and calls this an infallible Conveyance of true, constant,
and perpetual Tradition: here is but Oral Tradition; and it went beyond the
Limits of 200 years; otherways, it could not be a sufficient Evidence for all
the Kings that were before Fergus the Second; which is the Design for which Sir
George brings it. 4. Good Historians, who make it their Business to Search
into the Affairs of former Ages, may attain to some probable knowledge of what
passed for more than 200 years, by Comparing one thing with another; which
others who have not made that their Study cannot easily reach; yea, they do not
always set down all the Grounds of what they Write, for that would oblige them,
sometimes to write a Controversy, instead of a History. I say not this to
Oblige any Body to take all on Trust that Historians, even of the best Note, do
Write; but to show the unwarrantableness of Determining so dogmatically about
the Credibility of History; Neither do I think Defending our Opinion about the
ancient Church Government in Scotland needs the help of this Observation.
Before he had peremptorly Condemned the Historical Evidence that we bring; he
should have Answered what Sir George Mackenzie (an Author that he seems to
value) has Written against the Bishop of St. Asaph, p. 311. that History
requires, nor admits, no Mathematical, nor legal Proof. But is satisfied with
Moral certainty inferred from probable Tradition, old Manuscripts, credible
Histories, the Testimony of foreign Authors; and probable Reasons. 2. That
our Histories being already acquiesced in, and received by the Generality of
Mankind, and especially by Critics, Antiquaries, and Historians, the best
Judges in such cases, need no Confirmation, nor further Proof. And he shows,
p. 6. that Livies History has no surer Grounds than Tradition, he Writing long
after the time he speaks of. All this he fully Proves.

3. He does, p. 236. unjustly suppose, that I had asserted, that the History of
our Nation must perish, if there was no Presbyterian Church in Scotland, so
near the Apostolic Age. I said not so, nor had Words to that Effect. What I
did, and do affirm is, that if none who have written the History of this
Nation, are to be believed, our History is lost; for the Collateral Proofs from
the Roman Historians; that he talks of, could give us but a very lame Account
of our Affairs. He makes, p. 237. these Recitations of the Bards to be twisted
with the Practice and Custom of the Nation; and that by a constant, and
uninterrupted Practice; and that from the first Colonies that were planted
here: now let me ask him; what Authority he has for this; is not here an Oral
Tradition (for these Recitations are not extant, but are perished time out of
Mind) for much more than two hundred years, and thrice as many more. Nor does
Sir George Mackenzie give better Evidence for the Antiquity of our Kings, than
we give for what we assert. He tells us against Saint Asaph, p. 129. that the
Tradition of our Nation might well be preserved for six hundred years, which is
far beyond our Authors Period. That I Reasoned against Christmas from the
Silence of the first Ages, is no way inconsistent with what I have, on this
Occasion, written; for if our Author can prove it from any other Topic, we
shall not reject it. We shall tell him, whence the Historians had what we
receive, and assert from them; when we come to Debate with him, the Truth of
things we hold; we are now upon the general Argument, of the Credibility of a
History. We are not obliged to give him Instances of other Presbyterian
Churches before Calvin and Beza, others have done it. What he says of the
Waldenses I have disproved, Section 1.. 1. I promised, above, to state this
Question, about the Credibility of History, more clearly than he has done; for
which there is much need; for he neither distinguishes Matters related, nor
Persons relating, nor the Weight that is to be laid on what is related in
History. 1. Then Matters that are of no great Moment, whither they be true or
false, we may receive with a Historical Faith, on more slender Grounds than
what is of great Moment, or, the Consequences of Believing which is of great
Advantage, or in Convenience. Matters that we build an Article of Faith on, or
that our Christian Practice, yea, or that any great Worldly Interest depends
on the Truth or Falsehood of what is told us, have need to have Credentials
proportioned to the Stress that is to be laid on them. And therefore I yield so
far to this Author, that he shall not be obliged to believe what we assert in
this Matter, unless we bring such Evidences as the Matter requires, and is
capable of. 2. The Credibility of a Historian, must bear some Proportion to the
Degree of Assent, that we are to give to the thing narrated. If our Author will
have us to look on any History, as an infallible and irrefragable Ground of our
Belief; he must give us more than the Testimony of Men; or the best Historians
who are not Divinely Inspired. As I have showed Section 3.. 31, 35. on the
other hand, we talk not so high of the Historical Evidence that we bring, and
therefore, a Probability of a lower Degree, than what he talks of, may serve.
3. Tho the Credit of a Historian be not, by it self, sufficient to persuade us
of the Truth of what he says, yet if it be supported by the Probability of the
Thing, by Circumstances that favor it, or the Testimonies of others; or by any
good Topic, from which the Truth, or the Probability of the Thing may be
inferred, the History is not easily to be rejected. 4. The Persons who write
the History are to be distinguished, some of them have given Evidence of their
Ignorance, Negligence, Foolish Credulity, and Listening to Fables; others have
manifested great Learning, Industry, Care to Examine what they narrate; or are
Attested by others to be Men of Probity, Learning, Wisdom, and Exactness:
certainly more Weight is to be laid on the one, tho living at some Distance
from the Period he writes of, than on the other, tho nearer to it. 5. They who
live at great Distance from any Period of Time, may give great Light concerning
what was done in it, if they do not barely Assert what they Fancy, nor Measure
the Things of that Period according to the Opinions, Customs, the Dialect of
their own Time; as many of the Historians that our Author lays much Weight
on, have done; but consider Things as then they were Stated, and bring probable
Grounds, either from the Histories written by credible Persons in, or near that
Time, or from any other Medium.

4. I now proceed to the Vindication of our Argument from History, for the
first Christians in Scotland being Governed without Bishops. He mistakes when
he says, that I bring Blondel as a Historical Witness of this: I mentioned him
only, as Citing these Authors which assert it. Which are, Joan. Major. de gest.
Scotor. lib. 2. c. 2. Per Sacerdotes and Monachos, sine Episcopis, Scoti in
fide sunt eruditi; and before him, Fordon Scoto-Chronicon, lib. 3. c. 8. Ante
Palladii adventum, habebant Scoti fidei Doctores, and Sacramentorum
Ministratores, Presbyteros solummodo, vel Monachos Ritum sequentes Ecclesiae
Primitivae. It is true, Blondel cites also Boet, who was later than either of
them: But what he cites out of him, seems not to be so much to his Purpose;
wherefore I wave that Testimony. Our Authors Answer to the other two
Testimonies is, they were not competent Witnesses, living at so great a
Distance from the Time they speak of. To which I Reply, First, they cannot be
esteemed Partial Witnesses, being both of them Papists, and not Presbyterians:
and it may be rationally thought, that if they had no sufficient Ground for
what they said, they would rather have either said what made for the Way they
owned, or at least suppressed what they had no good Warrant to assert, against
their own Way. To this he says, p. 245. that the Monks advanced this Fable to
gratify the Popes Design of Exempting the Religious Orders from Episcopal
Jurisdiction. Reply, This does not meet with our Case; for Major was no Monk;
and so not concerned to tell a Lie to please the Pope in that Design. And for
Fordon; whatever Temptation he might have, to endeavor the Lessening of the
Extent of the Episcopal Power; he would not design to root out Episcopacy
wholly out of Scotland, (which this Testimony tends to, for the Period he
speaks of) contrary to the universal Sentiments of that Church, whereof he
was a Member. Wherefore that Consideration does no way derogat from the
Credibility of his Testimony. Secondly, We have no Ground to think that these
Historians spoke by Guess, or that they invented this Story; for the contrary
of it cannot be proved: and the thing it self is not impossible; yea, Sir
George Mackenzy, in his Advertisement before his Book against Saint Asaph,
makes it appear, that in our Country there were very Ancient Manuscripts, and
that the Priests learned our ancient History from the Druids; and he makes it
clear, p. 2. etc. that our Histories (of which that of Fordon and Major are a
part) being received by the Generality of Mankind, especially by Critics,
Antiquaries, and Historians, ought not now to be called in Question. And I must
still think, for all that he has said in Opposition to it, that the History of
our Nation falls, if these Authors are not to be believed; seeing without
them, he shall never be able to make up a Scots History out of Roman Authors.
Thirdly, The same Author p. 5. shows that Men satisfy themselves in most
things, with the general Belief and Tradition of a People; that Manuscripts
infer no Mathematical Certainty; but the Authors of them might mistake; that
the Histories of all Nations are no better founded. All which shows how
unreasonable it is to Question the Authority of these Histories; especially
when none do so, but one who is straightened with an Argument brought from their
Testimony, against a Cause that he is fond of. It is also much to our Purpose,
that the Learned Usher, de primord Eccles. Brit. 808. cites the same Passages,
with Approbation; he cites also Balaeus de scriptor. Britan. affirming that
Palladius was sent, ut Sacerdotalem Ordinem Romano Ritu institueret, which we
may rationally think: was to set up Bishops. Also the Learned Doctor Forbes,
Iren. p. 157. cites the same Passage of Major, and adds of his own, adeo ut
Ecclesia Scoticana plus quam 230 annos erat absque Regimine Episcopali; and
Forbes was Zealous for Episcopacy.

5. The Testimony of these Historians is supported by other Historians, who
show Palladius was the first Bishop that Ruled in the Scots Christian Church;
and that Church had Subsisted, and had Government, and others of Christ's
Ordinances in it, above two hundred years, before Palladius came among them.
This is Attested by Baronius and his Epitomator Spondanus, ad ann. 431. and by
them taken out of Prosper, see Spondan. p. 592. this is more fully cleared,
first Vind. p. 4. His Answer to this I now consider. He says, p. 244. that the
Controversy comes to this, whether Prosper says, that two hundred years
before Palladius was sent to the Scots, there was a Presbyterian Church in
Scotland, this is a ridiculous State of the Question, and made by none but
himself: we affirm that Prosper said, that Palladius was the first Bishop sent
to the Scots: and we, aliunde, prove that there was a Christian Church in
Scotland, two hundred years before that time. Whence the Consequence is clear,
that during that Space, the Scots Christians had no Bishops. I must ly under
his Charge of Supine Negligence, in not Reading the Authors I cite. I only may
be bold to require him to make that appear. That he thus attempteth. Baronius
says in the same Place of Palladius, Quem perductum etiam ad Hiberniam
Insulam, sed cito mortuum, Probus in rebus gestis Sancti Patricii scripsit,
dictum est superius. Hibernorum quidem Conversionem Deus Sancto Patricio
reservavit. I hope the Judicious Reader will neither think it a Token of Supine
Negligence, nor of my not Reading the Books I cite; that I did not Transcribe
this. For it was no ways to the Purpose in hand; it might as well be so
Constructed, that I did not write over all that follows in Baronius, about
Saint Patricks Descent, about his Ordination, his Instruction in Divinity, etc.
But the Weight of his Objection lies in this, that Baronius and Spondanus
understood Prosper so, as that Palladius was sent to Ireland; and not to that
part of Britain that we call Scotland. Here the Enquirer gives me Occasion to
return the Civility of a good Advice to him; that he would consider what he
Reads, and what he Cites out of Authors: for it is against all Sense and
Reason, to make Baronius and Spondanus, either mean this in this Passage, (or
so to understand Prosper) of a Mission to Ireland, and not to Scotland. It is
to make a flat Contradiction between their Meaning and their Words: Whereas
they say, Sanctus Prosper missum ait Palladium ordinatum Episcopum ad Scotos;
quem perductum etiam ad Hiberniam, etc. The Meaning then must be to our Author,
tho he was Missus and Ordinatus ad Scotos; he was not sent to the Scots, but to
Ireland. Do not the Words bear it in their very Face, that he was sent to
Scotland, and was their first Bishop: and after he had been there for some
time, he was brought over to Ireland; it is not said Missus, nor Ordinatus; but
Perductus: his Mission was to Scotland; what Casuality or Design led him to
Ireland, is not told us; neither is it Prosper, but Probus that mentions his
going to Ireland: and that he never was in Ireland, I have showed in the Place
Cited.

6. He further endeavors to overturn our Argument from Prosper, as he is
Cited by Baronius; where he attempteth two things, 1. To show that Palladius in
Prospers Sense, was not the first Bishop, that was in Scotland; but the first
Bishop that was sent to them by the Pope. This he builds on Prospers Words,
both as they are Cited by Baronius, and also are in the Augustane Copy; the
first are, Basso and Antiocho consulibus, ad Scotos in Christum credentes,
ordinatus a Caelestino Papa Palladius, primus Episcopus mittitur. And the other
Copy is, Basso and Antiocho consulibus, ad Scotos in Christum credentes,
ordinatus a Caelestino Papa Palladius, primus Episcopus missus est. I see not
what moved him to transcribe the Words twice; unless he see a Mystery that
others cannot observe, in the Difference that is between mittitur, and missus
est; but he will have mittitur, or missus est, primus Episcopus to signify
that he was not the first Bishop; but the first Bishop of the Roman Mission; if
he be allowed to put what Sense on Men's Words he pleases, it must be so:
Baronius and Spondanus did not so understand the Words; neither can any Man so
understand them, unless his Preconceived Opinion do Darken his Mind, that he
cannot see things as they are. If Prosper had thought that there were Bishops
in Scotland before, he should have spoken more plainly, and told us, that the
Pope sent him to Rule over the Scots Bishops, or, that whereas Scotland was
formerly Governed by their own Bishops; the Pope would have them thenceforth
Governed by such as he set over them. He tells us of several Bishops sent to
other Churches; not to introduce Episcopacy; but to bring them in Subjection to
the Pope. This I deny not, (tho he instanceth only in Austine the Monk, who was
sent to England) but this furnishes an Argument against himself; for none of
them is called primus Episcopus of such a Nation, except he who was sent to
Scotland. Augustine is neither called primus Monachus, nor primus Episcopus,
though, as Beda, hist. lib. 1. c. 23. has it, he was ordinandus Episcopus, si
a Gente Anglorum susciperetur. He says it is not evident from Prospers
Chronicon, whether there was any Formed, Organized Church in Scotland, when
Palladius was sent by Caelestine. This is wholly beside the Purpose: for
Prospers Testimony is not brought for that End. Is it not enough that it is
clearly proved out of Authentic Writers: that the Scots were Christians anno
199, and Palladius came to them about 431. Now can he imagine, that the Scots
Christians all that time, were not an Organized Church; if he think that
therefore they were Unorganized, because they wanted Bishops, this is to beg
the Question.

7. His other Answer is not a Refutation of me, but of Baronius, who took the
Chronicon consulare for Prospers Work; whereas our Author says it is none of
his; and for this he produces the Authority of Pithaeus: which is not
sufficient against that of Baronius. And even Pithaeus himself confesses that
Chronicon per consules digestum, hactenus in omnibus Hieronomiani Chronici
editionibus Prosperi nomine subjungitur. All the Ground he has for denying it
to be Prospers is, that the Style differs from what he calls the true
Chronicon, whereof a Fragment only remains. He tells us also, that Doctor
Cave says, that the Chronicon consulare is much Interpolated: but that does
not prove the Book spurious; neither does it derogate from the Testimony we
bring out of it; unless he can say that it is one of the Interpolations, may
be, Foisted in by some Presbyterian; which if he say, it will make the
Presbyterians older than our Author will allow. He quarrelleth, that I had
asserted, that the Christian Faith was received in Scotland in the beginning of
the second Century; and calls it a Dream; because we have no certain Records
of any Progress of Christianity made in the Island at that time. He should not
have been so confident in this Matter, without Answering what was brought for
that Assertion, or Dream, whatever he will call it. He should have disproved
that Donald was our first Christian King: that he began to Reign anno 199, that
Palladius came to Scotland 431, in all which Space the Scots lived without
Bishops. If I have brought our Christianity any nearer to the beginning of the
Christian Era; I shall confess an Error in Calculation, which I deny not that
I may readily fall into. What he says of Squeezing of his Words: I cannot
Answer, for he neither tells where, nor wherein; for my Book lying open to his
Remarks; the Reader must judge whether it be so, or not, and what Advantage he
has got against it; the Error of my Title Page, putting of in stead of for the
Clergy, is not such as he would represent; if they do not own it, he should
crave Pardon for making it; if they do, I have not Miscalled it; tho I confess
changing his own Word was an Oversight; but I hope it is not a Beam; but a Mote
that he has discovered, by his Critical Skill.

SECTION XII.
Of Ceremonies, and the rest of the Enquirers Quarrels with the Presbyterians,
which have not yet been touched.

THe last Effort made by this Author against the Presbyterians in his fifth
Chapter, is made up of his Essay against our Opinion about Ceremonies, and
other Miscellany Purposes, which hardly can be reduced to one Head: which I
shall consider as his Discourse shall bring them in. Before I Examine his
Dissertation, I observe two things in general concerning it. The first is, the
course Treatment he gives the Presbyterians, without Exception, as if he had
them under his Feet, in this Conflict, before he enter on the Debate. He
calls our Opinion (or rather his own mistaken Apprehension of it; for it is
none of ours, as will by and by appear) a silly Theorem, on which he says, we
have broken the Unity of the Church, and filled the Heads and Mouths of People
with a thousand Airy and Unaccountable Fancies: he calls what we say on this
Head, Raveries, and a Labyrinth of Idle Talk, Fooleries. My other Observation
is, his odd Representation of our Opinion, which he makes to be altogether
new, and our own: and indeed as he represents it, it is wholly new, and none
of ours, but his own: it is, that a Significant Rite in the Worship of God, not
founded upon Divine Institution, is Superstitious, Unlawful, and Abominable,
and such as may Legitimate a Separation from any Church, where it is enjoined
to preserve Order and Uniformity. Against this I have two Objections, 1. That
we did never condemn all Significant Rites in Religion, even tho they be not
founded on Divine Institution. Uncovering the Head is a Significant Rite, and
we know no Divine Institution for it; and yet we use it in the Worship of God,
viz. Prayer, and several other Exercises; and will separate from no Church
because of it. That a Minister Preach in a Decent Garb, and not in a Fools
Coat, is a Significant Rite used in Religion, not founded on Divine
Institution, yet we shall not separate for enjoining that. This loose and
indistinct Way of Refuting an Adversary, cannot Instruct, nor Convince any
Body. I shall not Retaliate his Harsh Words, by giving this Way the Epithet it
deserves. They who write on this Subject with Judgment and Understanding, use
to distinguish three sorts of Modes of Men's Actions; that are found in
Religion, viz. Circumstances, Rites, and Ceremonies. Circumstances are
Modifications of Actions, as Time, Place, Person; or, a Circumstance is any
thing that accompanyeth an Action which is not of its Essence, but is used with
it, relates to it, and is an Accident, or Adjunct of it: and it may be such,
either with respect to the Physical or Moral Being of the Action:
Circumstances use to be sorted in these Memorial Verses, Quis, quid, ubi,
quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando.
And forma, figura, locus, tempus, stirps, patria, nomen.


Circumstance is a Word of larger Extent than Rite, and that than Ceremony; a
Rite is the Manner of going about any Action (chiefly that which is Public or
Solemn) confirmed by Law or Custom. In a more large Sense* it is taken for any
Action or Thing that belongs to the Mode or Solemnity of another Action,
rather than to the Substance of it: such Rites are used in Judicatures,
Marriages, Burials, Inaugurations, etc. some of them are Civil, some Military,
etc. and some also are Sacred; when they are appropriated to Religion. A
Ceremony is a Sacred Rite: the best Authors that I have seen, whether Heathen
or Christian, Popish or Protestant, agree in this, that a Ceremony is peculiar
to Religion: however the Word be sometimes, in common Speech, more largely
taken. This applied to our Purpose shows, that our Author does widely
mistake, when he represents us as against Significant Humane Rites in
Religion: we oppose only these of them which are appropriated to Religion, and
so are Religious Rites, or Ceremonies. He cannot but know that there are many
Actions used in Religion, which are not Religious.

2. The second Thing that I Observe in his Representation of the Opinion of his
Adverstaries, is, that they found separation on Ceremonies imposed to preserve
Order and Unity. It is no so. Let them devise what Ceremonies they will (which
are not downright Idolatry) and impose them on the most plausible pretenses
they can think on: yea, let them use them as much as they will; we do not think
all this a sufficient Ground of Separation from a true Church whereof we are
Members: but if they impose on us Religious Rites, or Sacred significant
Ceremonies; so as we cannot be suffered to Worship God with the Church, unless
we either approve them, or use them, this we think a just Cause of Separation:
seeing such Compliance were our Personal Action, and sinful in the sight of God.
And yet the Separation of them who thus scruple, is rather a passive
Separation, than active: they are driven away, rather than run away. Let us now
hear what he has to say in Defense of the Ceremonies, the Question about which
he has so Stated. He will not gather together all our Raveries, but in a few
Words, Vindicate the Practice of all Churches, etc. Those are but Words. He had
done wisely if he had excepted the Apostolic Churches. And tho I deny not, but
that some Ceremonies did early and unobservably creep into the Primitive
Church, and that through the Zeal of some Good Men, who saw not the ^mportance,
nor bad Consequences of such Observations; it may be made appear that some of
the Ceremonies that they now observe had no such early Original; and that some
of these which were observed in the first Ages are laid aside by them. Of the
first Sort, I instance Kneeling in the Act of receiving the LORD'S Supper, the
Cross in Baptism, and some of the Holy Days, of which before. Of the other
Sort, I instance the Trin^ Immersio in Baptism, the Aagapae, Baptising on
Whitsunday, or Dominica in albis, rather than on any other Day; the Osculum
pacis, all the Steps of the Catechumeni, and Paenitentes, before they could be
received into Communion with the Church; and many other things which one may
find in Albaspin* Observe. Ecclesiast. which is Compendized by Keitembellius:
there are also not a few modern Churches who are not for the Cermonies as they
are Pleaded for by Him and his Party. If what I have said be Considered, his
first Argument proposed by way of Question admits of an easy Answer. The
Apostolic Church Worshipped GOD without Religious Ceremonies not Instituted by
CHRIST; and I hope he will own these as Societies of Men, who are to be more
Considered than others. A set of Arguments he next brings. 1. The Light of
Nature teaches us to Worship GOD, and all Men have Agreed in this, that Solemn
W^rship of the DEITY ought to be performed in Unity and Society. A. If he make
the Consequence (which he has Suppressed) to be, Ergo, we must have humane
Religious significant Ceremonies; we deny this Consequence, as not having a
shadow of Reason. Again, if this Argument have any weight, humane Ceremonies
must be necessary: And GOD cannot be Worshipped without them: and all the
Presbyterians are not only Defective in their Worship; but there is a Nullitie
in it through want of such Ceremonies: which looks more like Raverie than any
thing he can Charge us with. 2. Says he, This public Worship should be fixed
and Established by the Wisdom and Authority of Competent Judges, as to the
Manner and Method. Ans. 1. Are the Manner and Method of Worship Religious
significant Ceremonies? The Method is a Circumstance; neither Rite nor
Ceremony: for the Manner, it is either somewhat that is common to Religion,
and other Public and Solemn Actions; and it consists in some civil Rites,
therefore used in Worship because they have by Custom, Obtained in other
public Solemnities: this manner of Worship is not to be Determined by the
Wisdom and Authority of any particular Judges; but the Tacit Consent of the
Nation brings it in by using it in all such Actions: So in the Apostles time,
for a Man to Prophecy with his Head uncovered, and to wear long Hair; was a
Manner of Worship not determined by any Council, but brought in by civil
Custom, and so made decent, that it was a fault to do otherways: so it were a
fault among us, for a Minister to Preach in an Antic and ridiculous Garb,
which Custom has made such. Or the manner of Worship is something that is
peculiar to Religious Worship; and in that case it is Religion, or Worship it
self; being Designed, that by it GOD may be Honored: tho it be a Mode of that
Species of Worship: (V. Gr. the Cross is a Mode of Baptism) yet it is a piece
of Worship it self; being devised for a Sacred signification, and being
peculiar to Religion: this sort of Manner of Worship must be fixed and
Established by the Authority of CHRIST, neither do I know any lower Authority
of any Judge that is Competent for it.

3. His Third Argument, or Axiom, is, that we ought to express our Ad^ration in
the public Worship of GOD, by such significant Signs of Piety, and Devotion,
as are known in that Nation where we live, to express our Reverence, and
Esteem. The former Distinction will easily show how little this will make for
him. If he speak of natural or civil ^ites, that is, Actions, or Gestures, or
Things, that Nature or civil Custom has made so Expressive; we yield all that
he says, but if he mean Religious Rites, or Ceremonies; that is, such Things,
Actions, or Gestures as have no place, nor are not looked on as so Expressive,
in any other Solemnity but in Religion; I deny his Assertion: for what ever
Custom has crept into a Church or Nation, which is peculiar to Religion; and
tho it be never so well known in the Nation that the Church has introduced it
into Worship merely by her own Authority; So as it is neither made decent by
Nature, nor by Custom, in other Solemnities or Actions; nor enjoined by Divine
Authority, it ought not to be in the Church of CHRIST. Hence we can allow
Sighing, lifting up the Hands, or Eyes in Worship; Nature has made them
Expressive: also a grave and decent Garb; because civil Custom has made that
^it. Also using Water in the Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the LORD'S Supper;
because Divine Institution has made them Significant and Useful: but the Cross
in Baptism, the Surplice, etc. we cannot allow, because their Signification and
Use in Religon arises from none of these; but only from Man's will. His Fourth
Assertion is, these significant Signs being indifferent in their Nature are
variable according to the ^ge or Country with whom we have to do; and may be
Changed by the Authority and Wisdom of our Superiors, as o^t as there is
sufficient Reason; of which they only are the Judges. Other Ceremonialists use
to Plead for the Churches Ceremonie-making Power with a little more Caution and
Limitation* so as they are careful to Shut the Door against the Popish
Ceremonies: Some because of their ineptitude, the Bulk of them, because of
their Number, being a Burden: but this Author is troubled with no such
Scruples, or Fetters, he sets the Door as wide open as the Pope, or any
Church-Rulers (yea, or Rulers of the State) please to have it: no other thing
but their Opinion, and Will, can keep out a Deluge of Ceremonial Fopperies.
That the Ceremonies we Contend about (I mean Religious Ceremonies) are
indifferent in their own Nature, he supposes: but this is not to Instruct, but
to Hoodwink the Reader: for he should have Distinguished the Nature of a
Significant Ceremonies: It has a general Nature, as it is such an Action, V.
Gr. the Motion of the Finger, whereby the transient Sign of the Cross is made
on the Forehead of a Child; let that pass for indifferent. It has also a
particular Nature, as it stands in such Circumstances, viz. as it is
Appointed to be annexed to Baptism; as it is Stated in Religion, and appointed
to it: and as a Religious Signification for a Spiritual end is put on it, and
all this, not by CHRIST'S, but by Man's Authority; we deny it to be indifferent
in its Nature, while it is thus Considered: as it must needs be in this Debate.
But suppose we should allow an Indifferency to be in the Ceremonies, as they
are humane Actions to be used in Worship; it is said without all Warrant, that
our Superiors may Determine, and take away this Indifferency, and Change their
Injunctions about these Actions when, and as often as they see Reason so to do;
tho no Body else can see any such Reason. This is to make our Superiors
absolute, and to give them an arbitrarie Power, in these things that we can
make appear to be parts of Religion; and which himself cannot deny to have a
great influence on Religion, and in which it is nearly concerned. Beside to say
that Superiors may Determine every thing that is in its Nature indifferent,
wherein Religion is concerned, is to open a Door to so many Impositions as
might make Gospel Worship a greater Yoke than that which the Jewish Church was
not able to bear; as the Apostle says, Acts 15. 10. For Circumstances of
Actions are innumberable, and few of them are Determined and Enjoined by the
LORD. We know the Church may determine the Actions in, and about Worship, which
are not Determined in the Word, and yet must be Determined: but that she may
Determine what ever she thinks fit, is not to be Admitted.

4. He tells us, p. 152. that it is impossible to make Objections against the
decent visible Motions of the Body in public Worship, which may not be
improved against the vocal Expressions of the Tongue. If he must be allowed to
Determine what Motions of the Body are decent; this his Assertion could be not
Opposed: but there are who call most of these Bodily Motions decent, even in
Worship, which are Learned at the Dancing School: which yet it were hard for
the Church to Enjoin: Wherefore these Motions that were made decent in Worship
by Nature, by civil Custom other grave and serious Actions, or by Divine
Institution, we make no Objection against them, but blame them who neglect
them* but for Motions that Men will call decent, without ground from any of
these, we make Objections (which yet have not been sufficiently Answered)
against their being Enjoined in ^^orship, which he shall never be able to
Improve against all the Vocal Expressions of the Tongue. He says we allow all
these. What he means by so saying, I cannot Divine, we allow Vocal
Expressions, and Bodily Motions too, that such of them as are fit should be
used. But we do not allow that the Church, by her own Authority, without such
Warrant as is abovementioned, should enjoin her Determinations either in the
one or in the other. I hope he has no ill meaning when he says Nature led us
at first to the Worship of the DEITY. I think Revelation had as early, and as
effectual a hand in it, after the Fall. I confess Nature alone will lead Men to
Worship the DEITY; but that Worship will not be such as even this Author will
think suitable to Gospel Purity; but will have worse Mixtures than those that we
Contend about. He concludes, that the Reverence we owe to GOD, must needs
bring along with it these outward Significations of respect that are made
Decent by Custom and Authority, to whose Decision alone GOD left these exterior
Rituals of Worship. Thus he still endeavors to lurk under ambiguous
Expressions: we confess the Decision of some exterior Rituals in Worship is
left to civil Custom: and others to Divine Authority: but that the Decision of
any Rituals in Worship is left to Church Custom, where the Thing has no
Decency but in Religion; or to Humane Authority: this is what we Question; and
he should Prove. He speaks, p. 153. of Rites in the Worship of GOD (among the
Jews) that were only Significations of Reverence and Uniformity which were
still retained, as they were transmitted to them by Patriarchal Custom, and
Traditions, though only founded on Humane Appointment. But he has not thought
fit to give us any one Instance of such Rites. If he mean Religious Ceremonies;
that is, Actions peculiar to Worship, I think he can give no Instance of such
in the Jewish Church, before its great Apostacy, except these that were
Instituted by GOD, and taught in the Law of Moses.

. 5. He comes next, p. 154. to renew the Arguments he had managed in his
Apology, p. 155. etc. and were Answered, Def. of Vindic. p. 38. He tells us
of a General Medium he had used, that there are several significant Ceremonies
mentioned in, and alluded to in the Scripture, which were Practiced in the
Worship of GOD under the Patriarchal, Jewish, and Christian AEconomie, which
had no other than Humane Appointment. The first Instance he gives is,
Discalceation, Exodus 13. 5. He had in his Apology, joined with this, looking to
our Feet when we go to the House of GOD; Eccies. 5. 1. But he has now wisely
left out this last: and Insisteth only on Discalccation. What was Objected
here, with some freedom, that was bad Logic, he represents as reflecting on
Mr. Mede, who discourses of that Observation among the Eastern-Nations. I have
as high Esteem of Mr. Medes Learning as he has; and have said nothing that can
import the Contrary. The Answer given to this Instance, was, this was
Commanded of GOD; and so is no Argument for Observing what is brought into the
Worship of GOD merely by the Authority of Man. All the Reply that he brings
is, that this Command was no new Institution of a Ceremony, whereas he says,
what GOD said to Moses was only an Advertisement to Observe a Custom that he
knew to be used in the Eastern-Nations; so that had Moses put off his Shoes
before that Advertisement, he had done nothing amiss: and so this is a strong
Confirmation of Ceremonies that express our Reverence though founded on Humane
Appointment. Here I remark. 1. Whether this was a new Institution of a
Ceremony or not, is not to our Purpose: Moses had express Divine Warrant for
what he did: if he can show the like for our Ceremonies we shall Observe them.
The LORD might Enjoin what he would, either for that time, or for perpetual
Observation: either what was used among the Nations; or what was not so used:
Let us see an Approbation of any of our Ceremonies that is Parallel to this, and
we shall lay our Hand on our Mouth. 2. It is evldent that this was a Civil
Custom, and made expressive of Reverence by that Civil Custom; and therefore,
the LORD is not here either Instituting, or Approving, a Religious Ceremony,
but requiring to express profound Reverence in the Ordinary way, and that on
such an Extraordinary Occasion. Corn. a lapide; says, Minus enim audacter and
curiose accesserat Moses. That this was a Civil Custom, and had its
Signification, not from Man's Authority Appropriating it to GOD'S Worship
(which is the Foundation of the Ceremonies we Debate about) is clear from Mr,
Mede, and what my Antagonist brings out of him. Also, the same Learned
School-Man (I mean A Lapide) says, his ritus a mancipiis descendit, qui nudis
pedibus incedebant, in signum subjectionis, and therefore he Paraphraseth that
Text, Exodus 3. 5. ut totus in Dei jus and obsequium transeas. It is Observed by
Ainsworth on the same Text, that this was a Civil Sign of transferring our
Right to another, Deuteronomy. 25. 9. Ruth 4. 7. It was also by Civil Custom, an
Expression of Sorrow. 2 Samuel 15. 30. Isai. 20. 2, 4. Ezekiel 24. 17, 23. Now, if
he can show that the Ceremonies have, by Civil Custom, such aptitude to
Signify what we ought to express in the Worship of GOD, we shall not Oppose
them. It is, 3. Evident from his own Words, p. 55. where to my Question, why do
not they Observe it, if it be a fit Ceremony to express our ^everence in
Worship; he Answers; what is so Expressive in one Age or Country may be not
so in another. Surely this Change can only come from Civll Custom: what is
peculiar to Religion is the same every where. If then this Action was broug^t
into Religion by the Significancie and Aptitude it had been got by Civil
Custom, it is no Praecedent for such Ceremonies as that cannot be Pleaded for.

6. Another Instance he had brought was, Sackcloth and Ashe^, as signifying
grief and sorrow in their Solemn Humiliation; To these 2 Things were Answered;
The One, Why do not the Prelatists use these? This he Rejects, as
unparalelled Nonsense; because, if they were still in use in our Country who
would refuse them that was not resolved to be singular. A. I should be none of
these singular Persons: If they had now Significancie by civil Custom: I should
be willing that they should be used in Religion, when Humiliation and Sorrow
were Solemnly to be expressed: but when they want that, I think our Brethren do
well not to use them in Religion. Yet I must say still, that if they were
Religious Ceremonies of Old; that is peculiar to Religion; they should be still
used without any Dependence on the civil Custom of our Time. I see not what
Nonsense is in this. If he did not look on them as Religious Ceremonies, but
only as used in Religion from their Signification that they had by Civil use;
the Nonsense was in bringing this as an Instance of Religious Ceremonies of
Humane Appointment, for they had no Authority but from Men; therefore they
never were, nor now should be, Religious Ceremonies. His next Instance is (as
he says) ad hominem. Lifting up the right hand to Heaven, in Swearing the
Covenant. It was Answered, that this ^ite, not only has Warrant from Scripture
Example, but is the Civil Custom of the Nation, the like cannot be said of the
Controverted Ceremonies. His Reply is, a Ceremony being mentioned in Scripture
makes it not only allowable; but shows, that it was in it self, before
Lawful and decent. And it is Lawful to us, on the same Reasons that made it
Lawful to them who first Practiced it. In Pursuance of this his Reply, he
allegeth, that we hereby Grant, that many such Usages are alluded to in
Scripture, which are merely of Humane Appointment, and yet Deny their
Lawfulness; which is to make all Men that Lived before us to be Sottishly
Superstitious. To this Purpose he Discourses, p. 158. 159. Let it be
Considered that we do not make bare Allusion made in Scripture to any Usage, to
be a sufficient Proof of its Lawfulness: for some were Alluded to that were
very far from being Lawful: Instances may be given of putting the Branch to the
Nose, kissing the Hand, or kissing the Images that they worshipped, which (and
many more) were Practiced by Idolaters. Our Opinion in this Matter is, that
what Rites are mentioned in Scripture, as used in the Worship of the True GOD,
by His People, and are not any where Condemned, we ought to look on as Lawful,
and Approved of GOD, that is, as they then were used. Now some of these Rites
were of Divine Institution, as all the Jewish Ceremonies Enjoined by Moses:
these were then Lawful, but now are not so; because they are Abrogated by
CHRIST; also all these Instituted by CHRIST are still Lawful. Others of them
are Natural Expressions of the Acting of the Mind: such as Sighing, lifting the
^yes, etc. these are always Lawful: others of them were Civil Customs, which by
Use acquired a Significancie, and fitness to express our Affections that we
should have in Religious Worship; such as Sackcloth, renting our Clothes,
Incurvation, etc. these are certainly Lawful to be used in Worship, when, and
where they have that Significancie, by the Force of Civil Custom; but in Times
and Places where that Significancie is not, the Ground of it being ceased, I
see not how they can be Esteemed Lawful, having, then, and there, no Use or
Significancie in GOD'S Worship; but what they have from Man's will, which ought
not to Regulate GOD'S Worship. Our Author Mistaketh when he says, that we
think some ceremonies Lawful which are mentioned, or alluded to in Scripture,
though they had no other Original than Humane Appointment: this we Disown: for
none of these Three ways by which Rites get their Significancie (which (...)
have now mentio^ed) can be justly called Humane Appointment: Civil Custom is
that which comes nearest to it, but yet Differs far from it: for Humane
Appointment is an Act of Authority, i. e. a Law, or Injunction, or Declaration
of the Will of one, or more Men, expressly Concluding that so it shall be:
Custom is a Tacit Consent of People, whether Great or Small, whether Placed in
Authority, or not; in using such an Action, or Word, for such an End, or
Signification. I shall not Debate, what Men in Authority may do, toward putting
a Civil Signification on Words and Actions, and making them Current in Civil
Selemnities: but (...) Maintain that they cannot give a Religious Signification
or Use to any Word, or Action, or Gesture: that is, they cannot Appoint it to
be used so in Religion, when it has no Aptitude for that Use or Significancie
from its Common Use in other things: for this were to Dispose of the External
Worship of GOD at their will.

7. For the Rite of Lifting up the Hand, so often mentioned in Scripture, as
Practiced by good Men, by good Angels: yea, by God Himself, (speaking of Him
after the Manner of Men) that it had its Original from Humane Appointment, is
simply denied. We have no Footsteps of such a Law, Antecedent to the Practice
of it, either in Sacred, or other Records. I may with Confidence conclude, that
this Usage had its Original, if not from Nature, as Lifting up of the Eyes to
Heaven, yet from an Universal Custom, and that of all, or many Nations. It is
true, other Rites were also used in Swearing; but none of them so frequently
mentioned as this. Wherefore it can be no Precedent for, nor give any
Countenance to, Ceremonies peculiar to the Worship of God brought into it by
the Authority and Appointment of Men alone. It is hence evident, that we are
not guilty of counting all them Sottishly Superstitious, who used such Rites,
and that even in Religion, tho we think Humane Religious Ceremonies unlawful.
Our Author, p. 159. is pleased to make himself Merry with the Distinction I
have used of Civil Rites, (which he, with little Accuracy of Speech, calls
Civil Ceremonies) and Religious Ceremonies; that the one may be used in
Religion, without Divine Institution; the other not so. He calls it a
Metaphysical Distinction; and new Philosophy; and Co-aeval with Presbytery in
its last Figure. These Sarcasms are the Tokens of his Surprise, and Admiration;
not of his being much Conversant with their Writings who Treat of this Subject.
Let us hear his Thundering Arguments after these silly Squib. If the Civil
Authority can introduce a ^i^nificant Ceremony into the Worship of God, why may
not the Ecclesiastic Authority do it? A. He will not understand what we say:
we deny that Civil Authority can introduce a Significant Ceremony into the
Worship of God; tho Civil Custom may make a Rite sit to be there used. If the
Magistrate should appoint any Habit or Gesture to be used in Gods Worship, to
signify either Gods Will toward us, or our Duty to Him; which has no such
Signification, nor Use, but by the Law, or Will of the Magistrate, we should
disowne such a Religious Ceremony, as much in that Case, as if it were
appointed by Church Authority. But it is a quite other Case; when an Action, or
Gesture, has got a Signification by long and general Use in Men's other
Actions; so as that they are thereby made significant of what we are to express
in Worship. This may be cleared by a parallel Instance: Words which have got
their Signification by Use in other Things, may be well used in Religion: yet
it does not thence follow, that the Magistrate may enjoin Words to be used in
our Worshipping of God, which have no Signification, but from his Will: for if
this were allowed, the Magistrate might not only enjoin Latin Service, to be
used among a People that understand not that Language; but might enjoin Words
that now signify Error, or Blasphemy: and give them an Orthodox Signification:
which I hope our Brethren will not affirm. If Men may enjoin a Surplice,
because white Garments, in some Ages, and Places, were used commonly to
signify Purity or Gladness: why may he not enjoin the Language to be used in
Religion, that our Ancestors used many Hundreds of Years ago; tho it may be now
neither used nor understood: it would come, in Time, to be as Significant to
us, and as Religious, as now the Surplice is, where it has been long used. He
Mistaketh, or Misinterpreteth the Vindicator, when he says, that he allows
of Civil Ceremonies in the Worship of God; he owneth no such Ceremonies, if we
speak properly: what has its Use and Significancy from Civil Custom in other
Actions is no Ceremony; it is a Civil Rite, and may well be used in Religion:
he repeateth also his former Mistake: as if we thought that Civil Authority
might appoint Ceremonies for Religion, but not Church Authority: our Opinion in
which, I have made plain to them who will understand what we say. I have also
Answered his Question, how the Civil Rite used in Religion is Innocent, while a
Religious Ceremony, appropriated to Religion, if it be of Humane Appointment
(whether by the Authority of Church or State) is not so. I deny what he so
confidently asserteth, p. 261. that Lifting up the Hand in Swearing, is of
Humane Appointment: neither is his Proof of it sufficient, viz. that it has no
Divine Institution: for what is brought in, and gets its Use, and Significany,
by Civil Custom; is a Middle between these. 2. I am not at Leisure to repeat my
Answer, as often as he does his Objection taken from the Equality of the Civil
and Ecclesiastic Authority to institute Ceremonies; with which he fills
several Pages, with a nauseous saying the same thing, in Words little
different. The Immemorial Possession of any Rite in the Church (which he
insinuates as an Argument) cannot justify it, if it be appropriated to
Religion, and had no Divine Original. We are not concerned to account for
Kissing the Evangel in taking an Oath; whether it came in by Civil Custom, or
Ecclesiastic Authority. Let them who use it Answer such Doubts: or rather, let
them show us any Ground for it from Nature, from Civil Custom, or from Divine
Institution: if it be destitute of all these, he should prove, not barely
assert the Stubbornness that is in Refusing it. It is absurd to say, that the
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies having the Civil Sanction, are, under that
Reduplication, to be looked upon as Civil Ceremonies: for he might say the same
of the Sacraments of the New Testament, when enjoined by Law: it is not the
Civil Authority, but Rites being used in Civil Actions, and not being peculiar
to the the Worship of God; it is their having their Use and Significancy from
Civil Custom, that gives them that Denomination.

8. He Starteth a Scruple, p. 263. which has no Rise from what any of his
Adversaries had ever said; nor any where else, that I know, but in his
Imagination. It is, If a Ceremony have one Signification in Civil Actions, and
another in Religious Worship; Quaeritur, Whether it makes it lawful in
Worship? A. No. Because its ^awfulness is founded on the Significancy that it
acquireth in Civil Actions. I gladly would know what Ground was ever given him
to say so confidently as he does, that we hold that a Ceremony is lawful in
Religion, if it has been used in Civil Solemnities, tho in a different
Signification. If he find any Body asserting that, let him call such Persons
Absurd, Ridiculous, Foolish, etc. at his Pleasure; as he very freely calls
us, on that Imaginary Account: but if no such thing have ever been held by any
of us, I shall give him no Epithet, but leave it to the Reader to call him as
he deserves. He has another Argument for the Lawfulness of Humane Ceremonies
peculiar to Religion; which he Ushereth in with that Degree of Confidence, and
Insolent Contempt of his Adversaries, that might Fright us into Silence, as the
Lion by his Roaring Terrifieth his Prey into a Consternation; calling all our
Exceptions against Significant Ceremonies in the Worship of God, little and
idle frivolous Impertinencies. And no wonder he be so fond of his mighty
Argument; I believe it is the Birth of his own Brain. I never met with it
before: and I have seen few that are of less weight. It is that the Apostle,
Romans 6. 4. makes a palpable Allusion to the Significant Ceremony of Immersion;
when he says we are Buried with Him by Baptism into Death, etc. To strengthen
this Argument, he tells us of Immersion being used by Jews, and by
Christians; that it is founded on no Divine Institution: but on the Practice of
the Jewish Church, and thence derived to Christians; and was never established
by any other Authority, but what was purely Humane and Ecclesiastical. He
tells us this Custom was so known, that all their Learned Neighbors were
acquaint with it; and for this he very wisely cites Tacitus hist. lib. 5.
speaking of their Circumcision, but not one Word of Immersion. He calls for
the particular Text where this Ceremony is founded on express Institution; also
that we should show where it was used in Civil Actions: That Scripture Example
for it, is but the Consequence of it^ being Prac^ised; and supposes it. At
last, to make all sure, he condescendeth to the Jargon of the Schools (with
which this Soaring Eagle, thinks we Poor Worms are only acquainted) that is to
put his Argument into ^^gical ^orm and ^igure; thus: a Significant Ceremony
founded upon no Div^ Institution, and alluded to in Saint Paul's Reasonings,
Romans 6. 4. is lawful in it self. But the Ceremony of Immersion, in the
Administration of Baptism was founded on no Divine Institution, and yet alluded
to by Saint Paul, is a thing received in the current Practice of the
Apostolical Church, Ergo, such a Significant Ceremony in the Worship of God,
founded on no Divine Institution, is in it self lawful. I shall far more easily
dispatch this Argument, than he has framed it. If it were not to Hazard his
further Despising us, as Conversant only with the School Jargon of Syllogising:
I should observe that he flies so high, as to take little notice of
Syllogistical Form, for all his pretending to it: for the Major Proposition is
the very Conclusion of the Syllogism, only he has altered the Word, putting
such a Significant Ceremony, for a Significant Ceremony alluded to by the
Apostle Paul: other Informalities in it I pass: it is below him to mind them:
Aquila non captat Muscas. For a more material Answer, I first deny the Major,
as thus universally proposed: Allusion to a Ceremony is no Proof of its
Lawfulness: as I have proved. 6. Next, I deny the Minor: I affirm that
Immersion was founded on Divine Institution: which I prove, 1. Because it is
here mentioned, as the lawful and approved Way of Administration of Baptism:
which Ordinance Christ had appointed: it were a strange ^ancy to think that
Christ had enjoined baptism, and not told them who were to Administer it, what
He meant by it, or what they should do. Next, Whereas he demands a particular
Scripture for its Institution, (tho we be not obliged to that Exactness, yet) I
adduce Matthew. 28. 19. where Baptizing is Commanded: every one knows that
(...) signifies properly to Dip, or Plunge in Water: and that it is taken more
largely for any Kind of Washing, or ^insing, as Mark 7. 4. it is not to be
thought, that when ever the Jews came from the Market, they Plunged themselves
over Head and ^a^s in Water, act. 1. 15. the Spirits Cleansing the Soul is
expres^ed by that Word, so Act. 11. 16. 1 Cor. 10. 2. Hence it plainly
follows, that Christ enjoyneth a Sacramental Use of Water in Baptism, for a
Mystical Washing; and the Word being of so large a Signification; and Christ
not having determined how much Water should be used in Baptism: whether the
Body should be wholly Dipped, or a part of it, or Water should be Thrown, or
Sprinkled on the Body; or what Quantity should be Cast on: that all these ways
of Washing have Divine Warrant: and tho none of them be enjoined exclusively of
another; yet every one of them has Christ's Warrant: the Consequence of which
is, that this Dipping is no Humane Ceremony, especially considering, that every
one of these ways of Baptizing, has a Mystical Signification put on it, even
in the Scripture: Dipping in the Text that he cites; and Sprinkling and
Rinsing in the Old Testament, see Ezekiel, 36. 25. And this will be yet further
confirmed, if we consider, that Christ Teaches, that however applying Water to
the whole Body may be a sit, and allowable Ceremony to express Spiritual
Washing; yet that is not necessary; but a little may be as effectual for that
Mystical Use, as the whole: Joh. 13. 10. What I have said precludeth the
Objection, that Christ makes the three ways of Baptizing only lawful, and
allows the Church to determine which of them ought to be used: for the
general Word implies a Disjunctive Command; neither is it in the Power of the
Church to determine one way, exclusive of another: nor should different
Practices in this Case be Censured, as receding from Institution; each of these
ways is a Mode of Baptizing, which is within the Compass of Christ's Institution.

9. That this Immersion was used in the Jewish Church, (yea, it may be proved
to have been used among Heathens also) is no Proof that it is not of Divine
Institution, as it is used in the Christian Church; for the same may be said of
Baptism, which Christ made a Sacrament. Neither does its Mystical Signification
make it to be a Humane Ceremony; seeing it has that from Christ's Institution:
nor does that make it so necessary, as to exclude all other Modes of Baptizing;
seeing other ways have their Mystical Significancy, as has been showed: yea,
Casting Water on the Person may aptly signify the same with Dipping, viz.
being buried with Christ, a part of the Body under the Water, may signify the
being under it, as Washing the Feet signifies Washing the whole Body, Joh. 13.
10. He infers, p. 268. that the Power of Rituals is still lodged in the
Church, which she may vary and alter, to serve the Ends of Edification. This is
a most absurd Consequence: for, 1. He does not here distinguish Rituals, nor
exclude these of Divine Institution; but lays them, in the Bulk, open to the
A^bitriment of the Bishop^; if they think it for Edification, they may dispose,
even of the Sa^ments as they will: for these also come under the general Head
of Rituals. 2. It no way follows, the Lord has left some Circumstances of
his Worship undetermined, and variable: Ergo, he has left the Power of Rituals
to the Church. For the Imm^n he speaks of, is no more than a Circumstance of
Baptism, viz. what Quantity of Water should be used, and to how much of the
Body it must be applied: this is left variable: it does not thence follow, that
the Church may bring in new Rites, that have no Found^tion in the Word; as for
Example, the Sign of the Cross. He tells us, p. 271. of the Protestants
abroad, who have furthest receded from the Practice of the Roman Church; that
they never thought a Significant Ceremony in the Worship of God, was in it self
Superstitious and Unlawful. And we in this agree with them. I have already
often told him, what Ceremonies we own, and what we reject. He instanceth in
the Wald^nses retaining the trina immersio, and the trine Fraction of the Bread
in the Eucha^ist. We never thought the Wald^nses perfect: tho it is very
evident to all who know any thing of that History, that they were far from
using the Ceremonies used in the Episcopal Church, and that they condemned them
generally: and that the Simplicity of the Apostolic Church was very much
imitated by them.

10. Another Debate he commenceth, p. 272. about the Episcopal Church of
England not admitting any to Labor in the Work of the Ministry am^^g them, tho
they had been Ordained by Laying on the Hands of the Pre^by^ery, unless they
will submit to be Re-ordained by a Bishop: which he very slightly passes over:
taking no notice of what had been said against that Practice: only he tells
us what Sol^cisms he could pick out of my Book, even more than a hundred: but
is content with one Instance in the Title Page; the Apology of the Clergy; in
stead of, for the Clergy: he is very Charitable who overlooketh; and hides the
Shame of more than a hundred Solae^ism^, and comes over this Passage now the
second time, which is no Solaecism at all. What follows is yet more
f^i^olous, and is designed to Reflect on a Person of more Wo^th than I am, who
had said, that he had paid Material Canonical Obedience to the Bishop; but not
formally; by which he meant no more, but that he had performed the Duty of his
Ministerial Office, when the Bishops enjoined it, which he, would have done
without it. And now, if that Assertion do not please our Author, he denies he
paid Canonical Obedience at all. Also this is a false Accusation, and though
this Author was challenged often about his false Assertions against this
Minister; yet he had never the Confidence to Answer one of them, nor to
Vindicat himself from being a false Accuser, but made a silly Quible on that
^xpression; which he does here again repeat, which needs no other Answer then
the repeating that Reverend Brother's Words, which our Author c^^peth at, as
they may be seen in the Postscript to the second ^indication of the Church, p.
2^0. His Words are these, Thinking my self free to join in these Duti^s to
which I was Authorized by my Office, although there had been no Bishop in the
World; nor do I think that by this I paid Formal Canonical Obedience; so that
the asserting of this, may be accounted a thirteenth of our Authors Lies. I am
no further concerned to take notice of his Discourse on this Head. He returns
now, p. 275. to resume the Matter about Presbyterian Ordination, and only
tells us that he will wave it, and will not tell us his Opinion about it:
after he had been pretty plain in the Matter, in his former Book: it is Wisdom
to meddle no further in a Matter that has been made to appear to be
Indefensible: yet he will not dismiss this Subject, without a parting Blow to
the Ordination of the later (...) Presbyterians: which he says, p. 277. is
left naked, and destitute of all such Arguments, as might excuse the Ordination
of other Foreign Churches. And he does more than insinuate that Presbyterians
have no Ordination. His Arguments (so far as I can pick them out of his
Discourse) are, 1. They were under no necessity to separate from their Bishops
in the Isle of Britain, A. 1. Want of Bishops might be the same Excuse for the
want of Episcopal Ordination, that it was to other Protestant Churches for whom
he pleads it: they might have had Bishops if they would, in France, Geneva,
Switzerland, etc., as well as we might. 2. The Necessity lay in this, that we
thought, (and still must think, till he, or some else, instruct us better) that
Bishops ought not to be in the Church. 3. He speaks of separating from our
Bishops in the Isle of Britain: that plainly insinuates, that not only the
Bishops in the Church of Scotland are ours, but the Bishops of England also,
and that we are under their Jurisdiction; as some of them have pleaded: this,
from a Minister of the Church of Scotland, is Unworthy Flattery of that Clergy
that he now depends on for his Bread. 3. If Ministers in Scotland have no
Ordination, because, in want of Bishops among themselves, they went not to the
English Bishops for Ordination, why is not the same Defectiveness imputed to
these in France, who might have come over to England for the same End. But the
Scots Presbyterians are the Men of his Indignation: and therefore, any Weapon
that comes to Hand, must be used to beat them down. Before I leave this Point,
I shall make it evident that the other Reformed, who are without Bishops, can
no more have a lawful Ordination than Scotland has, 1. Because they might have
had Bishops to rule them; for what could hinder them? their Magistrates did not;
for they are of Opinion with themselves: except in France, where the Popish
Magistrates did not, nor would oppose that piece of Conformity with themselves.
Yea, Thuan. blames the Protestants for not setting up Bishops: the Primitive
Church under Heathen Magistrates, had Bishops in our Authors Opinion: and we
think they wanted no needful Church Officer, even in that State. 2. It is plain
that the Reformed were against Episcopacy, as no Ordinance of Christ, as I have
showed: and it is evident from Confession of the French Church, Art. 30. and of
the Belgic, Art. 31. which being read in the Synod of Dort, was not disliked
by any of the Externi, save these from England.

11. His second Argument that the Scots Presbyterians have no Ordination is, It
is very uncertain, whether they retain such Solemn and Formal Words, when they
impose Hands, as expressly declare, that the Priestly Power of Administrating
Sacraments, and Absolving Poenitents, is then Conveyed to him that is Ordained.
If there be no such Conveyance, there is no Ordination; and if the Words made
use of, does not plainly and formally signify such a Power, then there is no
such Power Conveyed. A. This Uncertainty can be no good Medium to prove his
Point. For such Words may really be used, tho both he and I be uncertain,
whether they were used or not. Again; how can he prove the necessity of such
Words: what if Words be made use of, which do really and materially signify
the thing designed; tho they do it not formally and plainly? He is the first
that I have met with, who lays so much weight on the Form of Words. It is one
of the new Opinions he has broached, while he pretends to refute new
Opinions. Against it I thus argue, 1. No Words are enjoined in Scripture: which
must needs have been, if the Nullity of Ordination, and consequently of the
Ordinances Administered by such Ministers, had been the necessary Consequent of
Words not sufficiently formal and plain. What a sad Uncertainty and Confusion
should follow on this Necessity of such Words? not unlike that which, in the
Popish Church, follows on the Opinion of the Necessity of the Priests
Intention in his Administrations. 1. Can he tell us what Form of Words the
Apostles used, when they Ordained Ministers; how plain and formal they were? if
Uncertainty about that Nullify the Scots Presbyterian Ordination, it will by
good Consequence, make void all the Ordinations of the Apostolic Church: I am
sure he can give us no Account of their Words from any Authentic Records. 3.
In the Administration of Baptism, no Church that I know of, uses Formal and
plain Words that express either Admission into the Church, or Communication of
Christian Privileges, or Covenanting with GOD, or our Renouncing the Devil,
etc. I am sure I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc. are not Formal,
plain Words, to express these Things; tho I doubt not but that they Include
them all: and if Baptism be valid without such a Form of Words, why not
Ordination also? He says, p. 278. that there are many of their Number in the
West, who think Imposition of Hands unnecessarie. I suppose he has no Personal
knowledge of this: and he should be sure of his Informers before he cast such a
Reproach on his Brethren: for my part, I know no Minister in Scotland, West,
East, South, or North, who professes that Opinion: tho mean while I can tell
him of others who are not far from it: even the Church of France, in their
Synod, at Paris 1565. C. 6. Quick. Synod. p. 62. but I far rather agree with
Mr. Firmin, who has Written a Treatise to prove the Necessity of it. He
infers likewise, p. 279. from what he had Discoursed, that we have no
Organical Church. We are not afraid of his Censures: we can Prove, not only
that we have the Essentials of Ordination; but that, for the Manner of it, it
is nearer to the Gospel Pattern than what is Practiced in that Church which he
owneth. I find him to be of the same Sentiments with that Bishop in England
that was mentioned to him, who said of a Presbyterian Minister that he was no
better than a Mechanic, tho he had never been Bred to any Art but the Liberal
Arts, and had Presbyterial Ordination. It is strange that he should Insinuate,
that we derive our Power from the People: he cannot but know that we Disown
that Principle: but Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit: he hops that
some will believe what ever evil he says of us.

. 12. His next Controversy is about the Presbyterian Church Discipline: which
he had most Abusivly and falsely Reproached, Apolog. p. 22, 23. and was Checked
for so doing by a Modest Answer, Def. Vindic. p. 17, In which that which is
most Material he wholly passes over: bringing some what like an Answer to Two
or Three Things. It was asked, what is that Discipline of the Ancient Church
(which he wishes were Restored) which is not either the same with ours, or far
more strict and Severe. He Answers that he never found fault with our
Discipline for its being strict; but for being factiously Pragmatical, and
endlesly Inquisitive, and from its having no Tendency to Edify the
Christian-Church, or to Reclaim wicked People. What can an unbyassed Reader
understand by these Words, but that the Man is angry, and hates the
Presbyterians, and their Way: and would fain cast Dirt on them, if he could
find it. These indefinite and gross Accusations must either be Proved, that
thus the Presbyterians do Manage the Discipline of the Church; and this must be
in many Instances, and many Ministers and Elders; and all this well Attested:
or the Man who thus Writes must pass for a Slanderer, rather than a Disputant.
Our Discipline we Manage by the Rules of the Word, and the Principles of sound
Reason; we do not Indulge Sin in these of our own Way; nor meddle with Things
that are without our Line: nor do we enquire into Scandalous Sins till they
become such, by being openly known: and if Occasion be given for Inquiry, and
nothing be found, we Desist, and leave Secret Things to GOD, to whom they
belong; for the Tendency of our Exercise of Discipline, we are sure it is for
Edification; and we can make it appear that sometimes it is Blessed with
Success; and if it Irritate some, or Harden others, or have no Fruit on many,
we Lament it: but are not to be blamed for it; for the same Thing may be said
of Preaching the Gospel, and that in a Commendable manner. I Deny not but that
some are short of that Dexterity that others have; and that there is
Imperfection in the best of us: and if they that blame us can say otherways of
their own Church, either they are strangly Deluded, or the World is generally
Deceived about their Way. He commenceth a new Debate, p. 283. about
Non-resistance which he had raised, Apolog. p. 20. and yet waved, and of which
very little was said, Def. of Vindic. p. 16. he now resumeth the Debate, and
talks more freely than before; being behind the Curtain, and not in Hazard of
Censure. I was then unwilling, and am still more so, to meddle in that Matter;
both because it is a Controuerne that belongs to the Politics rather than to
Divinity; and Lawyers are sit to Manage it. Also, because it is not now
between Prelatists and Presbyterians: the Generality of both having of late
years Agreed in what is Inconsistent with the Prelatical Doctrine that was
Current some years ago.

13. Another of our new Opinions he will have to be, p. 289. that they (the
Presbyterians) abhor and cast off all Established Forms and Rules in the
Worship of GOD, etc. we have under this Head a parcel of the most False and
Impudent Assertions, in Matters of Fact, and the most unjust Calumnies, that
ever the Press groaned under. And it is a wonder that a Person pretending to
Conscience, or to Christianity, could give such Scope to his Passion, as to
have no regard to Truth: and indeed here is little, or no Matter of Debate, nor
place for Vindication, but by Denying what he Asserteth without any Attempt to
give Evidence for what is Asserted. I Deny not but that there may be found some
few among the People that own Presbytery, who through Ignorance, and a mistaken
Zeal, run into some of these Excesses that he Taxes: but I know none who are
Guilty of all that he Imputes to us, sine discrimine: and I am sure the more
Sober and Intelligent sort of Presbyterians, abhors many of these things
that he Charge them with. He Asserteth that the Presbyterians of Scotland
abhor and cast off all Established Forms and Rules in the Worship of GOD. I
Challenge him to Prove what he says: it is a palpable Falsehood. For, 1. We
neither abhor nor cast off the Form of Sound Words, I mean the Scriptures of
Truth, recommended by the Apostle for us to hold, (...). 1 Timothy 1. 13. nor do
we abhor or reject the Form of Baptizing, and Administering the LORD'S Supper;
nor of Blessing the People at the Dismissing of the Assembly. 2. Even some
Forms that we Reject, as needles, and therefore unfit to be used in this state
of the Church, yet we do not abhor them; such as Forms of Prayer, we think they
were both Lawful, and necessary, when the Church was not Provided with
Qualified Ministers: yet we think they should now be laid aside, when they are
not so needed: as a Man should not use Crutches when he is well Recovered from
his Dameness. 3. To say that we abhor and reject Rules in the Worship of GOD
is beyond all bounds of Truth, and Modesty. We own, and use the Word of GOD as
the Rule of Worshipping Him: neither do we abhor or reject the Help of Humane
Rules which are drawn out of that Supreme and Divine Rule: we have our
Directorie, and many Good Acts of General-Assemblies, yea, of Synods, and
Presbyteries, in their respective Districts. His next Assertion is shameless
above measure: that since the Revolution, they Turn out the Episcopal Clergy
out of their Livings, if they retain any of the Ancient forms, tho never so
short, Catholic, or Orthodox. Pray Sir, when was this done, by whom, where, or
to whom? none of them were ever Turned out of their Livings on these Heads,
either by Church or State; and none by the Church except for Ignorance, Error
in some Great Point of Faith, supine negligence, or Scandal in Things that are
not Controverted among us whether they be Sins, or not. It is true, Uniformity,
even in these little Things, is required of these who will Join with us, be
Received into Ministerial Communion, and have a Share of the Government of the
Church with us (and much Tenderness, and Forbearance has been used even in
these, for some time) but they who think not fit to Join with us, are suffered
to follow their Ministerial Work in their Parishes, and Enjoy their Livings,
without such Uniformity with us, as he Talks of. And if we had Required this,
or Turned them out, it had been but an Imitating of the Practice of his own
Party. Whom do they Suffer to Enjoy Public Livings who do not Conform to their
Way, to the Height?

14. He persists in his false Assertions, while he says, the Episcopal Clergy
are Enjoined to forbear the LORD'S Prayer, Reading the Holy Scriptures in their
Assemblies, the Apostolic Creed, and the Doxology. This is far from any
Semblance of Truth: no such Prohibition was ever given. He insisteth a little
in Pleading for the Use of the LORD'S Prayer: but takes no Notice of the State
of the Question about it, as it has been Proposed by his Antagonist. His
Business seems to be, not so much to Convince, as to Accuse. It is False that
we have Banished that Prayer. We duly use it as a Directory, and Pray
according to it; we Teach it to our Catchum^ni, we do not Judge, nor Blame any
Man for using the Words: and if he can show us a Command for using them, we
shall Obey it. He says, it was Enjoined by CHRIST to his Disciples. If he
mean, that the Words should be Recited, we desiderate the Proof: nor do we find
that any of the Apostles, in their Public Administrations so used it. It is
true, the Presbyterians formerly used it; and if they should do so still, I
should not Reclaim: but I know that his Parties making it their Shibboleth,
together with Conviction of the Indifferency of so using it, gave the first
Occasion for disusing it. It is an unaccountable Fancy, that the Omission of
these have no Tendency but to promote Atheism: this is the general ^^nt of the
Party concerning what ever is out of their Road. As this his Assertion is most
unreasonable, and groundless in it self; there being other means far more
Effectual to keep out Atheism than the Use of these Forms can be supposed to
be: so Common Observation and Experience shows, that the Atheism that we all
should Lament, is no more visible, nor common, among that Party of Christians
who do not use these Forms, than among them who are fond of them. I can draw no
other Conclusion from what follows, p. 290, 291. but that the Author was, when
he Wrote these Things, in the Paroxism that he professed to be in when he Wrote
another Book, viz. provoked to the Indecency of Passion, to see his beloved
Forms neglected. Hence he tells us of the Madness and Dreams of idle People,
and the Humor of Schism: hindering the Holy Scriptures to be Read in the
Assemblies as heretofore. whereas it is evident (and the Reverend Mr. Boise
has made it appear, on occasion of the like Accusation against us by the
Bishop of L^ndonderry) that the Scripture is more Read in our Congregations,
and People is made more acquained with them, than heretofore in the Episcopal
Meetings. I mean where the Orders of our Church are observed: for them who Read
but a verse or two for a Lecture, I cannot Answer for their Practice: and we
make the People understand the Reading, as Ezra did, Neh. 5. 5. which was not
done in the Episcopal Church of Scotland: but Men who had no Authority, nor
were Teachers in the Church, were set up to dispense this Ordinance of CHRIST,
the Reading of the Scripture in the Congregation. He next blames us (under the
same Epithets of Madness, Dreams, Humor of Schism) that when Children are
B^ptized, the Parents are not allowed to know into what Religion or Faith they
are initiated; and this, because they are not made to repeat the Creed. I first
ask him, what Faith do the Generality of Parents of his Party understand their
Children to be Intiated into by their Repeating that which we call the Apostles
Cr^^d, which they cannot understand by our Conduct: seeing some of them
understand it not; and seeing it does not sufficiently Discriminate the sound
Faith which we own, from Socinianism, Popery, Antinomianism, and several other
gross Errors. Next, I Answer, that it is false and Calumnious that he
Asserteth: they are not only allowed to know the Faith that their Infants are
Baptized into; but pains is taken so far as Ministers can, to make them
understand that Faith* and they are Solemnly taken Engaged to adhere to that
Faith, and to breed their Children in the knowledge of it, and it is told them
what Faith we mean, by designing it from the Scripture, the great Rule of it,
and the Confession of Faith of this Church, drawn out of the Scripture. If any
have no other Notion of Baptism but that it is an Engagement to be a ^ovenan^^r
(which he would have us believe, tho I am persuaded he knows better things)
we give no ground for such a Thought, but endeavor to present things otherwise
to them.

15. He says we are so unfixed and variable, that not two in the Nation in
public follow the same Rule, etc. This is a horrid Abusing of the Reader, and
can have no other Design but to make the Presbyterians odious where they are
not known; for in Scotland, even among his own Party, the contrary is well
known. But all this Noise is, because we have no stinted Liturgy: without
which we follow the same Rules, both Divine and Humane, as I showed before, we
all teach the same Truths; and Administer the same Ordinances; and in the same
manner, except that we use not the same Words: wherein yet we do not study a
diversity, as he injuriously Asserteth. His Apology for the Episcopal Church
of Scotland for wanting a Liturgy is odd; the Clergy Composed Prayers for
themselves from which they seldom varied. It may be some of them did so, either
from insufficiency or lazieness: but I am sure neither the greatest, nor the
best part of them did so: but what ever be in that, both on his side, and on
ours, they who did not tie themselves to the same Words, at all times, managed
their Work with as much plainess, gravity, and coherence of their Words, and
left the People as little in the Dark as they did whom he so much Commends on
these Accounts. His calling Praying without a set Form, Rambling, and Ascribing
to it no Order, nor Dependence, but what is caused by the heat of the Animal
Spirits: I neglect, as showing a Temper of mind that is to be pitied rather
than Redargued by Argument. He waveth the Debate about stinted Forms, p. 292.
which any who Reads this Discourse must understand that he intends not to
Dispute by Scripture, or Reason, against him whom he Opposes in this, but to
Rail at him: And because I intend not to engage with him at that Weapon, I
shall wave it too. Yet he brings Calvines Testimony for the Preference of a
well Composed Liturgy; out of one of his Epistles, which he so Cites, as no
Man shall find it, unless he happen to have the same Edition of Calvines
Epistles that he used; which I have not: had he named the Epistle by its
Number, or the Person to whom Addressed, I might have found it by some pains. I
oppose Calvine to Calvine; he said of the English Liturgy (and I suppose that
will pass with my Author for a well Composed one) that it had in it some
Tollerabiles ineptias. He brings some what that looks like Argument, even
in this Debate that he waveth. The great things of Worship is not to be left to
the Wisdom and Discretion of every private Administrator. A. This is provided
against by the Churches trying Men well before they be Entrusted: by setting
the Word, and the Acts of the Church before them, as their Rule and Directorie,
and by Watching over them, and Correcting them for mismanagement. These are
GOD'S ways of preventing Inconveniency; a stinted Liturgy is a way of Man's
devising, without any Warrant, or Footstep of it in the Scripture. Another of
his Arguments: every Priest isnot wise enough to manage an Affair of such great
Importance. A. That is so true that none is wise enough for it, as the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 2. 6. And if so, who is fit to Compose a Liturgy for others;
which all Men must be tied to? On this Consideration, the Church ought to choose
the fitest Men she can get; and when that is done; both the weaker, and
stronger Sort should beware of leaning to their own Wit and Parts in that Great
Work; and should take the Word of GOD for their Directorie, and Depend on the
Spirit of GOD for His assistence: and this is a better Remedy of the Evil
feared than a sti^ted Liturgy is; and has more Countenance in the Scripture,
Romans 8. 26. Another Argument. Though a Minister should be very Wise, yet at all
times he is not in the same Temper, and it is not reasonable that the Worship
of GOD should be less decent when his Intellectuals are clouded than when he is
in perfect health. A. 1. If this Argument have any strength, we must have a
Form of Preaching, as well as of Prayer; and always tied to it: for a
Disordered mind may make sad work there. 2. Some have been out of Temper for
Reading the Service, as well as for Extemporary Prayer; when their Brain has
been clouded: and this has as often hapened in the Reading Pue, as in the
Presbyterian Pulpit. Wherefore, we must have another Remedy against it in both,
than a Liturgy. 3. I confess a lesser Degree of decency in the Worship of GOD
than should be, or has been, is never reasonable: but how can it be prevented
either in Praying, Preaching, or Reading, as long as, the Temper both of Men's
Bodies, and of their Minds are variable. 4. If a Man's Intellectuals be at any
time so clouded, whether by a Hypochondriack Distemper, or by Drinking too
liberally, or by any other Sickness; as that it is probable to make the Worship
of GOD to be unduely Managed, that Man (what ever have been his Wisdom or
Abilities) should not be suffered to Officiate at that time; whether with, or
without the Book: I am sure there was never any Church, Ancient or Modern,
which appointed a Liturgy for such Men; no^ to countenance the Putting, or
Keeping, such in the Sacred Fu^ction. 5. There is another Cause of Worship
being better or worse Managed at diverse times, which our Author has not
thought on, nor will his Liturgy serve for a Remedy of it; that is the better
or worse Frame of his Soul, with respect to Heavenly things, and the Degrees of
the Presence and Aids of the Spirit of GOD: therefore, however unreasonable it
be, yet it is manifest, that there is not the same measure of Decency, and
Spiritual Luster on the Worship of GOD at all times: nor can there be a Remedy
for this, till we be better Men: nor even then, if the LORD for His own Holy
ends, withdraw his presence: I know this will be slouted by some: but the
Apostle himself had his unusual Inlargements, 2 Cor. 5. 11. and found it
needful that the People should Pray for assistence to him, Col. 4. 3.

. 16. He brings yet another Reason: the spiritual necessities of the People
ought at all times to be ^qually Provided for. A. 1. That is impossible for Man
to do: unless we can find unchangeable Men to be Ministers. It is fair if they
be always well, and sometimes, if they be tollerablly provided for. 2. This is
the improperest Reason that he could have fallen upon; for it cutteth the
Throat of his Cause: because the Spiritul Necessities of the People are very
various: diverse People have diverse Necessities: and the same Persons Needs
may be far other, or greater, at one time than at another: they know little of
the Spiritual state of Souls, who know not this; now a ^^int^d Liturgy can
never reach these, half so well as a Minister may do, who has the Gift of
Prayer; and who endeavors, as much as may be, to be acquainted with the
Cases of the Peoples Souls. Next, he Pleads Uniformity for the use of a
stinted Liturgy, which is a weak Argument: for Uniformity in Words (and that
is all that we can have by a Liturgy, which can not be obtained without it) is
not so valuable. If we all speak the same things what great Matters is it if
they be expressed in diverse Words. Again, what Reason is there for the Necessity
of Uniformity in Prayer, more than in Preaching? which yet our Brethren do not
Enjoin. That the Forms he mentions are the Tessera's if Uniformi^y, is an
absurd and groundless Assertion: there was Uniformity in the Apostolic Church,
and is in our Churches, without them. If he deny this last, let him show what
Dissormity is among us, further than in Words, which he cannot show to be among
his own Party; yea, it is evident that such Discrepancie is in their Worship,
in one Church from another, that he cannot Charge us with the like: for the
Cathedral Service, and that in Country Churches, are more unlike to one
another, than the Latter of them is to the Meetings of some Dissenters. He next
Argues, that a Litu^gie obviates Men's v^nting their own Conceits. A. This is
far more readily and frequently done in Preaching than in Prayer: and therefore
will either Prove that free Preaching, without a Book, should be Restrained; or
it Proves nothing at all. And indeed the way to prevent Inconveniency in both,
is not a Liturgy, but to be careful that none but well Qualified Men be in the
Ministry, and Watchfully to look to the Administrations of them who are in that
Office.

17. Our Author, p. 295. and seq. Haleth in a Discourse by Head and ^ars,
without Occasion given, or Coherence with what he was upon, concerning
Superstition; wherein he takes it for granted that his Way, in all the Parts
and Steps of it, is right, and ours wholly wrong: and on this Begged
Hypothesis, he Declaimeth against the Presbyterians as the most Superstitious,
yea, the most Atheistical Men in the World. This is an easy Way of Running down
any Adversary whatsoever. Whether a Groundless Scrupulosity, either in Matters
of common Practice, or in Matters of Worship, be Superstition or not, I know is
controverted by some: I shall not now enter into this Debate; knowing that it
issues into a mere Logomachy. Tho I think Superstition, being a sort of false
Worship, or a Sin against the Worship of God, in Strickness of Speech, nothing
should be called Superstition, but that whereby People intend, or pretend to
Worship God. Scruples about what is not Worship may be very Sinful, because
Unreasonable and Groundless, and yet not be Worship, nor Superstition. If he
can prove that our Scrupling the Holy Days, Liturgy and Ceremonies, is without
all Ground, and that these things are well Warranted, and Approved of God; and
that there is no Sin in Using them: we shall change our Opinion, and submit to
what Censure he shall put on us. But while that is not done, (as I am sure it
has not hitherto been performed) we regard little his Railing Accusations that
he ^^lleth his Pages with. Most of what he here Loadeth the Presbyterians with,
may be evidently, and with good Reason, Retorted on himself, and his Party. For
Instance, he says when we represent the Deity, as one that is plea^ed with the
imaginary Notions that we Groundlesly entertain of Things; this is
Superstition, that Poisons the Soul and all its Faculties. Now whether
Presbyterians or Prelatists be more guilty of this, let the Reader Judge. The
one think that God is pleased with nothing as Worship, but what He has
Prescribed in His Word: And that He hates Will Worship, and all Notions about
that, which have no Foundation in Scripture. The other think God is pleased
with a great many Things that Men have have Devised for Adorning His Worship;
and for an Order and Decency that they imagine to be such; but the Lord has
never declared it to be such. Whether of the two entertain these Groundless
Notions of the Deity, which are the Superstition that Poysoneth the Soul and
all its Faculties? Another Instance: to say that such a thing is forbidden of
God, only because we forbid it our selves, is to teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men: but to regulate our Actions in themselves indifferent,
according to the Prudent Determination of our Superiors, cannot fall under
that Censure. Let us see whether we, or his own Party be thus guilty. We
disowne that we say of any one thing, that it is forbidden of God, because we
forbid it: if we say of any thing, that God has forbidden it, and do not prove
that it is so; we refuse not to bear the Blame of such Impiety: but it is
manifest, that his Party use somethings, as if God had enjoined them, when they
cannot prove that it is so; but only the Church has enjoined them: they
Command People to obey, to Use their Ceremonies, they Urge them with Rigor,
they do more severely Censure the Neglect of them, than they Punish Breaking of
Gods plain Commands. And yet they cannot show, nor do they pretend to, any
other Warrant for them, but the Authority of the Church; which he calls the
Prudent Determination of our Superiors. It were needless, as well as endless,
to take notice of all the Fantastic Notions that he expresses about
Superstition, and his Ungrounded Suppositions, that the Presbyterians are of
these Sentiments, in which he places it: what is said may give a sufficient
Taste of his Way of Refuting his Adversaries: only I cannot pass, that p. 29^.
he insinuates, that the Presbyterians esteem the Means more than the End; and
separate the Ecclesiastical Laws from their Subordination and Relation to the
Laws of God. It must be a strange Degree of Prejudice, that could seduce him
into such Distorted Notions. Do we esteem the Means more than the End, because
we would have the End, Edification, carried on by Means that God has
Appointed, and that He has Promised a Blessing to, rather than by Means of
Man's Devising, which have no Promise of a Bles^ing or Success? It is not only
Conscience of Pleasing God, but Concern for that End, that makes us so
Careful, that the Means we use be Approved of God. Or do we separate
Ecclesiastical Laws, from their Relation and Subserviency to the Laws of God:
we are so far from it, that we own no Ecclesiastical Laws, which are without
the Relation of Dependency on the Law of ^od; or without due Subordination to
it: and it is on this Head that we reject the Church Laws, that enjoin Humane
Ceremonics peculiar to the Worship of God; because the Church has no Warrant
to make such Laws, (if he say that she has, let us see it) and because these
Laws are not Subordinate, but rather Coordinate to the Laws of God, setting up
the Churches Institutions beside his. That the Negative Scrupulosity that he
mentions from Coloss. 2. 21, 22, 23. is a great Evil, we doubt not: and if he
will call it Superstition, we will not contend about Words (tho the Reason of
that Denomination is doubtful; the Will Worship that is mentioned, being rather
to be referred to the Worshipping of Angels, spoken of v. 18. which is there,
and also in Conjunction with this Will Worship, called Humility; that is a vain
Show, of it.) But nothing of this makes for his Purpose, unless he can prove,
that our Scruples about the Ceremonies, are wholly Ground* l^ss, as these
Scruples were; and as the rest of the Abstinc^ces are, that he mentions;
wherefore all that he, at great length Discourses on this Head, is wholly
impertinent. If he can prove the Ceremonies to be Excellent and Useful, as he
insinuates, p. 297. our Cause cannot stand before him.

18. He undertaketh to prove our Scruples to be more dangerous than these, in
that the Scruples there mentioned, had a Show of Wisdom; but the Presbyterian
Scruples have more dangerous Consequences, in that they co^demn those
Solemnities of Religion, which have a direct Tendency to promote Religion, in
all its most Excellent Branches. The import of this Ratiocination is, the Way
of the Ceremonialists is right, Ergo, the Presbyterians are to be condemned.
All this is purely Begging of the Question. We deny any such Tendency to be in
the Ceremonies; and cannot be persuaded of what he says, by his Confident
Asseverations, and Big Words. If I could find any thing in his following Pages,
that is worth Answering, and has not been already Answered, (for he repeateth
ad nauseam) I should consider it. The Persons that he knew, who were so Fearful
and Superstitious, that they would not Break up a Letter on Sunday, we do not
approve; nor do our Scruples Countenance such Misapprehensions: if we meet with
any such, (for I know none of them, but rather observe that an undue Liberty is
taken generally, on the Lords Day) we shall endeavor to instruct them better.
He tells us, p. 302. the fifth or sixth time, that Superstition leads to
Atheism; and adds, that by the Power of Prejudice, and Faction, it makes a
Man Despise the Omniscience of God, and to Venture upon the most Daring
Impieties, Tho I will not be an Advocat for Superstition, nor for Ignorant or
Groundless Scrupulosity: yet this his Assertion I cannot understand: for it is
the Apprehension of Gods Omniscience, that makes these Poor Souls, who dare
not Break up a Letter on the Lords Day, to Fear where no Fear is; and it is
want of all Scrupling, even where there is just Ground, that makes People
Venture on the most Daring Impieties; it is because they are Stout Hearted, not
because they are Fearful Hearted. And how Faction comes in to make up the
Scene, I cannot see; but that Presbyterians, whom he has concluded to be
Factious, must be the Persons to be thus Loaded. His Probative Instance of what
he had said, is yet less Accountable. It is, that the Covenanters, when they in
their full Career against the ancient Constitutions of Church and State, (thus
his Prejudice against them, does represent them to him, and his Hatred of them,
makes him so represent them to the World) with Hands lifted up to Heaven
abjured the Primitive Stations: and these Stations he highly extolleth; and
thinks the Presbyterians know not what they are, and concludes, that we are
bound by the Covenant, never to be present at such Exercises of Mortifications,
etc. The Stations were their Meetings on Wednesdays and Fridays, for Fasting
till Nine of the Clock, and for other Spiritual Exercises. So Albaspin. whom he
cites, and his Adnotator Keitombellius, Observe. 16. p. 23, 24. who also
tells us that this they did, primis i^is saeculis, quibus miseriis and
persecutionibus undique, and quasi perpetuis stiparentur. I know no
Presbyterian, who either has Sworn against, or Condemns these Stations; so
far as we have a distinct Account of them: have not we, in great Towns the same
thing, on the Matter, with these Stations: Morning Exercises for Confession of
Sin, Prayer, and Instructing of the People; and that of^ner, in some Places,
than Twice a Week. That the Primitive Stations are abjured in the Covenant, is
falsely asserted: indeed in the National Covenant, or Confession of Faith, which
was Subscribed by the King, the Nobility, and the whole Nation, they Renounce a
great many of the Popes Doctrines, and Practices; and his Stations are
mentioned among them: but will any Man, who understands what he says, or who
does not look on the whole of Popery as Pure and Primitive, say, that the
Popish Stations, (under the present Degeneracy of that Church) and the
Primitive Stations, were the same thing? the best Account that I can find of
what now is called Stations among the Papists, is from Onuphrius Panvinius, de
stationibus urbis Romae: where he confesses that their Original is obscure: he
makes them, in the Primitive Church, to have been Prayers with Standing, in
Opposition to these with Kneeling: to which sometimes Fasting was joined, and
he shows how several Popes Limited them, and others appropriated them to
certain Days: and shows how in his time they were fixed to Days; and to
Churches in the City of Rome: as it may be presumed was done also in other
Churches. He shows also their Number, viz. in forty seven Churches, ninety
six Stations, on eighty three Days, and tells us of Indulgences granted to
these Stations by Pope Boniface. This Term may also be applied to their Solemn
Processions, for Perambulating any Piece of Ground: wherein they do often Stand
at such a Cross, or at such a Turning, and Rehearse certain Prayers. This
Supestition is what is renounced in the Covenant, and it is joined with
Peregrinations and such other Fopperies. He calls Superstition a Bastard Kind
of Worship, p. 305. but Scrupling at Ceremonies, has nothing in it like
Worship, whether Bastard or Legitimate: how will he then Reconcile this, with
Calling our Scruples Superstition? The Jewish Superstitions, the Murdering of
A. Bishop Sharp, the Heathens Superstitions, that he has Consulted Juvenal
about, none of these touch the Presbyterians; tho one of them was Acted by some
who bare that Name, to the great Dislike of the rest of them. He further
Argues, p. 307, 308. that we Contend for our own Opinions, he for the Church
and her Catholic Constitutions. The same Arguments the Papists use against
Protestants: the Name of the Church is the Shelter that some flee to, when they
have no other Cover for the Nakedness of their Opinions. We affirm (and our
Assertion is as Probative as his is) that we maintain the Opinions that we have
Learned from the Scripture, and not such as we have Groundlesly Chosen for our
selves.

19. He next, p. 309. falls on the Catechism which is owned and taught in
this Church; after he has Loaded us with Servile Condescending to Popular
Fancies, and Leaving the People in Profound Ignorance. This is his Strain, his
Genius, and to be Neglected; his Reproaches, and Praises are of the same Value
with us. The Quarrel that he has with the Catechism, is, it is Unintelligible
by the People, (which were a great Fault if true) and that it is Adapted to
serve the Hypothesis of a certain Order of School Men: he means, as is
evident by what follows, the Dominicans, or Jansenists, in Opposition to the
Jesuits: his Grievance is, our Catechism is not Pelagian, nor Arminian enough.
I shall free him of a Fear that he expresses, p. 315. that if the Vindicator
(as he calls him) take these Paragraphs to Task, he will most Zealously
Undertake the Defense of all that Orthodox Stuff, that is Contained in their
Public Catechisms, and Write out a whole System to Confute his Adversary.
Whatever be that Persons Zeal to Defend our Catechisms, as entirely Orthodox;
he need not Fear Writing of a System on this Occasion; the Person he Aims at,
will be more Sparing than so, of his Ink and Paper; and yet more of his Time
and Labor: unless he saw more Hazard to Truth, than can arise from this
Authors Attempt: and unless there were none who could do it to better Purpose,
as there are many: seeing he intends not to Question the Orthodoxy of the
Catechism, (tho he often Lasheth it that Way by severe Innuendo's) but only to
Prove its Unintelligibleness: I shall engage with him only in that. He Talks
Big, of many Instances which might be brought, wherein our Catechisms are
Unintelligible; but he is pleased to pitch but on one; which is that Question;
Wherein consists the Sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell: to which
the Answer is, The Sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell, consists in
the Guilt of Adams first Sin, the Want of Original Righteousness, and
Corruption of his whole Nature, which is commonly called Original Sin, together
with all Actual Transgressions which proceed from it. I shall An^madvert a few
Things on this his Essay, before I consider particularly the Proofs of
Obscurity and Unintelligibleness of this Doctrine. 1. If I should yield all
that he here proposes to himself, he falls short of his Design; which is to
Reproach the Scots Presbyterians: for tho they own that Catechism, and look on
it as one of the best extant, yet it is not of their Composure; it was done by
the Divines Assembled at Westminster, few of whom were Presbyterians. 2. Few
Men of Sense, who are Concerned about the Promoting of Religion, and the
Salvation of Souls, will prefer it to the Church of Englands Catechism, which
begins, What is thy Name; Who gave thee this Name, etc. but will own that
there is more sound, plain, useful Truth, and what is necessary to be known by
the people, in our, than in their Catechism. As might easily be made appear, if
I might Digress to State a Comparison between them, from the Beginning to the
End. 3. We must not imagine, that whatever is put into a Catechism, must be so
plain, that the meanest Capacity, without Help, can sufficiently understand it:
for there are Truths needful to be known, which the People must be helped to
understand, tho at first View, they Comprehend them not: yea, somethings must
be taught to all the People, and are necessary to be known by Christians, which
tho they are intelligible, yet are not so easily understood, nor so fully, as
some other Things, can be. If this Author will take on him, to judge of the
Labor of such a Grave and Learned Assembly, as was that at Westminster, and
conclude, that they Acted Foolishly, in Proposing Unintelligible Doctrines to
the People, let him give also his Censure of the Apostolic Catechism; the
Substance of which is set down Heb. 6. 1, 2. where are Matters, that as many
Difficulties may be raised about, as he Starteth on this Question and Answer.
4. I hope he does not Dream, that no Truths are to be Proposed to the
Catechumeni, but such as the meanest (yea, or the greatest Capacity) can fully
Comprehend, and Solve all the Difficulties, yea, or Understand all the Debates,
that arise in the Heads of Learned Men about them: for then, they must be kept
in Profound Ignorance of all the Mysteries of our Religion, yea, of the
Greatest, most Fundamental, and most Necessary Truths that the Scripture
Teaches us. If he were put to Frame a Catechism so Qualified, he would find it
hard to get Matter for it. He should consider, that the Use of a Catechism, is
not to make the People Polemick Divines at first Hand, but to Acquaint them
with the Positive Doctrine of Salvation, and to Lay before them Scripture
Grounds for Assenting to it. 5. The Doctrine of this Question and Answer, is
very necessary to be known, as on other Grounds, so in Order to the Exercise of
Gospel Repentance: which is hard to say any can have, who is wholly Ignorant of
Original Sin, which is here, as plainly and fully Described, as has been done
by any, in so few Words. One may be Jealous, that Picking this Quarrel with the
Catechism, arises rather from Dislike of the Truths here Taught, than from the
Obscurity of it. If he allow Original Sin to be Taught to the People at all,
let him ^ry if he can Frame a plainer Question and Answer about it. 6. It is
the Care of Presbyterian Ministers, that People may understand the Grounds of
our Religion, as well as may be, not only to lay down, even in the Catechism,
the Scriptures where such Doctrines are Taught, that the Peoples Faith may
stand on that sure Foundation, but also they Explain the Catechism, and all the
Doctrines contained in it, to them, when they Catechize, and sometimes in
Preaching: and do not content themselves, that the People can Repeat the Words
of the Catechism: and therefore it is no sufficient Objection against the
Catechism, that any Passage in it is not so Obvious to every Capacity, as might
be wished. Notwithstanding of all that I have said, I do not yield that this, or
any other Passage in the Catechism, is Unintelligible by an ordinary Capacity,
where Attention, and Diligence is used, toward Attaining of Knowledge. 7. Tho
it were to be wished, that all the Lords People were Prophets, and that every
one of them were able to Debate for the Truth, and to stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers: yet we think it should be endeavored, that cople generally should
know the (...) of these Revealed Truths, which are Conducible to their
Salvation, and to Direct them in the Way of Duty; and if some cannot Attain
such a Measure of Knowledge in them as is Desirable; others who are more
Docile, should not be Deprived of what Advantage they can attain.

20. Our Author having set down the Question and Answer, says, there is
nothing in it but is Dark, and altogether beyond the Comprehension of
Illiterate People: yea, that it cannot be understood without Acquaintance with
the Language of the School Men: he calls it Clouds of Unknown Language: all
this is as easily denied as it is asserted, and with far more Reason: for we
can give the Instances of many, (tho may be, they will not be willing to be
Named, as he requires) who can give a good Account, without School Terms, of
the Doctrine here Comprised; who yet know no other Language, but their Mother
Tongue. He tells us that the first Difficulty is, de reatu peccati primi
hominis: I confess, if he propose it thus in Latin, it will puzzle most of the
Vulgar, (whom he Despises under the Name of Plow Men) but there are Plow Men,
and others, who in their own Language, can tell you that thus it is with us,
that we are guilty of Adams Sin; and can bring Scripture Proof for what they
say, out of Romans 5. 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Our Country People can understand,
that in that Passage of Scripture, it is plain, that we are guilty of Adams
Sin, and that we are justified by Christ's Righteousness: and so they will tell
you, that Scripture holds forth the Imputation* of both; and they understand
what is meant by that hard Word. His next Difficulty is, de privatione
justitiae originalis; and he Complains, that the English Word does not
determine, whether it be Privation or Negation: our People can tell, (and some
are Sensible of it, and Weighted with it) that they have no Righteousness of
their own, nor Rectitude in their Nature, that they are neither Born with it,
nor can Acquire it, but must have it from Christ, or perish without it: for the
Terms he mentions, they do not trouble themselves about these, nor do we
think it necessary that they should. His third Remark seems to make the
Answer to the Question, not only Obscure, but Erroneous: for he makes it to
insinuate, that the Rectitude of Men's Souls is wholly lost, and that there are
no remains of the Divine Image left on the Soul of Man. It is no wonder that he
thinks the Vulgar cannot understand this Answer, when so Learned a Dr. does
so foully Misapprehend it; I shall not impute this to want of Capacity, nor to
the Objective Darkness of the Thing; but to his Prejudice, or want of
Attention: for it is plain to any who will understand, that this is neither
said nor hinted and that it is manifest that the Corruption of all the
Faculties, not the total Corruption of all, or any of them, is there Expressed.
Such a Blunder as this, in another, he would have Insulted over. A further
Evidence of the Obscurity that he would Prove, that our sinful Estate
consists also in all the actual Transgressions that proceed from this
Original sin. He must have a very dark mind to whom this is unintelligible. But
the Great Matter is, that he that Answers must Re-collect all these things,
(and they are but 4. in Number) before he understand this Matter. What mighty
Difficulty is in that? or wherein lies the Necessity of Metaphysics for
understanding these Particulars, or making Re-collection of them, I cannot
Comprehend: nor can I understand how Peoples being I^cumbred with the Affairs
of Humane Life, puts them out of Case for attaining the Knowledge that we
Debate about. What he further has under this Head, is made up of Harsh Words
and bitter Censures, not to be Answered: that the Catechism was only designed
as the Badge of a Party (as if the Prelatists met at Westminster designed a
Shibboleth for the Scots Presbyterians to be distinguished by) this is wise
talk: he calls it such Words as Monks and ill natured Zealots pitched upon:
it is nothing else but to lift up a Banner for Faction, Ignorance, and
Superstition. They (the People) are Taught by their Leaders to baule against
the Ancient Methods of the Christian Church, and that which they set up in
Oposition to it, leads them naturally to Pride, and Enthusiasm: Let any Man
whose Tongue is under any Restraint from the aw of GOD, or regard to Man, tell
us how this can be applied to the Catechism. More stuff of this Stamp, he
has, which I am weary to Transcribe. He says, this Charge may be fairly
managed against the Catechism in general, as well as against this Question. And
I am Confident all such Attempts may receive a full and plain Answer. He is
pleased also to Reproach the Homilies of the Presbyterians (so in Contempt he
calls their Preaching of the Gospel) with the same strain; he must mean
unintelligiblness: from which he falls into a new Fit of calling his
Opposites by what ill Names he pleases. Such an Indefinite Charge as this is
not to be Answered; but by Denying it: and I am sure he can never Prove it, the
Stories collected, or devised by his Friend, the Author of the Presbyterian
Bloquence, are not Probative, where Sense or Reason, or Candor have place, no,
not among his own Party, who know the Presbyterians.

. 21. His next Charge against us is, a Repetition of what he brought, and I
Answered before: that the Scripture is not Read in Public; and this he says,
is pursuant to the Design of keeping the People in the Dark. He says, the
Canonical Scriptures, as well as the Apocryphal (a double Grievance in his
eyes) are laid aside from public use, which he calls a bold stroke of
Atheism, and Enthusiasm* But wise Men will think that there is far more of
Atheism in such a Bold, Public, Unlimited Assirming of what is an Evidence of
having no regard to Truth. If there were any thing Argumentative (as the whole
is most Abusive, and destitute of Truth) in his Harangue that he seteth off
these Falsehoods with, I should be at the pains to give them a fair Answer: see
what is said of this 14. He next, p. 317. Quarrelleth with our Ruling Elders:
which he Introduces with a Falsehood that is palpably such, viz. that we have
put away Deacons, as well as Bishops: the World knows the contrary: and if
this Author do not know it, he is very unfit to talk of the Presbyterians, who
is such a Stranger to their Way, and Constitution. We have Deacons, whose Work
it is to take Care of the Poor, according to Apostolic appointment. It is
true, our Deacons are not allowed to Preach and Baptize, as these who in the
Episcopal Church go under that Name: for we find no Warrant for giving them
that Power, except it be immediately, and extraordinarily given them by the
LORD; as it was to some (not to all) of the Primitive Deacons. It is also true,
that in some places, the Office and Work of Ruling ^lder, and of Deacon, is in
the same Person: which has Warrant from the Word: but that we have no Deacons,
is said without any Semblance of Truth. Tho he knows that, that Controversy
about Ruling Elders, who have no Preaching Power, has been much agitated
between his Party and us, and his Antagonist (whose Writing he never failleth
to Oppose, when he thinks he can) has Written on that Subject; yet he is
pleased here to content himself with setting his Nigrum theta on this our
Oppinion, without endeavoring to Refute it* except he will call it an
Argument, that he says, it is a Sacrilegious Usurpation on the Ecclesiastical
Authority. He has Two Quarrels with them: One is, that they are not set apart
by Imposition of hands. I have no other Answer to this, but that some among our
selves are unsatisfied with this: but they are Solemnly and Pubickly set apart
for their Work, and taken Engaged to it: and therefore, that want does not
Nullify the Office. That such an Office should be in the Church by CHRIST'S
Institution, I hold, tho I will not undertake to justify the Practice of our
own, or other Churches, in some things concerning these Elders. His other Fault
that he finds with them is, that the Preachers encroach so on them, that they
never suffer them, whose sole Office is Government, to interpose in the most
Essential Points of Jurisdiction, viz. the Solemn and Authoritative Imposition
of hands, Administration of Sacraments, and Absolution of P^netents. This
Objection amounts to no more but this: Ruling Elders, by Divine appointment,
have a Share in the Government of the Church for curbing of sin (for they are
Inspectores morum populi) Ergo, they have also all the Authority that CHRIST
has given to the Pastors of the Flock, such Reasoning is not only in it self
weak and fallacious, but it does ill su^e the Principles of this Author: do not
his Party, at their own hand, give some part of Church Authority to their
Deacons, as Preaching and Baptizing; and withhold from them all the rest of it:
why then may not we (with much more reason) allow, that CHRIST has given part
of Church Power to these Elders, and yet not the whole of it? But I consider
his Objection more particularly: the first Power (mentioned by him) as denied
them is, Imposition of Hands on the Pastors of the Church. If he can Prove that
any other than Pastors have that Power, by Divine Warrant, he shall gain this
Point. Neither is it consistent with Reason that Imposition of Hands, by which
the Authority for dispensing the Word and Sacraments is conveyed, should be
done by them who have not that Power themselves: for nemo dat quod non habe^.
The next is Administration of Sacraments, This is not due to them because they
are not the Pastors of the Church; and because they are only Rulers of the
Church: whereas this Administration is no part of Government. The 3d. is
Absolving of Paenitents: to which he might have Added excommunication, and
other Church Censures. A. This belongs to the Government of the Church; they
have a Hand in it; nor is it done without them, for both Censures, and taking
off Censures, are Decreed in the Consistory, where they sit, and vote: only
the Pronouncing, or Executing of these Sentences, in the public Congregation,
is the Work of the Pastor; both because public Administration of CHRIST'S
Ordinances are in his hand: and because these Administrations are intermixed,
or conjoined with the Word, and public Prayer; which are the Work of the
Minister, not of the Elder.

22. Another New Opinion he Taxes (but will not be at pains to Examine or
Refute it) is, that we think the People have a Right to Choose their Pastors.
The Novelty of this Opinion is most absurdly Asserted: for it not only was the
way of the Apostolic: but of the Primitive Churck for many Ages, as I have
showed Rational, Def. of non conformity, 6. p. 197. etc. and should now further
have Debated it with him, if he had insisted on it. He misrepresenteth our
Opinion, while first he says, we maintain this Right to be unalterable:
whereas we think a People may lose it, as to its present Exercise, by their
inhability or negligence, and it devolveth into the hands of the Rulers of the
Church. While 2dly, He insinuates, p. 320. that this Power is allowed in the
Body of the People, without due Restrictions and Limitations. We think the
People in this, as in all their other Religious concernments, are under the
Inspection and Government of the Presbytery, Congregational, or Classical.
Instead of Arguing against this Way, he labors to cast Dirt on it; which
easily may be wiped off. I have proved, in the Place Cited, that they who were
designed for the Ministry were not only named in the Congregation for their
Assent, or Objecting against them; but they were chosen a Clero et Plebe: for
the 36. Canon of the Apostles (it is, Mihi, 37.) which he Cites: not only we
Reject it, with the rest, as not Authentic, nor Probative: but it also
Censureth the Bishop that does not undertake the Office, and Charge: Does it
thence follow that a Bishop may be Imposed on a People without his own Consent,
as well as without theirs? that Canon seems to be meant of some incident
Dislike, either on the part of the Pastor, or of the People, after Ordination;
which should not excuse them from mutual Duties: and so it is nothing to our
purpose. How popular Election would hinder Uniformity, more than the Patrons
Election does; iss hard to be understood. That People will choose such as
themselves for Intellectuals and Morals, does not always hold: People generally
think that their Pastors ought to have both more Learning, and more Religion,
than themselves. And if they be of such perverse Inclinations, they are to be
Overruled by the Presbytery. What he says of the scandalous effects of
Popular Election (I suppose he means Tumults and Divisions) were far more
visible, frequent. and horrid, when Bishops were otherwise chosen: there was
never so much Bloodshed at Election of a Presbyterian Minister, as has been
at Choosing of some Bishops, in the Later Primitive times, after that Office was
settled in the Church. What are we concerned more than his own Party is, in the
Ridiculous Insinuation he has of a Company of mean Mechanics laying Wagers
that such a one shall Preach better than another. Is any Church accountable for
either the Follies, yea, or the Sinful Excesses of every one of her Members,
further than to Rebuke, or Censure them, according to the degree of Offense
given; when they come to be known? I know of no such Wagers laid among our
People, tho may be, there is too much of being Puffed up for one, against
another; as it was in a Church that I hope he will have more respect for than
for he has for the Presbyterian Church, 1 Cor. 4. 6. That he Asserteth that
the Talent of Preaching did not commend a Man in the Primitive time^, is most
absurd, if he mean, that a great regard was not had to it, as one of the Chief
Qualifications of a Pastor of the Church; if he mean, that this Qualification
only is regarded among the Presbyterians, and no more looked after, it is false
and injurious.

. 23. His next Work is quite out of his present Road: it is not to consider any
new Opinions held by the Presbyterians: but to revive a Reproach he had before
cast on one P^esbyterian, and which had been sufficiently wiped off: but he is
resolved not to be satisfied. I am wholly indifferent whether he be, or not.
And yet this Charge he only mentions; and therefore I shall not insist on it
neither: but it seems, this was but Introductory to what he intended: which is,
he will Vindicat a Notion that Grotius has about (...), 1 Cor. 12. 28. who had
Interpreted that Word as meant of Bishops. I have abundantly Cleared this
Matter, and Vindicated that Text from the Exposition put on it by Grotius, in
3d. Sect. of this Work, 6. 7. to which I refer the Reader, and shall now only
Answer what our Author here brings afresh. He tells us (...) signisi^^h
properly to help one that is ready to fall: this is the Duty of them who are
Stronger in the Faith, and higher in Authority: of whom then could it be so
well meant as of the Bishop, the Praeses. A most ridiculous way of Arguing:
For, 1. It supposes the Question, that Bishop, or the Praesides Presbyterii,
are higher in Authority: which we cannot yield. 2. It can be far better applied
to Deacons, who relieve them who are ready to Perish. Next says he: Grotius
saw the Episcopal Authority in several Places that the Vindicator will not
allow of. A. What Grotius saw, I know not, nor am concerned to know: Some fancy
they see a Man in the Moon, which others cannot discern 3. The Apostles might
make use of Words to signify the Episcopal Jurisdiction which are not in use
in our Days; there are so many Allusions to the Temple and Syonagogue, that we
must know these, that we may be acquainted with the Writings of the New
Testament. A. This Reasoning may infer quidlibet ex quolibet: may be (might one
say) the Apostles by Baptism, by casting out of the Church, etc. understood
some other thing than we do: at this Rate Skepticism about the whole Doctrine
of the New Testament may be brought in more effectually than by laying aside
Religious Ceremonies of Men's devising. We know the Apostles Wrote in Greek: and
we know what (...) signifies in that Language: if this Author allege that it
had then another Signification than now, he should have Proved it, and not
drawn his Conclusion from a May be. And if he thinks that there is any
Allusion here to the Practice of the Temple or Synagogue, he should have showed
it, and not thought us so ^ame Animals as to acquiesce in his Guess, built on a
Possibility, where he cannot show so much as Probability. His Advice has been
followed, before it was given, in Reading Grotius on the Places he mentions;
and yet nothing is found that makes for his Design. He has another Argument
from the Context (which yet is the same abovementioned, and Answered) that the
Apostle having in the preceding, v. (he should have said in the same v.)
distinguished the several Offices, etc. that were then most Observable in the
Apostolic Church. I suppose that the helping such as were ready to fall, did
most properly belong to the Spiritual Governors. This is above answered: and
it is not one whit stronger by being said over again. Further, he Asserteth,
but has not showed us, how the Context leads to this Interpretation: his
supposing it to be most proper to the several guids to help them that fall,
does not prove his design; unless he could show that there was an Officer in
the Church who had his Designation from thus helping People: and when he has
done that, he must show that this is peculiar to the Bishop, and that no other
Church Officer is called (...) from helping them who are ready to fall. That
Grotius tells us that the Ancient Greeks interpreted the Word, (...) is a
wronging of Grotius; who says not Graeci veteres, but Graeci complures: and it
is nothing to his purpose: for Grotius saying it does not prove it: neither
does Grotius cite any of the Graeci complures. Suiceri thesaurus Ecclesiae I
can not get at present: but if he say what our Author alleges, his sole
Authority must not carry it against all others, who have written Lexicons.
Hamond, on the Place, Expounds it of Bishops; not on Account of their (...),
or Governing Power, but because they had the Care of the Poor, and the
Dispensing of the Goods of the Church, as I showed in the Place above Cited of
this Book. Which, if it were granted, would make nothing for Episcopal
Jurisdiction. We maintain that the Deacons are here meant, and if the Bishops
be Deacons, let them have this Place in the List of Church Officers. For they
had no Room in it before, nor on the Score of Jurisdiction over other Church
Officers. I do not derogate from Grotius his Knowledge of the Signification of
Words, nor of his Ability to have Written a Lexicon: but I do not look on him
as beyond a Possibility of Mistake, even in that wherein he excelled. And
indeed he speaks very doubtfully of this Matter, as his Words Cited by my
Antagonist do show: nor does he positively say, that the Bishops are meant by
this Word. Another Proof of the Signification of the Word, is from Ps. 48. 3.
where the seventy use it to signify the Lords helping his People: what is this
to the Purpose? the Question is not whether this Word have the Notion of Help;
but whether it have the Notion of Government: but our Author Mendeth the
Matter, making up, by his Latin Translation, what is not in the Greek; for he
says (...) must signify, cum suscipiet came, nempe Civitatem, in Tutelam: why
must it signify this: why may it not as well be turned, cum opitulabitur illi?
Chrysostom. has it, (...), ad Munitionem. Aquila (...), ad Exaltationem. None of
all these signify any thing of Government; but of Defense or Support: so that
nothing in this Word agrees half so well to the Bishops, as to the Deacons
Work. I hope he will not think, that because the Lord who is in this Psalm,
said to Help His People, does also Rule them, that it hence follows, that
every (...) is also a Ruler. The same Import has what he Cites out of
AEmilius Portus, who from Suidas Translateth (...) Propugnator, Defensor,
Auxiliator. For none of these Words import Government, all that they signify,
may be applied better to the Deacon, than to the Bishop. I hope I have (with
the Current of ^xpositors) offered a better Exposition of the Word we Debate
about, than Grotius has Chosen: and yet shall readily Comply with my Authors
Advice, in being far from Comparing my self with that great Man.

24. What he further says of that Exposition of Jerome, Quid facit Episcopus,
etc. he has often Repeated, and it has been as often Answered: to which he
had said something, if he had showed the Consistency of what I said could not
agree: but this he thinks not ^it to Attempt: only Entreats me to give a
Paraphrase and Commentary on the Conclusion of that very Epistle of Jerome to
Euagrius, in which (says he) Jerome affirms, that the Hierarchy of Bishop,
Presbyter, and Deacon, was Founded on Apostolic Tradition: and that they Hold
the same Place in the Christian Church: which the High Priest, Priests and
Levites had in the Temple. For Satisfaction to this his Demand, I refer him to
Sect. 6.. 9, 10. where what he Desires is already Performed: and it is showed
that Jerome meant* no such thing as he alleges. The hundred Things in my Book
that he will not meddle with, and which he is pleased to call Triffling Stories,
or Personal Reflections, must stand as they are: let the Reader judge of what I
have there said, and of his Censure of it. And yet he spends some Pages on a
Story, that he and I had formerly Debated, which is of least Moment of any of
them: his Reason I shall not Enquire into: nor do I intend to be any further
Concerned in Jangle about Stories so variously told us, as that is; and which
may be many Ways Disguised: no part of which I was Witness to, nor know any
thing of, but by Information. For the Personal Reflections he charge me with,
he mentions but two; I leave it to the Reader, who shall think sit to Compare
the two Books, to Consider, whether any thing is said of him, but what to be
Literally true, himself had given Ground to think: and they are Matters of
Fact, and of no great Moment, save that they may derogate from the Strength of
what he Writes. And let all Men of Candor and Understanding Witness between
him and me, whether in his Book now under Consideration, and in his former
Apology, there be not many for one of mine, of not only Personal Reflections on
his Antagonist, but Reflections on the whole Party, without Distinction or
Exception: and that by Imputing to them the Worst of Evils; and Treating them
with the most Insolent Contempt that Words can express; as I have here and
there observed, (...): and the Reader may find presently after this his
Complaint, viz. 332, 333, 334. The Authority that the Presbyter^ans had over
she Church of Scotland, and consequently, over the Episcopal Clergy, I had
Debated with him before. I need say no more, till he Answer what has been
already Discoursed on that Head. What he says, p. 332. of his Resolution not
to continue this Debate, if not managed by greater Candor and Civility, I do
much approve: if he will put that Condition on himself too. If he, or any else,
Write in his Strain: yea, if they bring not somewhat that is not yet Answered,
and is of Weight. I think our Side will not Trouble them with more Arguings on
this Head of Government: there is enough said, if Men will Listen to Argument;
if they will not, what* is said, is too much. For my Part, I am weary of such
Altercations; and shall not be easily drawn into this Paper War any more: the*
I am Resolved, by the Help of God, never to Abandon the right Way of God, nor
to withdraw my Poor Help from the Truth and O^dinances of Christ, when it shall
be needed; and I shall be in any Capacity to a^^ord ^t

FINIS.

