A VINDICATION OF THE Church of Scotland. BEING AN ANSWER To a PAPER,
Entitled, Some Questions concerning Episcopal and Presbyterial Government in
SCOTLAND. WHEREIN The Latter is Vindicated from the Arguments and Calumnies of
that Author; and the former is made appear to be a Stranger in that NATION.

By a Minister of the Church of Scotland, as it is now Established by Law.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleetstreet. 1691.

THE PREFACE.
THat which is determined concerning all them that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, that they must suffer Persecution, is (and has long been) the Lot of
the Presbyterian Church of Scotland; and a Generation of Men have thus
exercised her for many Years by Severities hardly paralleled among
Protestants: And now when their Hands are tied, that they can no more thus
afflict her, their Tongues and Pens are let loose to tear her without mercy, by
the most virulent Invectives, and the most horrid Lies and Calumnies that their
Wit can invent; there are more ways than one by which the Serpent casts out
of his mouth waters as a Flood, that the Woman may be carried away of it. We
hoped in the little reviving that the Lord has given us from our Bondage, to
have had no diversion from feeding the Flocks over which the Holy Ghost has
made us Overseers: But our Adversaries will force us unto a less pleasing Work,
which is yet also necessary for the continuence of the Truth and Purity of the
Gospel with the People of God. They are the Assailants, and we must act the
part of Defendants, without which necessity I should not have troubled the
Reader with the following Sheets. It was judged necessary, not by me only, but
by them whose Opinion and Authority I do justly reverence; in obedience to
which, it was written five or six Months ago, but was by several Accidents
hitherto kept from coming forth to the Light. We are for Peace (even with them
who have not only differed from us, but dealt hardly with us; and are willing
to receive such of them as are qualified to be Ministers of the Gospel) but
when we speak (yea, though we are silent, and neither speak nor act against any
of them but such as the Gospel declares to be unsavory Salt) they are for War;
and labor to make us odious to Mankind, but especially to our Rulers.

Beside this Pamphlet, several other Prints have been emitted by these Men,
containing partly Historical passages full of Lies and Reproaches, and partly
false and spightful representations of our Principles and way: To which an
Answer, such as they need or deserve, shall e're long be given, if the Lord
permit. That this has not sooner been done, has been in a great measure
caused by the multitude of matters of Fact narrated in them, said to be done in
diverse places of the Nation, far remote one from another, to all which it was
necessary to send for getting a true Account of these things, and there being
but one Copy of each of these Books that we could find in all Scotland, the
several passages for the diverse parts of the Country behoved to be transcribed
and dispersed, before Information about them could be bad, which could not shun
to require a long time; and when these Informations were obtained, some other
things fell in, which did yet longer retard the Answer, which is now intended
to be hastened as soon as may be. In this matter our Adversaries have used a
piece of Cunning, which is, that these Books were spread in England only, where
the things contained in them could not be known nor examined: But in Scotland
(where most Readers could have discovered the falsehood of their Allegations)
there never was one of them to be found in a Book seller's Shop: But veritas
non quaerit Angulos.

I shall not anticipate what is to be said in answer to the Books mentioned, as
also to a Letter of the same strain, very lately come from the Press; only it
may be thought strange, that the Men with whom we have to do, should make such
Tragical Outcries about their Sufferings, when it may be made appear that in
the late Times, when Presbyterians suffered from their hand, any one of many
who may be instanced, suffered more Hardship and barbarous Cruelty, than all of
them have endured. It is also unaccountable that they should on this occasion
so reproach the Church as they do, while very few (not above a dozen, if I
mistake not) have suffered by the Sentence of any Church Iudicatory, and these
for Scandals that no man will have the brow to plead for: And if two or three
of them have been censured on slender grounds, as is alleged; not only our
Church did give express warning to Presbyteries against this Practice: But the
late General Assembly has Committed it to some of the gravest and most
experienced of their number to review such Processes (where Appeal or Complaint
has been made) and to relieve them who are injured. And it is evident to all
who know our practices, and can judge of them without partiality, that the
Presbyterian Church in Scotland has at this juncture used all due means to
make her Moderation known to all Men, believing that the Lord is at hand, who
will judge between us and them who show such spite against us; to whose
Judgment, and to the Censure of unbyassed Men, when they have heard both
Parties, and understood our matters, we refer our Cause.

A VINDICATION of the Church of Scotland; Being an Answer to a Paper,
Entitled, Some Questions concerning Episcopal and Presbyterial Government in
Scotland; wherein the latter is vindicated from the Arguments and Calumnies of
that Author; and the former is made appear to be a stranger in that Nation.
SO apparently weak and inconsequential are the Reasonings of this Pamphleter,
that nothing could make it reasonable for a Man who has few spare hours from
more necessary work, to undertake an Answer, except the Advice that the Wise
man gives Prove. 26. 5. for we find it to be the Genius of some of his Party,
when they find that Scripture and Reason cannot, and Authority will not,
support their tottering Cause, to betake themselves to clamorous lies and
railing, and charging others, (as sometimes Children do) with the same thing in
which themselves are most culpable; as in a late Piece, entitled, An Account
of the present Perscutions of the Church in Scotland by the Presbyterians. And
to write (with or without reason, seems to be much the same with them)
something that may prevail with their easy and biassed Disciples; for some men
are more ashamed to say nothing, then to say nothing to purpose.

2. He begins in his Title page with some Testimonies of King James VI.
against the Presbyterians. To which two things may be said: 1. That King James,
in an after Edition of his Basilicon Doron, did declare he meant none but such
as Anabaptists and Familists. 2. We set in opposition to this Assertion,
another saying of the same Royal Author, mentioned a little below.

3. His Preface takes notice of two opposite Narratives concerning Episcopacy;
the one to the Act restoring it 1662. the other to the Act by which it was
abolished 1689. whether of these contain most Truth and Sincerity, is not to be
judged of, but by entering on the Merits of the Cause; and his Pamphlet, with
this Answer to it, may contribute some light to it. But that he supposes
Episcopacy to be best fitted to keep out Heresy, is gratis dictum: and the
falsehood of it is manifest, if we account Popery to be Heresy; the
Abominations of which arose, and grew up under that Government of the Church in
this Nation; what might be its effects in other Churches, we do not now
consider. And our Experience may inform us what steps have been made, not only
toward the Superstitions, but even the Doctrines of Popery under its Wings,
since its restoration. And how Arminianism has been warmed, and got life by
its influence in Scotland, is too well known. He cannot be ignorant of what K.
James VI. (whose Authority in matters of Truth, he often brings as an Argument)
used to say of Presbytery, as managed in Scotland, That no Error could get
footing there while Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, and General Assemblies
stood in their force. What evil speaking and reviling there is in the Brief and
True Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, occasioned by the
Episcopalians since the Year 1660. I know not, not having seen that Book: But I
am sure his Party is in mala fide to challenge it, their style being such to
the Life, not in this Pamphlet only, but especially in those before mentioned.

4. The first of his Questions is, Whether Presbytery (as contrary to the
Episcopacy restored in Scotland 1662.) was settled by Law, when the Protestant
Religion came to have the Legal Establishment in that Kingdom? Which Question
may be two ways understood, and neither of them much to his purpose: either,
whether the Protestant Religion, when it was settled by Law, found Presbytery
already established; which is a foolish Question; for who ever heard of
Presbytery under regnant Popery; we deny not Episcopacy to be as old as Popery:
or, whether Protestanism and Presbytery were by Law established at the same
instant: neither is this Question to the present purpose; for it is enough to
show the Opinion of the Church of Scotland (as soon as reformed) about Church
Government, if our Adversaries cannot make it appear that she chused to be
governed by Bishops: And if we can show that Presbytery was the Government
practiced in her from the beginning of the Reformation; and that it was by Law
established, as soon as any fixed Government could be settled. And good Reasons
may be given why it was not done at the very first. First, The Errors and
Idolatry of that way were so gross, and of such immediate hazard to the Souls
of People, that it is no wonder that our Reformers minded these first and
mainly, and thought it a great step to get these removed, so that they took
some more time to consult about the reforming of the Government of the Church.
Secondly, It was possible at first, when the Nation was scarcely crept out of
Popery, to get a competent number of Ministers and Elders, who might manage the
Government of the Church; but this behoved to be a work of time: But what they
did in this, and what was their Sentiments about Church Order, we shall after
have occasion to discourse.

5. Toward the Resolution of his first Question, he tells us, in several
particulars, wherein all the dispute is, that is intrinsic to the Notion of a
Church Government; which his Question he stateth with no great show of
understanding in these Controversies. But that I insist not on, that which is
here chiefly to be observed is, that he overlooketh that which is the chief
(yea the only) Question, on which our Controversy with the Prelatists does
turn; viz. Whether the Government of the Church should be in the hands of a
single Person, or of a Community? whether the Rulers of the Church ought to
manage that Work in parity, or one should manage it as Supreme, and the rest in
Subordination to him. The distorted notion of a Moderator in Church Meetings
that he has taken up, seems to mislead him in this matter; for we will not
yield that the Moderator, qua talis, is a Church Governor, nor that he has
any Jurisdiction over his Brethren; his power is merely ordinative, not
decisive; to be the Mouth of the Meeting, not to be their Will or commanding
Faculty; to keep order in the manner and managing what comes before them; not
to determine what is debated among them. The Author talks at random, not
knowing what he says, nor whereof he affirms, when he speaks of our
election of a Moderator, as done by the Clergy (as he speaks) Lay Elders and
Deacons: For where was it ever heard of that Deacons had a Vote in Presbyteries
or Synods, among Scotch Presbyterians; we count them (though they are Officers
of Divine appointment, yet) the Servants of the Church, not her Rulers; they
are employed about her Goods, not in the Government.

6. He asserteth that the Protestant Religion was by Law established in Anno
1567. and the Constitution of Bishops remained as the Legal establishment, and
that Presbytery was not legally settled till 1592. His proofs for this, and
Objections that he obviateth against it, I shall consider, after I have given a
true Historical Account of the being and establishment of Presbytery in this
Nation. Two things we maintain as to this; the former is, That not Episcopacy,
but a Government managed by the Teachers of the Church acting in commune, and
in parity, had place in the Church of Scotland with its first Christianity, and
some Ages after. The other is, That not Episcopacy, but Presbytery, was the
Government of the Church of Scotland as soon as it was reformed from Popery.
For the former, Though we assert not that the first Christians in Scotland had
Presbytery in all the Modes of it, as we have; neither can we attain the
distinct Knowledge of the Actings of these Times by any Records that are left
us; yet that there was a Parity, and no Prelacy among the Church Rulers in
Scotland: For all agree that Donald (who entered upon the Government in the
Year 199.) was the first Christian King in Scotland, though it is rationally
thought, by the best Historians, that Christianity was embraced by many of the
people before that: And Baronius affirms, That the Scots received the
Christian Faith from Pope Victor; (had he said in his time, we should have
assented fully, but what he says is enough to our purpose) who was Bishop of
Rome from 194. to 203. And it is clear from Baronius, and the current of
Historians, that Palladius was the first Bishop of the Scots: (Spondan: exit
Annal. Baron. ad Annum Christi 431. p. (mihi) 592. has these words; Sanctus
Prosper missum ait Palladium ordinatum primum Episcopum ad Scotos.) He was sent
thither by Pope Celestine, who ascended that Chair Anno 424. So that the Scotch
Christians lived without Bishops for about 320 years, until Popery and its
Appendices did overspread the World. What is alleged by some, that Palladius
was sent to convert the Scots, is contrary to Beda, who tells us lib. 1. cap.
13. that he was sent ad Scotos in Christum credentes. And what others allege,
that he was sent to the Irish in Ireland, who then were called Scots, is
without ground. For 1. Beda Hist. lib. 1. c. 12. shows whom he means by
Scots, to wit, those that were separated from the Britains by the two Seas,
which he shows to be Clyde and Forth. 2. Patrick was sent to them at the same
time; viz. Palladius was sent to Scotland Anno 431. and Celestine died in the
beginning of 132. who yet sent Patrick to Ireland; and there is sufficient
ground for this from Balaeus (cited by Sir G. Mekenzie against St. Asaph) where
it is said that Palladius was sent to Scotland; that Claruit Anno 434. and
therefore could not dye to make room for Patrick in Ireland, 431. and that he
died at Fordon in the Mernes in Scotland. Also Tertullian, who lived in the
beginning of the Third Century, speaks of the Scots as then Christians; and
Britannorum Romany inaccessa loca Christo vero subdita, which Baronius
applies to the Scots; and to no other in that Ifle it can be applied. Spanhem.
Epit. Isag. ad Hist. N. T. Saecul. 3. Sect. 2. distichon hoc dicit esse
Vulgatum. Christi transactis tribus Annis atque ducentis
Scotia Catholicam coepit habere fidem.
Besides this, it is clear from Beda Hist. lib. 3. c. 25. and lib. 5. c. 16.
and 22. how averse the Scots were from the practices of the Romish Church in
the Observation of Easter and the Tonsure. And that Venerable Author taxes
them as ignorant of the Canons; and that they knew nothing but the Writings of
the Apostles: Which may give good ground to think, that it was long before that
Church-Domination, Prelacy, which at last they were forced to submit to, got
place among them.

. 7. That Bishops were settled in Scotland with the beginning of Christianity,
Archbishop Spotswood does boldly assert, but does not bring any Vouchers for
what he affirms: Neither does he name any one of these Bishops till
Amphibalus, who (he says) sat first Bishop in the Isle Iona, or Icolmkill: But
this was long after Christianity came into Scotland; to wit, all the time was
now lapsed that the Culdees remained in the Isle of Man, where Crathelinth
(little less than a hundred Years after Donald, and the entrance of
Christianity) built a Church for them, called Fanum Sodorense; so that they
were at least above a Hundred Years without a Bishop. Again, Spotswood is alone
in this, all other Historians making Palladius the first Bishop. Neither is
there any ground to think that Amphibalus was in any degree of Jurisdiction
above other Culdees, but that he was a Famous Man, and the first of them that
is expressed by Name in History. This Author tells also of other Bishops, but
gives no ground to believe any more of them, than that there were Men so
named, who were Famous among the Scotch Christians, and it is like were their
Preachers. We conclude then that the Christian Church of Scotland was governed
by the Culdees, who are sometimes called Priests, sometimes Monks, sometimes
Bishops. Neither is there any ground to think that this Name was appropriated
to any of them, secluding the rest, till Palladius came to Scotland; far less
that any of them had Jurisdiction over the rest: What may be met with
concerning any Famous Man that was Head over the Society at Icolmkill, or
elsewhere, makes nothing for Episcopacy, for he was there the Head of a
School, where Students were bred for the Ministry; but that he had Jurisdiction
over the Culdees, who either there, or through the Country, preached the Gospel
to the People, has no semblance of truth. Yea, we further assert, that however
a Prelacy (together with other Romish Innovations) was brought into the Scotch
Church with Palladius; yet Episcopacy, as our Pamphleteer pleads for it, and
as it was lately in Scotland, was not known in this Church for a long time
after. For Constantine the Second, King of Scots, in the Ninth Century, made a
Law against Church-men's meddling with Secular Business; so that they could not
sit in Parliament: And it was Malcolme Canmore, in the Eleventh Century, who,
as he brought in new Titles of Honor into the Civil State, so he changed the
Discipline of the Church, and brought Episcopacy to its (...).

. 8. The second thing that we above have asserted, is, That when the Reformed
Religion was brought into Scotland, and Popery cast out of it, this Protestant
Church was not settled under Episcopal Government, but under Presbytery, and did
so continue for many years; till by the secret practices, and at last by open
force of ambitious men, the Government was changed, to the great disquiet of
the Nation. Although the knowledge of the Truth did begin privately to creep
into Scotland, and spread among the People more early, even in the Reign of K.
James the Fifth, and made greater advances under his Daughter Queen Mary; yet
the first public step of the Reformation that is found in History, was in
1540. when, in a Parliament, the rigor of Acts against them who have English
Bibles, was taken off, and liberty was granted to read the Bible in their
Mother Tongue; also to read other Treatises: this was 1543. After this, for
diverse Years, many of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, owned the true
Religion, though the public Profession was still Popish: Yea, by many of the
Nobility and Gentry a Bond was solemnly entered into, for the defense of the
Truth, and adherence to it, Anno 1557. In the same Year the Queen granted
Liberty for Public Administration of the Word and Sacraments, as was desired
by a Petition of the Protestants. Anno 1559. the Protestant Ministers and
People held a General Assembly at St. Johnstown, says Knox, Hist. lib. 2. 137.
at which I. Knox was present. All this while there was no Episcopal Authority
owned or submitted to among the Protestants; however Bishops still retained
their places in the Romish Church, and in the State. In the Year 1560. July 17.
in a Parliament held at Edinburgh, the Confession of Faith, containing the
Heads of the Protestant Religion, was by Law established; August 24. an Act
past against saying of Mass. The same Year the Pope's Authority in Scotland was
abolished by Act of Parliament. Anno 1561. the first Book of Discipline was
presented to the Convention of Estates, but delayed and not approved nor
condemned at that time; yet soon after it was approved by the Authority of the
Council, and in it Presbyterian Government approved; for it owneth no fixed
Officers in the Church, but Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, (what is to
be thought of the Superintendents therein mentioned, is after to be considered)
this Discipline, and the Book containing it, was subscribed to in January 1561.
(1560. stilo vetere) by a great part of the Nobility. December 1560. a General
Assembly was held, where sat no Churchmen but Ministers. Another General
Assembly was held December. 25. 1562. where Bishops are so far from
Church-Domination, that they and other Ministers, who had not entered by the
Order in the Book of Discipline, are inhibited till further Trial. 1563. A
General Assembly at Perth about the end of June, gave the same Power, or
Commission, for planting Kirks, suspending, depriving, transplanting Ministers,
etc. to some Ministers, that had been given to Superintendents: And it is
noticed by the Historian, that Presbyteries were not yet constituted because of
the scarcity of Ministers. What is there in all this that looks like
Episcopal Government? Another General Assembly met June 1565. also December. 25.
of the same Year; where the Power of Superintendents was a little clipped; also
about the end of June 1567. At a Parliament held at Edinburgh, December. 15.
1567. several Acts were made about Church Affairs, where not only mention is
made of Synods and General Assemblies, but Appeals allowed to the latter, and
from it Appeals are forbidden; and a Commission appointed to enquire into what
Points should belong to the Jurisdiction of the Church, and all
Church-Jurisdiction forbidden but what is, or shall presently be established.
Another General Assembly December. 25. 1567. also July 1568. in both which
Superintendents were censured; and a Bishop (to wit, who had been such) deposed
from the Ministry. In the last Assembly it is appointed who shall Vote in
Assemblies, and not one word of Bishops. Another Assembly July 1569. Another
March 1st. 1570. where Order is set down about choosing the Moderator, there was
no Prelate to pretend to that Privilege. Another in the beginning of July
1570. Another in the beginning of March 1571. where again Superintendents are
limited. In January 1572. a Convention of Church men met at Leith, who were too
much influenced by the Court: The Council also with the Regent appointed
Articles to be drawn for the Policy of the Kirk, and after approved them: By
them was restored the Image of Prelacy, (yet the real Exercise of Presbytery,
in all its Meetings, lesser and greater, continued and was allowed) for these
called Tulchan Bishops were set up; who had the name of Bishops while Noblemen
and others had the Revenue, and the Church had the Power. This cannot be
pretended to be a restoring of Prelacy, more than of Popish Abbacies and
Priories, which were then the same way brought in. This Constitution was never
allowed by the General Assembly, and it lasted but three or four years, and as
a Corruption was protested against by the General Assembly 6th. of August 1572.
In an Assembly at Edinburgh March 6. 1573. David Ferguson was Moderator, though
neither Bishop nor Superintendent. Another Assembly August 6. Mr. Alexander
Arbuthnot, Principal of the old College of Aberdeen, was Moderator. Assemb.
1574. concluded that the power of Bishops should be no more than that of
Superintendents. In many of these Assemblies the Policy of the Church was
revised and still carrying on toward perfection. After this, in other
Assemblies pains was taken to perfect the Policy of the Church, which at last
came forth in the Second Book of Policy, agreed on in the General Assembly
October. 25. 1577. Also 1578. at several Assemblies Acts were made against
Bishops, the revising of the Book of Policy was delayed in a Parliament at
Sterling Castle 1578. called the Imprisoned Parliament. General Assembly July
13. at Dundie 1580. condemned the Office of Bishops as unlawful: Another at
Edinburgh October. 20. appointed a platform to be drawn for Presbyteries. 1581.
The second Confession of Faith was subscribed by the King and his Household:
Where Episcopacy is condemned under the Name of the Hierarchy, it being
declared that no other Church policy was to be allowed save that which then was
used, which every one knows was Presbytery. The same Year the Assembly caused
Registrate the Book of Policy among their Acts. In May 1584. some Acts of
Parliament were made, derogating from the Liberties of the Church, but so
little weight was laid on them, that by the King's Command some Ministers were
appointed to make Animadversions on them, to which the King answered,
explaining and smoothing most of these grievous Acts. In the Assembly 1586.
Commissions for Visitations were taken from Bishops, Superintendents, and
others, and the Church in several Meetings declared against Prelacy. Much
Contention there was between the Church in her lesser and greater Assemblies,
and a Court-Faction, about Prelacy, which yet was never re-established; but at
last in the Parliament begun 29 of March 1592. it was utterly abolished, and
Presbyterial Government fully settled; which Archbishop Spotswood in his
History, tho'he cannot deny, yet does most disingenuously labor to obscure.

. 9. Let us now consider what grounds the Pamphleter lays for his Conclusion,
and what is the Conclusion he builds on them; the latter of these I first
consider. In it I observe first, he is out in his Arithmetic; for between 1567
and 1592. are not 35 but 25 Years. Another thing to be observed is, that it can
make nothing for his Design, that Presbyterian Government was not presently
established by Law with the Protestant Religion, because then the Nation having
so lately been wholly Popish, and but few of the Clergy, or other Learned Men,
converted to the True Religion, there could not be a competent number of
Ministers got, who were tolerably qualified, either to rule the Church or to
administer other Ordinances: and the space of 25 years was not long for growing
up of such an increase of useful Plants as might furnish Churches and
constitute Presbyteries every where in the Nation; especially if we consider
what opposition was made to this settlement by the Court and its dependents;
and how some unfaithful preachers complied with the Court, in hope of
preferment from the year 1584. it was rather to be wondered at, that this work
was so speedily brought to such issue, and through such opposition. Let him
make what advantage of his conclusion he can: it is evident from what has been
said, that Episcopacy never took place in the Protestant Church after the
Reformation, till Presbytery was fully settled: also that the Inclinations of
the protestant people of Scotland (to speak in the dialect of our time) were
always for Presbytery, and strongly against Prelacy: and that whatever the
State did to retard this work, the Authority of the Church was always on the
side of Presbytery. It is also evident, that Episcopal Jurisdiction over the
Protestants was condemned by Law in that same Parliament, 1567. wherein the
Protestant Religion was established: for it is there statute and ordained, that
no other Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical be acknowledged within this Realm than
that which is, and shall be within this same Kirk established presently, or
which flows therefrom, concerning preaching the Word, correction of Manners,
administration of Sacraments. Now I hope none will affirm, that prelatical
Jurisdiction then was, or was soon after established in the protestant Church
of Scotland.

. 10. The Foundations on which he builds his Conclusion make as little
against what we hold: he says, the Constitution of Bishops, having then the
Public Authority, (the Popish Bishops sitting in this Parliament which settled
the Reformation) must in the Construction of the Law be confessed to remain firm
from 1567, to 1592. Ans. It is not denied, that the Constitution of Bishops, in
regard of their Temporalties, (such as sitting in Parliament, etc.) remained
after 1567. yea, neither do we say that, that Law took from them the Authority
they had over the Popish Church, (so far as then 'twas in being) for this Law
did not pretend to unbishop them, or make them no Priests; nor did it touch
their pretended Indelible Character. But it is manifest, that after this Law
they had no legal Title to rule the Protestant Church: and that by this, nor
any other Law, no other Bishops were put in their room for the ruling of the
Church. To what he says of the Popish Bishops sitting in a reforming
Parliament, I oppose what Leslie, Bishop of Rosse a Papist, has, De gest.
Scotorum, lib. 10. page 536. that concilium a sectae nobilibus cum Regina
habitum nullo ecclesiastico admisso, ubi sancitum, ne quis quod ad religionem
attinet, quicquam novi, moliretur; ex hac lege (inquit) omne sive haereseos,
sive inimicitiarum, sive seditionis malum tanquam ex font fluxit. Another
thing he alleges (or rather insinuates) viz. in the 1st Book of Policy, a
Superintendency, (which is another Model of Episcopacy) was set up. Ans. It is
true, the Protestant Church of Scotland in its infancy (it was neither by an
Act of Parliament that it was brought in, nor that it was after cast out) did
set up Superintendents, but this was truly (and was so declared to be) from the
force of necessity, and designed only for that present exigency of the Church.
Neither was it ever intended to be the lasting way of managing the Affairs of
that Church. At that time it was hard, in a Province, to find two or three men
qualified for any more work toward the edifying of the Church, than reading the
Scripture to the people, and therefore they found it needful to appoint one
qualified man in a Province, (and at first fewer, only five in all Scotland)
who had Commission from the Church to go up and down and preach, to visit
Churches, to plant and erect Churches: they acted only as Delegates from the
Church, and were accountable to every General Assembly; where they were
frequently censured: and ordinarily the first work in the Assemblies was to try
their Administrations: as the number of Ministers grew, their power was
lessened, and at last wholly taken away: their Commission was renewed often:
other Commissioners also beside them were sometimes appointed with the same
power. They were never designed to be instead of Bishops; for they did not keep
to the old division of the popish Diocesses. They might not stay above 20 days,
in one place, in their Visitations: they must preach thrice a Week at least. In
their particular Charge they must not remain above three or four Months, but go
abroad to Visitation again; they must be subject to the Censure of the Church,
in her provincial and general Assemblies. All this considered, let any one
judge with what candor our Author calls a Superintendency, a New Model of
Episcopacy. It is evident from our Church Histories, that the Protetestant
Church of Scotland was so far from that sentiment, that they had a strict eye
over Superintendents, lest their power should have degenerated into a lordly
Prelacy: and that they laid aside the use of Commissions to Churchmen, and
giving them such power, as soon as the Church could be provided with such
number of Ministers as was needful.

QUESTION II.
HAving brought his first Question to so wise a conclusion, he advances to a
second, which is,

Whither ever Presbytery was settled in the Church of Scotland, without
constraint from tumultuous times?

What advantage to the Cause of Prelacy, or detriment to Presbytery is designed
by this Question and the Answer of it, is not easy to divine. Is every thing
bad that has been done in tumultuous times? Does not the Lord say Daniel 9.
25. That he will build his House in troublous times? Will this man therefore
condemn the Reformation from Popery in Scotland for this, That it was settled
against the will of the Queen, and the popish Grandees, and some pretended, but
unfaithful, Protestants, in a very tumultuous time? It may be he will; and his
Citation page 4. out of Basil. Dor. Lib. 2. seems to import no less: But if
he thence conclude, That Popery is the Truth and Protestantism an Error, we
shall then know where to find him: And if he do not, all that he here says is
extra oleas vagari. But it may be the strength of his ratiocination lies in
this, That Presbytery was settled by constraint; And these by whose authority it
was done, were by the tumults of the people forced to it. Let us a little
examine this. First, Is every thing bad that men are forced to? Ill men do few
good things willingly, and of their own proper motion: By his way of reasoning,
the will and inclination of great men must be the standard of good and evil.
2ly, Presbytery had a twofold Settlement in Scotland: One by Church Authority:
After searching the Scripture, the General Assemblies of this Church did find
Prelacy unwarranted there; And that it was contrary to that Form of Government
that the Apostles settled in the hands of the ordinary Office bearers of the
House of God: And this they declared authoritatively in the Name of Jesus
Christ: I hope he will not say, that this was done by constraint. Another
Settlement it had by the Authority of King and Parliament, giving their civil
Sanction to it: Neither can he allege, That the Parliament was any way
constrained to this; Or that any force was put on them: Nothing appears but
that the Parliament 1592. [which made this Settlement] was as free in the
Election of its Members, in their Consultations and Votings, as any that have
been since: And some will say, more-free than these Parliaments which since
have undone what they did. It rests then, That he must mean, That the King
was some way violented in that he assented to this Act contrary to his own
sentiments and inclinations. But this rests to be proved: beside, that it is
a greater reflection upon the Conscientiousness and Uprightness of that Great
and Wise Prince, than is decent for a dutiful Subject to be guilty of.

2. Let us now hear how he will prove, first, That King James, Anno 1592; Then,
that King Charles, Anno 1639, Assented to Presbyterial Government unwillingly
and by constraint. His proofs are, first, King James in Basil. Dor. L. 2. p.
28. speaks with great bitterness against the Presbyterians, and their Way.
Ans. This does indeed prove, that he had changed his thoughts of that Way: Not
that he was never of another mind. It were not hard to cite words of his, as
much to the commendation of Presbytery, as these in Basil. Dor. are against it.
But that Way, and its opposite, stands or falls, by the sentence of a
higher Authority than that of men. 2ly, He thinks it against Reason and
Charity, to think, That this being his thought of Presbytery, he would settle
it in the Church without some kind of compulsion. Ans. It is little more
charity to think, That a man of any degree of Conscience or Religion, would
have so eminent a hand in plaguing the Church with that which he looked on as
so pernicious, as the words cited by our Author do express: Yea, the fear of
God would restain one from such an act, even under the highest kind of
compulsion. 3ly, He next objecteth the Preamble to the Act for Restoring of
Episcopacy, Anno 1606. Ans. Who can doubt, that when men had a mind to set up
that Government, they would say all the good of it that they could devise, and
speak to the disadvantage of the contrary what could be thought upon; but this
signifies no more, than that they were changed from what once they were; and
they who do so say and unsay, are unfit to give decisive Testimony about any
point of Truth. 4ly, He ascribes K. James's assent to Presbytery to his Youth.
Ans. He was no Child in 1592, having been married to Queen Ann three years
before, viz. in 1589. He was at least 30 years of age. 5ly, He pleads from
the unsettled condition of his Affairs: but does not show wherein they were
unsettled. It Is true, the King then had some trouble with the Earl of Bothwell,
but it is well known that Bothwell was no Presbyterian; and settling of
Presbytery could not tend to quiet him: But I am weary of such silly Arguments
which deserve no answer. What he makes the King allege, That the
Presbyterians were always ready to join with any Faction in the State: is as
groundless as any thing can be spoken: They never owned any but such as owned
the interest of Christ, and his Truth. Their appearing against his Grand mother
and Mother, was only in defense of Christ's Truth, which these two Queens did
labor to extirpate. And what is said of inordinate and popular Tumults,
reflecteth upon Procestantism, rather than on Presbytery. It Is a strange
Insinuation that he has in the end of the paragraph, page 4. That that young
King was forced to settle Presbytery in the Church, that thereby he might bring
off Presbyterians from joining with the Acts of their Kirk to unsettle his
Throne. Here is Malice twisted with incoherent Imaginations: For nothing but
Malice can make any think that Presbytery is an Enemy to Monarchy: but what
dirt he casts on us, of this kind, afterward shall, in its place, be wiped
off. It Is also a strange fancy, that if K. James looked on Presbytery as capable
by the Acts of their Kirk to unsettle his Throne, that he should put it in that
capacity, by settling it by Law, with a design to secure the Throne: It is as if
a man should let in the Thief at the door, that he might sleep the more
securely in his house.

3. What King Charles says for Prelacy [to which all know that he ever was a
constant friend] is much more modest than what we heard before: And we deny
not, but what countenance he gave to Presbytery, was in condescendency to his
People: Yet from the transactions of these times, we may confidently infer,
That the Nation, both in its diffusive and its representative Body, the
Parliament, was for Presbytery: And what our Author says of the Tumults of
these times, [which were sad, and lamented by all good men] lays more load on
Prelacy: The Tyranny and Innovations of the Church-Rulers of which way did
force the people either to see first the purity of Gospel Ordinances taken from
them, and then their Religion destroyed by a popish Faction [as of later years
appeared more convincingly, when the designs of these men were more ripened] or
stand in their own defense. So that what our Author gains by this passage is,
that Episcopacy raised a Tumult, which ended in its own ruin.

QUEST. III.
THE Scope of his Third Question, and of the Resolution of it, can be no other
but to render Presbyterians odious; not to disprove their Cause, nor to refute
their Principles: It is,

Whither the Principles of Scottish Presbytery grant any Toleration to
Dissenters?

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione loquentes? His party are, above all men,
except Papists, in mala fide to blame others in this matter: Among what party
of men has uniformity, and conformity to all the Canons of their Church, and
that in things confessed by them to be indifferent [that is needless] been
pressed with more severity, imposed by more unmerciful Laws, and urged by more
inhumane and cruel execution of them? That there has been excesses among
Presbyterians in this, we deny not; but lament it: humanum est Labi: Moderation
is not an easy Lesson, nor so often practiced, as it should be when men forget
that the Lord is at hand: as the best are apt to do, when they are at ease. But
all unbyassed men, who know, and have observed the way of the one, and of the
other party, while they alternatively had the ascendant, will say, that the
little finger of the meanest Prelate, and his Underlings, was heavier than the
loins of the greatest Assembly of the Presbyterian Church; As an impartial and
true Account of the Sufferings in both Cases will evince: Which on our part, I
hope may be given in due time; But on theirs, an Account is given as remote
from truth and candor, as any thing that ever came from the Press: which it is
like e're long may be made evident. But we desire not to recriminate, though
necessity is laid on us by their false History of things: far less intend we to
retalliate, though it should be in the power of our hand: But we leave our
Cause to him that judges righteously.

2. It is well that our Adversary is so favorable to that Institution of
Christ, The Government of his House by Presbyters without a Bishop; That we
own, in that he does not blame it generally, or in its most extensive notion;
Not Presbytery as such, but as Scottish. Let the Ordinance of Christ escape his
lash, and we are the less solicitous what he says against the Scots in their
management of the Government of Christ's House: He knows that Scotland is but
one, and a small part of the Reformed Church, in which that Government has
been, and is practiced. If there be any blame then in the practices of former
times, when Presbytery was ascendent, let it be imputed rather to the
praeservidum Scotorum ingenium, (in which they of the other party have far
outgone ours) than to the Ordinance of Christ, I mean that Government of his
House that we own. But even Scottish Presbytery, or that Government as
exercised in that National Church, will be able to stand before his Arguments:
Though it be hard for any thing, though never so good, to bear up against Lies
and Reproaches.

3. He should have considered, That there may be other Dissenters living among
Presbyterians than Episcopal men; whereas all that he says on this Head does
only relate to them: There may be a peculiar reason for their not bearing with
them who own Prelacy: viz. Because their Church Government does necessarily
overtop, bring into subjection, and root out that Government of the Church
which we own as Christ's Institution: It is against their principle, to suffer
Ministers and Elders to live beside them, who will adventure to govern any part
of the Church without subordination to the Bishops: And whatever Indulgence
has been, in by past years, given to Presbyterians, as we know it was designed
for no advantage to us, [without judging the secrets of any bodies heart;] so
we know, that not only it was not the act of our Churchmen; but nothing was
more grievous to them, and nothing they did more actively oppose.
Notwithstanding, it is the principle and purpose of Presbyterians, not to
exclude any of them from their religious Assemblies, nor from any of the
Ordinances of God in them, for their principle about Church Government, wherein
they differ from us. And for Ministers among them, we are ready to give the
right hand of fellowship, and to admit to all the parts of the exercise of
their Function among us, such of them as shall not be made appear to be
insufficient, scandalous, or erroneous, or to be void of that holiness of life
that becomes a Minister, and who shall be found willing to secure the
Government of the Church that we own, and to prosecute the ends of it; and not
to exclude any simply for his opinion about Church Government; though the mean
while, we are not willing, that all who will profess to own our Church Way,
should have a share in managing it with us; because many such might be a
scandal to it, others might betray it; neither can we allow, that any of them
should exercise a prelacy over us, or over the people of our charge. Further,
Never any Church, or State, gave Toleration to Dissenters from the established
Church Way, but as it might rationally be thought a necessary relief to tender
consciences: But this reason for suffering Episcopal men to practice their way
among us, at this time, cannot, without the greatest impudence and hypocrisy
be pretended. For refusing to receive the Ordinances from Presbyterians,
because they want Episcopal Ordination: this cannot be from conscience, seeing
it was their constant practice, when Prelates ruled this Church: they never
required any of them to be re-ordained who had been ordained by Presbyters, and
after complied with Episcopacy. Neither can they pretend conscience for having
a Worship different from ours (I mean the English Liturgy) for when it was in
their power to use it, they never did. Wherefore there can be no pretense on
which they can plead for tolleration in these things; but humor, and design:
and I hope it will not (by impartial beholders) be judged rigidity, if the
State deny a liberty to such persons to make such Innovations as never yet
could get place in this Church, especially when it is too apparent that they
who are most forward for such a liberty, give ground to think, that a design
against the present civil Government is at the bottom, they being such as have
no liking to the present Establishment.

4. But this Author has a mind to represent us in other colors: And for a
Foundation of this his Essay, he says, That the Solemn League and Covenant is
the Canon, and the Acts of the General Assemblies, the Comment of the
Principles of Scottish Presbyteries. This is false; the Rule that we Judge by
in the Matter of Church Government, as well as in other things, is the Word of
God; and we use no other Comments for our help to understand that Rule, but
such as are founded on the Word it self, and which we give sufficient Warrant
for. I hope the Reader will look on this loose talk, as Railing, not Arguing.
He may know, that Presbytery was long in Scotland before that Covenant had a
being. And for Acts of General Assemblies, they are no further our Rule, than
they are agreeable to the Supreme Rule, The Word of God; and to the Principles
of Right Reason: Neither do we look on them as Infallible, [as he foolishly
feigneth, page 6.] What he, or any other can make appear in them to be
unwarranted, we are ready to disown: And we know they may be changed by the
same power that made them; when any thing in them shall be found to be amiss,
or inconvenient for the present state of the Church.

5. He quarrelleth with three Articles of the Covenant, viz. The 1st about
preserving the Government and Discipline of the Church. The 2d, that is against
Episcopacy and its Dependents. The 3d, for defending one another in their
adherence to this Bond. Let any judge what is here consistent with a moderate
and duly limited Toleration of Dissenters: Is there no Toleration of men who
hold Prelacy to be lawful without allowing of Prelacy it self, and submitting
to its domination. Next he will prove his point from some Acts of General
Assemblies; but this he prefaceth first with the peaceableness of the Prelatick
Clergy in and after 1639. when their Church-Goverment was destroyed, in that
they neither raised Tumults, nor wrote Books. It is true, they raised no
Tumults; but they did what they could to raise War for continuing on the necks
of the people, that Yoke that they had wreathed on them: And did effectually
draw on a bloody War, which had very sad effects, and issued in the ruin of
them and Presbyterians too for a time, and showed well enough to raise
Church-Tumults, by their protesting and disobedience to the Sentence of the
Church: for their not writing Books, who hindered them? Unbyassed men will
impute it to somewhat else, rather than to their peaceableness. Another part of
his Preface, That they were not suffered to continue in their Cures: This is
indeed true of the Bishops as such: They were not permitted to exercise a
Prelacy over their Brethren; for that was inconsistent with the Government then
established: Yet as Ministers of the Church, none of them were deprived who
were willing to preach under Presbytery. And for the rest of the Clergy, none
of them were cast out for compliance with Prelacy, but they generally retained
their places; wherefore this is a most untrue Allegation. A Third thing he
says is, That the Presbyterians at the Revolution 1662. were not so dealt
with, that is, were continued in their places: Impudence it self could affirm
nothing more false. Were not above the third part of all the Ministers of
Scotland [and so in England] thrown out by one Act of Parliament? (For two
thirds complied, and by that means kept their places) and the few (in Scotland)
that could not be reached by that Act, were laid aside by the Bishops and the
Council, by more slow steps.

. 6. The Acts of Assemblies that he cites are, Act Aug. 17. 1639. Appointing
all in Office in Church, and Schools, and all Members of this Kirk to subscribe
the National Covenant. And an Act 1642. for intimating the abovesaid Act, and
proceeding to Church-censure against them that refuse such Subscription. And an
Act 1644. appointing strict enquiry and censure against disaffected persons to
the Covenant: And some other Severities he mentions (truly or falsely I know
not, for he does not direct where such Acts may be found) which may be
acknowledged as no Pattern for after-ages to go by. It is like if that Oath of
God had been less universally, and less severely imposed, it had been better
kept by many. What he alleges, That the Assemblies, Aug. 1642. do order the
persons of them who are Excommunicated, to be imprisoned, and their Goods to be
confiscated, is most false; never any Assembly in this Church did make Laws for
Civil punishments. All that I find to this purpose (for he is not pleased to be
distinct in his Citations) is, that August 3. 1642. the Assembly Petitioned the
Council to put the Laws in execution against Excommunicated Papists. All this
considered, I hope the Impartial Reader will not be imposed on, by what this
man has said, to think that the Principles of Presbyterians are inconsistent
with what Toleration is due to Dissenters: Nor will blame them, that they are
not for a vast and boundless Toleration, nor because they cannot bear them who
are evil, but do try them who say they are Apostles, and are not, and find them
liars, Rev. 22.

QUEST. IV.
Whether from the Year 1662, to the Year 1689, Presbyterian Separatists were
guilty of sinful Separation?

AWise Question indeed: He supposes them Separatists (which by no Author was
ever accounted vox media, or taken in a good sense) and yet Querieth, whether
they sinned in separating. But to let this pass; he tells us of Doctrine
taught in our larger Catechism, from which may be demonstrated, how necessary
it is to Salvation, that every Person keep Communion with the particular Church
established by the Laws of the State that he lives in, unless she either
enjoin in her Canons any sinful term of Communion, or propose in her Confession
any Heretical Article, or prescribe in her Directory for Worship any Idolatrous
Impurity. To this I repone a few things. First, according to his loose and
indistinct way of Writing, he neither tells us what these Doctrines are, nor
in what place of the Catechism they are to be found; we must take his Word for
all this, and we utterly deny what he says to be true. All that that Catechism
says, that could be imagined to have that tendency, is, That the visible
Church has the Privilege of being under God's special Care and Government, of
being protected and preserved in all Ages, notwithstanding the Opposition of
Enemies, and of enjoying the Communion of Saints, the ordinary means of
Salvation, the offers of Grace by Christ to all the Members of it in the
Ministry of the Gospel, testifying, that whosoever believes in him shall be
saved, and excluding none that will come unto him. Now it is evident, that all
this is said of the Universal Church, not of any Particular Church; far less
can this passage be understood of a particular Church as established by the
Laws of the State wherein it is: No Scripture ever made such Laws essential to
the Notion of a true Church, from which none may separate: Neither did ever any
Divine talk at this rate, except Episcopalians, and among them I remember of
none, that so express themselves, but this Man, and Dr. Stillingfleet. He does
indeed express three Cases, that excuse from sin in separating from a true
Church, but how these can be drawn from the Larger Catechism I understand not.

. 2. How far we allow a Separation from the late Episcopal Church of Scotland,
and maintain it not to be sinful in us, but sinfully caused by them, I shall
declare: We affirm it to be no Schism, but a necessary Duty, that the
Presbyterian Ministers did not own Episcopal Government, nor either directly or
indirectly countenance the Authority of Bishops above Presbyters: He tells us
of a Letter for Union, March 1689. wherein it is said (and not answered) that
never any Confession of Faith in our Reformed Church avowed a Divine Right for
a parity among all Church Officers. This Letter I never heard of before, but it
seems the Author of it, and the Writer of this Pamphlet, have Talents equal
for Controversal Scribbling: For whoever said that there is a Divine Right for
Parity among all Church Officers? We know that by Divine Right Ruling Elders,
also Deacons, are not equal in Church power with Preaching Presbyters. And for
the parity of Ministers, if it be not found in any Confession of Faith, it is
enough that it is found in the Scriptures. But we affirm that the Divine Right
of it is also found in the Confession of Faith, sworn to by the King and his
Household, and by the Nation, wherein they abjure the Hierarchy, or distinction
of Degrees among Ministers. He says, the Solemn League did not abjure the
President Bishop. Answ. We know no such Bishop, the President or Moderator has
no Jurisdiction over his Brethren. And he will not say, that the Bishops
restored 1662. to whom we could not yield subjection, was no more but a
President Bishop; if he do, all the Nation will cry shame on him, and his own
Tongue will condemn him. Page 1, 2. of his Book, What some in England
Petitioned for, we are not concerned; if he had told us what concessions the
body or generality of Presbyterians in that Nation had made, also let us know
where we might find such Concessions, an Answer might in that case have been
expected from us. But what he presumes about the Repentance of Scots
Presbyterians for not submitting to Episcopacy as established in Scotland, is
without ground, and absolutely false.

. 3. What we further declare concerning the Separation that he speaks of, is;
that Presbyterians generally did not think it unlawful to hear these Ministers
that had complied with Episcopacy; and often did occasionally hear them
(whatever was the practice of some among us) yet the best of the Ministers in
Scotland, and to so great a number, and to whom the people were under a
relation as their Pastors, being thrust from their Charges for their
faithfulness in that time of Trial, and others being obtruded on them, many of
whom were very unqualified for the Ministry, and they entering without the
peoples call or consent, they would not own them for their Pastors, nor thought
themselves obliged to wait on their Ministry; but thought it their Duty rather
to hear their own faithful Pastors (or others who walked in their steps) who
were not unministred by any Church-Act, but only restrained by the force of a
Civil Law, which could neither derogate from their Ministerial Authority, nor
loose the relation that the people had to them. I deny not but some went beyond
the limits of this Moderation; but that is not to be imputed to all the
Presbyterians, being neither the conclusion of any Church-meeting among them,
nor the sentiment of all.

. 4. This being considered, takes off the edge of all that he enlarges on
about the Episcopal party agreeing with us in the Confession of Faith,
Directory for Worship, and Administration of Sacraments: For it is on none of
these accounts that we withdraw from them; but partly because they suffer none
to be Ministers among them, but such as comply with Episcopal Jurisdiction;
partly because they deprived us of the Ministers that we stand in relation to,
and ought to own; partly because the Ministers obtruded on us are none of our
choice (as they ought to be by the privilege that Christ has given to his
Church:) And indeed (many of them) unfit to be chosen; and partly because this
change is made not by any Church Authority that we can own, but by the State,
and by an unlawful Church Power. It seems his Arguments are run low, when he
charge us with Nonconformity even to the Presbyterian Church, in that we use
not the Doxology, nor the words of the Lord's Prayer, nor the Belief at
Baptism: For when or where were these enjoined by the Presbyterian Church? And
if they had been, we cannot by such Injunctions be bound to what is after found
to be inconvenient: That we are tied to the use of the Doxology by the
Covenant, he does most ridiculously affirm: For whoever esteemed that a part of
the Reformation then engaged to? Using the Lord's Prayer we never condemned;
but that Christ has enjoined the using of these express words, or that that
Prayer was given as a form of words rather than as a Directory for the matter
of Prayer, we deny: Neither do we condemn the use of the Creed; but we think
that they who have their Children baptized, should profess their Faith so as
may more clearly distinguish them from Popish and other Heretics than that
Confession of Faith can do.

QUEST. V.
In this Question he advances a Paradox. The Question is, Whether the Penal
Laws against Scotch Presbyterians, had any thing of Persecution in them?

THis Question he concludes Negatively, with the same brow that Maimburg, and
other French Popish Writers do affirm, That all the Protestants who lately in
France turned Papists, did turn voluntarily, without any compulsion; and that
no Rigor nor Persecution has been used to move them to this change: This is a
degree of effrontedness, of bidding Defiance to Truth, and the God of it; of
bold imposing on the Reason, yea, and the common Sense of Mankind; that the
World does purely owe to this Age, and to Jesuitical obfirmation of mind. But
let us hear how he will prove this his strange assertion: As these Laws have
beat out the Brains of many good Christians, that could not comply with them,
so this Man thinks by his Arguings to beat out of the brains of such as
remain all Sense and Reason, whereby they may judge of what they hear, see, and
feel. In clearing the state of his Question, he confesses, There may be too
severe Laws, under which men may suffer for Conscience Sake; (this will
increase the wonder of intelligent, unbyassed men who know our Affairs, that
such Laws are possible, and yet ours are innocent) but makes the Question to
be, Whether our Laws were not necessary for preserving true Religion and
public Peace, or whether they were the uncharitable effects of a peevish
Resentment, inconsistent with good Nature and Christianity. Though even that
cloak of smooth words will not hide the nakedness of the Bloody Laws that he
pleads for; nor could warrant a man that believes Heaven or Hell, to plead
for such cruel Execution of them as was among us: Yet this state of the
Question is not the same with what in the Title is proposed: For there have
been few Persecutions in the World for which Necessity has not been pretended,
and that were given forth to be for preserving a false Religion, or for
hindering public Peace; or that the Actors in them would call peevish and
inconsistent with good Nature and Christianity, or Moral Goodness. And it is
certain, that where public Peace may be preserved without such severe Laws,
the enacting of them is Persecution; which was our case: for nothing caused the
sad breaches of the Peace that were in this Nation in 1666. and 1679. but the
unsupportable Hardships (tending to make wise men mad) that they who feared God
lay under by the severity of these Laws, and the Barbarity used in executing
them.

. 2. To vindicate the Laws from all blame of Persecution, he gives a lame,
unjust, and disingenuous account of them. Woe to Posterity if they be abused
with such false History; it is little Honesty to transmit such things to
after-ages; but it is the height of Impudence to publish them among such as
were Eyewitnesses of them, and among whom the sad effects of them remain with
grief and smarting to this day. I shall first examine the account that he
gives of these Laws, and then show how defective it is, by supplying what he
has omitted. He tells a story of the endeavors of the Synod of Edinburgh to
have Presbytery established; and who can blame them, especially seeing their
Attempt was only an Application to a Person of Interest with His Majesty. He
tells us likewise of their sending a Clergyman (whom he will not name) to the
same Great Man (who is also nameless) with a threatening Message, That if they
would not settle Presbytery they should have the people let loose upon them.
This story I never heard before, nor know I how to examine the truth of it;
neither can I meet with any Person that has heard of it; and so have more than
probable grounds to let it pass as a Forgery: And if it had been true, was this
private surmise a sufficient ground for a Parliament to make such Bloody Laws
against so great a Body of People as the Dissenters? Men will think it a weak
Cause that must be supported by such silly shifts. I take no notice of the Act
annulling so many preceding Parliaments and their Acts (though this were hard
enough) nor of their Act of Restitution of Bishops; it is not the right or
wrong of the Acts that we are now considering, but whether they were Moderate
or Persecuting. But it is not far from ridiculous that he adds, That this
Imperious Address from the Ministers (a private Transaction between two Men, if
it has any truth in it) should so far influence a Parliament, as to make them
impute all the Evils that he fancieth had fallen out, to the Invasion made on
Episcopal Government.

. 3. He next gives us account of the effect of settling Episcopacy: And first,
in the non-complyance of some of the Ministers, and their being therefore
deprived of their Churches and Benefices. And is this no Persecution? How then
is it that the World is filled with such outcries in one Print after another,
as if the Prelatick Clergy in Scotland were under Sufferings beyond the French
Dragooning, because some of them (and but a few of many that are guilty) are
deprived by the State for refusing to own the Civil Government under which they
live: A Crime never till this day thought consistent with the Being, much less
with the Peace of any Government. But these Men have not learned Christ's
Precept, To do to others as they would be done by themselves. But this Act was
not so much Persecution against the Ministers that were laid aside (they
suffered the loss of their Livelihood) as of the Church, and the People whose
Souls smarted under a sad loss, considering how many Eminent and Holy Men were
among them that were so (...) from their Flocks. And what a set of Men were put
in their room. If these Servants of God endured no Persecution from the State,
I am sure they do from this Man's virulent Pen, who says, They forsook their
Ministry either because of disappointment of their hope of Preferment, or from
love of Ease, and weariness of their Work, or from impatience to be
subordinate. The Lord will refute this malicious passage, when he shall come
with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all the hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, Jude v. 14, 15. This Man cannot be ignorant of what is
known all Scotland over, without question or contradiction, that some of these
Ministers had preferment in their offer, yea, the highest preferment in that
Church, and refused it: that they did not consult their ease, but did most
laboriously Preach under the greatest hardships and hazards; which is to this
day seen in its effects, on the crazy bodies of not a few of them: and if any
did otherwise, it was very ill looked on by the rest; and it is known they were
never backward to be subject to Christ's appointments; though they cannot (for
Conscience Sake) stoop to these of Men, in the Matters of God.

4. Then he tells us of the compliance of other Ministers; but it is
unaccountable which he makes the motive of some of them, that the Episcopacy
then settled, was not abjured in the Solemn League. Nothing but Ignorance of
that Oath, or Impudence to say what one will, could make them say so: it is
known, that this was not pleaded by them, but either that that Oath was not
binding, or that they had not taken it, and were not bound by the Nations
taking of it: and if this were true, what should have stirred the zeal of that
party so against that Oath, as to get it abjured, and burnt, in contempt, by
the common Hangman. He tells us next, how the people did comply, till 1663.
It is true, hearing the conform Clergy was commune at first* (other compliance
was never given; but an entire dislike of Episcopacy was as extensive as any
respect to Presbyterian Government was) but after a short trial, many serious
people, who minded the edification of their Souls, found what a sad change they
had made, and what want there was of the godly, learned and grave Men, that he
speaks of, to supply vacant places: which moved the people to look after
better means of edification: I deny not but some run to an excess: but there
was sufficient reason for leaving these Intruders when others could be had. And
both Ministers and People behoved to take some time to consider what was duty,
after they had been for a time stunned with the sad stroke that came upon them.
He next gives account of one of his Innocent Laws; It is Car. 2. Part 1. Sess.
3. Act 2. Ann. 1663. All who come not to hear their Ordinary, are to pay a
fourth part of their yearly Rent: others that had no Land, a fourth part of
their moveable Goods: a Burgess, the fourth part of his Movables, and the
privilege of his Burgiship is forfeited. Is here no persecution? to force
people thus against the light of their conscience, to sit under the Ministry of
them they had no pastoral relation to: and to desert them to whom they were so
tied; to hear constantly some that taught Arminianism; some that railed against
serious Religion: besides the horrid Immoralities of some of them, which made
the Ordinances of Christ contemptible to the people: for this Law extended to
hearing of such, as well as others. And was it no persecution to enact so
severe Fines for such a crime, so as a few Sermons might reduce a rich man to
absolute poverty? And did it savor of no persecution, in the Preface to this
Act, to declare such abstinence from hearing, to be seditious, when they that
were so charged, were as quiet and peaceable as any in the Land? He would
excuse the severity of this Act from the Sermons and Books of some, written to
justify the Murder of Charles the First, and the Banishment of Charles the
Second, and the Necessity of taking up Arms against the King, and laying out
the sinfulness of compliance with the Legal Settlement of Church and State.
Answ. If some, whose Spirits were imbittered by what they suffered, especially
who being banished into foreign Countries, took more liberty than was fit, and
spoke or wrote (on some of those Heads) such things: is it reasonable, or can
it be freed from spiteful persecution, to charge the whole party with these
things, and treat them accordingly; when it could not be, nor was unknown to
them, that most of these things were quite contrary to the sentiments and
practices of the best, and far greatest part of Presbyterians? And we may with
good ground affirm, That the spreading of such principles among the people,
above what was at first, was caused by the severities that they suffered: and
that these severities had not their rise from them. As for the Murder of King
Charles the First, it is well known, that the Presbyterians in Scotland did
declare against it, both in their religious and civil capacity.

. 5. What he next brings, of the open Rebellion of the Western parts, 1666.
(known by the name of Pentland-hills) was purely the fruit of the horrid
Barbarities that that people suffered from Military force, sacking their
Houses, and destroying their Livelihood, treating their persons with the
greatest Inhumanity, under which they groaned for several years, and had no
shelter but in Mountains and in Caves, nor were safe but in such companies as
could make resistance: and yet what then was done, was the act but of a few
Presbyterians, and therefore could not warrant further severity, nor could be
chargeable on all: and on this or some other consideration it was, that they
had an Indulgence granted for a time; but it was so contrived as could not
answer the necessities of the people, the Ministers being all confined to one
corner, and the rest of the Nation left destitute; which made it reasonable for
some to use that liberty, that they might serve the Church; and others to
refuse it, that they might be useful in other places where it was not allowed.
What is alleged, of assaulting Ministers, robbing their Houses, wounding them,
etc. much of it was found to be mere forgery, to make that party odious, and to
give a color for further severities; and what was done (if any thing) was
without the knowledge, and with the greatest dislike of the Presbyterians in
general: for, indeed, the severities of that time did provoke some to run into
these principles and practices that ever since has been uneasy to the State,
and grievous to sober Presbyterians; some of whom have been as much in hazard
from them, as the prelatick Clergy have been; it is therefore strange, that
such things should be pretended to justify the bloody Laws that followed, and
which reach even them that were quiet in the Land.

6. He next comes to the Act 1670, wherein the Preface brandeth Meetings (though
they were only for Praying and Preaching) as Seminaries of Rebellion (though it
is well known that Loyalty has been many times preached in them, and no
Sedition nor Rebellion was ever taught, except by the persons above marked) and
for a House-Conventicle, the Minister is Imprisoned, till he pay 175 l.
sterling: and must engage to preach no more, or give Bond to leave the Nation,
without returning, unless by the King's leave; others were to pay, an
Inheritour of Lands the fourth part of his Rent; a Servant the fourth part of a
Year's Wage; a Farmer 40 s. sterling; a Cottar 20 s. If the Meeting were in the
Fields, (where yet Christ and his Disciples often preached, and that contrary
to the Laws of Men) the Minister was punishable by Death and confiscation of
Goods; and every Hearer, the double of what is above mentioned. If here be
nothing of Persecution, that hearing a Sermon from one that Christ by his
Church has sent to preach, should be bought at such a rate; and that a few
peaceable People, meeting in a corner of a Wilderness, for no other intent, and
about no other work, but to hear the Gospel, should take away the Preacher's
Life, and the Hearer's Livelihood; if this, I say, be no Persecution, let the
World judge. There might have been some shadow for such severity against
meeting with Arms, (though even that was in some cases necessary) but that was
always disallowed by the soberest and wisest) but when nothing appeared in men's
words or behavior, but that in peace and quietness they were seeking after the
food of their Souls, such severity must either be called Persecution, or we
have lost the very names of things, and must call Vice, Virtue, and Virtue,
Vice.

7. What he has owned is sufficient to ruin his Conclusion that he would prove
by these Topics; to wit, That the Penal Laws against Scotch Presbyterians had
no persecution in them. But it does further appear how absurd it is, if we
consider what he has wisely suppressed, as ashamed to speak out all the truth.
Three things he suppresseth, 1. Some severe Laws. 2. Some Acts of Council or
Orders given forth by it, which exceeded all the Severity of the Laws. 3.
Execution of these Laws and Orders, beyond what either of them could warrant.
For the 1st. in the Act of Parliament, Aug. 13. 1670. it is declared, that if a
Minister Preach, Expound Scripture, or Pray in a House where there be more
persons than the House contains, (it is not said, than the House can contain)
so as some be without doors, (which might happen without the Ministers or
Peoples knowledge, after the work is begun, or by the Malice of some who might
stand without doors on purpose to ensnare those within) it is declared to be a
Field-Conventicle: and consequently the Minister is liable to death, when he
does his best, so far to conform to the Law as to shun that hazard, and the
People are liable to forfeit the double of what in reason they could expect. By
the same Act, the Lives of them that so meet are exposed to the mercy of their
most malicious Enemies: for not only a Reward is proposed to any who will (though
without Warrant or Order of Law) seize and secure any at such a Meeting, but
they are indemnified for any slaughter that they shall commit in the
apprehending and securing of them. Nothing but the restraining power of God
has preserved the Lives of many thousands, who were so (by this Man's Innocent
Laws) exposed to the will of an ungodly, and merciless Crew. Afterward an Act
was made, declaring, that not only Field, but House-Conventicles, should infer
the pain of Death to the Minister, and that a Field-Conventicle should be death
to all present, Minister and Hearers, 1685. May 8. It is by another Act, 1672.
declared, that wherever a Minister, not allowed by a Bishop, or licensed by
the Council, does preach and expound Scripture, or pray in his own House, where
more persons are present than four, beside the Family, or in any Family that is
not his own, though none should be present but the Family, that it is a
Conventicle. And comparing this with the abovementioned Act, a Minister loses
his Life by Law, if he pray in a Family where he happens to lodge a night out
of his own House. Likewise, Anno 1685. Act 4. any who refuse to witness (that
is, to be an accuser of the Brethren, the Devil's work) about House or
Field-Conventicles, or Church-Disorders, are to suffer as guilty of these
Crimes themselves; that is, to suffer death: and thus the Wife or Child, must
either contribute to take away the Life of her Husband or Father, or lay down
their own Life. Also Act 8. of the same Year, it is declared Treason to own the
Covenant as Lawful, or Obligatory, though we had sworn it, and many being
questioned about the Obligation of it, behoved either to Perjure themselves, or
suffer death from the hands of Bloody Men. And Act 6. Husbands who complied
with the Laws (unless they were also judged by the Council to be Loyal (which
no Man could expect unless he were thoroughly Episcopal, to say no worse) must
be fined for their Wives non-complyance, which put Men on this sore Dilemma,
either unnaturally to put force on his Wives Conscience (which may be he could
not Command) or be undone. Beside this (which is the second thing
abovementioned) it cannot be denied that the Privy Council gave Order not only
to Officers of the Army, but to every private Soldier, empowering them when
they met any Person on the Highway, to examine them whether they were coming
from or going to a Conventicle: And if they would not by Oath clear themselves,
they were allowed to take from them their upper Garment. Yea, afterward the
Officers (I know not whether the Soldiers had that Power) were warranted to
kill whomever they met with, who should refuse to give them satisfaction about
abjuring the Sanquhair Declaration. It is true, sober Men did not refuse to
take that Abjuration; but it was an unparalled Act, to commit the lives of
Men to Soldiers, to kill at their pleasure Men living in Peace, and going
about their Lawful Employments, without proof of a Crime, or due course of Law.
August 3. 1682. Major White in many Counties, and the Lord of Meldrum, a
Captain of Horse, in other Counties, are empowered to act as Sheriffs (though the
ordinary Sheriffs and their Deputies were executing the Laws) and to keep
Justice Courts; so that the Lives and Fortunes of People were at the mercy of
these two Soldiers. Sept. 9. the Lord of Claverhouse (a Soldier) is empowred
to put the Laws in Execution against withdrawers from the Church. A Commission
for judging and executing the Laws, even to death, is given to Crawford of
Ardmillan, November. 9 and 16 days the like to the E. of Linlithgow. I conclude
with what is wisely observed by the Prince of Orange (now our Gracious
Sovereign) in his Declaration for Scotland, about Imprisonments without cause
alleged, forcing many to swear against themselves, imposing Arbitrary Fines,
intercommunings on the slenderest pretenses, making Men incur the danger of
Life and Fortune for most innocent converse with their Relations outlawed, of
which the Counselors themselves were guilty, and behoved to procure Pardons.
By empowring Soldiers to act the greatest Barbarity on Persons living in
quiet, hanging, drowning, or shooting, without any course of Law. The Third
thing is, That the Execution did exceed both the Laws and Orders of Council,
Multitudes of Instances may (and I hope ere long will) be given of Men
pistolled, or hanged in cold Blood, by the Highway, on the Fields about their
Work, or dragged out of their own Houses, because they refused to declare their
Opinion of the Murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews: Of the Insurrection
at Pentland and Bothwell-Bridge, or of the Covenant. It is true, it does not
reflect on the Laws, but it shows what spirit they were of who made them, in
that they employed such Men, and did not punish them for such Facts, but rather
countenanced them.

. 8. He comes now to his Conclusion, to clear the Laws from Persecution: And
here he adds some Considerations that he takes for Argumentative: As that
three Rebellions were raised in the space of 23 Years. But if these Rebellions
were the Effects, rather than the Causes of that Severity (as indeed they were)
then his Argument is inconcludent. That it was so with the former two I have
observed before; for the third, it may be he is not ignorant how it was
influenced by that unparalled and ridiculous (but that it was on a mournful
Subject) Libel wyer-drawn against that Noble Earl that was the Head of that
Insurrection, making him guilty of Leesing-making, and liable to Death for what
unbyassed Men, and even some of his Enemies, judged to be below the least of
Crimes. He says, none ever suffered for mere Separation, but in Purse: But is
it not Persecution to be turned out of a Man's Livelihood, and made a Beggar
for worshipping God? He says likewise, That none suffered that way but such as
came to Church to save their Money, notwithstanding of pretended scruple of
Conscience. This is spoken at random; many suffered sadly for Conventicles, who
did not so comply: And I am bold to say, he knows the contrary of what he
here affirms. He will have his Conclusion to stand, Unless we will derogate
from the Authority of King and Parliament. That is a mistake: We question the
Justice of their Laws, not their Authority to make Laws. We may say, Nero and
Domitian were Persecutors, without questioning whether they were Lawful
Emperors.

QUEST. VI.
IT may be observed from this Author's Conduct in his Pamphlet, what it is to
be fleshed in bold averring of what all the World knows to be manifest
untruths: Some by boldness and frequency in telling Lies, have come at last to
believe them as Truths; what else could make him propose this Question, and
answer it Negatively?

Whether the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland from the Year 1662. to the Year 1686.
showed any thing of the Spirit of Persecution against Presbyterians?

We affirm that they did: He denies it. To prove what we assert, we might
bring a Volume of Historical instances, which now to adduce, should swell this
Paper to an undue bigness, and would anticipate what it is like will be amply
performed in the History of the late Times: A few things I hope will not be
denied by any Impartial Person that knows Scotch Affairs; and will be
sufficient to evince what we hold in this: One is, the Bishops of this Church
sat in Parliament when the abovementioned Laws were made; did any of them
either Reason or Vote against any one of them? Yea, it is known that they were
active Promoters of them; yea, our Author denies not their consenting and
advising to them, though he will not own their being the first Movers of them.
The former is enough to our purpose, and the latter is rationally suspected,
both from the active influence that some of them had in the Government, and
from the spite that on all occasions they showed against Men of our way.
Another Evidence of this is, the Churchmen in their Public Sermons did
frequently inflame both the Magistrates and Soldiers to execute the Laws
against Dissenters; and helped them by Direction, Intelligence, and all the
ways that they could, as thousands of Instances might make appear. A Note of a
Sermon was much talked of, wherein the Judges of Assize, or Circuit-Court,
(before whom it was preached) were advised to dye their Scarlet Robes yet more
red in the Blood of these Men. Again, it is known that the Ministers were the
Informers against such as did not comply with the Laws. It is true, this was
enjoined them by the Rulers: But conscientious Men would not have persecuted
them that feared the Lord, at the Command of Men: whereas most of them gave
ready, cheerful, and forward Obedience to these Injunctions. He speaks of
some of them who did not, but were chid by the Judges: And we confess, they
were not all Persecutors, but many, yea, the far greatest part were.

. 2. Now what has he to say for vindicating the Clergy from this Imputation?
He tells us, The Clergy never Addressed the King for punishing the
Presbyterians. A goodly Apology! as if there were no other way of compassing
such a malicious Design save this one. Next, The inferior Clergy did not obey
the Order for Informing. This is answered: Most did, and but a few refused. He
talks of Bishops showing Acts of Charity, in relieving the Necessities of
Presbyterians, and mitigating the Penalties of the Law when it was in their
power, and that the particulars of this might swell his Paper to a great bulk.
Answ. These Acts it seems were very secretly done; neither the man's own left
Hand, nor the Observation of others could discern them. If some acts of Charity
were done to some in distress, it is no more than what some Oppressors have
done, first made People poor, by taking a pound from them, and then relieved
them by giving a penny: notwithstanding any who have given a Cup of cold Water
to Sufferers, shall not want their Reward from the Lord, nor their Commendation
from us, That private and public witnessing against Schism was all that the
inferior Clergy did against Dissenters, is so false an Assertion, as nothing
can be more false.

QUEST. VII.
Whether the Episcopal Church of Scotland were compliers with the Designs for
taking away the Penal Law against the Papists.

HE will here vindicate his own Church from this blame, and in the next
Question, throw it on the Presbyterians; both of them with a like truth and
candor. We are far from charging all the Episcopal Party in this matter,
especially the Church diffusive, which he says was represented in Parliament.
We know these Patriots did worthily in opposing that ill and dangerous Design;
but we will not own, that all that sat in that honorable Assembly were
Episcopal; however, they went a further length in complying with it than some
have freedom to do. Not a few of them, we hope, will now show, and have showed,
that that way was not their choice: for the Bishops, he seems not to deny,
that two of the fourteen were for it; and it is well known how far these two
(and they were the two Heads, the Archbishops) appeared for it, both in
Council, and Parliament: and that two were deprived, yea, and appeared against
this design, we deny not: but can he say, that the rest appeared against it in
Parliament, when they had the fairest opportunity, and were in a special manner
called to it. For the inferior Clergy, he will have them all innocent in this
matter, because they preached against the Doctrins of Popery; that they prayed
for the Protestants in France: and other appearances they made against Popery.
None of these things we deny; nor do we envy them their due praise on this
account, yet two things are to be considered; one is, That it was but the
practice of some. It is well known how many were sinfully and shamefully
silent; and others, who were bold to speak, were checked by their Bishops for
it. The other is, That it is very consistent to be against the Doctrins of
Popery, and yet to be for a Toleration to them, and against their being under
the hazard of Penal Laws for their Religion: Whence I infer, That his
Conclusion does no way follow from his Premises.

2. The Zeal that some of the Prelatists showed for continuance of the Penal
Laws, might be considered, either with respect to Papists, or to Protestant
Dissenters, who might have ease by the removal of these Laws: the former part
of their Zeal was laudable; not the latter: which of them did preponderate, we
are left to guess: and may be helped in this guess, by a commune principle,
that many of them (I say not all) have expressed; That they had far rather that
Popery should prevail than Presbytery: and the actings of the chief men, and of
the most part of them, do correspond with this principle at this day. What are
the sentiments of the Prelatists in Scotland, about taking off the Penal Laws
against Papists, may be manifestly gathered (unless we will abandon all
argumentation and the rational inference of one thing from another) if we
consider what our prelatical Parliaments have declared; what the Archbishops
and Bishops in their Letter to K. James, Nov. 3. 1688. have with much flattery
said; and what the University of St. Andrews, in their Address to that same
King have published, partly of their adherence to him, while the subversion of
our Laws and Religion was not secretly, but visibly carrying on; partly of that
absolute, irresistible and despotick Power that they ascribe to him; for if he
have such power to do what he will, and if he was for taking off the the force
of these Laws, (as they cannot once question) how is it consistent with that
unlimited obedience that they owe to such a Monarch, that they should not be
also for removing them?

QUEST. VIII.
Whether the Scotch Presbyterians were complyers with the Designs for taking
away the penal Laws against Papists?

HE affirms it: We deny it: But in this, that Scripture is fulfilled, Psalm.
55. 3. They cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me. Nothing in this
Book has less semblance of truth, and more evidence of spite than this. And in
nothing the unfaithfulness of his Party, and the integrity of the
Presbyterians, did more appear, than in the stir that was about taking off
these Penal Laws: for his party had no inducement to be for removing them,
except to please the King, and to advance Popery: but the Presbyterians
(especially the Ministers) were under the strongest temptations imaginable to
show themselves so inclined, not only to gain the favor of the Court, the want
of which had been so heavy to them: but also because they were to share in the
ease from heavy persecution, which these Laws had brought on them, and on them
only; (for these Laws were severely executed against them, but not against the
Papists) and above all this, every Presbyterian Minister in Scotland was liable
to death by these Laws: none had observed them, and they might rationally
expect, that the Court, being provoked by their appearing for their
continuance, might cause them to be executed with rigor upon them;
notwithstanding of all this, they took their lives in their hands, and as they
had occasion showed themselves against taking off the Penal Laws against
Papists, merely out of conscience, and out of zeal against Popery: whereas the
other Party were not so faithful, as was above showed. Their Reasonings against
it on all occasions, and their dealing about it with Members of Parliament, are
well known, besides more public witnessing against it, as they had occasion.
Neither can it be made appear (for any thing that I could ever learn) that any
one Minister of our way was of another sentiment: and for others, two or three,
or a very few instances of many thousands, is all that can be given.

2. To prove his Conclusion, viz. That the Presbyterians were for taking away
the Penal Laws against Papists, he brings two Arguments, which a man
pretending to reason, might be ashamed to use: The first is, They accepted, and
gave thanks for the Indulgence, notwithstanding that they knew that all the
designs of Court were for advancing of Popery. Answ. They accepted an
Indulgence for themselves, and gave thanks for that alone: which was their due
by Christ's grant, and which had injuriously been withheld from them: but that
to the Papists, they were no further concerned in, than to lament it; which
they did: and witnessed against it as they had occasion: For the designs of the
Court, it was not their part to consider them, further than to endeavor to
disappoint them; which they did to the uttermost of their power, both by
warning and principling the people aagainst Popery: and also by doing what they
could to keep the Laws standing in force against Papists. It had been a strange
thing, if they should have been backward to preach and hear the Gospel, when a
door was opened for it, because some men had a design against the Gospel in
their opening of it. Surely their silence and peevish refusing on that occasion
had been much to the hurt of the Gospel, for then Papists (who would not fail
to use the liberty, for their part) should have had the fairest occasion
imaginable to mislead the people, without any to oppose them; on the contrary,
their using of the liberty was the great mean by which (with the blessing of
the Lord) so very few, during that time of liberty, were perverted to Popery in
this Nation: and they that were so drawn away, were none of our party. We have
cause to think, that if we had refused to use this liberty, this Man, and his
Party, would have lashed us with their tongues for so doing, as they now do for
the contrary: for they did so by some, who in former years refused to use a
liberty granted; which we all know was designed for the same end. But we expect
not that we shall be able to please them, whatever course we take.

3. His second Argument is notoriously false, in all the parts and
circumstances of it; and I affirm, that a man that knows our affairs shall
not find one word of truth in all his long Paragraph that he has p. 24. That
they were silent against Popery in K. James' s time, is grossly and notoriously
false; it is true, some of them thought the best Antidote against liberty for
Popery (and other sinful Ways) to be a sound work of grace in the Soul, and
engaging people to be seriously religious, and therefore insisted mainly on
such subjects: yet did not neglect to instruct people in the controverted
points of our Religion, nor to hold forth the evil and danger of Popery in
particular. For what he says of the Reverend and Worthy Dr. Hardy, who
preached faithfully against Popery, that his Brethren either blamed him, or
disowned him, is most false; they did often visit him in the Prison, which I
had from his own mouth; that Episcopal Advocates and Judges pleaded for him and
acquitted him, was no more but what the one ought to do for their Hire, and the
other were bound to by their Places: they acquitted an innocent man when no
crime was proved against him.

QUEST. IX.
Whether Scottish Presbytery in the Church, be consistent with the Legal
Monarchy in that Kingdom?

IF this Author knew us; he would not move this Question, and if he did not
hate us, and not resolved to say all manner of evil against us, right or wrong,
he would not (as he does) resolve it in the Negative. We have no other proofs
of the falsehood of what he asserteth, but 1. Experience; which shows that in
many Ages (in which Presbytery has had place in this Kingdom, as has been
showed above) it did well consist with the legal Monarchy of it. And 2. that he
(nor none else) cannot show what principle of Presbyterian Government, nor what
practice of Presbyterians (that is commune to them all, or generally) is
inconsistent with Monarchical Government, as it has been by Law owned in this
Nation. We deny not but there have been some things acted by men of our
Principles, in their Zeal for Religion, which we do resolve not to imitate; and
though we can clear them from that degree of blame that the malice of their
enemies casts on them, and particularly from being no friends to Monarchy,
and unfaithful to their Kings; yet we hope the excesses that have been in
former Ages, while both parties were overheated in their contendings, will be a
mean to teach more moderation to this and following Generations. Let us then
hear what he has to say for this his most absurd, malicious, and false
Position. After I have told the Reader, that the only thing that can with any
show give rise to such an apprehension, is, that Presbyterians, being generally
the more conscientious part of the Nation, could not comply with the lusts of
some of their Rulers, nor subject the interest of Religion to their will, while
others were ready to abandon Law, Religion, and Reason, to please Men: who, in
recompense of this, did exalt them above their Brethren.

2. What he asserteth he offers to prove, from the opposition of the Covenant
to Acts of Parliament, the latter giving to the King what the former takes
from him. The first thing that he brings as an instance of this is, That Par.
1. chapter 2. Act 2. it is the King's prerogative to choose Officers of State,
Counselors, Judges; but the Covenant makes this the prerogative of the Kirk,
in that Art. 4. we swear to discover evil instruments, that they may be brought
to trial; and confirms it, that Anno 1648. it is asserted by the Church, that
Duties between King and Subjects are the subject of Ministerial Doctrine, (for
what he says, that the Kirk must be as infallible in this as at Rome; I pass
it as the froth of a malicious mind, void of reason). A. 1. These passages were
20 or some fewer years before the Act of Parliament cited: how then can they be
charged as taking from the King what he had not by those Acts for so many years
after? But this is but a small escape in this learned Writer. 2. Will any man
of sense say, that the power of choosing Officers is taken from the King,
because Subjects are obliged to discover and complain of ill men, or because
Churchmen may tell Kings and Subjects their duties? such reasonings are to be
hissed at, not answered: Has a man lost the privilege of choosing his own
servant, because his son may tell him he has hired a very bad man? Another
Argument he brings is yet more ridiculous: It is the King's prerogative to
call Parliaments; but Scotch Presbyterians hold, that the power of calling
Assemblies, does not flow immediately from the King, but from Christ. Answ.
Baculus est in angulo ergo petrus stat; is just as concludent: What affinity is
there between the King's power of calling Parliaments, and the Churches having
no power to call Assemblies for Religious Matters? We deny not power to the
King even to call Church Assemblies; neither will we call any in contempt of
the Magistrate; but we maintain, that the Church has from Christ an intrinsic
power to convene about his Matters, though the Magistrate should neglect to call
them: but we confidently deny that the Church of Scotland ever did (or thought
it fit to be done) call an Assembly without the authority of their King, where
he was a friend to true Religion. Let him show us what Magistrate called the
Council that is mentioned Acts 15. Another Argument he takes from the King's
power of dissolving Parliaments, inconsistent with which, he says, is the 2d
Article of the Covenant, (he should have said the 3d Article) where we bind to
maintain the privileges of Parliament; one of which is, the General Assembly,
1648. declares against the Negative Vote in Parliament. Answ. Could any
other-man have made such an inference, unless Presbyterians had declared that
it is not in the King's power to dissolve a Parliament, but they may sit as
long as they will: which never was said, nor imagined; for the General
Assembly, 1648. denying to the King a Negative Vote in Parliament: this does
not concern the sitting of the Parliament, but the validity of their decisions
while they sit; also they say very little to this purpose, only in their
Declaration, July 31. they say, that they see not how the privileges of
Parliaments, and the King's Negative Vote can consist; I wish this had been
left to the cognition of Politicians. But what the Assembly there says, was not
their sentiment only, but of the Parliaments both of England and Scotland at
that time; so that his inference is no better against Scotch Presbytery, than
if he had asserted the inconsistency of Parliaments in both Nations with the
Legal Monarchy. That was a time when Debates about Prerogative and Privilege
had issued in a bloody War; the result of which was the ruin of both: Whereas
now the King's Prerogative and the the Privileges of Parliament being settled
and acknowledged, and the King's Negative Vote owned by all, none do more
cheerfully submit to the Legal Establishment in these things than the
Presbyterians do.

. 3. He says, The Covenant depriveth the King of the power of making Laws,
because Covenanters swear to continue in the Covenant all their days against
all opposition. A goodly Consequence indeed: We swear not to obey sinful Laws;
ergo, the King and Parliament may make no Laws at all. What he alleges in
further proof, That the Assembly July 28. 1648. declared against an Act of
Parliament and Committee of Estates, dated in June the same Year, and in
general against all others made in the Common Cause without consent of the
Church, is as little to the purpose: For it is not the same thing to declare
the Laws of Christ condemning the sinful Laws of Men, and to affirm, that Men
may make no Laws without the Churches consent; neither will we plead for every
thing that has been acted. Notwithstanding I hope Presbyterians will learn to
give all due deference to the Public Acts of the State, even when they cannot
comply nor give obedience to them. He further Argues, That they deny to the
King the Prerogative of making Leagues and Conventions of the Subjects, because
the Covenant was taken without the King. This was no Act of Presbyterian
Government, but an Act of the Estates of Scotland, of all Ranks; and this they
thought to be necessary for securing of their Religion from Popish Adversaries,
who designed to overturn it, as afterward appeared, when the Design was more
ripe, and it was fit to bring it more above board. He proves also that Scotch
Presbyterians are against this Prerogative of the King, because June 3. 1648.
The Assembly declares against the Bond subscribed by the Scotch Lords at
Oxford, and inflicteth the highest Ecclesiastical Censures against them, and
such as had a hand in it. Answ. Sure he could not obtrude this on the belief of
any, unless he had been confident that what he says would never be examined:
For in that Act of the Assembly there is nothing like condemning the King's
calling his Subjects together; but their condemning of a wicked Act that some
of them (being but in a private capacity) did when they were together. For this
Bond was not framed nor signed by any Parliament, or other Representative of
the Nation, called by the King, but by a few Lords sojourning out of the
Nation, who met and condemned what was done at home by the Representatives of
the whole Nation. This Bond was sent to the Assembly by the Convention of
Estates of the Nation, as the Act it self says, that the Assembly might give
their Opinion about it; and they declared the wickedness of it, and appointed
Church Censures against the guilty: What is there in all this that is
derogatory from the King's Prerogative of Convening his Subjects?

. 4. His last Effort to prove the inconsistency of Monarchy and Presbytery is,
That the Presbyterians deny the King's Prerogative of making Peace and War:
Which he proves, because the Assembly 1645. Feb. 12. declare them guilty of
sin, and censurable, who did not contribute to carry on the War. Answ. All that
the Church did in this was, That in a solemn warning to all the People of all
Ranks, for convincing them of sin, and pointing out their Duty to them, among
other Duties, such as Repentance, Reformation, etc. they held it forth as a
Duty for People to obey the Orders of the Estates of Parliament, toward their
own Defense when a bloody Army of barbarous Irish-men was in their Bowels. If
this his Argument can cast any blame on Presbyterians, it is this, that there
are cases in which they allow the States and Body of the Nation to resist the
King so far, as to hinder him to root out the Religion that is by Law
established among them: And one should think that he might have been by this
time convinced that this is not peculiar to Presbyterians, but that all the
Protestants in Britain are engaged in the same thing. Nor can Papists reproach
Protestants with it, for their Principles runs yet higher.

QUEST. X.
HE has said so much to little purpose, he is now come to his last Effort,
which does evidently show a fainting Cause, but strong and growing Confidence:
For he Querieth,

Whether Scottish Presbytery be agreeable to the general Inclinations of that
People?

This he denies; we affirm it, and wish the matter could be put to the Poll
among them that are sober, and that do any way concern themselves in Religion:
We do not grudge them a multitude of debauched Persons, who hate Presbytery, as
the Curb of their Lusts, and love the other way, under which they might be as
bad as they would, without a check; though others could not be so good as they
should without Persecution, or being discountenanced: though there want not a
great many even of such that never liked Prelacy, though they could comply with
it. Let us also set aside a sort of Men, who had their dependence on the Court,
or on the Prelates, and could advance their Interests that way. Let us seclude
also from this reckoning, the Popishly affected, who were but Protestants in
Masquerade; and though we deny not, that there may be found both among the
Ministers and People some sober and religious Persons, who are conscientiously
for Prelacy, yet these are so few in Scotland (and were much fewer before 1662.
since which time some have been bred to it) that not one of many hundreds or
thousands is to be found; and it has been in all Ages (out of Popery) seen,
that so strong and universal is the inclination of People against Prelacy, that
it never was brought in but by force and fraud, and never had long peaceable
possession in this Nation: So that it is well known, that not a few wise Men in
the Parliament, who have no Zeal for Presbytery it self, yet are for its being
settled here, as knowing that no other Church Government can suit the Genius of
this People.

. 2. The Proofs that our Author brings for his Assertion are strangely
inconsequential; he will not say, That the inclinations of the Nation
Representative is for Prelacy, lest he be found guilty of Leesing-making, a
Crime that he often talks of, and it seems has well studied, and may be
sometime strained his Wit about; but he will prove it of the body diffusive of
the people; and first, of the Nobility, because Presbytery is against Monarchy,
and they own it. This is answered. 2. Because they have taken the Test and
Declaration. Answ. He confesses some Peers took neither; and they that did
take them, did not by that show their inclination so much, as what they thought
fit to comply with, rather than suffer; how many of these, now when there is no
force on them, show that it was not choice, but necessity, that led them that
way; and many who seem to make Conscience of these Bonds, yet show no
inclination to the thing that they are bound to, except by the constraint that
they have brought themselves under. The Gentry he will also have to be inclined
to Prelacy, because they have taken the Test; which is answered: and because
many of them, when liberty was granted, went not to Meeting Houses. A silly
Argument, for many did go, and most other clave to the former way, because the
Law stood for it, and the Meetings seemed to be of uncertain continuance, but
how few of them now refuse to hear the Presbyterians? The Test is still the
Argument, the Burgesses must be Episcopal, because many of them took it. Also,
because of the rivers of tears shed at the Farewel-Sermons of their Episcopal
Ministers. O horrid Impudence! Scotland knows that where one was grieved,
multitudes rejoiced, others carried indifferently, at the removal of the few of
the men who as yet have been laid aside; for the Clergy, we yield him all the
gang, except a few, and those of the more sober of them, who declare, that they
never liked Prelacy as it was established, though they thought it Lawful to
Preach under it. The ability and worth of the Presbyterian Ministers he
labors to ridicule, but from such Topics as are fitter to be despised than
answered. Our three Commissioners sent to London, Anno 1689. (the former three
he thinks not worthy of his notice) he makes to be the Standard of
Presbyterian abilities: they are able to abide his censure, and to compete with
most of his party; but he might know, that among us many are infirm through Age
and long Hardships, who are of eminent Abilities; others are fixed in such
Charges, where their labor could not be wanted for so long a time: and what he
objecteth against them who were sent is of no weight; the first, that he once
complied, is most false: he resisted great Temptations to such compliance, and
bare faithful Testimony against it. The second suffered for his Principles in
the time of a sad Division in this Church. The third is no obscure Person, though
unknown to this Pamphleter, from whom, when things went as he wished, good Men
hid themselves, as from a Persecutor. We can also yield to him the Universities
and College of Justice, as lately stated; seeing none had access to such
places but they who were Episcopal: For the Physicians, there are not a few
worthy Men of that Faculty, who are far from inclinations toward Prelacy. It is
a new Topic, not often used before, That such a way of Religion is the best,
because most of the Physicians and Lawyers are of it: This his Discourse will
equally prove that Popery is preferrable to Protestantism; for in France,
Italy, Spain, etc. not the multitude only, but all the Churchmen, the
Universities, the Physicians and Lawyers are of that way. I conclude this our
Debate about the Inclinations of the people of this Nation to Presbytery, with
an Observation made by the late King James, when Duke of York, and in Scotland;
hearing of diverse persons of Quality, who on their Deathbed called for the
Assistance of Presbyterian Ministers, and refused others, though they had in
their life been either regardless of such Ministers, or persecutors of them, he
said, That the Scots, in whatever Religion they lived, yet generally they died
Presbyterians.

FINIS.
The History of the Affairs and late Revolution of Scotland: With an Account of
the Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon, and the settling of the
Church Government there. Printed for Tho. Salusbury in Fleet Street.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 14. dele exit, read Epit. P. 16. l. 29. dele consistent, read
inconsistent l. 40. dele well, read will. P. 32. l. 21. or against Popery, read
against a Liberty for Popery. l. 42 for and not resolved, read for and were not
resolved.

Books lately Printed, and Sold by Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple,
near Temple Bar in Fleet Street.
THE History of the Great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the Causes
and Means by which it was Accomplished. Together with a particular Account of
the Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon. As likewise the
Settlement of both the Kingdoms under their most Serene Majesty's King William
and Queen Mary. Octavo. Price 5 s.

The Safety of France: To Monsieur the Dauphine: Or, the Secret History of the
French King. Proving to his Son, That there is no other way to secure France
from the approaching Ruin, but by Deposing his Father for a Tyrant and
Destroyer of his People. Twelves. Price 1 s.

Pythagoras's Mystic Philosophy revived, or the Mystery of Dreams. Unfolded by
Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic. Octavo. Price 2 s.

A Collection of many wonderful Prophesies, relating to the English Nation;
plainly foretelling the late Great Revolution, and Happy Settlement of this
Kingdom; His present Majesty's Successes in Ireland, and particularly his
Victory at the Boyne; with other very remarkable Things not yet come to pass.
Quarto. Price 6 d.

Miscellany Poems, viz. 1. Remarks on the Death of King Charles the Second. 2.
On the Succession of King James the Second. 3. Upon Faith. 4. Upon Patience. 5.
Upon Ambition. 6. To the University of Oxford. 7. The Soul to a Good
Conscience. 8. The Soul to a Bad Conscience. Quarto. Price 6 d.

The Declaration and Manifesto of the Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont,
called the Vaudois, to all Christian Princes and States, of the Reasons of
their Taking up Arms Just now, against the Duke of Savoy; and why they have put
themselves under the Protection of William, King of Great Britain, and of the
Evangelical Cantons of Suitzerland. Quarto. Price 2 d.

Remarks upon the Dream of the late Abdicated Queen of England, and upon that
of Madam the Duchess of La Valiere, late Mistress to the French King, and now
Nun of the Order of Barefooted Carmelites at Paris. By Monsieur Gurne's Author
of the Harmony of Prophesies, etc. Being the Paper the Publisher whereof was
Condemned last Month to be Broken alive upon the Wheel, by the Parliament of
Roan. Done from the French Copy, Printed at Amsterdam. Quarto. Price 6 d.

Several Discourses and Characters, addressed to the Ladies of the Age. Wherein
the Vanities of the Modish Women are discovered. Written at the Request of a
Lady, by a Person of Honor. Octavo. Price 2 s.

Arithmetical Rules, with Examples; briefly comprised for the benefit of
Apprentices especially, etc. Twelves. Price 1 s.


