A VINDICATION OF THE Church of SCOTLAND BEING AN ANSWER TO Five Pamphlets, The
Titles of which are set down after the Preface.

By the Author of the former Vindication in Answer to the Ten QUESTIONS.

Licensed and Entered according to Order

Psalm. 31: 18. Let the lying Lips be put to Silence, which speak grievous
things, proudly and contemptuosly! against the Righteous.

Psalm. 55.3. They cast Iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.

Psalm. 63.11. But the mouth of them that speak Lies shall be stopped.

Gregor. Lib. 18. Moral. Nonnunquam pejus est mendacium meditari quam loqui;
Nam loqui plerumque precipitationis est, meditari vero Studiosae pravitarie.

Augustine, contra Parmen: L. 4. Quisquis vel quod porest corrigit; vel quod non
potest Corrigere, salvo pacis vinculo excludit; vel quod salvo pacis vinculo
excludere non potest, equitate improbat, is pacificus est.

Printed at Edingburgh, and Reprinted at London, for Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and three Crowns near Mercers-Chappel in Cheap Side, 1691.

The PREFACE.
THe Wrestlings of the Church of Scotland have been manifold, and of long
continuance: Jacob and Esau have been long struggling in her womb; many Changes
have gone over her; sometimes the one Party prevailing, and sometimes the
other: If there were no more at bottom of this strife then is pretended; there
might be some hope of Peace! If not by Oneness in Opinion and practice, yet by
yiedling so far as Conscience can allow, and mutual forbearance in that wherein
we cannot unite. But the Enmity between the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of
the Serpent, as it began with the World it self, so it is like to have no more
early Exit. I am sure, Lying, Railing, and malicious Reproaches, instead of
Argumentive Confutations, are not conducive to peace. This Conduct cannot
convince them that are otherwise minded, nor can it render that way Lovely, for
the sake of which it is used, to one who is influenced either by Religion or
Reason, But it tends to render the Cause that is so managed, Suspicious; yea
to disparage and Blacken a good Cause, in the Eyes of the Sober and rational
part of Mankind. It is a bad Cause that must be so supported; and a worse Soul
that will use such a weapon: Yea, men of a good temper will not listen to such
Discourses, but abhor them, Nor will they auribus aliquem calumniari, as
Simonides speaks. It has been an old stratagem of Satan, to disparage Truth,
or the right ways of God; either by misrepresenting, or disguising the
Opinions of them who own them; or drawing strange and absurd Consequences from
what they hold: Or imputing that to them that they never said nor thought: Or
by raising and venting Calumnies against the Persons and Actions of them whom
they would expose: Thus did the Heathens against the Jews, and against the the
Christians: For the former, enough to this purpose may be seen in Joseph contra
Apion. lib. 1.2. And the Ancient Histories of the Church are full of the
Latter: And the Apologies of Tertullian, and others, were occasioned by them.
It was also the way of Papists against Protestants: Yea our Lord, in days of
his flesh, suffered the same; and the very footsteps of these Enemies of Truth,
do these Authors tread, with whom I have now to do: As will appear in our
progress. It is a woeful work for men to employ their Wit in, and their time
about. The Devil has his Name from this practice, not only in Greek, (...);
but also in the Syriack N.T, -- one that feeds on Calumnies. It is strange
that Veracity is become as much a stranger among Protestants as among Jesuits;
Heathens would be ashamed of such Intemperance of the Tongue as some Divines
use; and that in Debates about Religious things: It is Unmanly as well as
UnChristian to tell a Lie, though for never so good a Cause, or on never so good
a design: Plutarch: de Liber, Educand. Mentirienim servile est: Et dignum apud
omnes Homines odio; ac ne mediocribus quidem servis ignoscendum. Is it any
wonder that we hesitate about some things related by Ancient Historians, when
so much false History is, with such effronted Boldness, written about the
things that we all know and about which we could be proper Witnesses, and could
Swear them to be Lies, before a Judge? Or that we can have little persuasion of
what we Read, or hear about remote Nations: When things acted among our selves
are so falsely represented? Woe to Posterity, if the Lying Stories that some
have Printed, and with bold Impudence avouched, pass with them for Authentic
Histories. Not only the Writings of Jesuits, but these of some discontented
Prelatists, are able to turn the succeeding Ages into absolute Scepticisme
about all the Transactions of former times.

Sect. 2. Our Opposities, in the Debate that I now manage, have not only loaded
as with reproach, without just cause given for their obloquie and clamours: But
they have showed their aversion from Peace with us: And that by the methods
unbecoming men of Candor and Integrity; as well as Lovers of Peace. We are not
ignorant of the measures that were the result of deep consults, both in this
Nation, and at London, when open Spire and Malice was not able to effect what
they designed; that the several Parishes should address the King for their
Ministers to be continued with them; even while it was evident that many of
them regarded not the Civil Authority of the Nation now settled; and others by
the Leudness of Conversation made themselves unworthy to be in the Holy
Function of the Ministry; and when this attempt did not succeed, it was
concerted at London, and advice about it written by Dr. Canaries to Mr. Lesk,
to be communicated to the rest of the Party; That they should yield seigned
Obedience to the Presbyterians at present, because their other Methods could
not take at that time. In pursuance of this addvice, two adresses were prepared
for the Commission of the General Assembly, in which as little Wit as Candor
appeared: It was evident by them, that the Addressers did not intend, nor
desire, to be received into a share of the Government with Presbyterians. And
these Papers were so ill contrived that it was visible to all, that no blame
could reflect on the Presbyterians, by refusiing to admit them on the terms
that they proposed: For their Lesson was conned for them. One of them was
offered to the Commission of the Assembly that was for the South part of
Scotland, by Mr. Alexander Less the 17. day of July 1691. In his own Name, and
of several others in the North. He was told by the Commission, That they could
not receive nor consider his Address; because he, and they in whose Name he
made application to the Commission, lived in the North; and that the Commission
had no Power from the Assembly to meddle with any Affairs in that part of the
Country; but that another Commission was appointed for the North; to which he
might apply if he pleased. He took Instruments in the Clerks Hand that he had
offered his Paper to the Commission; which was allowed. The other Address was,
at the same time presented by Mr. William Denune and Mr. Thomas Wood: which was
received, and Read: Of which I here give you a true and exact Copy. To the
Reverend the Ministers and Elders by Law empowered to Establish the
Judicatories of the Church of Scotland, The humble Petition of the Ministers of
the Episcopal Persuasion, shows: That whereas Episcopacy is by Law abolished
in this Kingdom. We, who have in the most dangerous times, manifested our Zeal
against Popery, are now ready to give all the assurances that are, or can be,
by Law, required of us, of our Aversion to Popery: of our firmness to the
Protestant Religion: And of our Duty and Fidelity to to their Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary. We are farther ready and willing, in Our respective
Charges and Stations to do every thing that is incumbent on us, as Ministers of
the Gospel, for advancing the power of Religion, for the repressing of Scandal
and Vice, and for sesecureing the peace and quiet of their Majesty's
Government; and to Act in Church Judicatories for carrying on of these ends,
without any regard to the differences of persuasion in matters that are not
fundamental. We do therefore humbly and earnestly desire, that in order to
these ends, we may be suffered to Act as Prebyters, in the Church, in our
several Stations and precincts. Sic subcribitur, David Urquhart Minister at
Clackmannan, William Denune Minister at Pentcaitland, Keneth Mekenize Minister
at Fearne, T. Wood Minister at Dunbar; Ad. Peacock Minister at Morbotle, M.
Howell Minister at Ploworth, John Swintoun Minister at Cranshawes, T. Edward
Minister at Tyningham, Rob. Smith Minister at Lonformagus, Jo. Broun Minister
at Ellon, George Dunbar Minister at Hadingtoun, Mr. Alex. Ireland Minister at,
Mr. James Foreman Minister at Hadingtoun, Ber. Makenzie Minister of the Gospel,
now at Iranent.

Sect. 3. The presenters of this Pettiion refused to satisfy the Commission
about some things in their Petition, which seemed to bear a dubious Sense;
alleging that they had no warrant to explain any thing for such as had sent
them: And when they were asked whether they would explain any thing in it, for
themselves; their answer was that they could not explain any thing for
themselves, because it was a joint Interest, and they would Act nothing without
the rest. After the Deliberation of a few days, the Commission gave the
following answer to their Petition, Edinburgh, July, 22. 1691; Which was read
to them by the Clerk, and they desiring to have an extract of it, the Clerk was
appointed to give it. A true and exact Copy of it, follows The Commission for
Visitation, etc. Having considered the Petition presented to them by Mr. Thomas
VVood and Mr. William Denune signed by them and other twelve Ministers, who
call themselves of the Episcopal persuasion, do find that some of these
Petitioners are deposed, and some suspended: both of them for gross
Immoralities: Others of them are in process referred by the General Assembly to
this Commission: And some declared contumacious by the Presbyteries of the
bounds where they have their residence; and some without the bounds committed
to the inspection of this Commission: They do also find, that not only these
Petitioners do not look on this Commission as a Judicatory of this Church; but
also do mistake their work, by ascribing to them, a power to establish the
Judicatories of this Church, which is committed to them by the Assembly: and
though the Commission be satisfied, to hear the zeal against Popery, fidelity to
their Majesty's; Yet they find, that seeing the Petitioners have not offered to
own and subscribe the Confession of Faith, which by Law is made the Standard of
the Doctrine of this Church! they have no security aagainst other errors; nor
do they offer to submit, nor to concur with, the present established Government
of this Church, according to the instructions of the General Assembly; much
less to acknowledge it, as is required by his Majesty's Gracious Letter; and
whereas, in the Petitory part, the Petitioners seem to desire an allowance for
setting up a Government separate from, and independent upon that which is
established by Law; and have refused (when desired by the Commission) to
explain either for their Constituents, or for themselves, this, or any other
expression, that seemed dark and doubtful to the Commission, declaring, also
expressly, that they had no further to say than what was contained in their
Petition, and that they could do nothing separately by themselves, without
their Constituents. Therefore, udon these grounds, the Commission cannot grant
this petition as it stands in terminis: However willing they be to receive such
of them as personally compearing, shall be found duly qualified, according to
the instructions of the Assembly, and his Majesty's gracious Letter. It is to
be noted that Mr. Ireland is deposed, (they indeed pretended; that his name was
blotted out, as soon as to they knew so much; but i was showed them that not
his Subscription, but the name of the place where he had been Minister, was
blotted out) Mr. Urquhart was declared contumacious by the Presbytery: Mr.
Peacock was suspended Mr. Wood is under process before the Commission: Mr.
Kenneth Mokenzie lives in the North, and so is not under the inspection of
this Commission.

Sect. 4. It is manifest from their petition that they Act as a party combined
against the Church as now settled by Law: Seeing they speak of a joint
interest, out of which none of them would so much as answer any question that
was put to them; also because this is owned as a petition of the Episcopal
Clergy, not of some of them; which stateth them as one party, and the
Presbyterian Church as another. It may be also rationally inferred from it,
that they could not expect that the Commission could receive them, on the terms
that they propose, for they do not offer Satisfaction to any one of the
conditions required by the Assembly, of such as we should admit to rule the
Church with us; we could not conclude their Orthodoxy from their being opposite
to Popery, for so are Socinians. Arminians, Pelagians, Antinomians, Quakers,
etc. Not had we ground to believe that they be Faithful to the Government of
the Church; but had reason to think the contrary; because they take to
themselves the designation of being of the Episcopal persuasion; which can bear
no other sense, than that either they think Episcopacy to be of Divine Right,
or at least that it is the best Government of the Church, and nearest to what
is enjoined in the Scripture: for they who are for the indifferency of the
species of the Church Government are not Episcopal more than they are
Presbyterian. Now such cannot give security that they will endeavor to
preserve Presbyterian Government, for it were to act against the Light of their
own mind: and he who promises so to act, deserves, no credit. This is yet
more convincing, if we consider, that they must mean, that they are for
Episcopacy as it was lately in Scotland: Now what that is not easy to know:
For they had no Canons by which it might be circumscribed, and so it was a
Boundless and Arbitrary Power. And in the Act of Parliament 1662. By which it
was Settled, it was restored To all the accustomed Privileges and
Jurisdictions; Which is as much Power as the Laws had ever given them: And it
Impowereth them to manage the Affairs of the Church with Advice of such of the
Clergy as they shall find to be of known Loyalty and Prudence; And that in
their Administrations they are to be accountable to the King: It is further
evident, that Presbytery could not be safe under their management; seeing they
will own no Church Power in the Commission; but look on them as a Company of
Ministers and Elders who derive their Power from the Law: Also because they
look-on the Judicatories of this Church as what is to be settled; and that they
are the Creatures of the State by looking on this Commission, as the Delegates
of the State. It is further to be observed, That while they speak of Securing
the Peace of Their Majesty's Government; They have no hint or any design to
secure the Government of the Church; either as to its Peace or to its Safety.
They tell us also of their design To act in Church Judicatories but whether
they mean the Judicatories wherein Parity of Ministers is observed, or these
wherein Episcopal Power over toppeth that of the Presbyters, we can neither
know from their words, nor will they inform us what is their meaning. They tell
us of their purpose To act in these Judicatories without any regard to
differences of Persuasions in things that are not fundamental. We are here
again left in the dark what things they will regard in their Management of the
Affairs of the Church: For it is a Controversy among Divines, what points of
Truth are fundamental, and what not: Some in our days have reduced fundamental
points to a very narrow compass: Men of Latitude have so widened Heavens Gates,
that even Heathens who know not Christ, may enter in: And how far these
Petitioners Principles may stretch in judging what is, and what is not
fundamental, we must not know for they will explain none of their words. But we
think that many Truths of the Gospel are to be regarded by them who are Guides
of Men's Consciences, and who are to censure Men for Errors, as well as for
immoral practices; about which we will not stiffly contend with them who do
think fit to call them Fundamentals. Again they may know, that there are somt
things Fundamental to Salvation: Others that are only so with respect to the
Government of the Church; That is, without which the Government settled in any
Church cannot stand. I know no Church; whether ruled by Parity of Presbyters,
or otherwise, but they have respect to these; and refuse to commit the Ruling
of the Church to them who have no regard to such things as are necessary to the
standing of her Government: If we would rightly manage the Government of the
Church, we must not regard the former only; but also the latter, We are not to
admit to a share of Presbyterian Government, such as though they be sound in the
Faith, will Vote against the Parity of Power in the Ministers of the Gospel:
Nor who will be for setting Bishops over us again; nor who will not secure us
against endeavoring the overturning, though it were by degrees, what is now, by
the Mercy of God, established among us. One remark more I make on their
Petition; which is; that they desire To be suffered to Act as Presbyters in
this Church in their several Stations and Precincts. It is not only ambiguously
worded, but they refused to tell us what they meant by it. For it may be
understood either that they should concur with us in our Judicatories; which
they cannot do for the reasons above adduced; or that they might Act in
meetings by themselves, and without dependence on the Government of the Church
now established by Law (as in many places they do practice, without leave asked
or given) this is a most absurd desire: For it is, that Presbyterian Government
being now established by Law, as it was before countenanced by the Gospel; the
Presbyterians themselves should allow a contrary way to be set up, in
opposition to it; and for perpetuating a Schism in this National Church: and
that Presbyterians should, by this means, put themselves out of Capacity to
purge the Church from Erroneous, Scandalous, and insufficient Ministers. If
they have a third meaning, that they might be allowed to exercise their
Ministry within their own Parishes; their Petition is wholly impertinent: For
that is already granted them, and none of them is hindered from this, except
such as the Church finds to be Insufficient, Erroneous, Scandalous, or
sapinely Negligent: If they plead for a toleration to such, neither Reason nor
Religion will allow the granting of such a request. All this considered, let
all the world judge whether these men design peace and union with the Church,
on Rational Grounds.

Sect. 5. While we have made such rational proposals for Burying former
differences; and yet they can neither satisfy nor quiet a Spiteful and
Clamorous sort of Men; We must defend our selves, as well as we can, against
Reproaches; and as we have (in this matter) a good Conscience toward God; so
we must vindicate our way before Men. This Vindication has been long expected:
The cause why it comes out so late, is not, that much time was taken to make
it accurate, either as to the Style, or other management of it; neither the
Authors capacity, nor inclination, nor the subject matter, do admit of that, it
was written festinante calamo; though I hope, not any material escapes will be
found in it; much less was it from the difficulty of the Work: Neither deep
thinking, nor much Reading, was needful 10 answer the Reasons brought against
us; The Argumentative part of these Pamphlets is of very small bulk, as well as
of little Strength. But the true Causes of this delay were. 1. It was at first
committed to another hand, who, after many months, returned the Papers to be
Answered without any reply to them, next, the Person on whom it was laid, and
who now has done it, was sent a long Journey, about the Affairs of the Church,
so that it was four months before he could do any thing toward it. 3. He has
so much necessary Work to attend, and that daily, that very seldom he could get
an hour for this Business: which he looked on as a (...) in respect of what was
his daily employment. 4. Informations from many corners of the Nation about
matters of fact, contained in the Pamphlets that I Answer, were to be expected,
and they came in very slowly; many of them after this Work was almost finished.
For which blanks behoved to be left in several places of the Book: and some of
them not come to this day. But the Reader must judge of the veracity and candor
of some of the things charged on us by what he may observe in the rest of them.

Sect. 6. I have treated the Adversaries I deal with as Brethren (desiring
rather to exceed, then come short in Civility, and fair dealing with them)
though they use us as Enemies; I hope, calling things by their true Names, will
not be reckoned inconsistent with that moderation and calmness that becomes a
Disputant, I have called nothing Lies nor Calumnies, nor Spite; but what is
manifestly such; and is made appear to be such: If any sharpness of Style be
used, how could it be shunned: Even the Disciples of Zeno would forget their
Apathia, when lashed with such virulent pens, as my Adversaries use; but I hope
there is nothing in the strain of this writing, that is beyond the bounds of
the Apostles injunction, Tit. 1.13. of reproving sharply, (...) is to argue the
case cuttingly: As the strength of Argument should wound a bad cause so a
Petulant and Effronted Adversary is not to be handled with that softness of
style, that is fit for such as are more modest. The truth of matters of fact
asserted in this Treatise, is not to be taken from me; but from them who are my
Informers: Few of them I pretend to personal knowledge of, therefore not my
veracity is pledged for them, but that of others: If I have here asserted any
thing that I cannot bring credible Witnesses for, let me be blamed: But if they
have deceived, or been deceived (which I hope shall not be found) I am not to
answer for that. Neither do I build on hearsay, or common talk; which is the
best Foundation of many of the Assertions of my Adversaries: But for many
things I name the witnesses of what I affirm: In some of them I bring the
Testimonies of them who had sworn these things before a Judge; and where the
names of Witnesses are for Brevities sake omitted, it is in matters of lesser
moment; and sufficient Testimony shall be given of things, when it shall be
required. I hope the Reader will find by this Examination of the Railing
Accusations brought against us, that the Church of Scotland has given no just
cause of Clamor to her Enemies, nor of dislike to our Rulers, during the time
in which our Observers do fix blame upon us: which is to the end of the General
Assembly, 1690. What the King and Parliament, and Council (and before them, the
Convention of Estates) did that has displeased this Party that I deal with, I
have also Vindicated from unjustice and oppression, and breach of promise, that
this pretended Loyal Party charge them with. For what was Acted by the injured
and enraged Rabble, who in their own Persons, or in their Relations, had
suffered intolerable and Barbarous favorities from these men; I am far from
approving, or excusing: Only I affirm that many of the things they are charged
with, are Lies and Calumnies: Others of them Truths so disguised, as none can
own them for truths. I also show that the Actings of the Rabble, were not to be
compared in Cruelty and Savage Barbarity, with what they suffered from that
Party whom they attempted to rid themselves of, when they got opportunity. And
what was done by the Episcopal party, was done under color of Law, or connived
at by them in Power; and was at the instigation of Churchmen: What was done by
the Rabble was their deed alone: Neither Rulers nor Ministers, nor the sobere
sort of the People, did either approve it, or was partaker in their Deeds.

Sect. 7. I have, in a former paper, pleaded for the Presbyterian Church of
Scotland, against an Adversary much of the same Temper with these I now deal
with; whose ten questions, and answers to them, I have examined; I now examine
five other Pamphlets: The first two were enjoined me to answer; the rest, being
of the same strain, and coming to hand while I was busy with these, and some
Persons of the best quality for rank, and for Religion, desiring it of me, I
thought fit to give my help (such as it is) to this laboring Church, in
opposing all these efforts of enraged Malice: If truth, and the ordinances of
God, be thereby Vindicated, and weaker ones helped to stand against the shock
of impudent Calumnies; and if any who gave too ready an ear to
misrepresentations of our Affairs, be better informed, I have my design. When I
first read and considered these Pamphlets, I hoped such a work would be
needless; for among our selves, most of their Assertions are known to be Lies;
yea some of their own party have regretted that such Lies should be spread; and
it was hoped that strangers would not suffer themselves to be imposed upon by
such vile stories, while the Propagators of them had not the wit to personate
Historians, but did openly vent such spite and inveterate Malice, as the
condiment of what they set before the Readers, that might ruin all pretenses
they could make to Veracity, with them who wisely consider what they hear or
read. But we see the world is so stated, that silent innocence may soon be run
down by bold Calumnies: And therefore this Vindication was, on after thoughts,
judged to be needful. I do not pretend to vindicate Presbyterians from all
blame: I know they are subject to like passions as other men; they are Sinners
and have need of a Savior: And their public Actings, as well as personal
Conversation, are short of perfection. There are many things among us that may
be mended, or better done. And we are endeavoring to bring things into better
order, and do not think that thus it must be, because thus it has been. Yet we
are not afraid to compare our Church order with that which our Opposites are so
fond of: Nor that they can charge us with such mis-managements as we can charge
them with; or as can infer any notable detriment to the great design of the
Gospel, and advancing of Truth and Holiness. I meet, in these Papers with
Variety of purposes, and frequent Co-incidencies: To have enlarged in Discourse
upon all these subjects would have swelled this work unduely. Wherefore I
behoved, in many places, to give short answers; which yet may be understood by
an attentive Reader: Especially if he compare the passages that are replied to
(which I could not always fully Transcribe) with what is said in answer to it.
If any thing be not touched, it is either not material or is before met with,
or it is so plainly false and absurd, that every one may see it. I have not
willingly overlookt any thing that might reflect any blame on the cause that I
plead for.

The Pamphlets here Answered are,
I. An Account of the present Pe^^^^utions of the Church of Scotland, in
several Letters. II. The Case of the afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly
represented. III. A late Letter concerning the Sufferings of the Episcopal
Clergy in Scotland. IV. A Memorial for his Highness the Prince of Orange, in
relation to the Affairs of Scotland, etc. V. An Historical Relation of the late
General Assembly, held at Edinburgh, from October 16 to November. 13. Anno 1690.
A VINDICATION OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND, etc. PART I.
THough it be no pleasant Task, to draw the Saw of Debate in Mattes wherein
Religion is concerned; especially, with such as own the same Religion with us,
and who, with us, should be engaged against the common Enemy of the
Reformation: Yet it is some Satisfaction, when we are attacked only with the
force of Argument, with plain Scripture, or rational Deductions from it; but to
be exposed to the dint of Malice, Lies, and Railing, and the foulest and
falsest Mis-representations that the minds of Man can suggest to them, when
they are enraged by being deprived of the occasion they once had to Persecute
their Neighbors, and being denuded of these Lucrative Places that they
improved to such Ends; this I say is, and must be grievous to an ingenuous
Soul: Now this is our Lot, Self-defence, yea the Defense of the Institutions of
Christ, which should be more precious to us, than any thing that we can call
ours, makes it necessary thus to enter the Lists, in confident hope of his
assistance whose Cause we Plead. I am far from either widening, or keeping up
the Difference, that has been between us, who own Presbyterian Government, and
the Episcopal Party in Scotland: Our Church (now established by Law, through
the Mercy of God, and the Zeal of Their Majesty's, and of the worthy Patriots
assembled in Parliament) has declared (and does practice accordingly) that
none of those Men shall be removed from their Office or Benefice, but such as
are found, on sufficient Trial, in an orderly way, to be Insufficient,
Scandalous, Erroneous, or supinely Negligent; and that we will receive into a
share of the Church Government with us, such of them, as beside their freedom
from the Evils mentioned, will own the Doctrine of this Church contained in the
Confession of Faith, and will submit to, and concur with, and will be faithful
to, the Government of the Church now Established. And we challenge our
Adversaries to show that any stretches have been made in expounding of these
Qualifications, or that any thing has been imputed to any of them as Scandal,
Error, etc. But what is commonly judged Scandal by Mankind, and Error by most
of the Reformed Churches; or that we have censured any for their Opinion about
Church Government, or for their compliance with Episcopacy, when it was here
set up; or that we have refused to admit any to Ministerial Communion with us,
who made application for that Favor, and was qualified as above expressed.

. 2. Notwithstanding of this Moderation (a course diametrically opposite to the
dealing that we met with from them, when their Way was uppermost) we have two
things to complain of against them who make such Outcries against us: One is,
That even the Soberest and best of them, are so far from endeavoring Peace and
Union, that they stand aloof from the most easy Terms abovementioned, and
think little of so great Condescendence made on our part: For let any unbyassed
Man judge what we could do more for Peace, unless we should have been so cruel
to the Souls of People, as to have entrusted the Conduct of them to such as
could not but ruin them, or that we should put the Government of the Church
into the Hands of such as had been its declared Enemies, and would give no
rational Security that they should not overturn it for the future. This their
Aversion from coming among us has this Evidence for it, that now when the
Government has been settled by Law near a year (and long before that they
might have been Received if they had pleased) only three of them, This was
written in March, 1691.
in all the Nation, has hitherto made Application to the Judicatories of the
Church, expressing their Desire to join with us; One of which is Received, and
the other two were but delayed for want of time then to consider their Case. Is
it not strange then, that such Outcries are made, that they are excluded from
that part of the exercise of their Ministry, while none but themselves are to
blame for it. The other thing that we have to complain of, is, That the
greatest number of that Party do not only stand off from us; and with all
possible Industry, hinder such as would comply with the established Government,
but do vent the greatest Malice against us, and spread the most horrid Lies and
Reproaches of us, that they are capable to utter, and do what in them lies to
make us odious to the World, and to bring us under dislike with our Rulers: And
that where there is no Cause given on our part. The Books that I have now under
Consideration are a full proof of this, as also are the lying Reports that the
Ears of People at Home, (and yet more Abroad) are filled with; which I hope
will appear in the following Examination of them.

. 3. I do not here undertake to Vindicate all Presbyterians from all blame in
their Carriage toward them that differ from them: We never thought that all of
our way are so Good, and so Wise, and so Sober as they should be; but I am
confident to say, that the Excesses, that any among us can be charged with, are
not to be compared with the Barbarous Severities that they of late suffered,
when they who now complain were in the Ascendent. That which I now undertake,
is, to clear the Presbyterians from these Calumnies that are cast on them in
general: And especially to vindicate the Actings of the Presbyterian Church of
Scotland, from what her Haters do brand her with, either in her Principles, or
in her Practice. Five Pamphlets stuffed with such Reproaches I have seen, to
answer two of them I was injoined, to wit. The two first mentioned in the Title
Page, the three which lately came to hand, I shall cast in as an Auctarium. I
shall consider them separately, yet joining them when coincidencies occur, to
avoid repetition. It is easy for an unbyassed Reader to observe the scope of
these Pieces to be, not so much the refutation of our Opinion about
Church Government, and the asserting of their own; (for little that looks
like Argument to that purpose, is to be found in them) or to set Matters of
Fact in their true Light; for the Candor requisite to that is evidently
wanting: As it is, partly to make all Presbyterians as hateful to others, as
they are hated by them: And partly to beg Alms of the Church of England; which
to be their Intention they do not conceal: While, Account of Persecution, etc.
Preface, the Reader is thus Addressed to, I have but one thing to request from
thee, and that is no more than what thy Profession will oblige and command
thee: I mean to put on Bowels of Mercy and Compassion to the poor Afflicted,
Distressed; to help them as much as thou art able with thy Substance, and to
extend that Charity which is already gone over the Alps, and has assisted the
Protestants in France, Hungary, and Peidmont, to thy neighboring Brethren, and
of thy Communion in Scotland: And if thy Circumstances are too mean to assist
them with thy Purse, be sure to let them have thy Charity for their Sufferings
in thy hearty Prayers (it is well that Prayer has some place, though but the
second, and in want of Money) in their desires. As also, Case of the afflicted
Clergy. Preface, the design of that Writing is said to be, Especially, that the
most Charitable-Church of England may see the sad effects of Rampant
Presbytery, pity their Brethren that have so severely smarted under it. -- Of
a piece with these Expressions are their setting up Conventicles here (so much
decried by them before) and in them using the English Service, in all its
Formalities, and their other Expressions of high esteem of, and Zeal for that
way, which were never heard of before, while they were under no restraint,
either for Pleading for it, or endeavoring its being set up by Authority. Let
the World judge what Meanness of Spirit is thus manifested, and what Mercenary
Souls they must have, who employ themselves in such mendicant Writings and
Practices, in the Matters of Religion. But thus it appears, How wise they are
in their own Generation: Who consider, What to do when they are put out of
their Stewardship. It is indeed a wiser way for them, then to have complied
with the present Eshablishment of the Church; from which not a few would, it is
like, have been excluded, either for their Immoralities, or Errors; or their
manifest abhorrence of the Civil Government. I observe but one thing more,
common to these Books, That they complain much more of the Government of the
State, than of that of the Church. And indeed the Council (yea the King and
Parliament) and the Rabble, were the Actors of most of the things that they make
such Tragical Outcries against, and not the Church.

. 4. I proceed now to consider the first of these Pamphlets. The Account of the
present Persecution of the Church of Scotland in several Letters. In the
Preface to which, I have but few things to observe, beside what is already
noted; what is calumniously asserted, without attempt toward any proof, I let
pass as Railing: Such as, Out-doing our specious Pretenses by our Actions; Our
being of the same Principles with Hobs, whose Doctrines, none do more abhor
then we. Our Principles being exceeded and basted by our Practice. That which
is added (and may be designed as the ground of these Imputations) is as
destitute of all resemblance of Truth, as any thing can be, viz. That They who
lately Addressed for Liberty of Conscience, do now Usurp and Tyrannize over
others, and deprive them of Liberty in Religion, of their Possessions, and of
their Lives, for adhereing to the Doctrine once delivered to the Saints, and
often established by Law in that Kingdom. This Author had consulted his own
Credit in the matter of Ingenuity and Veracity, if 1. He had made it appear,
that we Addressed for Liberty of Conscience, in that general Notion wherein he
expresses it: None do more (and ever have done so) oppose an unbounded Liberty
to speak, and own, what Men please in Religion, and particularly we, even when
the Liberty that he aims at was granted, did (as much as we were capable)
express our dislike of the Tolleration given to the Papists for their Heresies
and Idolatries: We thanked the King for allowing us to Worship God in his own
way, and taking off the Yoke of Church-domination that sore pressed our
Consciences, and ruined us in the World, if we would not ruin our Souls. And
what we then were willing to accept, we do not grudge to others, who can show
as good Warrant for their way, and use their Liberty with the same Moderation
and Peaceableness. 2. If he had told us wherein this Usurpation and Tyranny was
Exercised. These words use to signify the assuming an unlawful Authority, or
the oppressive abuse of that which is Lawful. Let him bring proof for his
imputing either of these to us, and we shall Answer him. 3. If he had told us
what freedom of Religion they have been deprived of: Who of them have been
Persecuted for Worshipping God, as we were by them; Except that some Ministers
have been restrained from Preaching, for their Unworthiness of that Office; or
from Preaching in places where they had no Legal Rights: What Possessions have
any been deprived of, unless for Crimes against the State; and even that has
been very rare. Ministers Stipends are not their rightful Possessions, when
either they are justly Deposed from their Office, or are found to be unjust
Possessors of this, or that particular Charge. For taking their Lives on
account of their Religious Principles, it has never been heard of since the
late Revolution; and it is the highest Impudence to allege it. 4. If he had
told us what the Holy Doctrine is that they have under such Sufferings adhered
to: Divines use to distinguish betwixt Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline; I
confess there are Controversies about all these: But that the Debates about
Church Government (which is the only thing that they can pretend to have
suffered for) belongs to the first of these Heads, I think none will say: But
let us own Episcopacy as a Doctrine, that it is a holy Doctrine, or that it was
once delivered to the Saints; he will find it hard to prove. But that which is
most absurd, is that he should insinuate that they have suffered in their
Freedom, their Possessions, or their Lives, for the Doctrine of Episcopacy, or
their Opinion about it, is so false, as Impudence it self may blush to assert
it.

. 5. A just Refutation of what follows would require a full History of the
Persecutions against Dissenters in England: not only that practiced by the
Justices of Peace (in the Execution of the most severe Penal Laws) but even by
Church-Courts, in their Citations and Excommunications, and what followed upon
both; to the ruin of the Estates and Liberty of many, and the Lives of not a
few, by the Hardships they endured: But that is too long to be here inserted. I
could fill many Sheets with what I know to be true in this matter. Was ever any
such thing done by the Kirk (as he alleges?) Let him tell us, if he can, that
ever the Church of Scotland did either Fine, or Imprison, any Person; or whom
they have (since the late Establishment of Presbytery) Excommunicated. What he
talks of Clubs and Battons, and insinuates to be the deed of the Kirk, is
beyond the common size of Slanderous Malice; these might be the Weapons of a
Rabble, but not of any Judicatory of the Church. But what of this kind he
imputes even to the Multitude, is after to be examined. We are not afraid to
have that English Persecution, and that which he calls a Scots Persecution,
impartially compared. But when he says, It has come near to, if not outdone
the French Dragooning, is such an effort of the Rhetoric of Men of his Stamp,
as is seldom parallelled by Men who know, or care what they say. We do, no less
than he, apprehend the evil of the Riots committed by a heady Rabble, and
detest conniving at, or countenancing such Practices; but we deny, that ever
that was done among us; and what he can say to prove what he insinuates, is in
its due place to be considered. What he adds of the resolute Christians of
his Party, who dare suffer for the Truths that they have taught, makes nothing
against our Cause, nor for his: Causa facit Martyrem. If they suffer for well
doing, they will have Peace in it; but when they have suffered as hard things,
and as long, as they made others to suffer, then they may boast of their
Sufferings.

. 6. Having now dispatched his Preface, I come to the first of the four
Letters, of which this Book is made up. It is (or pretends to be) written by
an English Chaplain to a Regiment; that of Sir John Laneer, as is supposed: In
which I meet with nothing but false History, and an unfair Representation of
things: Which might happen through prejudice, and mistakes, if the Author were
indeed a stranger; but cannot be excused from downright lies, if he be one
among our selves, and acquainted with our Affairs. But whoever he be, that is
evident, that the scope of his Letter is not barely to baffle Presbyterian
Government of the Church; but to overturn the present Establishment of the
State; to nullify the Convention of Estates, the Parliament, and all that they
have done, to advance the Reputation of the Viscount of Dundee, and his
Faction; so that the Gentleman does indeed suppose that the Interest of King
William, and that of Presbytery in Scotland, are embarked in the same Bottom;
which many thinking Men take to be no unjust Idea of our Affairs. In his first
Paragraph, he has a heap of Assertions, some palpably false, others as really
false; being general Assertions, built on, may be, a particular Instance or
two, yet none named: Of which after. And except that it is said, Episcopacy is
abolished, there is not a true word from the beginning to the end of it. In
that which follows, he lays the blame of all the Disasters, as he calls
them, on the Cameronian Party, and Characterizeth them at his pleasure. Here I
take notice of a few gross Mistakes, to call them no worse; That the prevailing
strength of the Cameronian Party was the occasion of all that here he
complains of; even the Abolishing of Episcopacy. All the Presbyterians in
Scotland did contribute their Endeavors to this, as also did many who formerly
had gone along with the Courses that the Episcopalians promoted: Now to call
all the Presbyterians, or most of them Cameronians, is as remote from Truth as
any thing can be. 2. He says the Cameronians are Fifth-Monarchy-men, which is
most false: I deny not that they have had Principles about Government, that
Sober Presbyterians could not go along with them in; but that they were of the
same Principles with these called Fifth-Monarchy-men, we deny: And he should
have brought some Proof for his Assertion. 3. It is also false, That these Men
care neither for King William, nor King James, but as these Kings happen to
please them. They have given such proof of their Loyalty to King William, as
their Enemies do envy, but are not able to obscure. Their Action at Dunkell,
known over all Britain; and their cheerful going at his Command, to venture
their Lives for him in Foreign Nations, are sufficient Refutation of this
impudent Assertion. 4. He accuses some designing Heads in the Council and
Parliament, for raising Tumults among the Cameronians; and then by these
Disorders representing abroad the Inclinations of the People. This is the
height of Dis-ingenuity; for these Disorders (as he calls them) were before
either the Convention or the Parliament sat. The Convention began March, 1689.
and before that time, the Ministers in the West were put out by the People; (I
suppose this he means by Disorders.) Again, That any in the Council or
Parliament had a hand in these Tumults, or abetted them, is spoken with much
Malice, but no Truth: The Men of most Note and Zeal for Presbytery, did what in
them lay to allay that Forwardness of the People, that the Church might be
reformed in a more legal Way.

. 7. That there was no Redress after Complaints of injured Persons, is also
false; for all the Ministers put out by Violence, without a Legal Procedure,
after the 13th of April, 1689. were by the Parliament restored to their Places;
such as were put out before that time, the Wisdom of the Nation thought it not
fit to Repone; because what was done in that, was done in an Inter-regnum, when
we had no Government: And it was procured by themselves who suffered, the
People having been provoked by them beyond what can be easily expressed, (of
which afterward;) and there was no other way to settle the Nation in Peace, but
to Indemnifie them who had avenged their own unparallelled Sufferings, on the
Authors of them; while these that so suffered, were also put to suffer no
greater Punishment for the Barbarities committed, by their means, on that poor
People. What he adds, That the Government became a Party against them, that
they suffered by a Form of Law, is such Language as under any Government, but
the present, might hazard his Neck. But we have here a Specimen of these
Gentlemen's Loyalty, and their Modesty, and Respect to Authority. It is
evident, that they cannot oppose Presbytery, without setting themselves against
the Civil Government now Settled by Law. Another Falsehood immediately follows,
That the Church-Party (as he calls them) is predominant in Scotland, both for
Number and Quality. That it is not so, is evident from the Constitution of our
Parliament: And I have made it appear in my Vindication of the Church of
Scotland, in Answer to the 10 th Question. And every one knows, that if the
Party which has appeared in Arms against the Civil Government, and they who do
palpably Favor them, be set aside, his Church-Party will be found to be very
few in this Nation; especially among the Gentry, and the Inferior People; and a
great part of the Nobility also are not fond of that way. One Proof of what he
now alleges, he brings from the Inclinations of the North: I confess, there
is the greatest strength of that Party; but there Papists also abound more than
elsewere in this Nation, and there is the strength of the Highland-Army: Yet in
the Counties of Sutherland and Strathnaver, in Ross and Murray, there might be,
and have been a Force raised, to defend the Settlement of State and Church,
which was a Terror to its Enemies: And many there are in other Counties of the
North, who are of contrary Inclinations to his Church. Yea, it is found, that
many of the Northern Ministers who had gone along with Episcopacy, and these
the Men of best Parts, and most Soberness among them, are willing to join with
the Presbyterians; who, on their part, are ready to receive them that are so
qualified. Another Proof of his Assertion, I cannot forbear to smile at, being
an Instance of the Vanity of his Mind: He had preached to the Satisfaction of
the Auditors (it seems others have been wanting to praise his Gifts, and
therefore he must even do it himself) and read Service, and the Gentry caressed
him, and the People showed him Respect when they met him: They did not abhor
him, nor his way of Religion. His Conclusion falls short of the thing that
was to be proved; for there are many Men (and may be not a few in Scotland) who
have little Abhorrence of any false way in Religion, and as little Zeal for the
right way. I doubt not that many Protestants did lately carry civilly toward
Popish Priests: Must they therefore like that way? Neither can what he
alleges infer his Conclusion; for in our Country, the Gentry are Men of
Breeding, and use a great deal of Civility to Strangers, even when they do not
like all their Principles and Practices. If Men of our way thought fit to use
this Topic, they could prove most of England to be Presbyterians; where they
have often preached, and had a greater Following than ever he had in Scotland;
and have been civilly treated among the Gentry, who yet were not of their
Principles, in the matter of Church Government. But such silly stuff is not fit
to blot Paper with. The History that he adds about the Magistrates of Perth,
proves no more, but that they are Enemies both to the Civil State, and the
Church, which every one knows: Yet they did soon after receive a Presbyterian
Minister (no Cameronian) into their Pulpit.

. 8. A most gross Mis-representation follows, viz. That at Edinburgh the
Faction (he means the Presbyterians) was so weak, that they were forced to
send privately into the West for Assistance. The truth of this matter is, About
the time that the Convention of Estates was to sit down, a Design was
discovered (framed by the Viscount of Dundee and others) to surprise and seize
the Convention; and for this End had secretly got together, of King James's
disbanded Soldiers, and others, about 2000 Strangers in Edinburgh; which
occasioned those in the West, to gather as many into Edinburgh to oppose them,
and secure the Convention. It is true the College of Justice (many of them,
but not all) did Arm; and it is no wonder, for they were King James's
Creatures, and their Places depended on him: But they were soon made to lay
down their Arms; which is no argument of the weakness of the opposite Party. He
gives also a false Account of Glasgow, when he says, That the most
Considerable, and of best Quality are well Affected ( i.e. in his Dialect)
Episcopal. Some such there are, from whose Quality we will not derogate; but in
the Town they are very few; and in the Country about, much fewer, most of the
Gentry being such as he will call ill Affected Persons.

. 9. He objecteth to himself, that if the Presbyterians were so weak, how came
they to prevail so much in the Parliament, the cause of this he makes to be,
that the Episcopal Party having deep impressions of their Allegiance to King
James, did not appear in the Election of Members of the Convention and
Parliament. Ans. 1. Here is some Ingenuity with a Confession that their
opposition to the present Establishment of the State, and the Church go
together. 2. If their concern for King James were so great, and they so strong,
why did they not concern themselves in the Elections for his defense. It seems
they love him and the Bishops, but will venture little for either. 3. It is
well known that they made all the Essays they were capable of, about the
Elections, and carried them in some few places; but were overborn by the number
of Voters in far the most Counties, and Burghs. But this Gentleman will say,
what he thinks does make for him, whether true or false. He does in what
follows, most unjustly reproach the Convention of Estates. That they chused a
Committee for Elections where no Episcopal Man could carry it, tho the number
of Electors were never so unequal, nothing can be more unjustly averred; and it
is the highest of Impudence and Sauciness, for a stranger thus to reproach the
Representative of a Nation, where he was so civilly treated, as himself
confesses. Another of his reproaches is, that many were allowed to sit in the
Convention contrary to Law; and particularly some who were not in^eft in their
Estates. If he had given instance, it could have been the more easily answered,
but se^ing he thought not fit to do so, our denial is a sufficient answer to
his Affirmation. I never heard that any such sat in the Convention, unless he
mean of one or two, who had been most unjustly forfeited in the late Reign, and
the Convention thought is not fit to debar any Man of his just Right, that
had been unjustly taken from him. On this he says, most of the Nobility
withdrew from the Convention and Parliament. Ans. It is false that most
withdrew, though some did, and they who did so withdraw, were found to be on
the Plot which was after discovered for over-turning the Government. So that it
is evident, that this Gentleman all along his discourse pleads more for
over-turning the Throne, than the present Government of the Church. This is
confirmed by what follows. viz. That if Dundee had lived, no doubt but that
he had changed the whole State of Affairs in this Nation. Hac Ithacus velit,
and magno mercentur Atridae, nothing but overturning of the State and Church
will please him, and his Accomplices. And it is reckoned by them a cross
Providence, that he was taken out of the way, who was like to be the chief
Actor in that Scene. But for all this confidence it might have fallen out, that
Dundee might have lived, and yet the present Establishment continued, our
confidence is built on a better foundation than such as Dundee was.

. 10. Having mentioned the Viscount of Dundee, he tells us (in the
Vindication of his Rebellion) an ill made Story; it is, that there was a design
on foot to assassinate him, of which he complained to the Convention, and no
notice was taken of it; though he repeated his Complaints, and offered to prove
the Attempt: And being thus in hazard, and not protected, he went to the
Highlands, and took Arms against his Country. This is purely a Forgerie, and
mis-representation, Dundee did indeed pretend hazard and made complaint, but
they were so far from taking no notice of his Complaint, that they examined
such as he accused, but nothing could be found against them; but on the
contrary it was evident, that his design was to have them who from the West
were come to Town to oppose his Party, and Guard the Convention, sent away, on
presence of his being unsafe among them, that so he may compass his Design
abovementioned against the Convention. What remains of this Letter, I shall
not much insist upon, it being mainly a Declaration against the State, and the
present Parliament, which this Gentleman (according to his wonted Modesty)
wishes to be dissolved, and another called, from which he promises a Redress
of all these things that he thinks to be Grievances: And indeed if we
consider the strain of his Letter, we may conclude, that from it he expects
an utter over-turning of the present settlement both of the Church, and of the
State, and all this he proposes to an English Lord (to whom his Letter is
directed) hop^^ng that thence may come that which he counts a Deliverance.
Others hope that the Lord will preserve what he has wrought for the Nation,
and for the Church in it, either by this Parliament, or by another, or by what
means he sees fit. He mentions a great many things that he and his Party
wonder at; which are no wonder to thinking Men in the Nation, but there is a
sort of Men who wonder at all things; one of these Wonders is, how the King can
be fond of this Parliament, which denied him a Sovereign interest in what is
debateable in Parliament, which is an eminent Branch of his Prerogative. I
pretend to no Skill in State Affairs, as this Military Chaplain does: but wise
Men among us look on the constitution of the Lords of the Articles (which is no
doubt what he here aims at) as an innovation (I mean, considering that
Committee with the power that it was lately scrued up to) as a destroying all
liberty of Parliaments. And the King (who best knows his own Prerogative)
with the Parliament, have happily composed this difference; which some managed
as a device to break them.

. 11. His next wonder is, that the Parliament has given the King no Money,
notwithstanding of the great necessity of his Affairs. What was done when this
Gentleman was pleased in his Letter to Criticize on our Affairs, which lay out
of his way, I know not: but it is well known, that the Scottish Parliaments has
been as liberal in assisting the King with Money, as the Nation was able to
bear. His next wonder is, How Presbytery can suit Monarchy in the State, and
that One Ruler should give Encouragement to the setting up of many. Ignorance
is the cause of wondering. We know how well these two Governments of Church and
State have suited one another many Ages, since this Nation was Protestant, and
before it was Popish, as I elsewhere made it appear; and surely, if the
Argument have any weight, it will prove that Monarchy (and consequently Popery)
must be in all the^e Churches where a King rules the Nation, which, I hope
Protestants will not yield, whatever may be the Sentiments of this Gentleman,
and his high flown Churchmen. I ask him, are not Bishops Rulers, and many
Rulers in the Church? Let him then answer his own doubt: How is Episcopacy
consistent with one Ruler in the State. And indeed this Argument strikes at
the Root of Church Government, of whatever Form it be, and brings in pure
Erastianism. It is no rare thing to see contrary Inferences drawn from a false
Position. Is it any wonder that many Rulers in the Church should well suit with
one Supreme Ruler in the State, while these Governments have such different
Originals? The one is from God, as King of the World; the other from Christ as
King of his Church: They are about most different Objects, the one about the
Affairs of the World, the other about the concerns of Men's Souls: They are
exercised in different ways; the one by Officers of Man's devising, the other
by Officers of Christ's Institution. The one Inflicting Corporal or Worldly
Punishments, the other Spiritual Censures only; especially while the Church
Rulers are far from pleading exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Civil
Magistrate, which is our Profession and Practice. This Gentleman might, with
the same pretext of reason, have said, That he wondereth how Christ could
pretend to have a Kingdom, and yet say, That his Kingdom is not of this World.
Another of his wonders is a groundless mistake, it is, How Men should be turned
out for not Praying for King William and Queen Mary by Name; when the Intruders
(so he is pleased to call the Presbyterians) refused to do it: This is a gross
Calumny, for Presbyterians generally did it: And if one or two in the Nation
did it not, let him show that they were complained of, and yet escaped Censure:
And if at any time they did not Name the King and Queen, they used such
Circumlocutions as were sufficiently Intelligible: Whereas the other Party
rather gave ground to think that they meant King James and his Queen: His next
wonder does indeed fill us with wonder, that he should think strange of it: It
is, That they who in this complied, yet were put out on some other Libel. As if
Praying for the King and Queen could atone all the Crimes of a Minister, though
he were a Drunkard, Swearer, etc. If any be put out on Insufficient Libels, and
their Grievances not Redressed, let them challenge us, but that some are put
out on other Libels, even though they can comply with the Times, is not to be
wondered at.

. 12. It is non causa pro-causa, that he alleges, the reason why they had to
that time made no Address to the King, was, because their Enemies had his
Majesty's Ear: I hope the Presbyterians have not lost that Favor with His
Majesty; though now these Gentlemen have made, yea multiplied, their Addresses:
But it is evident, that such Addresses were never thought on, till the Success
of His Majesty's Arms in Ireland, and in the Highlands of Scotland, did a
little damp their Hopes from King James. He has not yet done with wondering:
It is wondered, That the Church of England does not Interpose for them, since
the violent Party in Scotland will influence the Discontented in England. For
they are Sworn by then Covenant to Reform England upon their Model. He needed
not wonder at this, for some of the Church of England have meddled far beyond
their Line in our Affairs: Though we be far from interposing in any of theirs.
What we are bound to by the Covenant, is not to reform them, but to concur with
them, when lawfully called, to advance Reformation; and it is far from our
Thoughts to go beyond that Boundary, in being concerned in their Affairs: We
wish their Reformation, but leave the managing of it to themselves. What
follows concerning the Clergy, we are little concerned in: We wish they were
better than they are, we never thought them all scandalous, but we know many
are; and none shall suffer by us on that Head, but they who are made appear to
be manifestly and grossly such. I shall observe but one thing more in this
Letter, and dismiss it. It is a palpable and most soul Untruth, viz. That where
but one single Dissenter is in a Parish, though all the rest of the Parish be
for the Minister, it is a sufficient Reason to eject him: And he
giveth-Instances in the Parishes of Mousgard (a place not known here)
Colingtoun, Kirkne^^toun and Kirklistoun. Never any Allegation was more
injurious and false; yea, the contrary is daily practiced, that Men are
continued where the far greatest part of the Parish are Dissenters. It is true,
some, in that Case, have accepted of a Call to another place, where they might
do more Good, and have more Peace; but never any was deprived on that Account.
For Kirklistoun, I know the Falsehood of what he asserteth: Not above Sixteen in
that great Parish did ever hear Mr. Mackenzie, the Minister there; and he had
seldom preached in that Church; and his Admission to that Church was most
irregular, even according to the Episcopal way: And on these Grounds the
Assembly did not depose him, only declared him not to be Minister in that
place; but left him in a Capacity to be called to any other Church.

Answer to the Second Letter.
THis Letter is mostly Historical; but such a parcel of false and disingenious
History it contains, as is not easily parallelled elsewhere. We desire
nothing more than what he would have us expect, An Account of the State of
things among us, which may set things in their true Light: For then we are
persuaded the World will be convinced that our Representations are neither
unjust, nor calumnious, nor partial. He gives, page 1. a most unjust Account
of the Unity that, he says, was between Presbyterians and the Episcopal Party;
while he says, That all Scots-men were generally of one Communion, and that
the Presbyterians (except the Cameronians) had returned to the Episcopal
Church, and were become Hearers, and many Communicaters with her: That there
was no separate Meetings kept, at least publicly, but very rarely. This, I
say, is most false: For though never any of the Presbyterians would, directly
nor undirectly, own Episcopal Government, yet many of the more sober and
intelligent among them did not think it unlawful to hear them occasionally, who
had complied with Episcopacy; yet they chused rather to hear their own lawful
Pastors, though driven into Corners, than these unfaithful Men: And not only
so, but there were many Thousands, beside Cameronians, who would never hear
them: And that many (who when they had occasion to hear others, made use of
that Opportunity) did go to hear these Men, when their Liberty of hearing
others was taken away, it is no wonder. Yet this Practice was far less general
than he says, and Meetings of Nonconformists were not so rare (for all the
horrid Persecution that they were under) as he would make us believe: Many, who
were no Cameronians, kept up their Meetings; though I confess it was no wonder
that their Meetings were not public, when they were by such barbarous
Persecutions driven into Corners; and if some, under the Heat of Persecution,
stretched their Consciences to comply, it is nothing but that which has been
common among Men of Infirmities.

. 2. Another Falsehood is, that the Party which was then treated severely, was
only the Cameronians: Whereas, though they had their share of the Persecution,
yet other Presbyterians were most cruelly dealt with; and it was observed,
that, indeed, the Spite of his Party appeared most against the most sober of
the Presbyterians, as being the Persons most capable to do them hurt. It is
also false, that it was the Severity used against them only, that man
complained of in the Prince of Orange's Declaration, and in the S^o^^h
Inquisition: One of which Papers (but which of them no Man can know by his
Words; and may be such Ambiguity has been designed) he calls a most
scurrilous Pamphlet. It is also most false and calumnibus, that all
Presbyterians in Scotland were of one Principle, only the Cameronians were more
ingenuous: For the sober Presbyterians did always condemn many, both Principles
and Practices, of that Party* Such as that Magistrates and Ministers fall, ipso
facto, from their Authority, respective, and Stations, when they are guilty of
Mis-managements* and that private Persons may treat them as such, without a
^^^^enee of State or Church. That the rest of the Presbyterians condemned the
Cameronians for keeping up their Meetings, is also an Untruth, for they also
kept up Meetings; but they condemned them for the manner of their Meeting, with
such Contempt of, and bidding Defiance to the Authority of the Magistrate. He
gives a general Account of Argyle's Invasion; But the Ground of the
Presbyterians not joining with him, he misrepresenteth: It was not they, but an
irritated Party among them, who had been provoked by the most desperate
Hardships, and pinching Necessities, who had smarted for other Enterprises of
that nature. The general and dark Account he gives of the Concert made at
London, by some of the State, and some Bishops, about taking off the Penal
Laws, we can make no Judgment of, till that fuller Account be given of it, that
he gives us hope of: But this we know, that the Result of it was, these Men
did what they could for taking away the Penal Laws that were against Papists,
though that Attempt succeeded not in the Episcopal Parliaments; neither did we
ever think that all, especially of the Gentry, and other Members of Parliament,
who went along with Episcopacy while it had Law for it, were inclined to
Poper^y.

. 3. He does most injuriously charge the Dissenters with making a Schism, after
that abovementioned Imaginary Union that he had talked of; and that by first
Refusing, and then Accepting of the Toleration granted by King James, which was
founded on the Dispensing Power. And after a great deal of pains to fix some
Guilt on them in that matter; he concludes, that both the Declarations, that
came out about that Indulgence, being materially, the same, in pursuance of the
same Design, and both owning the King's Absolute, Dispensing Power, they were
as guilty in using their Liberty on the last Declaration, as if they had done
that on the first. For Answer; 1. Let his Friends reconcile him to himself, in
saying the two Declarations were, materially the same; and yet that the one
required an Oath of them who had Liberty of it, and the other not so. 2. It is
well known that the Presbyterians would never meddle with that Liberty, till it
was so contrived, as might neither engage them to own the Dispensing Power, nor
to any other unlawful Act: For such a Power being asserted in the Declaration,
does no way infer their owning of that Power, by their using the Liberty
granted them, after it had been unjustly withheld from them, and which was
their Due by a Grant from Christ in the Gospel. What could prompt this Author
to affirm, that the Presbyterians were moved at last to use the Liberty
granted, because they could no longer be disobedient to the Divine Providence?
And that, according to their Divinity, Providential Occurrences make a
considerable part of the Rule of Faith and Manners? I leave it to others to
guess; for none are more remote from such Principles, than Presbyterians. He
next undertaketh to prove, that Presbyterians did not separate from them (he
means, make use of the Liberty granted them) on any Principle of Conscience.
If this be well proved, it will give a deep Wound to our Interest, from their
continuing in Communion with the Episcopalians some Years before their Liberty,
and many some Months after. Answ. His Arguments, 1 st are, This Communion was
nothing else but Hearing them when they could get none else to ^^ar; which
many, yea, most Presbyterians never scrupled. But let him tell us, if all that
time they ever owned these Men for their lawful Pastors; or thought it Duty to
forsake them whom they had owned as such, to cleave to these; or that they ever
countenanced the Government or Discipline of the Church, which was exercised
under Bishops, and by their Authority. If they had done so, it had not
consisted with Conscience to separate from them on occasion of a Liberty
granted: But if otherwise, it does clearly consist with Leaving them for
Conscience sake; because their Scruple was not simply about hearing, but about
forsaking their lawful Pastors, and owning those others as their Pastors, and
their Church Government as Christ's Discipline. Arg. 2. While they continued
with us, they acknowledged that their Consciences allowed them. Answ. And well
they might, on the Grounds already given: But the fundamental Mistake, on which
all his Reasonings are built, is, that he takes such occasional hearing of a
Minister to be the Exercise of that Church Communion that fixed Members of a
Congregation have with that Church. Arg. 3. Many thanked God that they were
reconciled to us, and frequently protested, all the World should never again
engage them in the Schism. Answ. He wisely concealeth their Names (though he
says he can tell them) lest they should contradict him. But that which
enervateth his Argument, is, that he infers the Practice of Presbyterians
(which must be meant of all, or most) from that of many; and he is not pleased
to tell us how many they were: Two or three to do so, were many, and too many;
and I confess, such as said so, and yet did otherwise, did not act
Conscienciously: But I am persuaded, not one of a Thousand of them that were,
from a Principle, Presbyterians, were guilty of such juggling; whatever some
might do, who (from other Motives than Conscience) owned that way; in whose
Actions we are no ways concerned. What he calls Schism, we say, they are not
engaged in who went to the Meetings, but they who had departed from the good
old ways of the Gospel Church, and the Church of Scotland; a Deviation from
whose Courses Presbyterians could not own. Arg. 4. Some of the ablest
Preachers, a few Weeks before, said, they would never embrace that Toleration,
and that they resolved never to preach more. Answ. I have the Charity to think
that this is a Falsehood that is too gross to be uttered by a Christian; but the
Author might have consulted his Credit, by informing us who these able Men
were: If any such were, I doubt they were neither able nor honest; and I am
sure, if they were known, they would be abhorred by Presbyterians. Arg. 5.
Some, even after the 2d. Edition of the Toleration, continued in their
Resolution not to engage in it, and it cost their Brethren much pains to
prevail with them. Answ. They who have considered his abovementioned
Assertions, may easily know how to believe this: For my part, I believe not one
word of it, save that there were some Men so unreasonable as to be shy of
accepting any Liberty granted by the Magistrate; which was far from the general
Sentiment of Presbyterians. A 6th Argument he uses, There could be no
Conscience in this Matter, seeing we had no sinful Condition in our Communion;
we agree with them in Doctrine, the Administration of Sacraments, and have
Ordination which is valid; and our main Difference is about the Doxology,
Lord's Prayer, and the Belief, rehearsed at Baptism. Answ. For the first of
these, We deny it, for it is sinful to subject to Episcopal Government; and
without this, no Man could be of their Communion; that is, subject to all the
Ordinances among them. Again, though none of these were, removing our faithful
Pastors, and settling Intruders over us, did warrant us to wait on the Ministry
of the former, and not on that of the latter. That any separated merely on
Account of the Doxology, Lord's Prayer, and Belief, I know not; though many
would not use them as his Church did.

. 4. He tells us next of the wonderful Increase of Meetings, and of
Meeting Houses; which was very true, but not well consistent with the Account
he had but now given of the Disposition of the Nonconformists to comply with
the Episcopal Way. It is not usual for a Nation to be born in one Day; but it
sufficiently shows how the Generality of the Nation, who do much concern
themselves in Religion, are inclined: That many in the West went to the
Meetings, we deny not; but that few went elsewhere, should not be insinuated.
His Branding them with Fanaticism, is expressive of the Spite against them that
his Party is eminent for, but has neither Truth nor Charity to warrant it; for
the Men of that Way will vie with any in the Nation, for Sobriety and Soundness
in the Faith, and for Ability to give a rational Account of what they hold. But
what follows of the Cause he assigns for this Concourse to the Meetings, is
false (to say no worse of it) in all the parts of it: Never were Men farther
from Compulsion, than they were in this matter: Yea, it can be made appear
(which he does not so much as pretend to for what he affirms) that many were
restrained from the Meetings, by the power of ill-affected Noblemen and
Gentlemen. But it is not fit to rake into this matter, but to forget what
caused Differences, that we may now unite in one good Way. He seems, p. 12.
to ridicule the Presbyterians Grateful Address to King James, and Profession of
Loyalty to him, on occasion of the Liberty that he granted them; but I gladly
would know by what Topic either of these can be condemned: They gave Thanks
for restoring them to their just Right, which had been unjustly taken from
them; they professed and practiced Loyalty toward their Lawful Sovereign,
though of a different Religion from them, and though they had Jealousies of
Designs on foot to ruin their Religion and them: While his Royal Authority was
not taken away by the Nation, they, as private Men, ought not to question it.
That nothing was spolen in Meeting Houses against Popery, is most false: The
Preachers there, I confess, neither then did, nor now do make Controversies the
constant Subject of their Sermons; yet are at pains, both in Sermons and
Catechizing, to clear the Truth, against all the Errors of Popery: But their
main Word is to deal with the Souls of the People, about those things that do
most nearly concern their Eternal Interest; to make them know themselves, and
God in Christ, and Salvation through him: For they consider, that the surest
way to preserve from Error, is not only to make them know the difference
between it and Truth, but to get them to be truly concerned about their Souls,
and seriously Religious. To the Falsehood of what he affirms, he adds Spite,
in enumerating the Causes to which he is pleased to impute their supposed
Silence against Popery. Not one of them all has Truth or Reality in them:
Their Respect to Papists, their Influence from the Court, are Reflections which
I will not brand with their due Name: Their Ignorance of these Controversies is
an Allegation so impudent, that no Man that is not blinded with Rage and Malice
could be guilty of. The Can^ (that is the Word when such Men as he would
ridicule whatever looks like serious Religion) which he says they use
against Prelacy and Malignancy, and about King Jesus, and the Gospel being
banished, is asserted, not because it is so, but because it is a fine Device to
defame. Nothing is more rare in our Pulpits, than meddling with the late
Controversies, which now we would have to be buried; and when they fall in,
they are discoursed Argumentatively; and if any, at any time, do otherwise,
that is not to be charged on all. There is no Party, among whom some
Indiscretion does not appear in the Conduct of some Men.

. 5. His next effort is, a Satyr against the Prince of Orange's Declaration
for Scotland; and he fixes the Original of their Persecutions that he
complains of, on it: He Characterizeth it as Down right Presbyterian. He
taxes the Presbyterian Nobility and Gentry's going to London to wait on his
Highness: And confesses them to be the chief Persons, who ( upon his Majesty's
retirement,) so he terms that which the Parliament called K. James's
Abdicating the Government) did confer the Government of this Kingdom on the
Prince. This Paragraph is a sufficient evidence of the Temper of this Author,
and of those for whom he pleads: And yet they have now the Brow to make
Addresses to King William, full of the highest Assertions of their Loyalty both
past and present. But they who knew their way, don't believe any such
Professions; and they who read this Book will, I hope, be as far from giving
Credit to them. He now ( page 14^) begins to tell us of their Sufferings.
And what horrid Barbarities were used against them: And is so kind to his
Country, as to be spareing in this Relation, left he should thereby breed a
disgust at his native Country. This is shameful Hypocrisy, twisted with
Malice; For I hope it will be found, as we proceed, that his big Expressions
about their Sufferings will dwindle into Fleabits, in comparison of the Bloody
Lashes that others suffered, not long before, from Men of his Tribe. Which I
mention not here to excuse, nor extenuate, any irregular Course that some took,
nor to plead for retribution to his Party: We had rather suffer ten Wrongs,
than do one. It will be found that his Party did indeed expose the Nation to
the Reproach of Barbarity, and Persecuting their Brethren: So he does what in
him lies to bring the same upon the Nation, by his horrid Lies, aggravating of
things, and Misrepresentations. Before he came to his particular Stories of
that which he calls, The Persecution of the Clergy, he Prefaceth three
things, to render these Passages more odious. The first is, The opportunity
that was given for it by King James' s Forces, being at that time called into
England, to oppose the Prince of Orange, who sometime before that, had landed
in England: And the Council at that time dissolved of it self, so that, says
he, in effect, the Nation was without Government. Whatever improvement he may
make of this Remark, it may be of some use to us: For it is hence evident (as
it is in it self well known) That it was by Force, and not the Submission, or
Affection, the Call or Approbation of the People, who should have been their
Charge, that his Party enjoyed their Ministry, or any Exercise of it: And
indeed, an Army was, for many years, kept up in time of Peace, to force People
to come to hear them. Another thing that I here infer is, That King James's
Interest, and that of the Prelatick Clergy, were Embarked together, as are King
William's and that of Presbyterians. A third Inference is, That it being an
Interregnum, when there was no Government, Tumults and Disorders, though never
to be approved, yet are not so much to be wondered at: And indeed, considering
our Circumstances (after to be noted) it is a wonder that they had no sadder
Effects. There are Men in the World, who being so provoked as that People was,
and without restraint from Government, would have avenged themselves on their
bloody Persecuters at another rate. But, as we are sorry that there were such
tumultuous Actings, so we bless the Lord, that they had no worse Effects. The
2d thing that he premiseth is, The Story of a Massacre, by an Irish Army said
to be landed at Kirkcubright, which he Fancieth to be a device of the
Presbyterians; and industriously spread by them to be a Color for disarming
the rest of the Country. How that Story arose we are yet in the Dark, I hope
his imagination is not sufficient to fix it on the Presbyterians: We know in
such a time of Hurry, Fear and Confusion, with which the Minds of all sorts
were then filled, such reports as to rise without design or grounds: If any did
devise such a Tale, they deserve severe punishment. His three Remarks is on the
day that the rabbling of Ministers was set on Foot, which he says, was
concerted to be on Christmas Day; on which many Parties, in several Corners,
got together about that Work: And this Circumstance he tragically appears; It
being a day which brought joy to all People, which was once celebrated by the
Court of Heaven; which the Christan Church ever since has solemnized; and let
us remark a few a few things on this fine Notion, (on which this Author seems
to value himself not a little) 1. I doubt of the Matter of Fact, in this
Circumstance, it is like we should have heard of it, if it had been so. 2. That
the day was chosen, or concerted, I as much doubt. 3ly, That the day was so
celebrated, as he says, is ridiculous to assert, did the Court of Heaven keep
the anniversary Day? That the Church in all Ages keep it, is said without Book;
though that Institution is very ancient. I know the Birth of Christ was
celebrated by the Heavenly Host, and we celebrate it in our thankful
Acknowledgments of it, as the greatest Mercies: But that either Christ was born
on December 25. or the Heavenly Host did that day bring the glad Tidings of it
to the Shepherds, or that any Anniversary day is to be kept by God's
appointment, on that account, Quia Scriptum non Legimus, ideo Jussum non
Credimus.

. 6. He comes now, page, 16. To his particular Historical account of these
horrid Persecutions which are above reported to be unparallelled, That even the
French Dragooning cannot equal them: Before I consider them particularly, I
observe a few things concerning them in general; which if impartially weighed,
may sufficiently stop the mouth of all the Clamor, and let the World see the
temper of these Men; and what Unmanly, as well as Unchristian shifts they use
to buoy up their sinking Cause, 1. What is here said to be done, is not
imputable to the Presbyterians: More than the Drunkenness, Swearing, Whoredoms,
Persecutions, that we charge many of that Party with, are to be looked on as the
Crimes of all the Episcopalians: they were done by a few, not Ministers, but of
the meanest of the People; they never were, nor are approved, but rather
disliked and lamented, by the Body of the Presbyterians, who are as far from
disorderly and violent Courses, as any Men are, and who think that a good Cause
needs not the help of unwarrantable means, and that every Man should keep
within the bounds of his Station: And that not the People, but the Magistrate
and Church Authority in their several Ways, should rid the Church of bad and
unfit Ministers, whatever Reflections we have of the event, viz. Freeing the
Congregations from evil Ministers, yet we are far from applauding this manner
of doing it. 2. The People who did these things were under the highest
Provocations imaginable, to do what they did; yea to have proceeded to farther
Severities, which we rejoice that they were withheld from (we hope, by some
measure of the awe of God upon them) for the Ministers had been not only
intruded on the People, without their Choice and Consent, and were the mean of
depriving them of such Gospel Administrations as they highly valued; but they
were the chief Instruments of most horrid Persecutions and Barbarities, that
that poor People and their Relations, who lost their Lives by that Persecution,
had long and heavily groaned under: as will appear in the following Discourses,
and as I hope shall be showed in a more full account of these matters.
Oppression makes a wise Man mad. It is no wonder then, that it causes them
rush into some Practices which cannot be defended, who are neither so wise, nor
so good as they should be. 3. These things were acted in an Interregnum; When
we had no Civil, nor Church Government. When one King was removed, and another
not yet set up; and this poor oppressed and enraged People were chased in their
Minds: they had now power (I mean Potentiam, non potestatem) to shake off their
unsupportable Yoke, there was no orderly course for bringing that about, which
either was then practicable, or that they could, in those circumstances, have
the prospect of: and therefore, though it was not allowable, yet it was not to be
wondered at, that they relieved themselves, when they saw none else who would
or could do it. 4. The Histories that he here brings are partly Lies, partly
unjust and unfair Representations of truth: and if all were true, can no way
amount to such a horrid and general Persecution, as he speaks of: So that
indeed the whole of his account is Clamor and Obloquies, without any cause
proportioned to such Complaints.

. 7. Let us now examine the Matters of Fact, which he adduceth to make out the
Persecution that he charge the Presbyterians with, The 1. Of them is
concerning Mr. Gabriel Russel Minister at Govan, whom some of his own Parish
assailed (to several of whom he had done Kindnesses) Beat his Wife and Daughter
and himself, so inhumanely, that it had almost cost him his life; carried off
the Poors Box, and other Utencils of the Church, and threatened him with worse
Treatment, if he should preach any more there. To this I oppose the truth of
this Story, as it is attested by the Subscriptions of nine Persons who were
present. That there being great Confusion like to be in the Country, they
feared the Church Goods might be carried away: They went peacably, and demanded
them, offering sufficient security that they should be safely kept and restored
to them who should be concerned. This Mr. Russel and his Wife (who both were
Drunk, as they used often to be) not only refused, but gave the Men very
opprobrious and provoking Language: They essaying to lift the Box in which the
Poors Money was kept, Mr. Russel setting his foot on it, and his Wife sitting
down on it, they with all tenderness lifted her up, and carried away the Box;
but before they went out of the house, they got the Key, and secured what was
in the Box. Mr. Russel roared, and beat them with hands and feet: but they
utterly deny that any of them did beat either him or his Wife: yea, are they
parted from his house, they asked if any thing was wanting, and they could be
charged with nothing. This is attested by the Subscriptions of John Murdoch,
William Cowan, Zacharias Maxwel, John Keith, John Hill, Robert Burnside, Andrew
Shiels, John James Hill. The next History concerns Mr. Finnie Minister at
Cathcart; whose Wife and four or five small Children, they thrust out of Doors
at Midnight, tho it was a most vehement Frost. Threw out all his Furniture, and
by much entreaty, suffered his Wife and Children to have lodging in the Stable,
without a fire; the Children fell sick thereafter. The truth of this matter (as
attested by Robert Jamison, David Park, William Gouts. All living near to Mr.
Finnie's House) is, There being that Night an Alarm, as if the French and Irish
had landed at Greenock, all the Country got together in Arms. When the Alarm
was found to be false, the Parish of Cathcart (though the Gentlemen had desired
them to go home, and be in readiness if there should be need) hearing the
Prince of Orange's Manifesto was to be proclaimed at Glasgow, went thither, and
assisted at the Solemnity; and returning with Joy, made Bone-fires in several
parts of the Parish; and at Mr. Finnie's House (he being abroad) made a
Bone-fire before the Barn-door, of his Coals: Some of them, who had been
greatly injured by Mr. Finnie, went into the House, offered Violence to no
Person, only desired his Wife to withdraw; which she did till they were gone,
which was about Eight or Nine-o-Clock at Night; when she returned to her House,
and stayed in it for a considerable time, and left it of her own accord,
without Compulsion. I hope the Reader, by comparing these two Accounts of the
matter, may see how a Story may be altered, by the right or wrong telling of
it: Yet I am far from approving what they did; but I am sure it is not like the
French Dragooning.

. 8. The third Story is of Mr. Boyd, at Carmanock; whose Family, he says, was
as rudely treated. And the like was done in many other places. This General we
cannot answer, he not being pleased to mention Particulars; but that this
Gentleman should give these for Instances of incredible Barbarities (as here he
is pleased to call them) may help us to understand his Words, and to put a
softer Sense on them than they bear; for it is evident that in this Cause his
Words are full of monstrous Hyperbolics, if not of plain Forgeries. The Parish
of Carmanock had their own former Pastor among them; Mr. Boyd had been a cruel
Persecutor of some of them, by causing some to be imprisoned, forcing others to
flee, and wander for several Months; they peaceably desired his Family to
remove, which they did, leaving only some Lumber in the House, they expected
several Months till that also should be taken away; which not being done, and
finding that the Parliament had made an Act for the Old Presbyterian Ministers,
who had been cast out, to return to their Charges, they took out what remained
in the Minister's House, and committed it to the keeping of some of Mr. Boyd's
Friends, till he should send for it; and this, that they might repair their
House for their own Minister. All this is attested, May 12, 1690. by Francis
Park, James Parker, Archibald Park, John Smith, Matthew Park, William Baird.
Mr. Robert Bell, Minister at Kilmarnock, is the next Instance of the
Persecutions complained of; Whom they kept bare-headed four or five Hours in a
Frosty Day, caused his own Sexton tear his Gown in pieces from his Shoulders,
burnt the English Liturgy which they found in his Pocket, and that with much
Ceremony, at the Market-Cross. This same Story we have at great length in the
2d Book that I have to answer, called The Case of the present afflicted Clergy;
which I shall here consider to prevent Repetition. We are told of Abuses done
to Mr. Bell, by a Party of the Presbyterians, now in Arms in Scotland: How they
took him going to Riccartoun, made him put off his Hat, called him Rogue and
Rascal, said they did these things by the Rule and Law of the Solemn League and
Covenant; and other such Speeches they used: That they carried him Prisoner to
Kilmarnock; that the Lord of Bridge-house, by the way, reproved them for their
illegal Acting, willed them to leave these Men to the Parliament, now to be
assembled by the Prince of Orange. That they answered, they would not adhere to
the Prince of Orange, nor the Law of the Kingdom, farther than the Solemn
League and Covenant was fullfilled and prosecuted by both. That when they came
near the Town, they made the Minister pluck off his Hat, threatened to throw him
into the Rivir: That they met the Body of their Party, who at the Market-Cross
had discharged the Minister to preach any more: That they reproached the Church
of England carried him to his House, where they got from him a
Common Prayer Book; then carried him to the Marketplace, where, after some
opprobcious Speeches against him, and the Churches of England and Scotland,
they burnt the Book, holding it upon the point of a Pike while it was burning:
They asked if he were an Episcopal Prelate's Man, and of the Communion of the
Church of England and Scotland; which he owned: Then they tore his Gown,
required him not to preach any more; which he would not promise. This is all
that is material in that long Narration, and his signed at Glasgow, January 8.
1689. Robert Bell. In Answer to all this, I shall give the Reader a Breviate,
which is attested by many Persons in that Parish, of Worth and Credit, whose
Names shall be subjoyned. They observe his flattering Insinuations on the
Church of England, and his most dis-ingenious Imputations, as if these things
had been done by the Presbyterians; whereas his own Conscience has extorted
from him, in private Discourse, a Clearing of that Party from such Principles
or Practices. They take notice of his small Proficiancy at the College of
Glasgow, witnessed by his Master, and several Students: That being some time at
Oxford, at his Return he was suspected at London, and elsewhere, by all good
Protestants, who shunned his Converse: Yet, by the means of the Archbishop of
Glasgow, he was planted at Kilwining, where he preached but one Lord's Day;
then got into Kilmarnock by Si^^^iacal Dealings with the Patron, his Father
giving a Bond for Two Thousand Marks, and he making Exchange of the Glebe:
During his being Minister there he preached seldom, residing mostly at Glasgow,
sixteen Miles distant, spending his Time in Whistling, Singing, Carding,
Drinking, and the like. About this time, a Liberty being granted to
Presbyterians, the Parish had recalled their old Minister, Mr. James Rowat, and
called to his Assistance Mr. James Osburn, and built a Meeting House, where the
whole Parish frequented: So that never above Twelve of that Parish (consisting
of Two Thousand Five Hundred Persons, of Age to be Catechized) did hear Mr.
Bell. They show farther, that among that whole Party who so treated Mr. Bell,
there was not one Person that belonged to the Parish of Kilmarnock, save one
poor young Man; but that some of the Parish, who never owned Mr. Bell as their
Minister, yet did deal earnestly with the Party that molested him, to desist
from their Course; but they were in no Case to hinder them by force, both
because they were surprised by this Tumult, and because they had been
frequently disarmed through the Jealousies of the former Government, and the
Party consisted of Two Hundred well armed and resolute Men. They affirm
farther, that the armed Party were as much Enemies to the Presbyterian
Ministers in the Meeting Houses, as to the Episcopalians; calling them
Apostates, and Preachers of the Duke of York's Gospel; with many other
unsavory Expressions: And that they had diverse Consultations about the doing
the same Indignities to them, that they did to the Episcopal Clergy; and that
particularly they did threaten Mr. Osburn, if he did not depart thence. At the
same time they fixed a Paper on the Meeting House at Irwin, threatening to burn
it. Farther: Though they cannot evince the Falshhood of all that is here
alleged, yet they can prove some things (where they were Ear and
Eyewitnesses) that they are false; from which, the Credibility of what they
saw not, nor heard, may be guessed at. As that the Service Book was lifted up
on the end of a Pike; there was not a Pike among all that Rabble: That it was
done with Shouts and Acclamations, is also false: As also, it is false that any
such Words were spoken as Down with the Idolatry of the Church of England and
Scotland. And that he was questioned about the Church Government, is false;
nothing was asked, but if he owned Prelacy? To which he faintly replied, Yes.
What is said of the Lord of Bridgehouse is incredible, for he never has
showed such Respect to the Prince of Orange, nor to our Sovereign King William;
but often drinks King James's Health, and has often Caballed with Mr. Bell,
especially when his Cousin Mr. John Bell, and his Brothers Colin Bell and
Patrick Bell, were preparing for their Dublin Voyage; in which they were taken
going with Supplies for the Irish Rebels there. These things are Attested by
the Subscriptions of John Crawford of Crawfordland, Hugh Hunter, Robert Wright,
John Paterson, John Boyd, Alexander Muir, John Adam, Joseph Waugh, Robert
Bankhead, John Miller, James Campbel, Andrew Tailor, John Tunahill, Matthew
Duncan, John Tunahill, John Armor, William, Robert Paterson. I leave the
Reader to make his own Judgment on these Stories, the one avouched by the
Person concerned, the other by so many unconcerned Persons, and of known
Integrity. And to consider whether from this Tale such Barbarity as is
alleged, be imputable to the Presbyterians.

. 9. I now return to the first Book: The Authors next instance is, Mr. Simpson
Minister at Galston, whom they caused to go bareheaded to the publickest place
of the Village, and caused him put on his Morning Gown, (the Canonical Gown not
being found) which they tore off him, and caused him wade through a River at
one of the deepest places, and commanded him not to return. The truth of the
matter, is, Mr. Robert Simpson had violently Persecuted several of the Parish;
particularly he had caused George Lamb, a very old Man, Janet Lamb, the Wife
of James Mill, who was very Infirm, and brought forth a Child ten days after,
and James Lamb; to be carried on Carts (not being able to go) to Kilmarnock by
Lieutenant Colonel Buchan's Soldiers, and that for not coming to hear; some
of their Friends in Resentment of this, did in January, or February 1689. take
Mr. Sympson out of his House, and discoursed with him about an hour, he being
Uncovered, and put him through the Water of Irwin out of the Parish, but they
neither rent his Gown, nor did other Injury to him. These Persons were
strangers, except some few of the Parish. This is attested by Hugh Hutcheson
Notar, Thomas Morton, John Adam. Next comes on the stage Mr. Mill Minister at
Caudor: he being absent they rent his Gown, Harangued and Prayed before, and
concluded with a Volly of Shot. Concerning this I have received no Information,
but from what is said, have cause to dis-believe it: Next we have Mr. White
Minister of Ballingtrea, whom a Peddler beat on the Face with a Musket, for
speaking to him with his hat on his head; thrust at him with a Sword to the
piercing of his Clothes and Skin, but it went no deeper, a throng being in the
Room, and the Actor of it at a distance. To this is answered, that the Parish
had no hand in this, though he had beat some of them of good note, and had been
injurious to severals of them in his Dealings. This is attested by Henry
Mackbreath, James Mowat, Hugh Kennedy, Gilbert Maciltire, John Macqualter: all
who have their Testimony from their Minister, that they are credible and famous
Witnesses. This is witnessed by the same Persons; that whereas he accused the
Presbyterians for beating his Wife, that they never knew any to beat his Wife,
except himself, which they have often heard and seen. Our next instance is Mr.
Brown Minister at Kells in Galloway residing at Newtoun, whom in a Storm of
Frost and Snow, they carried to the Marketplace about four a Clock in the
Morning, tied him to a Cart, set his face to the Weather, where he had died, if
a poor Woman had not cast Clothes about him. The Truth of this Story is, that
Mr. Brown being beastly Drunk at night, after a little sleep, went to his House
at a distance from that Town, and returning in the Morning betimes, was by the
Guard taken for a Spy, who were informed that six or seven Men had a little
before gone through the River, supposed to be the Earl of Melford; and that
they had inquired, if my Lord was at home: And were said to come by Mr. Brown's
House: On these grounds, the Prison not being firm, they bound him: This is
Attested by Gilbert Gordon, and Lieutenant Kennedy. It is hard to justify this
usage of any Man: But it is yet harder to impute this indiscretion of Soldiers
to the Presbyterians. Next we have Mr. Ross at Renfrew, whose Wife with her
Infant they threw out the third day after she was brought to Bed. Ans. This
Narration is so false, that neither Mr. Ross nor his Wife will own it: Mrs.
Ross was brought to bed 17 days before these Men came to the House; they caused
the Goods to be removed without any damage to them: And at the entreaty of some
of the Town, suffered the Goods to be put into the House again, and Mr. Ross's
Family lived peaceably in that House 16 Months after that time. But which is
mainly to our purpose, the Presbyterian Minister at Renfrew, hearing of such
Disorders elsewhere, had warned his Hearers against them; So that none of them
had a hand in this Fact: But they who did it were Strangers, and such as joined
with no Presbyterian Meeting. All this is Attested by William Scot Bailly,
William Scot Elder, William Armor Elder, John Reidman, Patrick Scot, John
Jackson.

. 10. Next he brings on the Stage Mr. Gutherie, Minister at Kier, whose
Family, in a rainy day, they turned out, though three of his Children were sick;
one of a Fever, and two of the Smallpox, and two of them died upon that
Treatment. To this the Persons after mentioned do Answer two things. 1. That he
did extremely disoblige and provoke the Parish, not only by his Intrusion
against the Will, both of the Gentry and the rest of the Parish; but also by
informing against the People: Who by his means were severely fined: He had a
hand in sending out Dragoons who killed four Men, and hanged them on a Tree for
18 days, at the Church of Iron gray: He beat Bessie Smith (he being on horse
back, and she on foot) to the great effusion of Blood, and till she fell dead;
and after returned to her and beat her, saying, it would heal her. 2. The
People being so exasperate, threatened to cast him out of his House, he often
promised to remove, but did it not: At last they cast out his Family, without
doing hurt to any Person, his Wife through peevishness would not go into
another House, though earnestly invited by several Persons, particularly the
Mistress of Waterside, John Osburn's Wife, and John Hudstons Wife; there was
but one of her Children sick at that time, who is still alive. The other two
did not fall sick for eight Weeks after that time. This is Attested by Charles
Maxwell, John Hudleston, Thomas Hudleston, William Hastings, William Halliday,
John Maxwel, John Osburn, John Waugh, John Hudleston, Thomas Mitchelson, John
Pagan, John Grant, John Smith, William Waouh, W. D. James M'gie. His last
instance is of Mr. Skinner at Daly, They frighted his Daughter, aged about 20,
into a Fever, returning after 5 or 6 days, they turned her out of her Bed,
pretending to search for Arms, so that she died raving. This is most false;
there came indeed, some Persons to Mr. Skinner's house, knocked at the door,
which was opened to them by those within, Mr. Skinner asked them, what they
were come for? Was it to fright him and his Family? They answered, they came
only to search for Arms; and that they would do no harm to him, nor to his
Family: He told them, he had no Arms, and he commanded his Daughter, Katherine
Skinner, to set Meat before them: After they had eaten, they went away without
doing prejudice to any in the Family: After five or six days, they returned,
and forbade Mr. Skinner to Preach any more at the Church of Daly: Mr. Skinner's
Daughter, Katherine, was them sick: One of them looked into the Bed where she
lay, and said, who lies here: A Woman who attended the sick Person, answered,
it is Mr. Skinner's Daughter, who is sick; upon which they all removed, without
saying or doing any more. All this is Attested upon Oath, before the Baron
Court of Kilbochen, held at Halhil, June 30 1690. The Witnesses were Janet
Dalrymple, the Wife of James Mackneben, Anna Abercrombey, the Wife of Andrew
Neilson, Gilbert Mackennie Servant to Mr. Skinner.

. 11. The Author, as lifted up in his own conceit, with such full proof of his
point, (as he fancieth) by these Stories that he has told (though most
disingenuously and falsely,) does now page 18. Harangue upon the Disorders, That
they contrived and raised at Glasgow, and at Edinburgh; Citations in Name of
the Rabble, to remove from Churches and Manses; and thinks it enough to his
purpose, to tell the Person that he writes to, that these were their common
Methods, and that by such means in a short time, more then 200 were thrust from
their Churches and Dwellings, and all this can be Attested with the greatest
Evidence. It is not easy to Answer such loose Declamations; it is often
observed, that some Men's confident Expressions run highest, when Truth and
Reason is with them at the lowest: Yet some Observations I shall make on this
Passage, which may make him ashamed of his Confidence. 1. That they raised, and
much more that they contrived Tumults, is an Impudent Calumny; for the Tumult
at Glasgow, it was raised by his own Party, who were the Aggressors; and the
Presbyterians did nothing but in their own Defense. But of it I shall here add
no more, but refer the consideration of it till we come to Answer, The Case of
the Afflicted Clergy, etc. Where our Author does more particularly give Account
of it. 2. For the Tumults at Edinburgh, we know of none, but what was made by
the Students at the College there, in burning the Pope in Effigy, and
defacing the Popish Chapel at the Abbey of Holyroodhouse: Few of these Actors
were Presbyterians, though they were all Protestants; most of them were
Episcopally inclined, and bred under Masters who were of that Profession^ and
that any Presbyterians who then, or since, had Authority in the State, or
Church, did assist in contrivance or management of this matter, we do sitterly
deny. 3. If their were Citations in the name of the Rabble (which we know not
and wish he had attempted to prove it) It was done by the Rabble, whose Actions
we disclaim, and who were not of our Communion. 4. What he says, that these
were the Presbyterians common Methods, is as false as any thing he has yet
said; or as any thing that can be spoken; and if it be enough that he tells
his friend so, he has found an easy way of persuading to the belief of
whatever he pleases. How many were put out by the Rabble we know not, but this
we know, that most of them who went out, were put out by their own Consciences:
For they deserted their Charges without either Sentence, Threatening, or
Compulsion. 5. That all this can be attested, we deny; and bid him defiance, to
bring half the Evidence for it that he vainly talks of.

. 12. He does now, with all the little Rhetorical Artifices he is Master of,
labor to make these things credible to his Reader, by taking away what might
be any Ground of Doubt about them: Wherefore he undertaketh to show, That
Application was made to Magistrates, and no Redress: That they were not pure
Rabble who acted these things: That these Actors were easily controllable by
Authority: That Nobles, Gentry, Ministers had a hand in these things: That they
who suffered these things were Men that deserved better Treatment. Let us now
attend to his Proof of all these: He says, p. 19. That Applications were made
to Peers who were Privy Counselors, not gone to London; but he is not pleased
to tell us who they were, that the Truth might be enquired into; neither do we
know that any Peer, to whom they made Address, was furnished either with
Authority or Strength sufficient to repress such Disorders in that
Inter-regnum, and time of Confusion: Every Peer has not Authority over the
whole Nation. That these Peers were Privy Counselors is false, for there were
none such at that time in the Nation, the Council having dissolved themselves,
and another not as yet constituted. He next tells us of their sending private
Accounts to London, but without success, because their Enemies (the
Presbyterians) had many ways defamed them, and called all their Letters Lies
and Forg^ries. Here is Non causa pro causa: The true Reason why they then had
no Relief was, None at London had the power to do what they designed, more than
they had who were at home: That the Presbyterians did mis-represent them, is
false. Let us see what was charged on any of them, but what can be made appear.
And if our Party would have attempted such a thing, they had many of their own
Party who were ready to believe what they wrote, and to improve it to their own
Advantage. That any Matters of Fact (Rabbles or Tumults) that were acted then
in Scotland, were industriously concealed or denied at London by the
Presbyterians, he does affirm with as little Truth as Honesty: Fain would he
retort on us these lying Methods, that he and his Accomplices have followed; but
we are beyond such Reproaches in the Consciences of all that know us, and do
not hate us.

. 13. He begins, page 20. to give Account of the Prince of Orange' s
Declaration for keeping the Peace, and how it was mis-regarded by the
Presbyterians. And he tells us of Dr. Scot's Message and Instructions from
the Deputies of seven Presbyteries (where it is pleasant to see what pains he
is at to apologize to the Church of England for that odious Name) and how the
good Party (so he calls us Ironice) contradicted all the Accounts that they
gave of things. (If the Doctor's History of things was of the same strain with
what this Author gives us, I hope the Reader will not wonder that he met with
Contradiction.) On this Application the Prince's Declaration came out, though
not so full as the Doctor would have had it. That he procured the Declaration,
the Author dreameth: The necessity of the thing required it. That two
contending Parties should be restrained from mutual Injuries, in an
Inter-regnum, and time of Confusion, was very suitable to that great Prince's
Wisdom and Justice: As also that Dr. Scot and his Party got not all their Will,
was but Reason. The Presbyterians Disobedience to the Prince's Declaration, he
proves by three Instances: The first is, The Tumult at Glasgow; the true
Account of which I have already referred to another place. The Second is, Mr.
Little, of Trailslat, about to repossess his Pulpit, was assaulted by Women,
who tore his Coat and Shirt off him; and had done so with his Breeches, but
that he pleaded with them from their Modesty. I have often said, that we can no
ways be accountable for what was done by the Rabble; they were none of ours,
and little less unfriendly to us, than to his Party; which is particularly
attested concerning them who did so use Mr. Little, of Tinal, or Trailslat. His
Third Instance: He quoteth some Men and Women, calling the Prince's Declaration
a Sham, and that they knew His Highness's Resolutions. If he had pleased to
tell us who said so, we could have enquired into the Truth of what he
alleges, and have judged by the Quality of the Persons, what weight is to be
laid on their Words: If we should be at the pains to print all that the Scum of
his Party says, we might write Volumes of Matter that would make them black
enough; but withal, it might make us ridiculous to the World. But that this
Author should lay such stress on the Talk of Women, whom no body knows who
they were, as thence to fancy that they now have a Discovery of the Intrigue of
Presbyterians, is no great Argument of his deep Judgment. He next tells of an
Intrigue in the Prince's Declaration (for even His Highness, nor now when he is
our Sovereign, cannot escape the Lash of these Men's Tongues and Pens) in
commanding all to lay down Arms, save the Garrisons, and the Town Company of
Edinburgh. It seems it grieves this Man that King James's Forces must be
disbanded; for I suppose he will not quarrel with disarming any of the
Presbyterians. But surely here was no Intrigue, but a plain Design that the two
striving Parties should not fall on each other in a War commenced by Authority:
But that which piqueth him is; that by this means the College of Justice were
forced to lay down their Arms, which he will have to be taken up by the
Authority of the Magistrates of Edinburgh, and in defense of the Ministers of
that City, on whom he alleges that the People resolved to fall. In answer to
all this, I shall not derogate from the praises of that Honorable Society of
Lawyers, and Men about the Law, which he is pleased to give them. But, 1. It
was not the College of Justice, but some of them, who took Arms, some of the
chief of them gave no countenance to that Action. 2. It is known that the
members of that Society as then constituted were greatly opposite to the
Revolution in the Civil state that then was in fieri, and therefore the
disbanding of them seemed to be necessary for the peaceable conclusion of that
matter. 3. Whether the Arming of the College of Justice was by Authority of
the Magistrates of 'Edinburgh, I shall not determine: But the Magistrates as
then Constituted were all opposite to the Prince of Orange; and therefore it
was no wonder that any Force raised by them should be by him disbanded. 4. That
there was a design to fall on the Ministers of Edinburgh, or that the College
of Justice armed in their defense, is affirmed on no ground, and without any
truth. It was rather on the same design on which the Viscount of Dundee had
gathered Forces into the Town (of which above) and it was for opposing of them,
and not assaulting the Ministers of Edinburgh, that the Western Rabble (as he
is pleased to call them) came to Edinburgh, viz. To defend the Convention of
Estates, against the Force that might have hindered their sitting and Acting.
That the College of Justice were quarrelled (though yet no punishment, nor other
effect followed on it) for their taking Arms without Law was no wonder: That
the Western Rabble (as he calls them) were not quarrelled, is as little
wonder: For the one was a party of men that should have known the Law better
than the other: the one did continue in Arms till they were forced to disband.
Which the other did not.

. 14. Our Authors next Essay, p. 23, is (according to his strain and temper) to
nullify the Convention of Estates, as being unduly constituted, and
consequentially that all that they did is of no force, Which is at one Blow to
dethrone Their present Majesty's, and to unsettle the present Establishment. To
what other purpose can his remarks tend, of the absence of so many of the
Nobility, the scruples of the best and most Judicious of the Gentry of the
Nation had about it, how thin the meetings of the smaller Burghs in many Shires
were at the Election; How Industrious the Presbyterians were to get all Elected
of their own gang, what methods were taken to impose on the simpler Members,
what partiality was used about controverted Elections. I have seen a time when
talking at this rate, and by so doing striking at the root of the Government,
would have cost one a more severe Reprimand, then is a Paper refutation; but we
have the advantage by this passage, that the Clamours against Presbyterians
have the same Authors, and Grounds, with these against the Government of the
State, which I hope will make them to be otherwise understood, then if they had
taken the Presbyterian Church alone for their Party. After some Historical
remarks on the Convention (which I insist not on) he says that the Rabble
which had thrust out the Ministers were thanked by the Convention, though not
under that reduplication. Though this is no effort of his spite against the
Church, but against the State, yet I cannot but observe his Malice in it, for
we deny that they were the Men that put out the Ministers: and the thanks they
had was for their zeal in defending the Convention from that opposite rabble, I
mean the 2000 men that the Viscount of Dundee, and others, had gathered
together at Edinburgh, to have surprised the Convention, as was above showed.
When the hazard was over, they were, with the thanks of three Estates,
dismissed to return to their several homes, and this was all the pay that they
got, or were willing to receive, for their service. But he tells us, that
this was done when the Bishops, many of the Nobility, and not a few of the
Barrons, had deserted the House. These big words have no more truth in them,
but that all the Bishops, and some others of the Convention, who were Enemies
to King William, went away, and would not assent to his being called to the
Throne: These were the Clergies Friends, being of the same Inclinations with
themselves.

. 15. He now, page 24. quarreleth with the Act of the Convention, April 13,
1689, In which all were required to pray for King William, and Queen Mary. And
to read that Proclamation in their Churches; and that the Refusers should be
deprived of their Churches and Benefices: And that they who obeyed should be
protected. From this he takes occasion to digress very extravagantly, by
recapitulating the proofs he had mentioned, that the Rabble were Acted by great
Men: Which I have answered: and by telling us some stories that he had heard
(may be from some of his twatling Gossips) what the Viscount of Stairs did, and
what the Earl of Crawford said, which he brings no shadow of Evidence for;
and therefore is to be slighted. For what he alleges of the Earl of
Crawford's writing Letters to the Rabble to go on, even after April 13. And of
the Duke of Hamilton's producing one of these Letters in Council. Answ. This is
a false Representation, and injurious to that Noble Earl, who did more for
Suppressing the Disorders of the Rabble than others did, or could do; and who
acted with Justice and Moderation toward the Party, whose ways he did not
approve. The Truth of this Story is, The Minister of Logie was put out of his
Church, he had made Complaint to the Council, who had his Case under
Consideration, in order to do him Justice; mean while, Lieutenant Colonel
Ramsay went from Stirling to Logie with a Party to Repossess the Minister by
force of Arms, and that without any Warrant from Authority. The Earl hearing of
this, and meeting occasionally with Lieutenant Colonel Buchan, told him how
Irregular it was for Ramsay to interpose in a matter that was depending before
the Council, and that nothing could excuse it, but that Ramsay was a Stranger,
and understood not our Law, which does not permit the Military Power to meddle
in matters of Controversy between Parties, except when they were employed by
Authority to assist in the Execution of the Law. This Buchan wrote to Ramsay;
and Buchan's Letter was produced before the Council, where the Earl defended
what he had said. That his Lord wrote to the Rabble, or to any person else, in
this matter, is false. The man had little to write when he blotteth Paper with
what he ascribed to Sir John Monro of Foulis, if all the Sarcasms thrown out
against either Party should be Printed, we would do little else but make such
Collections. It is one of this Authors doughty Arguments, to prove the
Sufferings of the Clergy: Such a Man Jeared an Episcopal Minister as he passed
by on the Street, Ergo, the Suffering of the Clergy from the Presbyterians, are
worse than the French Dragooning. He objecteth, that not one Presbyterian
Minister has been heard to condemn the Disorders of the Rabble from the
Pulpit. Answ. The Falsehood of this I can testify, ex certa scientia, Often we
have condemned Peoples going out of their Line, and Prosecuting good ends by
unwarrantable means, and commended Moderation, etc. And prevailed with them
that are our Hearers: Though they whom he mainly charge, will take little
notice of what we say. What he says, that the Rabbling has been approved in
the Pulpits of Edinburgh, is more then I know, or can believe, unless (if any
be which I know not) one or two imprudent Men, casually employed in these
Pulpits, has done so, as I know they have spoken sometimes to the Offense of
their Brethren. For what was spoken in the High Church of Edinburgh. Which he,
according to his wonted respect to the established Law says, Is De Jure, the
Bishops Cathedral, but De Facto, a Presbyterian Meeting House: That such
shakings were the shakings of God, and without them the Church used not to be
settll'd. I hope no intelligent Person will reckon these words an Approbation
of the Rabble: Nor will think that they import any more, than, that the Lord is
pleased often to bring lovely Order out of Confusion, which in it self is very
undesirable: as he sends Divisions, and makes a good use of them, so does he
with Rabbling. Next he complains, that no Proclamation has been issued out
against them; but because he cannot but know the contrary, therefore he
charge the State, that they have not put their Proclamation in the Form and
Words that pleas^ him. This I observe only to put a note on this Authors
seeking occasions of complaint, and his Sawsiness, if not satisfied. But he
tells us, on the contrary, of Two or Three Cameronian Regiments (whereas we
never heard of any such, save one, and of that the Officers and many of the
Soldiers were men of Sober and Sound Principles, but the Regiment had the fate
to be so called) who were Quartered in Perthshire, and in Angus, where should
they be quartered but in these Shires, where many of the Inhabitants were
Enemies to the State, and daily renewing to the Highland Army,) That they were
sent to persecute the Clergy, is most false: Or that they did molest them, more
then is ordinary for Soldiers to do to them who are not of their way. And but
very few instances, and in very few of these Soldiers, can be given. He
designeth to ridicule them (but exposes his own Folly, Malice, and ^lly
Credulity) by a story that he has heard of their refusing obedience to their
Officers in exercising, if they use often the the same Words, because they are
against set Forms. Such a silly Forgery I should not have Noted (it being known
no Regiment is better Disciplined, nor has done better Service) if it were not
to give the Reader occasion to observe the Spirit of our Adversaries, who lay
hold on every Tattle they hear, to Reproach us, when they can find no better
Arguments to disprove our way.

. 16. He further raileth at the Proclamation, April 13. saying, That by it all
the Deeds of the Rabble are justified, and permission, and encouragement given
to them to go on. One would think this needs clear proof, instead of which we
have a full Evidence to the contrary, in that very passage of the Proclamation
which he cites, which is, The Estates do prohibit and discharge any injury to
be offered, by any person whatsoever, to any Minister of the Gospel, either in
Church or Meeting House, who are presently in the Possession and Exercise of
their Ministry. Whereby, says he, all who were formerly thrust from their
Churches are entirely excluded from the Protection of the Government. Let any
unbyassed person judge whether what he affirms, or the contradictory of it,
be proved by this passage of the Declaration: It is evident that the very
Design and Strain of it, was to protect these in Churches (who were the
Episcopalians) from further progress of that disturbance from some hot and
irregular Persons, which some of their Brethren had met with: And it was but
reasonable that the Presbyterians (who then had the Meeting Houses) should
share in the same Favor. That they who were put out by the Rabble in the
Interregnum (which did now terminate) were not by this Proclamation restored,
can in no sense, be construed either to justify what was done, or encourage to
do the like: Other men have learned Logic that teaches them to infer the
contrary, viz. A tacit blaming of what was done, and express forbidding the
like in time to come. That the Presbyterians Preaching in Meetings, was
directly contrary to Law, is false: They had the Authority of King and Council:
And, while the Act of Supremacy was in force (as it then was) the Parliament
had given the King Power to do in the external Policy of the Kirk, what he
thought fit: And therefore he had Power by the Act of Parliament, to give
Liberty to Dissenters. And it is contrary to the avowed Principles of his
Party, who not only promoted this Act, that screwed up the Supremacy to the
height, but pleaded always, till it crossed their Interest, for the King's
absolute and dispensing Power. In confirmation of this, he cites another
Proclamation, August 6. 1689. Restoring such Conformists as had been thrust out
by violence, after April 13. Can any Man hence infer, that the former
Proclamation gave Liberty to put out Ministers by Violence: And not rather that
it condemns what had been done that way: And yet the man has the Brow to
value himself upon this as a full and concludent proof. Are ye satisfied now?
says he; No, Sir, and I think none else can be satisfied with this Inference,
whose Wit is not a Wool-gathering. But 'ex super abundante, we shall yet have
more proof; It is from a passage in an Address to the King, of the greatest
part of the Members of Parliament, complaining of the want of Ministers in the
West, where most had been put out by the Rabble. I shall not trouble the Reader
with observing the silly Quibbles that he strains at, upon some passages of
this Address: But to show how unconsequential this proof is. 1. This Address
was no deed of the Parliament, or of the Presbyterian Party, but of a few. 2.
There is nothing in that Address, that either approves of the disorderly way
of putting out of those men, or incourageth to go on in so doing: What he
cites is merely matter of Fact related, that the West was desolate, that is,
in great want of Ministers; can any rational man think that it thence
follows, that they who said so, do approve of the manner of putting them out,
what ever thoughts they may have of the inconvenience of restoring them; of
which in its due place. We must take farther notice of the Superfoetation of
this Authors invention, to prove his point: The Council on Christmas Eve, 1689.
(Our Author is a great Observer of days, which, it is like, the Council had no
respect to) discharged all Inferior Judicatories within the Kingdom to give
Decreets for the Stipend, 1689, to these Ministers who were out of Possession
on April 13. reserving the Determination of that Case to the Parliament. Who
but our Author, could thence infer, that they approved of the Summer way of
putting out those Ministers, nothing does thence follow, but that the
Parliament might judge of the convenience of reponing them. On this occasion he
dilateth on the Misery of those Suffering Ministers, and puts the question,
Can any History show a President for their Case? Was ever Christian Minister so
treated in a Christian Kingdom? To these his questions, I answer Affirmative,
viz. The Presbyterian Ministers, anno 1662, were worse treated, when upwards of
300 of them were put out, and no allowance given them at all. And yet worse,
when afterward it was enacted that none of them should live within six Miles of
his former Parish, not within six Miles of a Corporation: So that it was hard
for not a few of them to find a Habitation, where they Lawfully might be in the
Nation; But all of them were driven, with their poor Families, from their
Habitations, from among their Friends and Acquaintances, who might show them
Mercy in their Distress, to seek shelter among Strangers: And this was done in
the beginning of Winter, when it was hard to remove a Family. But comparing
their Sufferings, that they make such outcry about, with ours, which we bare
patiently; we may observe, that some are so tender of their Worldly
Accommodations, and ease: that they will complain more of the scratch of a Pin,
than others will do of a deep Wound by a Sword.

. 17. We have, page 30. An evidence how resolute this Gentleman is to be
unsatisfied with whatever is, or shall be done, either by the State, or by the
Church, as they are now established; For when the Act of the Estates
discharges any Injury to be offered to any Minister now in Possession of his
Church; he quarrelled at this Restriction, and puts a N. B. to it, They
behaving themselves as becomes, under the present Government. Did ever any
Government allow protection to any on other terms: Yea, it is not usual, under
any Government, to give a Pass to any to travel on the Road without Let, or
Molestation, without this express restriction. But what follows is one of the
highest efforts of Malice, blinding the mind, and depraving the apprehension of
things. Which is, that giving them protection on their good behavior, is to
enjoin the Rabble to fall on them if they should not read the Proclamation, and
pray for King William and Queen Mary. And the Man has the brow to say, That no
Man without doing Violence to his own Sense, could put a better Construction
upon it, but I persuade my self, that unbyassed Men will judge, that no Man
without doing Violence both to his Reason and Conscience, can put such a Sense
on it as our Author does. For the Council did what in them lay to hinder all
disorders of the Rabble. The State, more than the Church or Ministers, the
King, the Council, and Parliament, are still Adversaries that this Hero will
cope with. The Council required the Ministers of Edinburgh to read, and obey
the Proclamation on April. 14. Being the Lords day, after the forenoons Sermon:
Which required praying for King William and Queen Mary, by Name: And all the
Ministers besouth Tay to do the same on April 21. and these be North Tay to do
it on April 28. where as it was enacted on the 13 about twelve a Clock, and
came to the hands of the Ministers at Edinburgh late on Saturday, or on Sabbath
morning: Some (as he was told) and we know many things were told him which were
not true) not till they were in the Pulpit. This he thinks absurd, because,
the Bishops in England would not enjoin their Clergy to read Proclamations Fide
implicita, and because the Parliament of England gave the Clergy there sever'dl
Months to consider the like Case. He might know that though the English Bishops
be admired, for advantage, by him and his Party, yet their practice need not be
a Standard to the Scoth Council. And that the Parliament of England thought
they had reason for what they did: And the Council of Scotland thought the same
of what they did: The case, though of moment was plain enough, neither was it a
Surprise to any of those Men, for the thing was long in Deliberation, and known
to be so, before it was enacted: Few in the Nation, if any there were, who were
not then at a point, whether they would own King William, or adhere to King
James. Except such as were resolved to do either, as it might more serve their
Ends. What is said of the Peoples going out of the New Church when the Clerk
read the Proclamation after the Blessing; is not to be wondered at, for after
the Blessing People use not to stay. And it is like it was designed to be read
to the Walls, by uttering the Blessing before reading of it. The Ministers
example in not reading it himself, it is like, did influence such as used to
hear Men of his stamp. And of such was that Congregation then made up.

. 18. We now enter upon the Execution that was done by this Proclamation, which
this Epistle does lay heavy load on the Council for. Far less reproaching of
the Justice of the Nation would have cost a Man his Neck in the former Reign.
The first instance he brings is of Doctor Strachan, late Professor of
Divinity in the College of Edinburgh, who when accused for not Reading and
Praying as enjoined, pleaded, that in the Claim of Right it was found, that
none can be King, or Queen, of Scotland, till they take the Coronation Oath:
And that K. James had forfeited his right to the Crown by Acting as King
without it. That the State had only named William, and Mary, but neither the
Crown was yet offered to them, nor they accepted it, nor had they taken ehe
Coronation Oath, and he wish others were deprived, who used the same defense,
and added that they were willing to pray for King William and Queen Mary, as
soon as they had accepted, and had taken the Oath. An answer to this might more
be expected from some Statesman, who knows the reason that the Council were
determined by in this matter. It is known that the exercise of the Government
had been long before tendered to the Prince, and that his Highness had accepted
and exercised it. That the Estates sat by his Authority, that the Nations
Representative had then owned him as their King, and therefore it was a
contempt of the Authority of the Nation for any Man to refuse to own him, when
called to do so. Further, it is a material mistake of the words of the Claim of
Right: Which does not say, None can be King or Queen, but that none can
Exercise the Legal Power, till they have taken the Coronation Oath. It is
certain, that on the Death of a King, his Rightful Successor is King; and may
be Prayed for as such; and such Praying may be enjoined, even before taking of
the Oath: The same may be said of One chosen, and proclaimed by the Supreme
Authority of the Nation: which is the Case now in hand. That these Men promised
to Pray for K. William afterward, is false, and the Committee deprived none who
were willing so to engage. The petulant liberty that he takes to disparage the
Council that was nominated by the King after he had accepted of the Government,
I remark, but insist not on. He now, in the end of page, 32 Returns to the
Rabble, his misrepresentation of things in General I stay not on, he is secure
he cannot be refuted but by denying the truth of them: But his particular
accounts of these things, I shall examine. The first Instance that he gives
is, of Mr. Mc Math Minister of Leswade: On whom one night as he was going from
Edinburgh to his own House, 4 Fellows fell: Pierced him with Bodkins and Auls,
so that he had ten or twelve Wounds in his Belly; filled his Mouth, till they
had almost Choked, him with Horse-Dung; and left him in that sad condition. If
one should consider the Ineredibility of this Story it might save the labor of
a Refutation, or evincing the falsehood of it. He has not told us who these
four Fellows were, nor whisher they were Presbyterians, or not; must all the
Robberies and Assassinations that are committed on the high way, by unknown
Persons, be charged on the Presbyterians: Such Insinuations will better evince
the Spiteful humor of our Adversaries, then the disorderliness of Men of our
way. Next, is it probable, that a Man should have 10 or 12 wounds in the Belly
with Auls or Bodkins, and none of them Pierce the Peritoneum, which would
readily prove mortal? And yet Mr. Mc Math neither was sick, nor died, nor was
any Indisposition visible on him next day, but what was the effect of his being
Drunk overnight, which all that knew him do Affirm was very Customary to him. I
wish our Author had told us who ever saw these Wounds, or the Scars of them. It
is attested by his Neighbors as follows: We under subscribers, declare, that
we came of purpose to see Mr. Mc Math's pretended Wounds: The Gate being shut,
we went to the House of Mr. Robert Trotter, his Precentor, who going to him,
returned with this answer, that, he freed the whole Parish, and knew not who
they were that injured him. At Lasweed December 6. 1690. James Currie, Adam
Alexander, Gawin Hunter, James Simson. I declare that I saw Mr. John Mc Math,
betwixt six and seven a Clock in the Morning, following that Night wherein he
pretends that injury was done to him, at his own Gate, as he used to be,
witness my Subscription at Lasweed, December, 6. 1690. Andrew Finlawson. For
this Andrew Finlawson, was challenged by Mr. Mc Math: Which he also testifyeth
under his hand. Also James Simson declares under his hand, that he saw Mr. Mc
Math on the Street, 2 or 3 Days after he was said to be Wounded: And that
People going on the Road from Edinburgh told him that they saw Mr. Mc Math
Drunk that Night, as he came from Edinburgh, Likewise we have it under the Hand
of John Young Merchand in Fisherraw, that at the time when it was said that Mr.
Mc Math was Wounded, he went to see him (being his Cousin) and saw no
appearance of Sickness or Wounds, and that when he went out of Mr. Mc Maths
House, Mr. Richard Hyslop, showed him the place where Mr. Mc Math fell, and got
his Face dawbed with Dirt: And that when Mr. Young said, That he had heard that
Mr. Mc Math had this done to him by some Persons, Mr. Hyslop (his Neighbor and
Friend) said, there was no such thing. It is also to be observed that not a few
Persons who came to see him in his Wounds, were not admitted. Besides all this,
we have Proofs well attested, to evince the horrid immoralities of Mr. Mc Math,
such as Lascivious carriage toward several Women, Drunkenness, Imbezelling the
Collections for the Poor, taking another Man-Horse and Saddle from his Servant,
by the way, and giving out afterward that he found the Horse, which he
restored, but kept the Saddle 40 days, denying it, till it was like to come to
a public hearing, and then restored it. I hope the Reader by this time, can
see what weight is to be laid on the Histories brought by this Author; and what
sort of Men they are whose quarrel he espouseth: Though we are far from
approving Irregularities and Injuries, whether done against good or bad Men.

. 19. Some other he names, who were Rabbled, but gives no particular account
of what was done to them; such as Mr. Burgess at Temple, Mr. Mackenzie at
Kirklistoun, Mr. Hamiltoun at Kirknewtoun, Mr. Nimmo at Collingtoun, Mr.
Donaldson at Dumbarton, (some of whom we shall afterward meet with,) etc. And a
whole Presbytery in Galloway. I hope a particular answer is not expected to
these. And for the General Assertion, the Reader must be strangely biased, if
before he have thus far proceeded, he does not understand this Authors Dialect;
that is, if he has not learned to disbelieve every thing that he affirms,
unless it be sufficiently vouched: That is the least punishment due to one, who
has so often, and so soully, prevaricated in his Assertions; wherefore we may
justly reject all these as Forgeries; as two of them I can sufficiently
disprove. Mr. Mackenzie was never Rabbled, only at the time he was at
Kirkliston very few of the People heard him: And for Mr. Hamiltoun he never was
Minister at Kirknowtoun: If the People have at any time refused to hear him,
when he was to Preach transiently there, this is no Rabbling: He is a Man for
whom we have due respect, and he is now received into Ministerial Communion by
the Presbyterians. The rest I know nothing of, but three Instances he gives us
more distinctly, which obliges us to a more distinct and particular Answer.
The 1 st. is, Mr. Macgil of Kilsyth, though he had obeyed the Proclamation, The
Rabble hindered him to enter the Church; my Lord Kilsyth's Factor raised a
Force to defend him: in the strife, one of the Rabble was killed: The Factor
went to Edinburgh, and told the Com^^rce of Estates what had happened: The Lord
Rosse being Preses of the Committee, thinking the Person Killed to be one of
the other side; said, it would be hard to get that Murder punished: But at
last, understanding that it was one of the Rabble, changed his Note, and
aggravated the Business. The next day the Rabble fell upon Mr. Macgil' s House,
destroyed his Furniture, Books, and Papers, plunged his Hat and Peruke in the
Churn, among Milk, emptied out his Meal, and a Chamber Box among it. So that he
suffered loss to the value of 150 pound Sterling, and to this day has got meet
her Reparation nor Protection. The truth of this story is, some Soldiers had
hindered Mr. Macgil to Preach, they being gone, he on the Lords day, intended
to reassume his Pulpit: some of the inferior People gathered together, and
refused to let him enter; but used no other Violence: My Lord Kilsyth's Factor
caused beat of Drum, and gathered a great many Men in Arms, and assaulted the
People that were in and about the Church door, and killed one of them: This
matter was tried before the Lords of the Justiciary, who found both Parties
guilty of a Riot, but the Factor to be more guilty, as having with Arms fallen
upon them who had no Arms, and killed one of them: He was fined, and declared
incapable of any public Employment. For the Stories about my Lord Ross, and
the Peoples so abusing Mr. Macgil's House and Goods, we must receive them on
the Credit of this Author, ( id est) Look on them as his own Invention, or that
some Body had told him: For I can find no ground to believe one word of what,
in these, he affirms. His other two Tales, of Mr. Craig, and Mr. Buchannan, I
find no ground to believe. But on the contrary that they (at least Mr. Craig)
were put from their charges by a Sentence of the Presbytery, and that for gross
Scandals, and obstinate refusing to submit to the Discipline of the Church; as
can be made appear by their Processes yet on Record. The account that he gives
of those two Ministers (being also Heretors, who have Vote in Election of
Members of Parliament) their appearing for King William; by Voting for such as
Voted him into the Throne: This, I say, is a foul Misrepresentation; for these
two Ministers (especially Mr. Craig) entered a Protestation, at the Meeting for
Election, that whoever should be chosen, should fall from their Commission, if
they transgressed the limits set to them by the Electors: And that they should
do nothing in prejudice of King James, nor Prelacy, nor the Test. It is true
they Voted for the Lord of Houston, who in the Convention, Voted for King
William, and for Presbytery: But it is known, that these two persons have often
said, that the Lord of Houston is a perjured person, for they had his
Engagement to Vote for Episcopacy. And when there was a vacancy by the death of
one of their Commissioners, at a second Election, these two Gentlemen Voted for
a known Jacobite, who had a little before, been actually in Arms against King
William, but now was freed by the Indemnity. It is also known, that since it
was Enacted, that the Oath of Allegiance to the present King and Queen, should
be imposed on all Electors, neither of these two Ministers have appeared.

. 20. Our Author catches hold on all the occasions he can find (whether
offered, or not) to reproach us: Wherefore he taxes our Address to the
Parliament, given in, in July 1690, which he takes to have had its rise from
the Councils delay to deprive non complying Ministers, being very unpleasant to
Presbyterian Preachers: This is a strange mistake (to call it no worse) for in
that Address there is not one word of complaint of such delay: Nor of
Petitioning that the Council would deprive any of these Men. But on this
Address he gives us the best Specimen he can, of his Critical Skill; with what
Success let us consider. He passes the Preface of it with his mocking at our
owning the Prince of Orange for the Instrument of our great Deliverance, and as
our King: This we are not ashamed of: Let him and his Accomplices gnash their
Teeth at it. He says, We Miscall the Bishops, which is false: We gave them no
Names of Reproach, but relate the Hurt that they have done in this Church;
which we are able to make appear. The first thing that he reproves in the
Petitionary part of the Address is, Our desire that this poor Oppressed Church
may be freed from such Oppressors and Oppressions: And what harm is in this?
do not they complain of Oppression; which yet it may (and I hope shall) be made
appear, that their Sufferings were not once to be compared to ours. We press no
man's Consciences as they did, nor force them to compliance, by Prisons,
Finings, Banishment, and yet greater Severities. He next Narrateth our desire
of Settling the Church in the Hands of Presbyterians; his Note is, This is
nothing like Prelacy. Why does he wonder at that: Had it been a wise
observation, for showing the absurdity of their Attempts, for Settling Prelacy:
This is nothing like Presbytery. But yet a greater Absurdity he observes in
our Address, viz. That we Petition, That the Church established, may be allowed
to purge out insufficient, negligent, scandalous, and erroneous Ministers. His
strong Argument against this is in a Parenthesis: And what Apostle (says he)
if ye give them a Presbyterian Jury, shall not come within the compass of one
of these four. Such ignorant Malice is not to be answered, but despised. We
esteem all the Apostles (except his Predecessor Judas Iscariot) as much as he
or his party can do: And we know, that not only the Apostles, but some who have
complied with Episcopacy, may, and have escaped all these four, even by a
Presbyterian Judicature. But I am weary of such trisling. He afterward falls
more heavily on these four Qualifications of Ministers, in p. 44. where we
shall attend him, being obliged to follow this his interrupted Method.

. 21. He now, page 36. Re-entreth the Lists with the Council, as the great
Persecuters of the Clergy. He complains of the undue transmitting of the
Proclamations to the Ministers who were to give Obedience to it; alleging,
That there came but six Copies of it to Fife. His Voucher for this is, he is
credibly told it. But we have already found that he has been told a great many
Lies, and that credibly enough too, for a Man of his large Credulity; which is
as receptive, when ill is spoken of Presbyterians, as that of any Papists, with
respect to the Legends. If these Proclamations were not so dispersed as was
fit, it was not to be wondered at: For many of the Servants of the late
Government were still in place, with whom the Ministers concerned might have
correspondence: That they might not see such Papers in time. But this can best
be answered when we come to particulars. Then he narrates the Councils
proceeding in the Indictments, and Interrogatories, putting all in the most
odious and ridiculous dress that he can devise; which yet he can fix no blame
upon: Only his uncivil Reflection on the Earl of Crawford, is like the spirit
of this Author. That Noble Earl is Master of so much Sense and Reason, as that
he could not ask whether they mentioned in Prayer the Surname of the King and
Queen. Though I know such an Expression might have inadvertently dropped from a
person no ways contemptible, as that which is a word of course. That they were
Censured for neglecting thus to Pray; what wonder is it, seeing the Law
expressly required it. And is it to be thought strange, that the Law should
require this, when it was notour how disaffected most of these Men were, and
how openly they owned King James's Interest? Was it ever heard of, that any
Government allowed Persons to hold Public Places, who would not own the
Government under which they lived? The former Government took the Lives of such
as showed the least scruple in this matter, so far was it from allowing public
Places, or Benefices to any such. Next he complains that they were put out
for not Reading and Praying as enjoined, If either the Proclamation was sent to
them, or it came to their Hand, or if they had knowledge of it: And here we
have an Instance of Mr. Guild, Minister at Northberwick, who had Prayed but not
Read; and he tells us of half a dozen more such Instances, but we must not
know them, lest we examine them. What to think of his hidden Instances, I know
not; but Mr. Guild was not deprived simply for not Reading at the time
appointed; but because he declared before the Council, that he was not free to
Read it afterward: This is Attested by the Records of the Council. He brings
Instances of them who had Read and Prayed, but not on the Precise day, who were
deprived. Mr. Hay, Minister at Kinneucher, (our Author or the Printer mistaketh
the Name of the place) Mr. Hunter at Sterling, Mr. Young at Monyvaird, Mr. Aird
at Torryburn. This is strange prevarication, Mr. Hay was deprived for not
Reading and Praying, and for Praying for the late King James, and for
Reflecting upon the Estates: witness the Records of Council; which say that all
this was fully proved: Mr. Young confessed before the Council, he did not Pray
in the Terms of the Proclamation, till the Sabbath after he was cited to appear
before the Council. Mr. Aird was deprived for Praying for King James as our
Natural Prince, and Praying that God would send back, with a Hook in his Jaws,
that Tyrant that had come to Invade these Lands; meaning King William; all this
proved, (and that of Mr. Young) and Recorded in the Books of Council. For Mr.
Hunter I find nothing of him in the Records, but the Reader will easily judge,
by what is already said, how far our Authors Assertion is to be believed in
such a matter. That it was not asked them whether they would obey for time to
come, is not strange: in Civil Courts amendment uses not to a^tone Crimes
committed. Therefore his story of the Magistrates of Perth desiring of my Lord
Crawford that their Minister might be reponed, is wholly Impertinent: Beside
the Authors most uncivil. Treatment of that Noble Earl, saying he turned
Hussie, which is far from both the Natural Temper, and Civil deportment toward
all, that his Lordship is Commended for, by all who know him, and do not hate
him; as this man seems to do, by taking all occasions (and seeking them) to
quarrel with his Lordships actings. What he after imputes to my Lord, that he
said to a Minister, it was enough to deprive him, that he Prayed not for the
King, as is directed, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Was no Derogation (if it was expressed as is
Alleged) from the Authority of that Scripture: for when the Apostle requires
us to Pray for Kings, and the Law requires us to Pray for this King, and not
for his Competitor: The one of these do not hinder the other, for Subordinata
non pugnant: nor does it derogate from the sufficiency of Scripture as our
Rule, to say, that some more may be required, in some exigents, to
particularize what the Scripture does in general hold forth. Even the zeal of
the Noble Lord that he is pleased to set as the Butt of his Malice, this Author
reproacheth; when it appears either for the service of his Prince, or for
purging the Church of such as were a reproach to her; while he does expose my
Lords care to get the Council to meet at its appointed times. But I give too
much to his impertinencies by thus notioing them.

. 22. He will now, page 38 Return to his thread (which he had broken off to
reach the Earl of Crawford) and he blames the Council for allowing the People
to Cite the Ministers who had not Read and Prayed, before the Council. What
harm was in this? May not any of the Kings Subjects make complaint of breaking
of his Law? This is not to be compared with what his Party did, when in Power,
who made Soldiers Judges and Executioners of some of the Laws against
Nonconformists: Yea, committed the power of Life and Death to many of them. He
tells, that immoralities were libelled, though the Council Judged nothing but
not reading and Praying, yet the Lybels were kept in retentis. Ans. The Council
Acted Rationally, and with Moderation in this. They could not reject Libels
which they had called for by their Proclamations; and if any thing was in them
that was not ejus fori, they passed that without Notice. Is it not ordinary to
all Courts to pass Sentence on one Substantial part of a Libel, sufficiently
proved, though other parts of it be neither relevant, nor proved. What he
surmiseth of Church Judicatories sustaining these Libels as sufficiently proved
already, is refuted by the Event; no such thing has been done. And it might
have been silenced by the known Principle and way of Presbyterians, who are
against such Illegal Actings: But we must be made black by his evil surmisings,
when he can find no other way to do it. Every thing Acted by the Government is
evil in this Gentleman's Eyes: Wherefore a third Proclamation falls under his
Lash, whereby Heretors in a Parish, (tho not living in it,) Sheriffs, and their
Deputies, Magistrates of Burghs, Members of Parliament, in their respective
Bounds, might Cite Ministers who had not Read and Prayed. What harm in all
this? May not such call for Justice against Offenders? The Council were still
Judges whether any offense were committed or not. But now that he is in a
quarrelling strain, even the Nations humbling themselves before God for Sin,
and Fasting and Praying to implore his Mercy, stirs the Choler of this
Momus. His 1. Imputation to it is, It was designed for a Choking Morsel. Who
made him the Judge of Hearts and Designs? It was designed for humbling the
Nation, and Imploring Mercies from the God of Heaven: And that it was not
designed as a Trial of Men's Compliance, is evident from this: That he cannot
Instance in any Person that ever suffered for not Observing it. But our being
thus reproached, is but what better then we have before met with from such as
he is, Psalm. 69.10. When I wept and Chastened my Soul with Fasting, this was to
my reproach. Next he blames this Fast, That it was on the Sabbath Day: We deny
not but that another day of the Week is better for Fasting: But we know no Law
of God that is broken by Fasting that Day; whatever he, or any other think in
the contrary. When he shall please to bring his strong Reasons for his Opinion,
they shall, I hope, be considered. The Reason why that Day was pitched upon
was, it was Harvest, and a very bad and dangerous Season, and it was not fit to
take People off their Work on a Week day, when the loss of a day might have
hazarded their Corn: And People would have been under Temptation to neglect the
Solemn Duties of the day. Further, he charge the Proclamation for the Fast,
with bad Grammar, and a good stock of Nonsense, and for Unministring and
Unchristning the whole Regular Clergy. This is the Title that the Episcopal
Ministers use to Dignify themselves with, (though now they walk not by the Rule
of the Law, as formerly they did deviate from that of the Scripture) and them
who owned them. If he had pleased to tell us what Words or Expressions, in the
Proclamation, are thus faulty, we should have treated him as a Disputant, but
seeing he thought not that fit, we must entertain his Discourse, as Hezekiah
commanded the Jews to do, by that of his Patron Rabshakeh, such Language is not
to be answered. We find nothing in that Paper but what is good Grammar, and
good Sense. It may be some parts of it contain such Spiritual matter, and in
which the inward Exercises of the Soul is so concerned, as a Man who is alien
from the Life of God, does not understand, and therefore may count it
Nonsense. I suppose he will reckon this to be cant: But it is not mine, but
the Apostles, Ephesians. 4.18. That it complains of the withholding of the Spirit
in the work of Conversion, is not meant of Episcopal times only, though then it
was observable: But he, and Men of his Temper, use not to trouble themselves
with such thoughts, and therefore they think strange that others do. That two
Ministers of Edinburgh were deprived for it, that is only for not keeping the
Fast, is absolutely false. The story of the Lord of Brodie, acting as Accuser
and also as Judge, is like the rest of his Forgeries, or Hear-sayes.

. 23. This Epistler now tells us, page 41. That he has done with his
History, what he next falls upon is a Recapitulation of what he had said, and
determining what shall be for the future, viz. That none of the Episcopal
Clergy shall be spared, but all who entered by Presentation from a Patron or a
Collation from a Bishop must be turned out. This his Prediction he Establishes
on several Grounds, such as they are: One is, a nameless Counselor said to his
Cusing a Minister, (who also must not be named) that he was glad that their
Minister had not complied, for the Resolution was that none of the Episcopal
Clergy should be spared. The strength of this Argument lies on this, that none
can find out the truth or falsehood of the Anticedent, viz. Whether such a thing
was said or not; Yet I am sure it is easy to deny the consequence: for all
Counselors are not Infallible, nor know the mind of all the rest, where never
any conclusion about the matter was made at the Board, as in this case is
certain. His other Argument is, some Argyle Ministers were put out for not
Reading and Praying, and on after-complyance, they have the offer of other
Churches, but must not Re-enter to their former charge. Ans. There was reason
enough for this, from the Credit of the Councils Authority; which should have
been Baffled by putting those Men into the same Charges; the sentence being
that they should Preach no more in these places; which was shunned by admitting
them to other places; especially considering that it was not the Council, but
the Church that was to admit them. A 3 d. ground is, He is told the Statesmen
are clear for this Resolution: An usual Argument with this Learned Author, on
which he uses to build very weighty conclusions: But other wise Men think it
fitter for Fools and Children. He has yet a 4 th Ground. Dr. Robertson, and
Mr. Malcom, Ministers of Edinburgh, have made great complyances, and sent to
the Presbyterian Clubs, that they might be admitted to sit in their
Presbyteries; and yet this could not be granted. Ans. 1. It is an impudent
falsehood to affirm that either of these two Ministers sent such a Message, or
made application to any Presbyterian Judicatory: For their Clubs we have none
for Drinking; and any who casually meet for conference, have no Power to
receive, or answer, such addresses: Neither was it ever heard among us, that
either of them spoke, or sent, about that matter, either to any one Minister,
or to more than one met together. 2. Suppose that they or any other in their
circumstances, had made such complyances, and such application; we have
declared that we will receive none to Rule the Church with us, but such as are
qualified for the Ministry, have been diligent in that work (if they have been
before employed in it) are free of Scandal and Error, and who will submit to,
concur with, and be faithful to the Presbyterian Church Government: Wherefore
he must not wonder if we reject some Complyers, for we know that the worst of
men are often readiest to comply with what they hate, and have violently
opposed. But for men so qualified, as is above expressed, who shall make
application to us, Our Assembly has declared that we will reject none of them.
And we have acted accordingly, in receiving most of such as have applied. For
the two Persons that he mentions, one of them is now removed by Death, and
was never molested by us: The other is deposed, for declining the Authority of
the Commission of the General Assembly, when he was cited to answer to what
Immoralities he was charged with.

. 24. His next undertaking is, to Vindicate the Scots Episcopal Clergy from the
account that has been given of their Lives and Abilities. Two Accusers of
these Brethren he takes to Task, p. 43. The Prince of Orange (he says) in his
Declaration declared them Generally Scandalous, and Ignorant. This is to belie
that Illustrious Prince, who is now our Gracious Sovereign: when he is thus
Treated, what may others expect? The demerite of which Crime I leave to the Law
to determine. That Declaration speaks of many, not of all, nor the
Generality. The other sort of Accusers he makes the good Party (it is his
Ironical, and Sarcastick Designation of the Presbyterians) If any of us have
Printed or Published false Stories of them ( Odd Stories, which he charge us
with, may be true Stories) let us know them, and the Author of them, and what
is asserted shall either be proved, or our fault in so saying acknowledged. We
never charged them all as such: we know there are Sober and Learned Men among
them. We know also that such general Assertions, and indefinite Accusations of
Men cannot be proved: And it is unfair dealing on all hands: Neither do we deny
that there may be found among us, some unconsiderate Persons, Men or Women, who
have been too General in their rash discourses to this purpose: but who can
answer for all that is said by every individual, with whom they live in
Communion: I am sure he, nor his Party, cannot: Nay, nor can they make good
what is commonly in Print, and by their Chief Men, usually charged upon us, as
if we were all Ignorant. Nor can this Author make good what we have met with,
and what he after says of us, neither can he prove the General, and indefinite
Assertions that he uses concerning the Learning and Piety of his Party. I am
unwilling to enter into such a debate, where so little can be proved, or
disproved: Though in matters of principle, the more General the conclusions be
they are the more Scientifick; yet it is quite contrary in matters of Fact,
such as this is. But we must follow as he leads. I shall observe some few
things in his Discourse in the Praise of his Party. He says, page 43. Since
the Reformation, the Church of Scotland was never generally so well provided
with Pastors, as at the beginning of the present Persecution. This he
confesses cannot be demonstrated; which is truer then most of what he writes
beside; but other Men will as confidently, and with more truth, Affirm, that
she was far better furnished at the beginning of another Persecution, viz.
1661, and 1662. Neither Assertion can be proved without going through all the
individuals, and considering, and making Faith concerning all their qualities,
which is a work not to be undertaken. Wherefore we must leave it to the
Sentence of him to whom both Parties must give an account, and to the
Sentiments of the World of unbyassed Persons, who have known this Nation, and
the Affairs of it. He will now vindicate his Clergy. 1. From Ignorance, and
that by the Trials they must go through before they be admitted to the
Ministry. Ans. Though we do not charge all of them with Ignorance, yet this
Argument cannot vindicate any one of them. For, 1. Ad hominem; That would prove
all the Presbyterians to be Learned, whom yet he reproacheth as Ignorant. For
they all pass through exactly the same steps of Trial. 2. Ad rem, it is not the
kind of Trial, or the multitude of the parts of it, which shows a man's
ability: But the Accuracy that is used in management of it; and the
Faithfulness of the Judges who must determine upon what is observed in the
Trial. This he has not asserted. And if he should, we have but his word for
it: Of the veracity of which this Book has given but small proof. Another
Argument for their Abilities, is their Education, which he far prefers to
that of the Presbyterians: They being consined to the Dutch Divinity, and
making the Common-place-Men the Standard. Whereas the Episcopal men, after the
way of England (If this Insinuation had been left out, it might have spoiled
much of the design of the Book, and lessened the Favor and Beneficence of our
great Patrons) take the Scriptures for their rule: and the Ancients, and right
Reason for guides, for finding the Genuine sense of that rule. Whereby they
come to have their thoughts better digested. Ans. I wish he had told us more
plainly what he means by the Dutch Divinity, for there is Divinity taught in
Holland, (I mean Arminianisme) which his Party do generally fall in with, and
ours as generally do dislike. But for the Divinity publicly Authorized and
Taught in Holland, and which was agreed to by the Synod of ^or^, where were
British Divines, and therefore might be called British Divinity: We own it as
Scripture Divinity, the Divinity of the Ancients, and the Divinity that right
Reason does Countenance, above any thing that is contrary to it. For the
Common-place-Men (whom he so despises) we value them as Men eminently Learned,
and have not yet seen the Works of any of his Party, wherein the Form of Sound
Words is more clearly and fully held forth, nor more Learnedly Defended against
the Assaults of all sorts of Adversaries. Yet we never made them our Standard,
nor did consine our Studies to them. Let us know what Books (that are of value)
they Read, which we neglect. What parts of Learning (that are truly such) they
can pretend to, which be not found among us. (the Reader I hope will not
misconstruct this confidence in boasting: It is from the same provocations and
necessity, that moved the Apostle in the like case: Neither do I speak thus of
my self, but of the many worthy Men who own the way that I profess) It is a
most injurious Insinuation, as if we did not also take Scripture for our Rule
(no men contend more for it then we do; and if his Party did so indeed, as they
pretend, and in all the Controversies of Divinity, as they do in some, we
should have fewer debates with them) and that we do not make use of right
reason, and of the Writings of the Ancients, as helps to understand the rule,
is false. We both profess and practice this: Though at the same time, we do not
pretend to make Reason the rule of judging of Truth, or of the sense of
Scripture, as some Socinianizing Divines among them do: Neither do we make the
Fathers the Rule of judging of truth, as many of them, with the Papists, do; we
study their Writings, and make use of them; and give all that Authority to them
that is due to humane works; yea, all that they require should be given them,
or that they gave to them who were their Fathers, and went before them: but we
reserve a Liberty of Dissent, when any thing occurreth in them which is
inconsistent with plain Scripture, found Reason, or the Analogy of Faith:
Considering, that the Fathers (particularly Augustine, that great Light of the
Latin Church) do often advise to receive their word no further than it is
consonant to Scripture, and do always call People to judge by the Scriptures
alone, and to refuse to be determined merely by the Authority of men, though
never so Learned or Holy. It were easy to multiply Citations to this purpose,
if it were not to digress. Aug. Ep. 19. Ad Hier. denies to be concluded by the
Authority brought by Jerome against him out of some Greek Fathers, and pleads
that Jerome was of the same mind. And Aug. lib. 11. Contra Faust. Quod genus
literarum non cum credendi necessitate, sed cum judicandi liberate legendum
est. We use them in our Studies, though we think it not fit to intersperse our
Sermons, so much as some others, with Greek and Latin Citations out of them:
We think Scripture Authority is most Convincing, and Affecting. He will now
prove the great abilities of Episcopal Men. Because of them who had been
Presbyterians, and conformed 1662. They were generally of Presbyterian
Education, and the ablest among them; and yet if they were examined with them
who after had Episcopal Education, he will lay an even Wager, yea three to one,
that Impartial Judges would determine in favor of the latter sort. Ans. 1.
Though I deny not that some of them who Conformed were of good Abilities: Yet
that either the best of them were beyond such as did not Conform, or that
generally there were such, is absolutely, and notoriously false. 2. That they
who arose after them, in the Episcopal Church, went beyond them, in Abilities,
whether ye compare the generality, or the best on both sides, is so false, that
no Man will affirm it, but he who can say what he will. And it is known that
they were generally the Men who got the chief places, both in the Church, and
Schools. I instance Mr. Sharp, Mr. Fairful, Mr. Scougal in the Church, Mr.
Cant, Mr. Charters in the Universities. 3. His Learned Argument, laying of
Wagers I will not meddle with, I leave it to Women and Children. His conclusion
from all this is, That the Episcopal Party understand the Christian Philosophy
better, and that Philosophy was never understood nor Preached better in
Scotland, then under Episcopacy. Ans. I thought the Commendation of a Minister
had been rather to understand Christian Divinity, then Christian Philosophy:
But we must not wonder that Men so strongly inclined to Socinianism, speak in
the Socinian Dialect, with whom Philosophy, That is, the Improvement of Reason,
overtopeth Divinity, that is Divine Revelation, for indeed that which goes for
Religion among some Men, is nothing but Platonic Philosophy, put into a
Christian Dress, by expressing it in words borrowed (some of them) from the
Bible: And the Preaching of some Men is such Morality as Seneca and other
Heathens taught, only Christianised with some words. I confess this Philosophy
was never much Preached by Presbyterians: Yea the Apostle disowneth it as not
his Work in Preaching. He (and we endeavor to imitate him) Preached Christ
Crucified, 1. Cor. 1.23. Not the Wisdom of this World, but the Wisdom of God in
a Mystery, which even the Princes of Philosophers (as Plato, Aristotle, etc.)
understood not. It is true we Preach Obedience to the Laws of Christ; That is,
Holiness in all manner of Conversation: But with that respect to the
Righteousness and Strength that we look for from the Lord Jesus, That makes it
another thing than the Philosophy that he ignorantly talks of. And if that
Preaching of Philosophy that he valueth himself, and his Party upon, be the
Excellency of a Minister, we are not Ambitious of the Victory in that point:
Though may be, we understand even that, as well as our Neighbors do.

. 25. He acknowledges page 46. the Immorality of the time of Episcopacy in
Scotland: But lays the blame of it upon the Presbyterians; but from so absurd
and Ridiculous Topics, that I am almost ashamed that they should have been
mentioned by a Man pretending to Learning. The 1 st. is, Presbyterians made
Rebellion and Presbytery Jure Divino, and baffled Peoples Credulity, and
hindered the Success of the Gospel. Ans. 1. Presbyterians always abhorred
Rebellion, so far were they from asserting a Divine Right of it. What Disorders
were in the Nation, that could be called Rebellion, was the Fruit of Episcopal
Fury, more than of Presbyterians Disloyalty. Some (whom Presbyterians pitied
for their Sufferings, but did not approve their Actings) made stirs because of
that Oppression from such as he is, which makes a Wise Man mad. The Jus
divinum of Presbytery we own: But understand not (till we be illuminated with
this Learned Authors singular Speculations) how this can baffle any Man's
Credulity, or be the cause of Profaneness. Neither can we easily guess what he
means by Baffling Peoples Credulity: Nor are we curious to enquire into the
abstruse Sense of the Phrase, if it have any Sense at all. 2. I hope the
Immorality was not among them who owned the Divine Right of Presbytery ^ If no
more Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing, etc. had been found among others then
among them, there had not been Ground for his Complaint, as indeed there was A
2 d. Proof he brings: The Schism made by Presbyterians caused Immoralities.
Ans. That Schisms cause Immoralities, and are a great let to the success of the
Gospel, I deny not? But the Schism that has been among us was made, and is
fomented, to this day, by his Party, not by us: We hold to the good way that
this Church was settled in; they treacherously set up (by the help of the Civil
Power) an opposite way: And not only so, but they imposed Compliance with it on
the highest Penalties, and with the out-most Severity: The Consciences of some
could not yield to this Barbarous Treatment; such therefore must be reckoned
Schismatics; with the same reason on which Papists impute Schism to
Protestants, who cleave to the Ancient Scripture Christianity, and cannot
receive their Additions to it, nor depravations of it. Hence that he cites out
of Irenaus, belongs to himself, not to us. But that he has the Brow to
ascribe the meek Calm Spirit of the Gospel, to his own Party, and the contrary
to ours, is beyond comprehension, to any who knows the Bloody Laws that the
Bishops assisted the making of, and the inferior Clergy assisted and
instigated the Execution of: Which all Scotland knows, and most of the Nation
cried shame upon. The contempt of the Ministry he imputes to pleading Gods
Authority to all their unaccountable Freaks: Whereas indeed it came from the
Atheism, and Debauches of the Clergy, that he his defending: If any entitled
bad ways to Divine Authority, it was not Ministers, but some weak Christians,
who had been horribly oppressed, and were driven beyond the Bounds of Reason
and Soberness by the usage that they met with. His last thing on this head is,
He challenges an equal number of Presbyterians and Episcopalians, to a
dispute, for Trial of their Learning: Which we shall not decline, if he will
find a way to make it practicable.

. 26. He will next ( page, 47) purge the Clergy from Immorality, and that 1 st.
By recrimination. There is one Man among us, Mr. Williamson who has played
Tricks beyond what can be showed in any Episcopal Man, and yet he is not
Challenged, but in esteem. Ans. Suppose this were true, The Faults of one does
not blacken a whole Party of Men, so much as those of Scores, or Hundreds,
which yet were born with under Episcopacy. 2. What these Tricks were, he does
not tell us, and therefore what he says, is to be looked on as Slander; Mr.
Williamson is deservedly esteemed among us, as a Man of a good Conversation,
and while it is so, we Love and Honor him; if he or any other can make what he
alleges to appear; he shall see Justice done. Another Topic is, An Edict is
served in the Congregation, inviting every one to object what they can with
Truth, against a Minister before he enter. Ans. This is not always done: The
Edict of Mr. Mackenzy who was placed at Kirkliston, was served, not there, but
at Sr. Andrews, 30 Miles distant: Nor were ever the People of Kirkliston put in
a Capacity to object. Again, we know many People will not object against a bad
Man; but Love such as will Patronize their wickedness. His third Topic is,
They are Deposed if a Crime be proved against them. Ans. I deny not, but this
has been sometimes done; but so rarely, as was next to nothing. All this then
is an Insufficient exculpation of his Clergy: Especially it is so notorious
that there are many gross Immoralities among them, that few of his own Party
can deny it. Another Topic is, The pains that was taken in the Diocese of
Glasgow, by Bishop Lighton and Doctor Burnet, and yet they could find none but
one to be Deposed, and that not without some Suspicion of Injustice. Ans. What
Truth is in what is here asserted, I know not: This Authors word goes not far
with them who have read his Book: Or how impartial the Judges, and others were
who had the Management of that Affair, we know not, but all who have lived in
that Country, even they who are no Presbyterians, do know, that much more
guiltiness was to be found. Negligence is the third thing that he undertaketh
to clear the Clergy from: Which he does by saying, There are no Pluralities,
nor Non-residencies in Scotland, and they generally Preach twice every
Lord's Day. Ans. May not a Minister be counted Negligent who does not visit
Families in the Parish, nor the Sick, or otherwise distressed; or who does not
Catechize the People? So we reckon in Scotland, whatever they do in England; to
satisfy whom alone this Book is Calculated. He is as slight in clearing the
Clergy from Error, viz. Because they could sign the 39 Articles of the Church
of England. So can many do who every day Preach against the Doctrine contained
in these Articles: We know that Socinians, Arminians, and some Papists sign,
and Swear, Assent and Consent, for a Livelihood, who yet are unsound in the
Faith. He confesses, There are many among them who are not inclined to be
every day talking to the People, of Gods Decrees, and absolute Reprobation, and
Justification by Faith alone, in the Presbyterian Sense, and think their
Hearers may be more edifyed by other Doctrines which he names. Ans. If he mean
no more then what he expresses, his Discourse is Impertinent, for who ever
blamed any as Erroneous because they insisted not always on such Subjects: We
do but rarely, yet sometimes, instruct the People, about the Decrees of
Election and Reprobation: Imitating the Apostle in both. But if he mean (as he
must if he speak to the purpose) that the absolute Decrees of Election and
Reprobation; both praeteritum, as an Act of Sovereignty, and Praedamnatum as an
Act of Justice, are not to be held forth, or taught to the People, we abhor
this as unsound Doctrine, and look on him as a pitiful Advocate for the
Orthodoxy of the Clergy: Yea he is unjust to them, for I know not a few of them
who served under Bishops in Scotland, are far from these Arminian Tenets, though
many of them incline that way. For Justification by Faith alone (what he
means by the Presbyterian Sense of it I know not) we hold nothing is our
Righteousness but the Satisfaction, and Merits of Christ, and that neither
Faith, nor Works can stand in that stead to us; and that his Righteousness is
made ours, not by Works, but by Faith: Though we say, that this Faith can never
be without the Works of Holiness. If he deny Justification by Faith alone in
this sense, we judge him erroneous, and as many of his Clergy likewise as are
of the same Sentiment: But I am far from thinking that all the Clergy are of
his Opinion in this.

. 27. His next flash is to free the Clergy from Persecution: Which he manageth
with a confidence, in asserting falsehoods, and denying known truths, beyond any
degree that any sort of Men (except Jesuits) have arrived at. He is bold to
affirm the Persecutions under Presbytery in former times, and now, to be
beyond what was under Episcopacie. Let him tell us who has been imprisoned,
fined, to the impoverishing of such as were Rich, banishing for not Preaching
against the light of their Consciences, or for hearing the Word Preached. Who
has been pistoled by the high way, and while about their Lawful employments,
for refusing to declare their Opinion in matters controverted; and yet this was
frequent under Episcopacy: And it was not for rising in Arms alone (though that
was from the force of necessity caused by Persecution) that men suffered: So
that it is the highest of affrontedness, to ask, dare any men say than
Presbyterians suffered any thing for Conscience sake these 27 Years? That the
Clergy did as little toward the Execution of these Laws as they could, and did
no more but inform what the Law obliged them too, is most false. The Bishops
concurred in making these persecuting Laws; And many (not all) of the Inferior
Clergy did officiously, and maliciously, instigate Magistrates, and Soldiers,
and did assist them in the Persecution. The instance of Sir John Riddle of
Riddel's carriage toward Mr. Chisholm, is false: Sir John neither said any
such thing to Mr. Chisholm, nor had ground to make such acknowledgement of
favor received from Mr. Chisholm: Which I have good ground to aver. page 50.
He makes a ridiculous Recapitulation of his former defenses for the Clergy,
and asks some impertinent Questions, which could be answered if they could be
understood, and page 51. He is at his predictions again. That the Church will
not be so well planted, nor the Gospel so well Preached: That the State shall
not be in peace, nor our King sit securley (which King he means, we are less
to guess) on His Throne, nor have his due; That the Church of England shall not
want a Thorn in her Side, that there shall never be Peace, nor Union, while
there Dagon (Presbytery) stands in the Temple, and all this he foretells
on no less hazard then his being deceived by experience, and mistaking of his
measures: What security the Reader has by these Pledges, he may judge: He
concludes his Letter that he has omitted a hundred things proper to have been
inserted: And I conclude my Observations upon his Letter, affirming, that he
has inserted several hundreds of things which might have been spared, without
derogating from the Honesty and Veracity of the Letter.

Third Letter.
THis Letter is from the same hand with the former; for he begins with
supplying the things that he said were omitted, and might have been inserted,
in the former Letter. 1. Several Ministers who were Injuriously dealt with by
the Council. His first instance is Mr. Pitcairn of Logie, who was deprived,
though he had eight or ten years been disabled from the Pulpit through Age and
Infirmity, and hat been obliged to maintain an Assistant. Ans. It was
reasonable that he should be put out of Capacity to keep a man in that Charge,
who did defy the Government; for the man whom he employed, Mr. David Balfour,
refused to Read or Pray. Another instance is Mr. Johnkine, at Abernethie, who
came that day, though he appeared not at the hour appointed. Of this man I find
nothing in the Records of Council, and therefore Judge that the Epistler does
mistake in this: But if it were true, the Council cannot be blamed, seeing
their Citations are to a peremptory time, which ought to be observed: It could
not be expected that they should wait his time, which they were uncertain of.
Mr. Falconar at Dyck in Murray, is his next Instance. Who read not the
Proclamation on the day appointed, because the Viscount of Dundie, with his
Forces, were his Hearers that day. Ans. He continued in his disobedience, even
though protected by Macky's Forces, in the vicinity: And Dundie was removed, and
seeing he had so long been disobedient, The Council thought it not fit to try
his Obedience any further: For Mr. Moncrieft at Heriot (his next Instance) he
does not say that he was deprived by the Council, but his Church is planted by
a Presbyterian Minister; may be it is by the former Incumbent; who has right
to it by the late Act of Parliament. If the Author had given a more distinct
account of the case, he might have expected a more positive Answer. He tells
us likewise of turning Ministers out of their Houses, as Mr. Galbraith at
Jedburgh, Mr. Millar at Musleburgh, and many others. Answ. When they are for
Disobedience to the Law, turned out of their Churches, it is but reason that
they should be removed from the Houses that should be occupied by them who
succeed them: These Houses belonging properly to the Ministers of the Parishes.
Neither was this done suddenly: They had sufficient time allowed to provide
other Habitations, and to remove. For the many others, I judge if he had ground
to allege that many others were so turned out, he would not have spared to
tell us of them: Though it had been but upon report, or his being told so: But
this he loves, to make as fair an appearance, as he can, with what he has a
mind to charge us with, with or without ground for it, is much at one with him,
He affirms also, that the Rabbling work is begun again in the West; and that
they will not suffer them who were thrust out a year ago, to live in that
Country. If he could we think he would have given Instances of this: We hear
nothing of it from other hands, and therefore judge his imagination tinctured
with ill will against us, has thus represented things to him. What follows
is absurd above measure. He tells us of a design (and that on his usual
ground of Assurance, he was told it) to Banish all that live in Drumfries, and
in Glasgow; this design no man knows but himself: And now his Book has been
out more than a year, and yet no such thing put in Execution: Which I hope will
help the Reader, how to judge of this man's Veracity.

. 2. His Invention is very fertile of Arguments against Presbytery: One of them
page 53, is, the Magistrates of Edinburgh, being Presbyterians, called for the
Utencils of some of the Churches from the Church Treasurer, who had the keeping
of them, and the Lords of Session suspended their proceeding against him. What
is this to the cause: did never Episcopal Magistrates mistake in one step, or
if they did, will this ruin Episcopacy? But there are several
Misrepresentations in this Narrative, as that the Church Treasurer is chosen by
the Sessions: He is chosen by the Magistrates; and therefore they might call
him to an account of what was entrusted to him. Next, it is false that the
Magistrates are no more concerned in them than in a private Man's Furniture; For
some of them were bought out of the public Stock; and though others of them were
Dedicated by private Persons; yet it was to a public use, and therefore are
under the Magistrates Care, as the other (...) of the Church. Again, that Sir
John Hall consulted the Earl of Crawford in this matter; What moved him to
affirm! But he is resolved that that Noble Lord shall bear the blame of all
that he thinks to be evil. But why do I imitate him in blotting Paper with
such stuff? When he has no more to say, he must, ad pompam, conclude the
History of the Troubles of the Clergy (which exceed the French Dragooning, on
which he hitherto has infilted) with telling of Innumerable things that he
has to say, but we are no wiser for this, while not one of them is told us.
Instead of these he accuses us of Printing and Publishing Pamphlets at London
(not known here) full of lying Aspersions against the Clergy: And adds, that
Lying has ever been one of our chief Artifices for carrying on of our
Purposes. What these Pamphlets should be I know not: I never heard of any such
either here, or while at London, since the late Revolution. But his imputing
Habitual Lying to Presbyterians, is an Allegation so impudent and false, that
we challenge him, and all his Party, to give the least evidence for what he
says. I shall not, I need not recriminate, the way of his Party is so well
known among us, even in that particular: I need go no further for Instance than
this his Book, out of which I have observed so many gross untruths already, and
it is like, may meet with more. One Presbyterian lie he is pleased to insist
upon, p. 55. Concerning the Excommunication of A. B. Spoteswood of St. Andrews,
1638. It is like he thought the Falsehood of this Story could not, after so long
time be traced: But the Reader may know, that the slander is built on no better
ground than this, He had it from Persons of great Integrity (but none shall
know who they are, left some Body ask them about it) and they had it from an
ear Witness; so that a story at Second hand, from nameless Persons, must be
enough to defame Presbyterians. But I can on better grounds disprove his
History as a Forgery: viz. From the Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow, where the
Sentence of Excommunication against that Are. B. is set down, as it was
pronounced by the Moderator; and not one word of any of the Crimes that he
mentions, nor any other, save Usurpation over the Church, and declining the
Authority of the Assembly: And he with others, are charged with refusing to
underly the trial of Scandals lybelled against them. Let any now judge whether
he or Presbyterians be more chargeable with telling Lies. The contradicting of
the Accounts of his Party sent to London of the Persecution of the Western
Clergy, I have above Vindicated; the Malicious aggravations of this which he
lets his Pen loose unto, I do not notice, further, than to observe that very
temper in himself, which he would fain charge others with. What follows about
the false news that have been spread, could not be observed with such concern
by any Person, but one of his Temper; while spite prompteth him to say, all the
evil that can be devised against Presbyterians. Was there ever a time when all
the News in Coffee-Houses, and elsewhere, were true; can he make it appear that
the news that fly about are invented by the Presbyterians? Yea, it is more then
probable, that many of them were the Inventions of his own Party to make the
Intelligence that seemed to make for us, Ridiculous, and Incredible. What he
further adds, of our forging of Lies, if turned upon him and his Accomplices,
would have a more certain and complete verification: Mutato nomine de te. If
the Author of this Letter be the Person whom I guess, I could convince the
Reader of his most absurd and habitual lying: known to most in the Nation, even
to a Proverb. These Presbyterian Lies he attempteth further to prove by a
strange Argument, viz. That the Council deprived the best, and spared the worst
of the Clergy. And a large Comment on this he gives us, as his conjecture of
the design of it. This last we may justly neglect, as that which no reason, but
purely his design to defame the Council, could suggest to him. The former (if
true) has a plain reason for it: The Council considered no Ministerial
qualifications in such as came before them; only whether they Read and Prayed:
And it may be some of the best might scruple this, and some of the worst might
comply with it; yet I know that some very Immoral men were put out by the
Council: And it is like (if we also may make conjecture) that they thought this
the more creditable way of being turned out, then to be deposed for Scandal,
which they might justly expect from Church Judicatories.

. 3. That which in the next place ( page ^7^ he is pleased to propose, as the
subject of the debate, is the Inclination of the People. That expression being
put in the Claim of Right, as one of the grounds of putting away Prelacy,
because the Inclinations of the People were against it. On this head he
screweth his wit to its outmost extent, to disprove this. And I shall premise
to what I have to answer to what he says: That Presbyterians wished, and
endeavored that that Phrase might not have been used as it was; not that we
call in question the truth of it: But because we know People to be changeable,
and often most Inclinable to what is bad: And we think the Government of the
Church is Christ's appointment, as in General, so in the particular Species of
it: And therefore ought to have been settled on a more firm Basis; yet it
satisfies us, that the States mentioning that foundation of it, did not
derogate from what is more Divine, and unalterable. He excuses his not
speaking on this Subject in his former Letter, because he was not willing to
fall foul on the State. If it had been indeed so, his modesty were to be
commended, but it is so far from that, that the Strain of his Letter (as was
before observed) was most petulantly to expose the actings of the State, both
in the Convention, and in the Council: But it seems this pretended modesty is
now to be laid aside, and he will fall as foul on them as his Power, Parts, and
Malice can reach. 1. Then he tells us, this is an Inconsequential Argument.
Episcopacy must be abolished, and Presbytery established, because the
generality of the People are for the last and against the first. And this his
Repartee he manageth with a great deal of insolent scorn of the Estates (whom
he calls the Scots Laiks) who do thus argue, while the English Divines (as if
no other Divines but the Church of England had managed that point against the
Papists) thought universality no Argument for the Church of Rome. All this
Discourse (except the violent and insolent style, which deserves an answer of
another nature) may receive an easy answer. In that Honorable Convention (and
in the Parliament also, who with His Majesty, who gave His Royal Assent to the
Act establishing Presbytery, where the same consideration is used) there were
some who looked on both Governments as Lawful, and some of these thought
Presbytery to come nearer to the Word of God, though not absolutely, and
unalterably enjoined there: others thought it to be Christ's Institution, and
Episcopacy to be a corruption of, and sinful deviation from what our Lord had
appointed. The first sort might well make use of the Inclinations of the
People, as that which might determine them in a case, either otherwise equal,
or inclining to the same side with the desires of the Nation. This is most
foolishly compared with being determined in the controversies between us and
the Papists, (where we can show Scripture Arguments against their way) by the
Inclinations, or Universality of the People on that side. It is one thing to
determine a Controversy in Divinity, in which all do acknowledge Truth and
Error, by the Sentiments of the multitude, and another, to satisfy the People
of a Nation in a matter which they are zealously for, as that which is
commanded of God, and to the contrary of which their Consciences cannot submit:
While they who are thus to satisfy them see nothing in that way contrary to the
Law of God. The other sort might rationally make use of this consideration, as
that which might strengthen them in doing that which otherwise they know to be
their duty.

. 4. His next effort against this determination of the States, cannot be better
exposed, and the Man Characterized by it, than by giving it in his own words;
which are, Why then, to tell you in a word, Sir, (If I may say it without
giving the Lie to the Convention) There is not a falser proposition in the
World, than that the Inclinations of the generality of the People of Scotland
are against Episcopacy, or that they look upon it as a great and insupportable
Grievance to the Nation, I hope the Reader now has a Specimen of this
Gentleman's Temper, and of that of them whose cause he undertaketh; and will be
confirmed in what I have formerly observed, viz. That the Friends of the
present Government of the Church, and of that of the State are the same; a very
few excepted. Of this Subject I have said enough in my former Vindication; in
answer to the 10 th. Question. Wherefore I shall here only consider that which
goes for his proofs, of what he does here so boldly, and so indecently assert:
He affirms that of the Rude, Illiterate Vulgar, not the third Man of these of
the better Quality and Education, not the thirteenth Man is Presbyterian. Here
I observe a few things; he mistaketh the question, for many groaned under the
Oppressions and Usurpations of the Bishops, and their Clergy, who had no fixed
Principle on either side, in the Controversy about Church Government; and that
either because of their Ignorance, or because of their Indifferency about such
matters. 2. There are many thousands in Scotland, who belong to neither Member
of his Division, they are not of them whom he calls of the better Quality;
but among the lowest of the People, for worldly Advantages, and neither are
they Rude nor Illiterate: But though they want Philosophy and such humane
Learning, they are knowing and serious Christians, and can give a Scriptural
and Rational account of what they hold in the matters that belong to their
Faith, and their Duty. 3. It is most irrational, in a Controversy of this kind,
when the debate is about the number of them who are on this, and of them who
are on that side, in a Religious Controversy. To consider them who are
Neutrals, and on neither side; as are all they who are unconcerned about
Religion, both in the greater and in the lesser Truths of it; and we know that
many ten Thousands are of this Stamp, and are for whatever side is uppermost.
Beside, there are not a few who are of opinion, that Church Government, as to
the Species of it, is indifferent: These (though they may be Persons Religious
and Learned) are on neither side; and not to be brought into the reckoning. 4.
There are not a few whose Light and Conscience does no ways incline them to
Episcopacy, who yet are zealous for it, and against Presbytery, because under
the one they are not Censured for their Immoralities, as under the other. One
would think that Episcopacy has little Credit by by such Bigots for it, and
that Rulers have little cause to consider the Inclinations of such, when they
would settle that Government in the Church that may most conduce to the Nations
Peace, and well being. 5. There are many who seem to be zealous for Episcopacy,
who are with all, Implacable Enemies to the King and the Civil Government of
the Nation, as it is now Settled by Law; and it is unreasonable to think that
such a Government could be Settled in the Church as likes them, and might give
them advantage to overturn the State: When no other Obligation lies on them to
Settle it. Now let all these be call out of the reckoning, and I affirm that
they who are inclined to Episcopacy (though some there be) are not one of a
thousand in Scotland.

. 5. I now come to consider his Arguments for what he has so boldly asserted:
His talk of putting the matter to the Pole, I neglect as an impracticable
fancy. Then he tells, How little Phanaticism has prevailed be worth Tay.
Ans. 1. It is not Phanaticism, but Presbytery that we plead for, that is, not
for wild unscriptural Fancies; but for Sober Scriptural and Rational
Principles, which we are ready to make appear to be such in defyance of what he
can Object against them. 2. If there be many in the Northern parts, who are not
for Presbytery, there are as few who are for the present Settlement of the
State. 3. We affirm, and can make it appear, not only that there are many in
the North who appeared zealous for Presbytery, as was evident by the Members of
Parliament who came from these parts; very few of them were otherwise inclined,
and they made a great Figure in the Parliament, for settling both the State and
the Church: But also there are very many Ministers in the North (and People
that own them) who though they served under Episcopacy, are willing to join with
the Presbyterians, and whom the Presbyterians are ready to receive, when
occasion shall be given: And those of the best qualified that are among them.
That there were so few Meeting Houses in the North (though yet they far exceeded
the number mentioned by him) was caused by the opposition some great Men made
to it, and not through want of inclination in the People to it. He says, even
he says Tay, the third Man was not concerned in the Schism. Ans. We know no
Schism but what was made by his Party. But that the plurality did not suffer
under the horrid Porsecution raised by the Bishops, does not prove, that they
were not inclined to Presbytery: But either that many Presbyterians had freedom
to hear Episcopal Ministers, or that all were not resol^^^ enough to ^offe^ for
their Principle: so that this is no rational way of judging of the Peoples
inclinations. His next Argument is, that Phanaticism (thus he is pleased to use
reproaches instead of Arguments) though it prevail most in Towns, yet in many
Towns, the Plurality are against Presbytery: And he brings instances in
Perth, etc. Ans. 1 st. That Presbyterianism, or serious Religion either,
prevails most in Towns in Scotland, is no well grounded Observation; The
contrary is often seen, and it is no wonder if we consider what sort of
Magistrates and Ministers have been set up in Towns under the late Reigns, when
Magistrates were forced in on the People, and they chused Ministers of their
own Stamp. Religion is more ordinary among our Gentry and Commonality in the
Country, then in many of our Corporations, though (through the Mercy of God) it
is not wanting in them. For the instances that he gives of Towns inclined to
Episcopacy, Perth is known to be almost generally addicted to King James, and
gave proof of it when they had occasion, by the Highland Army being in their
Vicinity. What he says of Couper and of St. Andrews, both are certainly false.
Though we deny not but that the late Constitution of the University, in the
latter, had much alienated many from the best things. Sterling is little better
then Perth; though not wholly so bad: Bruntisland is hot of that Temper that he
ascribes to it. Musleburgh has many Presbyterians, though may be, some more be
for the way that allows them more Liberty for their Lusts. Dumfermling has
very Sober Ministers who Conformed, which made many cleave to them; Dysert has
a Meeting House well frequented; of Weems he is in a great Mistake, the whole
Parish goes to hear the Presbyterian Minister, after the example of the Noble
and Religious Countess and her Family; it is so also with Leith, Kelso, and
Jeaburgh have many Jacobites; yet the former did unanimously call an eminent
Presbyterian Minister, though they did not obtain him, and the latter did the
like, and after missing one, they called another, whom they now enjoy. Nothing
can be further from Truth then what he says of Edinburgh: For though one Church
there while it was possessed by an Episcopal Minister, was as throng as some of
the Presbyterian Meetings; yet the other two were far from being so; and one of
them was shamefully unfrequent, while the Meeting House in that Parish was
Crowded; and the daily Collection in the Meeting House was five or six times
greater then that in the Church: Neither is it to be wondered at, that in so
populous a City, and where the worst as well as the best, of all places in the
Nation do resort, one Church should be throng with Persons of that way. That
the greater number of Citizens of Glasgow of the best Quality are of Episcopal
Principles, is so false as nothing can be more so, and yet this he is told.
From all this we may infer, what horrid Lies some do either Invent, or are
willing to receive, and propagate, when they may serve their Design.

. 6. He will have us believe in the next place, that the Peoples Inclinations
toward Presbytery is diminished from what it was a Year or two ago, by a third
part, and that People now observe their Principles and Practices, are
inconsistent with the common Rules of Nature and of Christianity. This is a
bold Assertion, and a heavy charge: Of which, full, clear, and uncontrolable
proofs might be expected: Instead of which we have only these two. The one is,
that an Ingenuous Gentleman told him, at second hand from another Gentleman of
good Quality, and good Abilities, that he had heard the Presbyterian Preachers
(I observe he will never own them as Ministers, I suppose because they want
Episcopal Ordination) and he censureth them that he never heard one Criticism
with the explication of a Text, nor a Citation out of a Father, Poet, or
Philosopher; or of Civil Church or History: And but little sense: And mockingly
calls all their Preaching, pure Scripture, and clean Gospel. Answ. If the
inartificial Argument of the Testimony of Ingenuous Gentlemen, and Gentlemen of
Quality and Ability, might carry the cause, especially when the report passes
through so many hands, and heads, who may practice upon what is talked, to
improve it; and if we could abandon Conscience, and say what ever might
contribute to our design, right or wrong, we could tell as many tales, and more
of them with truth, of the manner of Preaching on their side, but we affect not
such Recriminations: I wish both they and we might Preach more edifying than we
do. For his ^s^ Gentleman, being Ingenious, he might invent or heighten what is
said; and the other seems to have been a profane mocker; as many are who are
persons of Quality and Abilities: But it is evident to any who know the
Presbyterians; and can speak truth of them, that they preach good Sense and
useful Doctrine. 2. That our Sermons are not bespangled with Latin and Greek
Sentences, out of Fathers and History (for Poets and Philosophers, we think
that however their sayings might be Argumenta ad Hominum, against Heathens. The
Gospel, and the Salvation of men are little concerned in their Sentiments) It
is not because we cannot, but because we think it not fit, to use such means to
convince the Consciences of Sinners. We know the Gospel revealed in the
Scripture is the power of God to Salvation. But that either writings of
Fathers, or History, deserve that Character we are not convinced: We read
these, and take their help in our studies. And if any thing occur in them
that has some peculiar Emphasis or usefulness, we use that in Sermons: But the
use of them we neither affect, nor make our daily Practice. 3. His Gentleman of
Quality is either a stranger to our preaching, or some what that is worse, if
he say, that we use no Criticisms in explaining the Text: though we think some
others exceed in seeking after them where they do not occur, and are more
curious than edifying in the use of them. 4. To mock at preaching Pure
Scripture and Clean Gospel, is able to give such a Character of this Author,
and of his two Gentlemen; as I am not willing to name: Had he heard the Apostle
Paul, who determined to know nothing among the People, but Christ and him
Crucified, The same Sarcasm had been thrown at his head. Another Argument to
prove his point is, a Statesman who had a hand in the late revolution, did
affirm that he thought the Episcopal party the greater, and the better part of
the Nation. Ans. 1. We are not obliged to believe this on the bare affirmation
of a Person who has written so many falsehoods, in so few sheets; And we cannot
enquire into the truth of what he says, unless he had told the Statemans
Name, which he has more prudently then honestly concealed. 2. It is not
unlikely that there might be Statesmen, one or more, who might have a hand in
the late Revolution, without any regard to Religion; who being disappointed in
their Designs, might change their thoughts about the constitution of State, and
show spite enough against the Church* However it is but the Opinion of one
man; whose Person and the Credibility of what he says, and his capacity to
judge, we are ignorant of.

. 7. He frames and answers an Objection: Why then was this Article put in
the Claim of Right, concerning the inclinations of the People: This he imputes
to the bad constitution of the Convention: through the negligence of the
Episcopal Party, and the vigilance of the Presbyterians: To the Members (many
of them) deserting the Convention; and such like. All which was answered
before. I cannot shun to take notice, that he designeth his party, The Loyal
and Episcopal Party: No man will doubt but he means Loyalty to King James;
which confirms what I have often said, that the present constitution of the
State and that of the Church must stand or fall together. He concludes his
Letter with the greatest and most comprehensive Lie that is in it all: Viz.
That there is nothing but Truth in it. Of which I hope the Reader is, by this
time, capable to judge. To his Letter he adds two Postscripts. In the first
of them he tells us that The Presbyterians cast many Reflections on the
Church of England, But names but one of them, That her Clergy have deserted
their former Principles of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance. I wish the
English cast no more groundless Reflections on us: Truly it seems so to us,
and though some have endeavored to clear them in this; I am one of these who are
not cleared by any thing they have said on that head; however, though we talk of
these things, we leave our Brethren of England to stand or fall to their own
Master, and do not meddle in their Affairs; as we think they should not concern
themselves with ours. He says, It is our Common talk, that King William loves
Episcopacy as ill in England, as in Scotland; We cannot answer for all that is
talked; but wise men among us do not meddle with judging the hearts of other
men, far less of Kings, which are deep. The Act of Council, December 24, 1689.
Which he sets down at length, can answer for it self: And gives good reason
for what it appoints. His second Postscript contains a Story which he
seems to be very fond of: he could not let it pass, after he had finished his
Sheet. It is, That a Presbyterian Minister in Edinburgh, confessed to a
Gentleman, that within half a year last past, the Presbyterian Party had lost
40000: And that they were not inclined that Patronages should be taken away, in
that Session of Parliament, least by Popular Elections all Ministers should be
chosen either Cameronians, or Episcopal. Answ. This also we have on his single
Testimony: And his concealing the Ministers and Gentlemen's Names, is not, I
presume, out of tenderness to any of us, but that we might not enquire into it.
I converse with all the Ministers of Edinburgh, and I never heard any thing of
that kind from any of them. But and if one man had such a Melancholy
apprehension; his mistake is not probative. For hindering the taking away of
Patronages at that time, it was so far from that, that the Presbyterians
laid-out themselves to the outmost to get it done, and obtained it, and I never
met with one man among them who was against its being then done. What he says,
that there is as little Religion in the Western shires of Scotland as in any
part of Christendom, is so notoriously false, as I did not think the worst of
Scots men had been capable of this Assertion, Except them who know not what
Religion is, or who hate any thing that has the appearance of it.

Fourth Letter.
IN this Letter, I find a Repetition of many things said in the former Letters,
and already refuted, which I shall pass over in silence. It is not Inferior to
any of the rest in abominable Lies, and Reproaches: Such as, That no History
can parallel the Tragical Disasters the Clergy has met with: That their Judges
plainly and openly avow, that they do not intend their Obedience, but their
ruin. The most bitter Invectives can be invented fill up his few pages: Such
as, That the Protestant Religion is now no more than every man's Fantastic
humor, new Models of Governments, and a Liberty to pull down the things that
are most Ancient, and most Sacred. These things are not to be refuted, more
than the words of a mad man, or of one raving in a Fever. He says, Some were
deprived merely for not reading the Proclamation for the Fast: Which is an
abominable falsehood: Though such disobedience to the State deserved a check. It
is as false, that any such Reflection as he mentions, was cast on the
Episcopal Clergy, by the Narrative of the Proclamation, as any who reads it
may see. And the Nonsense imputed to it, is most falsely, and most wickedly
asserted; and yet without cunning malice: For it does not tell what it was. In
a word, this Letter holds all in general; and so is unexaminable (except one
passage, of which anon) and is full of virulent Reproaches, and so void of any
thing that is Argumentative, that it is impossible for any man to answer it;
except his Talent for Railing, and his Conscience to say what he will, true or
false, be equal to that of this Gentleman's. Wherefore, I shall pass it with a
few Remarks. I might refute all that he says, as it deserves to be treated,
by writing on the Margin of every Page Lies and Calumnies, He tells us page
65. That the Presbyterian Party are not considerable: And will prove it by
daring the West Country people to reduce the Highlanders. He may know what one
Regiment of them did toward it at Dunkell: And many wish that they were
Authorized to attempt it. He talks idly when he speaks of The Supremacy of
the Kirk: They never pretended to any Power but what God has given them, to
Govern their own Members, in things that belong to the Soul, and by means that
reach the Conscience, not the Bodies, or Purses of Men. His further ^ailing on
this Head I pass, finding nothing that has so much as the shadow of Truth, or
Argument. He calumniateth, us when he says, that we have hired Scriblers to
defame them: The Pamphlet he speaks of, called Plain Dealing, I never saw,
nor heard of before; and therefore can say nothing of it. His Defense of the
Clergies Morallty, I have above-answered, in the former Letter. That the
Council received Libels against them, containing Immoralities; is no blame.
They must hear the Complaints of all the Leiges: That they did not try them, is
as little blame, for their work was only to judge whether they Read and Prayed,
as was enjoined them. He in the midst of this Discourse, tells us of the
Persecution of the Clergy as unparalelled: But one instance must be suffieicnt
to vouch for this full mouthed Calumny. It is of Mr. Mowbray Minister of
Strathbrock, Though he complied to the full, yet he was Rabbled, his Gown Torn,
his Life Threaned, his Daughter beaten, his Wife frightened to Death, and His
Church door shut against him, by my Lord Cardross. The falsehood and
disingenuity of this Story is manifest to all who know our Affairs; for several
things are here eyed together, that were acted at different times, and had very
differencing Circumstances. My Lord Cardross had been out of Scotland for many
years; being persecuted for his Conscience: Nor had his Lordship been in the
Parish of Strathbrock till several Months after the time when Mr. Mowbray was
put out by the Rabble: But Mr. Mowbray being one of them who were excluded from
re-entring their Churches, having been outed before April 23. 1689. Yet in
August, or September 1689. did re-enter his Church: Whereupon my Lord, being
both Patron, and Heretor of the Parish* seeing to him desiring him to forbear,
seeing he had no Legal Title. And his re-entry could give him no Title. When he
would not be prevailed with, my Lord caused shut the Doors, desiring Mr.
Mowbray to apply to them who had Power in that matter, which he never did; but
signed a Dimission; and after that lived peaceably with the Presbyterian
Minister, who was settled in that place. For what is said of the Actings of the
Rabble against him, it was before my Lord came to that place, and deserves no
Credit; considering what disingenuity appears in the general Narration. He
says, That all that was acted against Mr. Mowbray, was only because he had
Episcopal Ordination. This is false, for he was Ordained by a Presbytery, when
there was no Bishop in Scotland: For he was Minister at Strathbrock in the year
58, or 59. His Defense of the Clergies Learning I have examined in the former
Letter. Only a new Topic I cannot let pass: They are favored by the College
of Justice: And these are all Learned men. Ans. Non sequitur. His Calumnies
about the Education of young Men for the Ministry among Presbyterians, are not
worthy to be noticed; they are so manifestly false. He tells a ridiculous
Story, of one of them which I never heard of, nor have ground to believe: But
the Truth of it cannot be examined, because we know neither the Person, nor any
Circumstances to guide us in enquiry about it. I conclude my Remarks on the
first of the Pamphlets, with an Appeal to the Judicious and Unbyassed Reader,
whether the noise they make about their Persecutions be proportioned to what
they have suffered? Whether the Presbyterians in general be chargeable with
what has been done against any of them. Whether such a strain of Writing do
tend to Union, and Peace in the Church? Whither they show a Christian Spirit in
dealing thus with others, when they take it so ill, when they imagine
themselves to be injured in Word (...) Deed?

FINIS.

