Rules, Orders, AND DIRECTIONS BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Dublin Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty;
And are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in Castle-street, 1672.

decorative floral border containing a crown, the Scottish thistle and Tudor
rose
BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL RULES, ORDERS and Directions made and
Established by Us the Lord Lieutenant and Council, for the better Regulating of
the Corporation of the Town of Gallway, and the Electing of Magistrates and
Officers there.
ESSEX.

WHEREAS in and by one Act of Parliament, lately made in this Kingdom;
Entitled, An Act for the Explaining of some doubts arising upon An Act;
Entitled, An Act, for the better Execution of His Majesty's Gracious
Declaration for the Settlement of His Kingdom of Ireland, and Satisfaction of
the several interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other His Subjects there;
And for making some alterations of, and additions unto the said Act, for the
more speedy and effectual Settlement of the said Kingdom.

IT is amongst other things therein contained, Enacted, That it shall, and may
be lawful to, and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor, or
Governors, and Council of Ireland for the time being, from time to time, and at
all times to come, during the space of Seven years, to be accounted from the
Nine and twentieth day of September, One thousand six hundred sixty five, to
make and establish such Rules, Orders, and Directions, for the better
regulating of all Cities, Walled Towns, and Corporations, both New and Old, and
such as shall be created within this Kingdom, and the Electing of Magistrates
and Officers there, and to inflict such penalties for the breach thereof, as
they in their wisdoms shall think fit, so as the penalties for breach of the
Rules, Orders, and Directions to be made, touching such Corporations, do not
extend farther than to the Removal and Disfranchisment of such Persons, as
shall be found guilty of the breach thereof; and such Rules, Orders, and
Directions, so to be made as aforesaid, shall be as good and effectual in Law,
to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been specially and particularly
Established by Authority of this present Parliament, and shall remain,
continue, and abide in force, for such and so long time, as in the said Rules,
Orders, and Directions shall be limited and appointed, any thing in the said
Act, or otherwise to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

WE the Lord Lieutenant and council, in pursuance of the said Act, and the
Authority thereby given unto Us, Have thought fit to make and Establish; And We
do hereby Make and Establish the Rules, Orders, and Directions hereafter
mentioned, for the better Regulating of the corporation of the said Town of
Gallway, and the Electing of Magistrates and Officers there.

First, That upon all Elections to be hereafter made, after the Second day of
October next, of any person or persons to serve in any of the Offices of Mayor,
Sheriffs, Recorder, or Town Clerk of the said corporation, the names of the
persons so Elected to serve in the said several Offices, shall be by the said
corporation, forthwith presented to the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors, and the Privy council of this Kingdom to be approved
of by them, and the said persons so Elected for any the said Offices, shall be
for ever hereafter incapable of serving in the said several Offices, or any of
them, until they shall be respectively approved of by the Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors, and the Privy council of this Kingdom, by
Order under their Hands; And in case the persons, or any of them, whose names
shall be so presented to the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or
Governors and council of this Kingdom, shall not be so approved of within Ten
days after their names shall be so presented, then and in such case the said
Corporation shall from time to time proceed to a new Election of fit persons
for the said respective Offices, for which the persons so presented, shall not
be so approved of, and shall in like manner present their names to the said
Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors, and Privy council of
this Kingdom, until they shall have chosen such persons for the said
respective Offices, as shall be so approved of as aforesaid.

Provided always that this Rule shall not extend to the Election of any
persons, that shall be Elected in the place of any of the said Officers
annually chosen, who shall dye within the year of their Execution of the said
respective Offices, or within one Month before they are to enter upon the
Execution thereof.

Secondly, That no person shall be hereafter chosen Warden of the said Town of
Gallway, but such person as shall be nominated to the said Office by the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom for the time
being.

Thirdly, That no person or persons, that shall hereafter be Elected, either
Mayor, Recorder, Sheriffs, Treasurer, Alderman, Town Clerk, or one of the
Common Counsel within the said Town, or Corporation, or Master, or Wardens of
any Corporation, Guild or Fraternity within the said Town or corporation, shall
be capable of holding, enjoying or executing any the said Offices, places or
employments, until he or they shall have taken the oath of Supremacy,
Established by Act of Parliament 2do Elizabethae in this Kingdom, and the Oath
of Allegiance, besides the Oaths usually taken upon the admission of any
persons into the said Respective Offices, places, or Employments. And also this
ensuing Oath, viz. I A. B. do Declare and Believe, That it is not lawful, upon
any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the KING; And that I do abhor
that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or
against those that are Commissioned by him. So help me GOD. The said Oaths to
be taken, before such person or persons as shall admit them to the said several
Offices, places, and employments (who are hereby empowered authorized and
required to administer to them the said Oaths) and upon any such person or
persons refusal to take the said Oaths, The Election of such person or persons
into any of the said Offices, places, and employments, is hereby declared to be
absolutely null and void (such persons only excepted, with whose taking the
said Oath of Supremacy, the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom for the time being for some particular Reasons shall
think fit by writing under his or their hand by Name to dispense.

Fourthly, For the avoiding of such Tumults and Disorders wherewith Popular
Elections of Magistrates and other Officers are often attended; We do hereby
further Order and Direct, that for ever hereafter, the Mayor, Sheriffs,
Recorder, Town Clerk, and all other Officers of the said Town of Gallway, shall
be Elected and chosen only by the Mayor, Sheriffs and Common Counsel of the
said Town, or the greater number of the Votes of such of the common counsel of
the said Town, as shall be present on the days whereon such Elections are or
ought to be usually made; And that no Freeman of the said Town, or other
person, who shall not be of the common counsel of the said Town, shall at any
time hereafter have any Vote in the Election of any Mayor, Sheriffs, Recorder
or Town Clerk, or other Officers in the said Town of Gallway: And that no
matter or thing in any wise relating to the affairs of the said Town, shall be
hereafter propounded or debated in the Th^lsell, or General Assembly of the
said Town, until the same shall have first past the common counsel of the said
Town, and that the persons offending against this Rule, shall be Disfranchised
by the Mayor, and common counsel of the said Town, any Law, Usage, or custom of
the said Town, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Fifthly, That all Foreigners, Strangers, and Aliens, as well others as
Protestants, who are or shall be Merchants, Traders, Artizans, Artificers,
Seamen, or otherwise skilled and exercised in any Mystery, Craft, or Trade; or
in the working or making any manufacture, or in the Art of Navigation, who are
at present residing and inhabiting within the said Town of Gallway, or who
shall at any time hereafter come into the said Town of Gallway, with intent and
resolution there to inhabit, reside, and dwell, shall upon his or their
reasonable suit or request made, and upon payment down, or tender of Twenty
shillings by way of Fine, into the chief Magistrate or Magistrates and
Common Counsel; or other persons authorized to admit, and make Freemen of the
said Town of Gallway, be admitted a Freeman of the said Town of Gallway. And if
he or they shall desire it, of all or any Guild, Brotherhood, Society, or
Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or other mystery within the same during his or
their residence for the most part, and his and their Families constant
inhabiting within the said Town of Gallway, and no longer; and shall have,
exercise, and enjoy all privileges and immunities of Trading, Working Buying,
and Selling, in as large and ample manner as any Freeman of the said Town of
Gallway, might have, exercise or enj^y by virtue of his or their Freedom: And
that every such person or persons, who shall be admitted to be free as
aforesaid, shall from thenceforth be deemed, esteemed, and taken and be Denizen
and Denizens within this Kingdom, any Law Statute, Charter, Usage, or Custom
of this Kingdom, or of any City, Walled-town, or Corporation of the same, to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, That all such
Strangers, Artificers, and others, to be admitted Freemen as aforesaid, shall
take the Oath of Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and
Successors, and also such other Oaths as are accustomably taken by all or any
Freemen, or members of the said Town of Gallway, or by all or any the members
of any such Guild, or Brotherhood; Society, or Fellowship of the Trade, Craft,
or other mystery, which he or they shall occupy, or exercize, in case he or
they shall desire to be incorporated into any such Guild, Brotherhood, Society,
or Fellowship aforesaid, and shall pay all such and like Charges, as all
Freemen His Majesty's subjects, of the like Trade, Craft, or mystery, shall or
do use to pay, and no other or more; And that if the chief Magistrate or
Magistrates or other persons authorized as aforesaid, of the said Town of
Gallway, or any Master, Warden, or other Governor of any Brotherhood, Society,
or Fellowship; or any Trade, Craft, or mystery within the said Town of Gallway,
shall refuse to admit any such Stranger, being a Merchant, Trader, Artificer,
Artizan, Workman or Seaman, residing or coming into this Kingdom, with intent
as aforesaid, to be a Freeman of the said Town of Gallway, or to be a Brother
or member of any brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship within the same, every
such chief Magistrate or Magistrates, Master, Wardens, or other Governors
respectively shall (upon complaint and due proof made, of such refusal, before
the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors, and Council of
this Kingdom, be by their Order Disfranchised, and from thenceforth incapable
(without their License) of being a Freeman or member of the said Town. And
every such Stranger being a Merchant, Trader, Artificer, Artizan, Workman or
Seaman, upon tender by him made of Twenty shillings, by way of Fine as
aforesaid, and taking the Oath of Allegiance before any Justice of Peace, of
the County of Gallway (who is hereby authorized and appointed to administer the
said Oath) shall thereupon by virtue hereof, be deemed, reputed, and taken to
all intents and purposes to be a Freeman or member of the said Town of Gallway,
and of the Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or mystery,
where he or they shall be denied admission as aforesaid; And from thenceforth
have, exercize, and enjoy the liberty and privilege of Trading, Working,
Buying or Selling of any commodities whatsoever, in as large and ample manner,
as if he had been admitted a Freeman of the said Town of Gallway a Brother or
member of such Brotherhood, Society, or Fellowship of any Trade, Craft, or
mystery within the same, taking the usual Oaths of such Freemen, Brothers or
members, which Oaths any one Justice of Peace of the said county of Gallway,
shall have power to administer, and paying all such charges as aforesaid, any
Law, Custom, Charter or Usage, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding:
And in case any person or persons shall give any interruption or disturbance to
any such Stranger, being a Merchant, Trader, Artificer, Artizan, Workman, or
Seaman as aforesaid, to the hindering him in his Trading, Working, Buying or
Selling as aforesaid, contrary to the intent and meaning hereof, all and every
such person and persons so offending, shall upon like complaint and proof made
of his or their offense therein, before the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors and Council of this Kingdom for the time being, be by
their Order Disfranchised, and from thenceforth incapable without their License
of being made a Freeman or member of the said Town of Gallway.

And these Our Rules, Orders, and directions, We do hereby Order and Establish
for ever hereafter, to continue in force within the said Town of Gallway, and
within the Corporations thereof.

And that the same be forthwith enrolled in the Rolls of His Majesty's
High-court of Chancery in this Kingdom.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin, the Three and Twentieth day of
September, 1672. Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin Canc. Drogheda. Arran. Conway and
Kilulta. Massereene. Hen. Midensis. Fran. Aungier. Art* Forbese. Jo. Bysse.
Rob. Byron. Will. Stewart. Hen. Ingoldesby. Theo. Jones. Char. Meredyth.



