THE Royal Wanton: Containing the Gallick Intriegues, WITH LYCOGENES (Late King
of Albion) HIS Expedition for Hibernia: BEING The Second Volume of the Amors
of Messalina, WITH Polydorus, K. of the Goths.

Completing the whole History.

By a Woman of Quality, a Late Confidant to Queen Messalina.

LONDON, Printed for J. B. and are to be Sold by Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1690.

To the READER.
OUR kind Cologne Correspondent (though a little Tardy in his Favors) has at
last transmitted over to us the long-expected remaining Part of our Messalina's
History. And since her Pourtrait in Miniature, in the Four Parts of her Amors,
already published, (we acknowledge) has been your Favorite; we dare boldly
assure you, in this Second Volume, an Equal (if not a greater) share of
Divertisement: For you are to consider, that in Albion (the Scene, where the
Four Parts of the First Volume, are mostly laid) she sat at the Helm, and the
Fatigue of Business, and Guidance of Empire, lay too close upon her, to give so
entire a loose to Pleasure, as in her Retirement and Recess in Gothland. And
since Love seems to fill her whole Ascendant here, which generally occasions
more variety of Accident and Adventure, than the heavier movements of State;
this Remainder of her History, on that Account, carries its own Recommendation
above the foregoing Volumn.

However, I am obliged, on the Booksellers behalf, to beg the Reader's Pardon.
The Matter of this History, depending upon Foreign Correspondence (from whence
the Original has been transmitted the Receipt of this Second Volume coming a
little tardtly, and the expecting Bookseller quite despairing (being called
upon for a Complete History) and the Long Vacation drawing on, truly
over-sway^d by present Interest, together with his desponding of this Second
Volume, he huddled up the History in Four Parts, under the Name of The Co^p^at
and Fi^he Amors of Messalina and in the Last Part of the First Volume, he
unhappily added a Fragment of the last almost Five Pages utterly spurious alien
to her Adventures* The Reader therefore, that possibly may have the First
Volume by (...), is desired to take notice^ That this Second Volume is
continued from that Conclusion only of the Fourth Part, where the Original
Authored left off, without any Cognizance taken of those five last spurious
Pages, abovementioned* The True Conclusion of the Fourth Part terminating at
Page 50, Line 12.

Our Messalina therefore, comes now adorned and array^ (...) her Gayest Dress;
and vouchsafes, (...) concluding Part, to appear Her whole, The Self, to please
you.

THE Fifth Part.
THE Landing of Lycogenes on the Gallick Shore, is such surprising News, so
shrill the Trump, and so fleet the Wings of Fame on that loud Subject, that all
Tongues are taken up with no other Theme, and the whole Court of Gothland
Echoes with the sound. The Presence Chamber of the Fair Albion Queen is in a
few minutes so thronged with pressing crowds of the Gallick Nobility of both
Sexes, the Great and the Fair; that betwixt their Abhorrence of the Christian
Barbarity, and Albion's Ingratitude in his Expulsion, (for that is the best Name
they can afford it) and their own Transport at the Reception of that God-like
Pagan Prince; what with their Joy on one side, and their Execration on the
other, the Gothic Grandees with one universal officious Emulation, every one
to be the first and earliest Addresser to the Royal Messalina in their
Compliments of Condolance and Congratulation, so filled Her Court, and made an
appearance so splendid; that she seems to shine a second Cynthia, with all her
Stars around her, her own the Sovereign Beauty.

Polydorus above all the whole Company is the only Person, who though more
interested in the Arrival of Lycogenes, or at least in the dismal Cause that
brings him, has his thoughts at present, the least employed about it. The
Resentments of defeated Love (a Concern that always supersedes all other
considerations) had so taken up his whole faculties. His damned mistake of the
Nurse for the Queen, was still a Torment so violent: His burning out his whole
stock of Incense at so unhallowed an Altar, as the poor Arms of a sordid
Lactilla, a Pesants Courser-born Brat; and not one Grain left for the Divine
Messalina; to rise up so Impotent, so shamefully unperforming in a Cause so
Glorious, lay a load upon his Soul, as heavy, as the very raising of the Siege
of Vienna. As the sight therefore of all Company, during this present fit of
melancholy was uneasy to him, he lays hold of this occasion of retiring, by
telling the Queen that the necessary Orders and Instructions for the Reception
of the Royal Lycogenes, was that Important Call, as must exclude all other
thoughts, and rob him of his present Felicity in making a part of the Court of
Messalina, for the immediate Execution of so incumbent a Duty: And so with a
profound Reverence he makes Congee, and takes his leave.

To all this Train of Glittering Beauty, the Court of Messalina has one more
particular Darling-Star appear to complete the whole Constellation; the Fair
Aspasia Arrived from Ibernia. The sight of so dear a Friend and Confident
returned to her Bosom, gives our Messalina that sensible delight, that her
Caresses and Embraces of her welcome Aspasia drew the Eyes of the whole Court
upon this new Favorite Beauty. The Queen, though not a little pleased with so
Pompous a Train, the Grandeur of her State, has those dearer Joys and tenderer
accents to pour forth into the Ears of her Aspasia, as required a more private
Audience; dismissing therefore the gay Assembly, as soon as Decency, and
State-Ceremony would permit, she takes her Aspatia alone with her into her
Closet, and with a hundred kind and passionate kisses (her Friendship almost as
warm as Love) she repeats her welcome: When the Ardence of their mutual
Endearments, the Transports of meeting Friends, had spent their heat, and and
cooled into a little leisure for Discourse and Business; Aspasia recounts to
the Listening Messalina, the State of Affairs in Ibernia, and the unshaken
resolution and invincible constancy of her Latroon, and the Ibernian Loyal
Pagans in the Cause of Lycogones. Alas Madam, says Aspatia, Let Parasites, and
Sycophants, the mercinary Creatures of Prosperity, play the Eastern
Worshippers, and adore the Rising; He the Setting Sun: Shall the injuries or
miseries of Lycogenes withdraw the Allegiance of Latroon. "Not all the shocks
of Fate and Shafts of Vengeance can stagger his least Loyal thought. Let
Fortune frown upon the unhappy Lycogenes: Yes, let the angry Gods call in their
faithless Guardians of the Throne, his Tutelar-Angels all shamefully disbanded:
Let People, Nations, Crowns, Peace, Happiness, and all the smiles of Providence
desert him; though Earth and Heaven it self forsakes him, Latroon shall not. Yes,
my Dear Aspasia, Replied the Queen, The Fidelity of Latroon wants neither
Herald nor Historian; His Deeds, I doubt not will be their own Trumpet and
Recorder. My Royal Lord knew well the Soul, the Principles, the Faith, the
Integrity of that brave Pagan-Hero, and trusted him with the Sword of Ibernia,
only because he knew him worthy to be trusted. No Madam, answered Aspasia, The
Royal Lycogenes has been too generous to Latroon for a return of Ingratitude;
Yes, he remembers from what humble State, and meaner Extract he raised him to
that Princely Dignity, the Vice-royship of Ibernia. How many Grandees of the
Albion Nobility, enriched with all hereditary Honors, Illustrious Veins, High
Blood, and Higher Fortunes, stood Candidates in vain for that Important charge,
the Government of Ibernia. Yes, they were Christians all, untrusty Tools, and
undeserved that Honor: Vassals to Oaths, and Slaves to Laws, bound up poor
Fools to Rules and Limits, to antiquated Pandects, musty Records. Senseless
Servility! Ignoble Manacles! But my Latroon, yes, my once poor little Lord; for
his true Pagan zeal, that all creating Merit, advanced to Title, Wealth, Power,
Trust, Dominion, o'releaped their dull pretensions, out-soared the Heads of
their neglected-greatness, and plumed by kind Lycogenes, percht in Glories Nest
above them. And do you think he can forget such Favors, or falsify a Trust so
mighty? Has he not long ago given ample demonstrations! All Heretic Ministers,
public Officers, Civil and Military, Disbanded, Cashiered, Turned out,
Disgraced; and the whole Power of Ibernia lodged in his Faithful Pagan
Creatures Hands. (Oh that the Albion Administration had been so Modelled, so
Reformed!) It Is true, the murmuring Heretics seem aggrieved at this Universal
discarding from their Posts of Trust, and soolishly plead their Truth, Fidelity
and Services to Lycogenes, to upbraid him of unkidness. Some, viz. that they
had fought his Battles, won him Laurels, stood up the bold Supporters of his
Throne, against the Perkin Rebel, and early flushed their Swords in the Western
Elood. Others, that they had been the Champions of his Birth against the once
impending Senate Thunder-Storm, his EXCLVSION; even their whole Church
embattell'd in that Cause. Others again, who perhaps had yet few Honorable
Scars of their own, point back to their Illustrious Ancestors Glorious Wounds,
those ever Famous Heroes and Monarchy Champions, who Sacrificed their Fortunes
and their Lives to his Great Martyred-Father, their bleeding Veins, and no less
bleeding Patrimonies. These very sons of Worthies, even of the Noblest Rank,
left Heirs to nothing now but a Name, and Title, perhaps reduced by their
Hereditary hard-sated Fidelity to dependence under Lycogenes for Bread, only
from their profuser Ancestors Loyalty under his Father for Glory: And whom to
turn out from serving, is to turn out to starving. These and twenty other such
idle foolish pleas they make of their Faith, forsooth, their Loyalty, their
Sufferings, etc. weak Heretic merit, and all dull senseless gibberish in a
Pagan Princes Ear. No, Divine Madam, those useless Christian Tools are all
thrown by for Lumber, Rust and Rubbish; and Power and Pagan Sovereignty are all
our own. And do you think that my Latroon so backed, so assisted, will tamely
loose his hold. No, Madam, Your generous Lord remembered. (yes, and with
Ecstasy) that once Great, Blessed, Memorable Day, when two Hundred Thousand
Heretic Victims sell; Oh our rich-fatten'd Land! Their reeking Gore a fragrant
Sacrifice, sweet in the Nostrils of the Pagan-Gods, and in our Divine Records,
a Legend of ever Sacred Memory. Yes, he remembered it, and like a Pious Royal
Son of Boanerges, and a true Servant of our Great Diana, gave my Latroon
Ibernias's glittering Sword, to play that Game of Glory over again; and root up
all those remnant Heretic Weeds, that have since run up to Seed. Yes, he did
so; and doubt not Madam, but that Great Commission, in spite of all the
threatening Albion Apostasy shall still be executed.

The Continuation of this Subject had insensibly drawn on a great part of the
Night upon them, when Messalina, more careful of her dear Aspasia, began to
think that a little Rest, the Traveller's welcome Companion, would be no
unacceptable Guest; and therefore, after a small Banquet for her Entertainment,
kindly motion'd her going to bed: But as necessary as Repose might be at the
end of a Fatigue of so many hundred Miles Travel to the Court of Gothland;
however, not to part with so dear a Favorite too easily, the Queen invites her
to her own Bed, (a peculiar Mark of her Royal Favors, and as dutifully
acknowledged by Aspasia) resolving to gratify her Delight in the Enjoyment of
so dear a Conversation, though but in Dreams together. The small Remnant of the
Night thus passed over, our two female Consorts, with the very first dawn of
day, awake together, as early, and as fair too, as the blushing Morning; and no
sooner have they got their Eyes open, but their Arms too, and embraceing each
other with the renewed Endearments of Friendship, could now allow no longer
leizure for sleeping. A hundred new, curious, and inquisitive Questions are to
be asked. Their Fortunes, their Adventures, and all the whole Revolutions since
their last parting in Albion, are work enough, ready cut out, for their whole
Mornings Employment. But as Ecclesiastic and State-Politicks, the Arcana of
Church and Empire, Cabinet-Counsels, and holy Leagues, were the whole Subject
of their last Nights Conference: for the sweet Pleasure of Variety, a softer
Theme, must take up their present Morning Communication; viz. Love and his
Kingdom, the Politics of Cupid, and the Cabinet of Venus, and all the secret
Arts and Manage of that important Universal Empire. The Fair Aspasia has very
little of Novel of that kind of her Adventures, worthy recital: For, alas! her
voyage to Ibernia was so entirely devoted to serious Business and deep Consult,
that that aerier Deity Love had little or no Administration there. Alas, Madam,
says Aspasia, I have nothing worthy Your Majesty's Ear, for truly I left Love
behind me when I left Albion; my Friends, my Servants, my Favorites, yes, all
left behind. Love Madam, in Ibernia! when Your Majesty knows I met with nothing
but that thing we call Husband there; nay, not only a Husband, but a Statesman
too; so involved in Thought, Study, Project: poor man! so laboring, so tugging
at the Helm, so tired with the toil of the Day, that God-wot, the Fatigue of
Night too, was too much for him. It Is true, my poor Latroon was very glad to
see me; so many years asunder as we had been, would make the conversation of
older Friends at first sight at least, agreeable. But truly Madam, under the
Seal of Confession, a little love went a great way between us two; his Talent,
I assure you, lies another way: Besides, we two were so old to one another, as
made us kiss so aukwardly -- In short Madam, I beg Your pardon for entertaining
you on so dull and so insipid a Theme. A Husband! -- but no matter: Poor
Latroon! he has, however, these other qualifications; whatever he wants in
Amor, as will amply compensate all other defects. The CAUSE, the Divine Pagan
CAUSE is his Wife, Mistress, Saint, his All: it is in her Arms alone lone he
Lauguishes, Adores, Sighs, Dies; and every faculty of his Soul is sworn Vassal
to no other Sovereign. The short Narrative of Aspasia is no sooner done, but
the Queen in return, resolved to unlock her own whole Heart too, to so entire
and absolute a Mrs. of all her secrets as Aspasia, and not able to contain
within her own Bosom only, the Victory of her Eyes over the captive Heart of
her Polydorus, could not forbear recounting the whole progress of her new
Conquest. The Sighs, the Languets of so passionate an Adorer, were Trophies to
her no small Glory: It Is true, the infirm part of his Love, his deficience in
her Arms, she generously concealed, in pure tenderness, not only to her Lovers
Honor, but also to her own Glory; lest the ridiculing of his unperformance
might diminish from her own Charms and Attractions; her mere vanity (if nothing
else) thought fit therefore to veil that blemish. Aspasia, at the Relation of
Polydorus Captivity, paid her Congratulatory Compliments to the Victorious
Messalina, with all the Panegyricks and Iopoeans due to so Imperial a Conquest.
So diverting a Subject as the whole Narrative of Messalinas Triumph, and
Polydorus Fetters held them discourse till their uprising; when no sooner were
they got dressed, but as if Love had yet a greater, at least a more moving and
more heightn'd Scene to play; Tomazo appeared, and tells the Queen that the
Baron of Sanctifiore attended without, and humbly waited a seasonable hour when
the Gracious Messalina would condescend him the Glory of throwing himself at
her Royal Feet. The Queen seemed so struck with the very Name, that she could
not answer Tomazo; when turning to Aspasia, all she could get out, was,
Sanctifiore! -- And then redning even to a scarlet Bloom upon her Cheeks, she
could proceed no further. Aspasia perceiving her surprise, and well remembering,
that more than happy Name of Sanctifiore our Messalina's Virgin Conqueror, a
Name so often repeated by her, in her most languisant and softest minutes, and
perfumed with the fragrant sighs that followed it; she wonderd the less at only
so superficial an Impression in the blushing Eyes of Messalina, from her
knowledge of a deeper one in her heart, her present disorder being only so
sudden an effect from so rooted a Cause. Turning therefore to the Queen, (who
in a deep and pensive kind of study, had leaned her fair Hand for her Support
upon Aspasias Shoulder,) Well Madam, says she, Does Tomazoes Embassy from the
petitioning Sanctifiore require no answer; or do you dispute her Credentials in
the Message she brings you? No, my Aspasia replied the Queen, I neither doubt
the Petition nor the Petitioner: Alas, I only mistrust the supplicated Power
that is to Grant it. Oh my Aspasia, how shall I look, speak, move! Oh my
misdoubted Eyes, but more suspected Soul! How, oh how shall I be able to
receive him, (assist me Glory resolution!) as Messalina Daughter of Modena, or
Messalina Queen of Albion! Receive him? Madam, answered Aspasia: Fie, is that a
Question! No, Madam take him as you left him; overlook but half a score of
rolling Years, and e'ne find your selves where you lost your selves. Receive
him as Queen of Albion? Ridiculous foolery! leave Titles, and big Names, empty
Pride, and senseless Vanity, Court-Grandure, and Court-Ceremony, (those
luggages of Majesty, worn like Imperial Crowns only on days of State,) to their
proper use and seasons. Think who it is, and where it is you receive him; not on
your Throne, but in your Bed Chamber. Well, My airy Companion, Replied
Messalina; "Loves-cause sure would neversail of success, if he had always such
Advocates as you to plead it; and if Messalina commit that weakness that the
Queen of Albion must blush for her; at your Door, my leading Counselor lie
the fault. Tomazo, who thought the Preliminaries a little too tedious, and
knowing her self both an able and acceptable Mistress of the Ceremonies in
interviews of this kind, without waiting further Orders or Commission,
introduces the attending Baron. The admitted Sanctifiore makes his approach
with that awful respect, and no less surprise: The grateful remembrance of a
Hundred crowding past delights, and his astonishment at as many new commanding
Charms in the Divine Messalina; the heightning thought of her Imperial
Character, adding a more dazzling Luster to her native Beauties; the present
Raptures of his Eyes and his past revolving Ecstasies, all so many Darts from
so many several Quivers struck him with that admiration and confusion, that
what betwixt fear and transport (for that is the sublimest Adoration that
trembles where it kneels) certainly never Lover fell at the Feet of Beauty with
more exalted Devotion than Sanctifiore. The fair Messalina, touched with the
same spark, felt a warm Joy about her, that soon blazed out into the same
re-kindling Fire: She could not see that dear, that darling Man, thus prostrate
at her Feet, without remembering him, the dear once happy Riffler of all her
Virgin-Joys. Oh the never forgotten Beatifick minute; the Pleasure and the
Pain! Then a whole Legion of Delights surround her; the private Grotts, the
silent Shades, and conscious Groves; all the stolen Pleasures, the soft and
tenderest Blisses in the opening bloom of Love, and Nonage of her Charms, now
muster a thousand Beauteous radiant Forms before her, till her pleased Soul
surveys that vast Expanded Scene, as leaves her almost lost in the
contemplation. The prostrate Sanctifiore continued kneeling all this while,
little less than rooted at the adored Messalinas Feet: till a soft accent from
the Albion Queen, a ravishing all charming look, and her fair Hand stretched
out to raise him, (snatched to his burning Lips) all Signed the Royal Mandate
to Command him Rise. In short, at so sudden an Encounter, and so vigorous an
Assault on both sides, (as if Love's whole Magazine, all the Artillery of the
blind God had been spent in one single Salley) never meeting Eyes, or yielding
Hearts encountered like Sanctifiore and Messalinas. Yet as warm as their Hearts
beat, and as strong a violence of Impetuous Love was just ready to bear all
down before it; however, the interposing Dread and Awe in the daunted
Sanctifiore, and a present resolved Reservedness in the Queen, (perhaps, the
greatest Denial that her o're-mastered Passion ever truckled to) stood up that
bounding Bar between 'em, possibly the only chain on both sides, that otherwise
could have held them from rushing wild into each others Bosoms, with all the
open outrages of folding twining Arms, and rioting ravaging Lips, close as
their meeting souls, and loose as all their roving boundless Wishes.

This distant Ceremony being all that the first Caress to her Sanctifiore would
admit, the Queen however as a mark of more than ordinary Grace (a dispensation
of State which in the privateness of so early a visit, was allowable) commands
her Sanctifiore to be seated in her Presence; and after the usual Compliments
made by the Baron, though perhaps a little more refined, at least more exalted
than the daily Addresses made to Crowned Heads, by more indifferent Homagers:
The Queen finding him too prolix a Panegyrist (a Theme however not ungrateful)
upon her Glories, diverts him from that Subject, by commanding him not to be
hers, but his own Historian; desiring him to entertain her with some Relation
of his own Fortunes, and the occasion of his Residence in Gothland. Sanctifiore
making his humblest and duteous acknowledgement for the Honor received in so
generous a command; tells her, that at present he has the Happiness of wearing
a Sword under the Bannors of Polydorus; and Commanding a Regiment of Horse in
his Service. But truly, Madam, continued the Baron, Since your Majesty is
pleased to ask the occasion of my Residence in Gothland: in more ample
obedience to that Command, I must own, that the Glory of Fighting under the
Standart of a Monarch so Renowned, (whose formidable Power in defiance of the
Confederated World, can singly stand the Swords of the United Universe against
him,) carries an Attraction of it self alone, sufficient to invite a more
distant admirer of that Famous Hero, than a neighboring Native of Italy, to
quit inglorious Peace at home, for so active a Scene of Honor abroad: Nor is
the Post, his Favors have raised me to, so inconsiderable, but nobler Merit,
and higher Pride than my own might thank fully accept. However Madam,
[Sighing]. a yet far nobler Cause made me desert my Native, and (forgive me
when I call it so) my loathed and hated Country. It Is true, I must avow, I drew
in my first Breath within that happy Roman Principality, blessed with the Birth
of the fair Albion Queen: Yes, I had the envied Honor to be born a Subject to
the Hereditary Coronet of the Illustrious Messalina. Thus happy I was born; but
oh Divine Madam! The ascendant Star that shined so kind; yes, once so wondrous
kind, and blessed me with so bright and dazzling Morning, recalled her too
generous influencing Beams; for Oh, I lived to see that black, that fatal
over-clouded Day; the adored Guardian Planet of my Life, withdrawn to shine in
a new Orb of Glory, to smile on a more worthy happier Charge; and set alas,
from me, for ever set; and the miserable wretched forlorn Sanctifiore left
despairing, mourning, dying; and hurried by the horrors of his wild and
ghastly Thoughis, (Remembrance, tormenting Remembrance,) to fly his loathed
detested Native Soil, and seek some happier corner of the World to find a Grave
in. But how far soever his despair could lead him; and as delectable as his
miseries had painted the lovely Face of Death to him; nevertheless his Pride
would not permit him to lay his resting Bones in any other Bed than that of
Honor: The Gratification therefore of that only Ambition had fixed his thoughts
and his resolves on Gothland, as the noblest choice to find that Grave in. For
indeed having ever a natural Aversion to the common Exits of Mortality, the
Sleeping out of Life; to those, who dying as dully as they lived, lie lazying
on Down for their last Pillow; and with the effeminate cries of Children, and
puling Women's Tears around them, are hushed and lulled into their Eternal Rest;
it was his ever constant wish, to bye harder, and die louder; to have the
Thunder of the Cannon, a more manly Music at his long Repose, and his last
Call to Fate, a summon from no other but the Trumpets sound. The Queen at this
Declaration of the dear Baron, so artfully made, as even the most rigid Virtue
must have heard without a frown, not a little delighted at the recital of the
fatal influences of that fair setting Star he had so passionately in such
murmuring plaints described, could (if she pleased) have told him, that the
very same tutelary Planet, as long set to him as it had been, and as many
despairs it had cast him into, was in this one short half hour so fully risen
again, with all its favourablest Aspects, every kind re-kindling Beam about it,
as at this very moment could shine down all the tenderest warmest Blessings
over again, all those softest, sweetest Joys repeated, that ever its most
melting influence smiled upon him. All this She could have told him; but, alas,
restrained by rigid all-commanding Honor (empowered at least to Reign for one
short hour at their first meeting) those sublimer Felicities, are a reserve,
not to be cheapned by too hasty a Condescension.

The conversation between Messalina and Sanctifiore, now begins to be
interrupted, by a concourse of Gallick Ladies, come to make their morning Court
to the fair Albion Queen: All she can farther learn from him in so public a
conference is, that an important Express brought him from his post on the Banks
of the Rhine; and how soon he should be commanded back thither lay only in the
Breast of the King. His Express indeed he had this morning sent in to
Polidorus; but his Majesty being indisposed, and Orders left, that he would
admit of no Visits till after Morning. Devotion, he had not yet had the honor
of kissing His Royal Hand. When Sanctifiore had taken leave of the Queen in
order to his attendance on Polidorus, and the Court Ladies also according to
customary Ceremony were retired, at the Queens usual hour of her private
Morning Prayers; Messalina having at this time gotten one half hour free to her
self, attended only by Aspasia, on whom she had laid her particular commands;
out of an extraordinary Devotion another way, that had taken up her present
Contemplations, she makes bold with Heaven for one mornings Dispensation; and
taking her dear Aspasia with her into her Closet, to confer about the
importance of this mornings Adventure, and her future Conduct in relation to so
unexpected a Visitant, she first asks her her opinion of her Sanctifiore.
Truly, Madam, answers Aspasia, "If you will have my cordial sentiments, I think
him a Person of that generous Appearance, that Messalina did her self right, in
her Virgin-Election of so Gallant a servant. For since Beauty is a Treasure,
like all other Treasures, only truly valuable when Possessed; (for what is the
Pearl in the Sea, the Diamond in the Rock, or the Gold in the Mine; and by the
same reason, the Lady in the Cloister, worth?) and accordingly we are all
Jewels ordained for wearing; a young Lady by the undoubted Charter of her Sex,
holding by that most absolute of all Sovereign Tenure, viz. the whole Power in
her own hands, the entire freedom of choosing, whether the Privy Signet of
Nature, Inclination and Love, or the Broad-Seal of Law, Matrimoney, shall first
unlock the Maiden Cabinet; for my part, I applaud that Ladies dearer and
worthyer choice; that honors the First, with the concession of so high a
Favor, before the Last; unless, indeed, our Auspicious Stars design us the
uniting of Both in one Person, Love and Hymen in one knot. But, alas, that is a
blessing of Heaven, (a rarity Phoenix like) so seldom ordaind for Princes,
where Marriages are almost always the creation of Policy and Interest; that
even the common liberty of the poorest Vassal is denied Them; for whilst the
meanest Peasant, from his own equality, has, in a manner, the whole world to
choose in; can select the Face, the Wit, the Temper, the Humor of that Bride
that best can make him happy; on the contrary poor confined and shackled
Princes, utterly debarred all these privileges, must Woo and Wed by Proxy;
trust to the Flattery of a Painters Pencil, and the groser Dawb of a lying
Embassy, for the Beauties both of Body and Mind; (and ten to one not that
neither, where absolute State-Convenience, their common Matchmaker, ties the
Gordian) and consequently, so blindly and ignorantly, if not so ungratefully,
Sign, Seal, and Contract; that certainly the Amorous Rambles, Wanton Stealths,
and Love-Frailties of the Great, ought in Conscience, to be listed in the Roll
of their Venial Sins, as a mere charitable grain of Allowance, in pure
compensation for the servitude of Custom, the slavery of Overuling Politics,
and the hard hand of Fate so heavy upon Them only, in Their Having and Holding,
above all the rest of the Creation, Well my witty Sophystress, replied the
Queen, Thou are an Artist at an amorous Argument, a very Casuist in the School
of Love; and truly, my Aspasia, I never had more need of such a Counselor;
alas, dear Friend, in the surprising return of my Sanctifiore, I have
encountered an object, dearer to my Eyes, and nearer to my Soul, then all the
Favorites my Arms e're blessed; so much above them all -- Yes Madam, Replied
Aspasia, Those very Lovers whose Fortune it is to crop our Virgin-bloom, are
always observed to possess ever after it the utmost extremes of our Affections,
the highest or the lowest Seat in our Esteem, becoming either the objects of
our ever tenderest, softest Remembrance; or else our humblest and despicablest
Disdain and Loathing. If a lose wantoness, and unthinking Amor, some Folly,
Frenzy, Surprise, or a prevailing Snare betray our Easiness or Simplicity to
yield up that irrevocable Treasure to some indifferent or unworthy Possessour;
our Eyes once opening; and our re-collected sense awaking, we look back with
that sensible Resentment of our mistaken and deluded weakness, till the
undeserving Rifler of those envied favors becomes so much the object of our
little Thought, that we despise and loath the very sight and name. But if
forethought and Reason, a studied Love and ponderated Passion, the Endearments
of Address, Caress, Sighs, Tears, Prayers; the Charms of Wit, Sense, Honor;
the Ties of Sevices, Duty, Faith, Gallantry; with Worth and Merit to fill up
the balance, all join to assault a yiedling Virgins Heart, till in the embrace
of some dear dear Man, Desires meet Desires, Souls link Souls, and Tides dash
Tides; that never forgotten minute of Delight takes an impression of that
rooted Sweetness, so dear, so deep even in our inmost Thoughts, till that dear
Darling never banished. Lord of our best wishes fills up so large a Room in our
remembrance, that all our after-Favourites, ordained to reap our fainter
Blessings left, succeed but like the Heirs of the Great Alexander; they only
Canton out our Hearts, our subdivided Favors, Reigning but like pettier
Provincial Lords, where his sublimer, vaster Empire was All and Universal. Oh
hold Aspasia, Replied the Transported Queen, Thou have touched me in the
tenderest part^ and if there be an Art of Painting Souls, certainly thou have
made a Masterpiece; for never was Effigies drawn so near the Life. True, my
Prophetic Aspasia, that never, never Banished Lord of my First, Best, yes, and
my Last Eternal Wishes, is my Sanctifiore. And after such an envious Divorce, a
hideous dismal yawning Separation of more then ten long distant Years torn from
me, Oh with what meeting, twining, rioting Blisses, in those dear Arms could I
pour out my Soul. After this frank Confession of Messalina, the Generous.
Aspasia Employs the remaining part of their Conference in Advice and Council;
she lays before her, how that Sanctifiore being in so eminent a Station in the
Army, in this active Juncture of the Affairs of Polydorus, could not possibly
be permitted any long absence from his Post of Honor; that as he came only
with Martial Expresses from the Camp, undoubtedly his Dispatches will be matter
of Haste and Expedition, and consequently his stay at Court but short; and
therefore the Golden Fruit must be speedily gathered, least Polydorus, by his
sudden Commands upon Sanctifiore, should unluckily prove the envious Dragon to
intercept it. And therefore Reservedness and Disdain, (those common Female Arts
of postponing Blisses, only for the fantastic vanity of heightning their
value; at best but a customary foolish Hypocrisy in the Sex,) must now be laid
aside. Nay, and considering that Sanctifiore, were his Desires as ardent as her
own, however, must not, or indeed dares not presume to any Address of Love to
the Queen of Albion, the Advances therefore must be all of her own side; in
short Messalina must be the first Fair Inviter to the amorous Field; and that
she need not be abasht at being her self the Aggressor, she desires her to
consider that Necessity in that case had made that a Virtue in a Royal
Character, which possibly might be a blemish in Ladies of a lower Station. It Is
true indeed, since Honor perhaps may scruple at pronouncing the last
consummating Oracle from her own Lips; however, Aspasia offers her that
Assistance and Service as shall take off that Blush: for that Province shall
all be her own. The Queen threw her fair Arms about Aspasias Neck, in Gratitude
for so Generous a Friendship, expressing her acknowledgements in all the
softest endearing Terms suitable to the Obligation of so extraordinary a
promised Service.

Upon the full result, the final Conclusion being agreed upon, and the whole
Scene laid between 'em; in persuance of the Measures resolved, after Dinner
Aspasia finds Sanctifiore; and inviting him into the Queens Privy Garden, at
the end of their first walk, they are met by Messalina; Sanctifiore approaching
with all the profoundest Respect, and Aspasia retiring, the Queen Graciously
lending him her hand to walk with her, and taking the advantage of a close Walk
sheltered both from envious Eyes, and dangerous Ears; after several languishing
Aspects, the softest Eloquence of her Eyes, and a hundred little kind
introducing Preliminaries, (all which how sensibly soever the charmed
Sanctifiore might interpret to his Advantage, yet his trembling distance to
Imperial Quality durst yet only silently receive,) she came at last to the
condescending Confession and Discovery, that her Sanctifiore was a Person she
never had and never can forget; and though advanced to share the Albion Diadem,
the Bed and Throne of Lycogenes, yet her blushing weakness compelled her to
tell him, that to Sanctifiore she was still the Daughter of Italy, and Neice of
Boanerges. The Transport of Sanctifiore at this ravishing Declaration, too full
of Ecstasy to be able to make answer in any other Language, threw him prostrate
at her Feet, which, grasping her Knees, he Kissed with so much Ardence and
Passion, that Aspasia thought it her Qu of Entrance now, and accordingly coming
up to them; Help me my dear Aspasia, cried the Queen, Help me to fly from this
bewitching Man, to seek some silent cover for my shame, and hide my burning
Blushes. At which the Queen having by a kind of Force got loose from his Arms,
immediately ran away, leaving the Baron and Aspasia together. Aspasia, whose
Part began at the Queens Exit, has now the opportunity of paying her endebted
promise of serving the Queen, and accordingly addressing to the Baron, in an
artful and insinuating Relation tells him, How surprising the sight of a Person
sometimes so dear to her had been; what a Passion it had awakned; what
Violence, but all in vain, the Queen had put upon her self: How Love had
over-mastered her Reason and Resolution; what Fatality the Twice Victorious
Sanctifiore carried with him; and after all, how thankfully he ought to receive
the yielded Laurel; and how Honorably use his Triumph. Upon all which Topics
she enlarged with all the Harange and Flourish fit for the Amorous Subject. All
which Sanctifiore heard with that infinite Satisfaction and heightened Delight,
and (having now found a Tongue) with a hundred several other most extravagant
acknowments of the Divine Messalinas sublime Favors, he conjured the kind
Aspasia to assure her Majesty that her smiles had raised him to that exalted
Felicity, that he could even despise Kings, and almost pity Gods; and that had
he millions of Lives and Souls, they were all her Vassals, and her Sacrifice.
Aspasia being now come to the last point of her Commission, tells him she must
take her leave at present, but withal desires him to make this Garden his walk
alone after Sunset, and so order his Affairs this Night, that he may Dedicate
it to Felicities designed for him; to which the Marchioness of Tomazo should be
his Harbinger: and so bids him good night, leaving him to all the Beatifick
Visions in the First Heaven of Love, Expectation.

All things now conspire to give our Messalina a Scene of Bliss even to their
highest Wishes; for the Evening is now drawing on, and our Sanctifiore walking
in the Garden with all the impatience of furious Love, repining at the very Sun
for setting too slow, that his Happiness could rise no faster; when Tomazo
appears to him, and gives him a particular Mandate at Nine at Night to be in
the Queens Gallery, where her self should be his farther Guide; and so retires
to the Queen. Our Lover is not only fixed, and all preparations made for his
Reception, but also, as her good Stars would have it, the Queen has not all
this Day received one Visit from Polydorus; his Indisgestion belike of last
Nights over-surfeiting with his course Feast upon poor Lactilla for the
mistaken Regale of his Divine Messalina; his gorging with Lees, instead of
Nectar; had put that melancholy shaggreen upon him, even to a shame that
wanted Confidence (at lest for one four and twenty hours) to look her in the
Face; so that no Interruption from that Danger was like to disturb her. The
Hour of Nine now drawing nigh, something of the earliest Bedtime with
Messalina, (but a pretended Indisposition had not only salved all that, but
also cleared the whole Coast for the safe Admission of her Sanctifiore,)
amongst other roving Fancies, Polydorus came into her Head, a Servant of that
Quality, that at least in due time must be considered; though at present her
more diminitive Thought, (for Majesty does not in all Cases carry the
Pre-eminence) compared with the overruling Ascendance of all pure Love, in that
Object of her more delicate Delight her dearer Sanctifiore. As Polydorus
however was such an Adorer, as for several Reasons must be endeared, her
ruminating Fancy whispered her, that, considering his absence of a whole Day
from her, and the known Malady the cause of it, she could not do better than
Write a kind Billet to him; a piece of Gallantry which after his late shameful
Recoil in her Arms, would undoubtedly be received with that Rapture, and so
heighten his Value of his Darling Messalina, as might make for her Interest:
It Is true, a Billet on that Subject from her, would be somewhat a fault on the
Fond side of Love; however, as Fondness was always the captivating Allurement
with Polydorus; (for even his once famous Vestal Mrs. arrived to all her
Grandeur by no other Charm,) and therefore excusable; a little fondness too, on
another account might be at present her wisest Game, especially should
Sanctifiore, (as she trusted in her kindest Stars he would) stay long at Court;
as a necessary and politic prevention of Jelousy in Polydorus, a Frailty too
much in his Nature; and which her Conversation with the Baron, if not artfully
managed, would give him speedy occasion for: and therefore resolving to
Dedicate to Morrow Night to the Embraces of Polydorus, she sets Pen to Paper
and Writes this following Billet, Designed not to be delivered till to Morrow
Morning, and so Written accordingly.

To POLYDORVS.
SIR,
A Whole Days unwonted Absence of Polydorus must proceed from some uncommon
Cause; the unknown Reason of which, gives you this troublesome Billet from a
Jealous Messalina. However, both to Correct and Instruct you to Repair your
Faults, so Order your Affairs, this Night, that you may receive your long
Reprimand in the Arms of

MESSALINA.


Having Sealed this short but sweet Epistle, she gives it to Tomazo with a
particular charge early to Morrow morning to attend the King, and either at, or
before his uprising, deliver it, or see it carefully sent in to him; having
this farther reserve of advantage to her self in it; that the receipt of so
welcome a Paper as the Invitation to her Bed at Night, would undoubtedly so
take up our Polydorus whole days thoughts, that she need not fear any
interrupting visit from him in the morning, to incommode her happy Minutes in
Sanctifiores Embraces, whom she is very well assured, she shall not be willing
so easily nor over early to part with* Tomazo engages to execute her Commission
with due Diligence and Application; and now the hour of Nine approaching, lends
her helping Hand to undress the Queen, and puts her to Bed; and that done, goes
in Quest of the Baron, whom she soon finds in the Gallery, and having
introduced him, tells the Queen, she had brought a Mate for a cooing Turtle;
and so leaving the two happy Lovers to an absolute Jubilee of Love, (where the
whole Arrears of an Age are to be paid in the Revels of a Night;) she locks 'em
in together, and bids 'em good Night. It Is true, the Marchionesses apartment was
an adjacent Chamber to the Queens, with a Door of Communication between 'em,
where as being now the Queens only Night-waiting Bedchamber Lady, she always
lay, as a Matron of that sworn Secresy and Fidelity to Messalina, that upon all
occasions was to be confided in, in Matters and Intrigues, not to be committed
to the Charge or Trust of any common Courtier: however, she thought it a little
of the earliest for any but Pairs to go to Bed yet. Besides, for another great
reason, she was not over-fond of being a Listner to Joys so near her, as but at
one thin Walls distance, which old as she was, might perhaps put her into
longings that might disturb her Nights sleep; for which Cause she would
prudently keep away an hour or two, not only to return a little more sleepy to
Bed, and thereby less capable of receiving that disturbance, but also to find
the Lovers too after two hours engagement the less capable of giving her that
disturbance. Swayed by these Reasons our Tomazo withdraws; and immediately
taking her Chair designs to spend an hour or two in visits. Her first Ramble
carried her to a knot of Gothic Ladies of her acquaintance, engaged at Cards,
where she fell in and made one at Ombre; but her luck being bad, after a two
hour loosing Hand, it being now past eleven, she thinks it time to adjourn
homewards; but in her march, being to pass under Aspasias Window, and finding
extraordinary Lights in her Lodgings, and a great Crowd of Coaches and
Attendance at her Door, she stops her Chair, and resolves to look in, and see
what good Company she had gotten, and so bid good Night and to Bed: When she
comes up, who should she meet there but Polydorus and a very great Trian of the
greatest Grandees of Gothland making their Court to Aspasia: For the King
hearing of the Arrival of a Lady of her Intimacy with Messalina, and likewise
the Wife of a Person of that eminent Fidelity; and Zeal in the Pagan Cause as
her Lord Latroon; had generously vouchsafed her the Honor of a Visit, attended
with the highest Nobility of his Kingdom. Our Tomazo meeting Polydorus so
Fortunately, presently considers with her self, that either some necessary
Service to the Queen, or her own Rest in the Morning, may possibly make her
over-slip her critical Time of obeying the Queens Commands in the delivery of
her Letter; besides the needless Trouble of a mornings Ramble and Attendance,
for what an opportunity much fairer was presented; she resolves to embrace this
good Fortune, and by way of supererrogation not stay till to Morrow, but give
him the Queens Billet to Night. Accordingly watching his motions, by a private
Sign expressing her Inclination of speaking with the King, Polydorus instantly
singles himself out to a Window at some little distance, where the Marchioness
without any words steals the Billet into his Hand; and after a Compliment made,
takes her leave, Aspasia and the rest of the Noble Company, pressed much for her
stay: but excusing her self with the lateness of the Night, and her own
Constitution that could not dispense with unseasonable Hours; but above all
that she did not expect so splendid a Court, her visit being only intended en
passant in her way to Bed, she immediately withdraws, takes Chair, and moves
off; and entering her Lodging with all the tenderest silence she could, for
fear of disturbing that short but necessary Repose of the Lovers, to which
their hearty fatigue no doubt by this time invited them, she steals into Bed;
where [leaving her to her Rest, and returning to our Polydorus.] No sooner had
Tomazo delivered the Letter as we told you, but the King notwithstanding the
silent delivery, not doubting ^ut it come from the Queen, both by the Messenger
and the manner of the conveyance into his hand, was not a little transported at
the very receipt of a Billet from Messalina; but when he came to Read it, and
found himself that blessed and more than happy Man, to be invited to the Bed of
his Messalina, a whole Night in her Arms; and this very Night, (for so the
Invitation ran) he was so rapt with the very thought, that he could hardly
contain himself, so extravagant a Joy possessed him: However, with all the
Decorum and Civility so hasty a parting Compliment would admit, he takes his
leave of Aspasia, for indeed his Soul was upon the Wing; and no expedition fast
enough, to carry him to the Arms of his Messalina. Dismissing therefore at his
departure all his Nobles, Attendants, and his very Guards, he only Selects two
confiding Grandees Masqueraded for his present Gaurd du Corpse, and immediately
putting himself into incognito and in a private Chair, with these only
Attendance is he carried to the Queens Palace. Where leaving his Chair below
and the two Noble Masqueraders as his Watchmen and Scouts, up stairs he mounts,
and opening all Doors by his Key, he is instantly got to the Queens
Bedchamber. But as the General Keys of the Palace could open all other Doors,
and he had made his own way thus far: However, he must be forced to depend upon
the Queens Favor for Entrance here. Accordingly first modestly (in the Court
fashion) scraping at the Door, but hearing no answer; (for truly at this
minute, the Queen and her Sanctifiore were in a Goulden Slumber, possibly
repeating in a lovely Dream, the Joys on which they had so lately and largely
Feasted waking,) after three or four times endeavoring to be heard by this
gentler sort of motion for Admission, and no answer returned; enboldned at last
by the impatience of Love, he ventures to make a pretty smart knock, and with
an audible Voice to call, Tomazo! Tomazo! Madam, the Marchioness! This
unexpected Alarm, the distinct Voice of Polydorus at her Bed-Chamber-Door, put
our Messalina (who with her awakning Lover had now both their Eyes and their
Ears too open) into so terrible a fright, as made her sink almost dead into the
Arms of her Sanctifiore, (a very unresting Pillow at present) for so dismal an
apprehension had seized her, that the Kings Presence in that manner, unsent
for, and at so unseasonable an hour, appeared to her (so far from the real
cause that brought him) nothing less than certainly some Matchivil Train
against her own Honor and her dear Sanctifiores Life, and that undoubtedly he
had half a Battallion at least at his Heels for the Execution of it What
tremendous-Forms this sudden Gorgon had raised, may easily be imagined; when
all she could utter, was; Oh my Sanctifiore, we are undone. Nor wanted our
Baron some little seeling too of Messalinas pain; for as naturally undaunted as
he was at the Faceing of Death, and as much, and as long prepared as our brisk
Warrior had been for sleeping in the Bed of Honor; yet as his own Reason,
besides the Queens Fright, suggested that nothing but some Revengeful transport
of Jealous Love, could make the King so untimely a visitant: His violent
suspicion of some ill-boding impendent Fatality upon himself put him in a
little Bodily fear at present. The same. Alarm too, had rowzed our Tomazo, who
scarce ten minutes in Bed, and not sive of them asleep, was in a perfect maze
half asleep, and half awake, in her Smock by the Queens-Bed. Oh my Tomazo, cries
the Queen, What cursed Destiny has conspired my Ruin. Nay, Madam, answered the
Marchioness, I know not what Devil's in the Wind, unless the King has mistaken
your Letter. My Letter, Cried the Queen; Sure thou have not given it him? Yes,
by my Troth, I met him at Aspasias Lodgings, and to save the trouble of a
Journey to Morrow morning -- Nay then, Cries Messalina, the Cause is plain, and
thy officious folly has undone me. However, recovering some of her frighted
Senses again, at the satisfaction she received from Tomazo, which had
dissipated her first hideous apparitions; and finding that a gentle though cross
Gale of Love, and not a storm of Vengeance had driven him thither; upon farther
re-collection of mind, as unlucky as the accident is, in one half minutes
thought, she has cast about to recover all, and retrive both his Life, and her
own Honor. And thereupon in a few short huddled Words, she tells the Baron
that she must beg his Pardon, that there was an unfortunate Amor between her
self and Polydorus; that a mistaken delivery of a Letter had occasioned this
unhappy Visit of the King; that nothing but Polydorus admission could pacify
all; and that if he valued his own Safety or her Reputation, he had no other
means of shelter from the certain Vengeance of a too powerful Rival, but by
instantly concealing himself in Tomazo's Chamber, and lying hushed in her Bed,
till she received the King; and by her management made way for his Deliverance.
This Proposal was immediately embraced, and without any reply, Tomazo and
Sanctifiore, are all hands at work at a nimble conveyance of all his Clothes,
Sword, Wig, Hat, and all other Rigging into the next Room, as well as the
darkness of the Night would permit, for the last Candle was put out when Tomazo
went to Bed; whilst the Queen in the mean time, for want of better Attendance
was put to the making her own Bed again, and laying the Pillows, the
Bed-cloaths, etc. in as much Decency and Order again as possibly so short a
warning from so late a ruffle could put'em into. All which performed with all
the hurry and expedition imaginable, and our Sanctifiore got snug into Tomazoes
Bed, the Marchioness unlocks the Door and admits the King, and with an
immediate Apology ready at her Tongues End, to excuse his Reception in the
dark, which otherwise might have suprized him. Oh Sir, says she, Excuse the
weakness of my poor Mrs. that loves you but too well, who is so strangely
ashamed of that bold Paper she sent you, that she dares not expose her Blushes
to the light, to think what a fond Creature you have made of her. The King thus
introduced, immediately unriggs himself for Bed, where the Queen receives him
with such open Arms, and endearing Embraces, that nothing possibly appeared
more kind; though in truth our amorous Monarch comes but to a poor thin Gleaning
in the Field of Love, after so large a Harvest so profusely cropped and carried
off before; for in reality, her heartier satigue with Sanctifiore had so much
imbeciled her Present Caresses, that her most passionate Languishments in
Polydorus Arms are little better than feigned, the movements rather of Art than
Nature; (a refuge always favorable to that fair sex, who boast that peculiar
Advantage above ours, that in the assaults of Love they can battle without
Ammunition, and engage even with the empty Quiver when all the Bolts are gone.)
It Is thus, our fondling Messalina manages her wanton Dalliances with the more
than ravished Polydorus. On the other side, our sculking Sanctifiore lying
Perdue in Tomazoes Bed, with the cold comfort of an old Matron by his side.
(but that is the least of his grievance) and troth with a pure Virgin Innocence
too, lies ruminating with a hundred restless Thoughts about him. One while he
thinks of the Paradise he is so suddenly excluded from; then of the aggravating
consideration of the over-rivalling Imperial Ravisher that banishes him; after
that, the ill-paid Merit of so many sighing languishing Years for the adored
Messalina, rewarded by his penurious Stars, only with one poor hour of
happiness; and that too, immediately sullied and blasted by the incroaching
Felicity of a more happy, or at least more formidable Favorite; and even his
own yet warm, yet melting Caresses in her Arms, all dashed and blended; (Oh the
nauseating Imagination) with the miscellanious Adulteration of slubberd-Joyes:
and above all, himself so totally excluded from all his poor short Reign of
Victory, as if his succeeding bolder Triumpher had razed the very Monuments,
and even defaced the memory and footsteps of his Conquest: So witty and curious
is Thought to its own tormenting pain; and so sullen and gloomy Contemplation
where the vapors of disturbed Love sit brooding for the exhalation. Perhaps
after another turn on his Bed, (so voluble is the roll of Fancy,) a more
smiling Idea dawns before him. First, he remembers with what killing Horrors
she heard the very Name of Polydorus, and almost fell dead into his Arms, even
at the sound. Then he reflected with what revelling Dalliances, Love flowed in
Torrents. (Oh the balmy sweets!) Embraces so twining, as if her transmigrating
Soul had Kissed through her Lips. And if the pitied poor deluded Polydorus, by
the Caprice of wanton Fortune, was blindly shuffled into her Arms; what then!
he comes too late: Alas, the purer Fires were all burnt out before; himself,
his happy self, had run down all the Gold, the bright Elixir; and the dull
drudging Chemist after him was only toyling amongst Smoke and Cinders; perhaps
indeed she kissed him, embraced him: mere cheat, hypocricy; a bribe for her own
Honor, and the Life of her Sanctifiore. In short, he had found himself so dear
a guest to her Bosom, heard those protesting Accents from her Lips, that sealed
'em as they sell; so sealed 'em that Polydorus comes but an intruder; steals
her forced, tired, unwilling kisses, and only plays the Riffler and the
Plunderer. But to draw toward Morning, our Lovers all kept restless, and
pleased on all sides; our Sanctifiore with the tickling satisfaction of a
cullied unenvied Polydorus; our Messalina, though disappointed of sublimer
Pleasures, yet not a little delighted to think how cheap, and yet so high her
Arms had treated, in furnishing out so Rich a Feast to the Rioting Polydorus,
with all but Fragments; her whole Nights Charms all over so lovely fair, and
yet their Gold beat out so thin. But after all their several satisfactions,
upon the first peep of Day, our cautious Messalina bethinks her self of her
wise and timely dislodgement of her Polydorus: Accordingly she tells him, that
if he values the continuation of her Favors, the preserving her Reputation
must be the effectual means of securing 'em; wherefore, how unwilling soever,
she is compelled to desire his uprising, and his securing his safe retreat by
the kind shelter of the same friendly darkness that introduced him. The King,
who indeed by this had exhausted his whole present Artillery, is the readier to
obey her Commands, to have the fairer opportunity of quitting the Field with
Honor; and as dark as it was, made a shift to dress him in his Dishabilee, (the
Queen begging Excuse that Tomazo was not called to strike a Light, least the
blaze of a new lighted Candle at that unseasonable hour in her own Bedchamber,
might occasion matter of curiosity to any accidental wakeing Eye near it.) The
King after a Hundred Protestations and Vows of Eternal Love and Fidelity, by
the help of Tomazo, who unlocks the Door for him, retires to his Chair, and so
home to his Bed; his little sleep-truly, and much exercise, of his riffled
Spirits all Night inviting him to a heartier Mornings slumber, than ordinary.
The King is no sooner departed, but the Queen prepared for twenty little
amorous Excuses to her Sanctifiore, for her unfortunate Amor with Polydorus,
by her summons likewise, the Baron begins to dress himself; but immediately
upon search for his Clothes, amongst all his other Rigging, he misses his
Breeches; which upon sudden re-collection, must either be unluckily left behind
upon the Queens Couch by her Bedside in the hurry of their removal, or else
dropped in the passage by by the way. Instant inquiry is thereupon made, when to
his no little surprise and confusion, he finds the Kings Breeches dropped behind
the Couch; and his own very fairly marched off with by the King in their stead.
What sudden outcry on all Hands this fatal mistake had raised, may well be
imagined. As for Tomazo, she was almost thunderstruck to think, not only the
First, in the delivery of the Queens Letter, but also, this last more fatal
Error lay wholly at her Door; that in her accursed over-haste, she should so
unfortunately drop the Barons Breeches from out the rest of his Clothes, and
the King so unluckily to meet with them. The first shock of their fright was
such, that except [ruin'd, betrayed, undone!] or some other such short Raptures
to the same tune, they could hardly get out one reasonable word. But at last, a
little consideration being thought seasonable; they begin to examine the inside
and outside marks of Both the Breeches, to see if there were any shadow of
hopes, that the King going home to Bed, might not possibly discover the
mistake. As for the Breeches themselves, it fell out so that they were both
Velvet, the Kings only Crimson, and the Barons Scarlet. In the Kings pockets
were only a few pieces of Gold, and a Gold Watch, with a Seal cut in a Ruby,
tied to the Chain of it, and a snutch-Box: But the Baron in the discovery of
his pockets, tells the Queen, It Is true, he had a Gold Watch in his too, and
some small matter of Money; but then here came the misery, his Commission was
in his pocket; (plain demonstration in the case, that would infallibly rise up
in Judgment against him;) and besides, that very Jewel that he valued above his
Life, her Majesty's Picture set in Diamonds, presented to him as a mark of her
First Favors, which he had ever about him. Alas, Replied the Queen, That
foolish Trifle is not worth your thought, that loss might be Repaired; besides,
my dear Sanctifiore has so much Interest in the substance; that the loss of the
shadow should not afflict him. But oh! this accursed Commission! That fatal
Paper points out my dear Sanctifiore a certain Victim to the Bloody Rage of
Polydorus. At this last Apprehension she could not forbear bursting out into a
torrent of Tears, which wrought a very tender Impression in the Baron, Having
at last retrieved Reason enough from an hundred passionate Expressions in
concern for her Barons danger; upon farther debate upon this accident, they
considered, possibly the King might go to Bed without taking Cognizance of the
color of his Breeches; and also have no occasion of searching his pockets to
make any discovery by the Inside. Intelligence; and more than that, the Master
of his Wardrobe might lay out other Clothes for his next dressing. But, alas,
what signified that; for though indeed all the Money found in 'em goes to a
Fee; both the Watch, the Picture, and the Commission, would certainly (as
customary) be put into the pockets of whatever Breeches he should next wear; so
that either way, the Kings surprise at finding all those things about him,
would lead him into a thousand Imaginations, but none of 'em either to
Messalina's Honor, or to Sanctifiore's Safety. What to do, or which way to
turn themselves in this unhappy Labyrinth, they cannot tell. However, it is
resolved between them, that Sanctifiore should immediately withdraw, lest the
King might return and surprise him there, and not go to his own, but Aspasia's
Lodgings, to be out of harms way till such time she had felt the Kings Pulse:
For as sooner or later the King must find those things, undoubtedly his
Curiosity, (whatever his Resentments were) would soon bring him to the Queen;
and if so, possibly Woman's wit, which yet never failed her, would so far friend
her, as to save all. For as 'twas impossible for her to know the Kings
particular Sentiments till she saw him; so all stirring in the matter before
then, might rather create Jealousies, than allay them. Besides, she had so much
confidence in her own assurance, that her blushes should not betray her Guilt;
and whatever humor she found him in, she was resolved to look so unconcerned,
and wear such perfect Innocence in her Face and her behavior, as well managed
might make for both their Safety: Accordingly Sanctifiore, with two or three
deep sighs of his own, and as many of the Queens, and a wet Eye too into the
bargain, takes his leave, submitting the whole disposal of his Destiny to no
other Guardian-Angel than Messalina.

But to return to our Polydorus, whose Contemplations at his parting with
Messalina had rapt him much above the consideration of what color his Breeches
were of, it goes so fair for us, that he is at present in Bed heartily sleeping;
and no part of any discoveries yet made. And being to give Audience about
Eleven a Clock this Morning to an Ambassador Extraordinary from the Grand
Seigniour; a very Rich Embroidered Suite for the State of the Day is ready for
his wearing. Polydorus being got up and dressed, no sooner than just time enough
for the appointed hour of Audience; in the middle of the Ambassadors Speech,
putting his hand in his pocket for his Snutch-Box, he lights upon a Gold Box,
which opening, he finds the Contents much Richer than the outside, viz. the
Queen of Albions Picture set in Diamonds. The sight of so dazzling a Jewel
striking so sudden upon him, and so unexpected, appeared a mere Vision to him.
The Darts that attended even but the shadow of his adored Messalina, gave him
a touch so near his heart, that he could not but conceive an infinite Pleasure
at so charming a miniature of the beauties of his Albion Divinity --. But how
came he by it? so inestimable a Jewel in his possesion, and yet so
unaccountably dropped into his Hands! I, that is the quection! Yes, such a
question which Love, that always plays its own flatterrer, soon answers for
him. For that generous Messalina, who had given him such a Night of Raptures,
nay, and had Written her self the inviting Summons into so fragrant a Field of
Paradise; as an amorous Endearment to her so highly, favored Polydorus, must
undoubtedly have gotten this Jewel conveyed into his Pocket; a Caress so
surprising as infinitely heightened (if possible) the value of the Present.
Amongst an hundred pleasing Thoughts, (for the fond are easily tickled) upon so
surprising an Adventure, (which indeed had so taken up his Meditations, that he
was but an indifferent Attender to the Embassy) it came into his head to dive a
little deeper into his pocket; for if the Rich Mine, upon the first search had
produced so wealthy a Treasure, possibly it was not yet wholly exhausted. For
who knows, thought he, (for Love is naturally avaritious) but his Messalina may
have obliged him with some other kind Favor, if 'twere no more than a Letter
with it, as a kind Interpreter to the silent Oratory of this Beauteous but
Toungless Charmer. Accordingly, upon a second search in his Pockets, he lights
upon the Barons Commission. How, Sanctifiores. Commission in Polydorus's
Pocket! Yes, very likely. The Queens Countryman, nay, and some part of a
Relation to her! And undoubtedly his Commission by the same fair Hand conveyed
into his Pocket, as her Picture was: And though his present Apprehension cannot
lead him to any fixed or positive Conjecture, why her Picture should come so
attended, he has no Curiosity for so puzling an inquiry. Let it suffice her
fair Hand has lodged it there, for Causes and Reasons to her self best known;
which in her ^n due time, her own fair Lips will vouchsafe to explain* It is
enough, he is Master of a Jewel of that inestimable Value, the Sacred Image of
his Goddess, the unquestioned Demonstration of her kindest Favor, with neither
Riddle nor Mystery in it; but all Love, pure Love, and nothing else but Love
both in the Blessing and the Conveyance of it. Our Polidorus is so all on Fire
to be throwing himself at his Messalinas Feet, in Gratitude for so transcendant
an Endearment, that he is almost impatient till the Embassy's finished, (it
being the first time that an Ottoman Ambassador could tire him before.) And
that dispatched, he immediately posts away to the Queens Palace; whether he
comes with that cheerful and indeed transported Look, that Messalina began to
read a favorable prologue in his very Eyes. The King finding the Queen alone
with only Tomazo, (for indeed the Queen had so managed it, as to avoid all
Visits on purpose for a private Conference) Oh Madam, [falling upon his Knees]
You have so greatly Surprised me, so blessed me -- This little Divinity, this
unvaluable Treasure -- [kissing the Picture] Fie, Sir, [raising him] Replied
the Queen, But pray [smiling] when did this little Divinity (as you are pleased
to call it,) that it seems descended in a Cloud, first discover it self to you?
Oh Madam, not above half an hour ago. Just in the height of my attending the
Ottoman Embassy, I found this little Dear Beauty crept into my Hand, with that
surprise, that I protest, it put my whole Politics of Empire, quite out of my
Head; and my heart was so wholly taken up with receiving this little Envoy from
the fair Majesty of Albion, that I had not leizure to lend Audience to any less
favored Royal Representative. The Queen, who by ^his time had made discovery
enough to lighten the whole Load of her Soul, thought it seasonable to make
this answer. Well, Sir, you see what a confident thing your Love, or rather my
own has made me; that I durst take the boldness, by the help of kind Tomazo, to
steal so worthless a trifle into your Pockets -- Worthless! Replied the King?
Yes, my Polydorus, answered Messalina, worthless indeed; that poor dull
shadow, a faint and weak Resembler of the passionate Messalina, when her Soul,
her entire Devoted Soul to Polydorus, not all the Pencils in the World can
draw. That Imagery, that Pourtraict-work fit only for the Pencil of the Gods,
the Gods that know, that see, yes, and themselves inspired that Heart, where
Polydorus Reigns, and Reigns alone. But, alas, whether does Love transport me!
Let me not boast my Virtues too fast, before I first beg Pardon for my Faults.
For I have committed a greater piece of boldness yet, in disarming a Colonel
of yours. To take his Commission from him, was an Achievement which perhaps no
power but Messalina 's could have performed. But as a near Relation of
Messalina, and a Native Subject of my Brother, I hope you will Excuse his
Re-signation to my absolute Commands laid upon him. Nay, Sir, I have yet
greater Presumption that wants your Forgivenness. For that Commission so boldly
intruding into your Royal Hands, carries a bolder Petition along with it from a
supplicating Messalina, whose Natural Affection for a Person so near to her
Blood, brings her a Suitor to your Majesty, that, that Commission, though it
self already so Honorable; yet, if Sanctisiores Courage and Fidelity, and my
Intercession may prevail; may (when Opportunity will serve, or a Vacancy
permit) receive some small additional Glory for my sake. Opportunity! and
Vacancy! Replied Polydorus. Wait tedious Months, (...) Weeks, or Days, to grant
a Boon, my Royal Messalina vouchsafes to ask her Polydorus? No, Madam, thus I
cancel his Commission, [pulling it out of his Pocket, and tearing off the Seal]
and in Exchange for a poor Regiment of Horse, I from this minute Create him a
Marshall of Gallia; and bid him wait on me at Supper to receive his New
Commission. The Queen almost ravished at the Gallantry of Polydorus, on so
pleasing a Subject as the Advancement of her Sanctifiore, was Launching into a
hundred Thanks and Acknowledgments; when the impatient Polydorus interrupting
her. Hold, Madam, I can hear no more, oh spare those unindebted Thanks; for by
the Gods, I grant not this New Honor to the Baron of Sanctifiore, at Messalina
's Suit, but his own. No, Royal Madam, when Missalina 's my Petitioner, reserve
it for a Nobler Boon, worthier her self to ask, and me to Grant. It it enough
the Baron of Sanctifiore has Veins enricht with Messalina 's Blood, and with
that single Plea alone, stands Candidate for higher Honor; and I have but paid
his due. The Queen could hardly find words to express her Sense of the
prodigious Generosity of Polydorus; nor indeed would Polydorus hear any on that
Subject, pleasing himself undoubtedly with a greater vanity in gratifying his
Messalina, without the vanity of receiving Applause for it. The Queen
perceiving his humor, told him in a little airier Style, that she had played
another Love-trick with him, she had made bold by her Tomazoes help too, to
exchange a Watch with him (but indeed the Seal tied at the String* she had no
design upon, which therefore she restores him) resolving to count all her
tedious widowed minutes in Polydorus absence, by no other Hand of Time but his
own: And if in his own gay hours in her absence, be would honor hers with the
same use, it would be no little pleasure to her to think, that when his Eye
should sometimes be cast upon it, it might now and then at an idler minute be
his remembrancer of Messalina. Polydorus flying into her Arms, and printing his
Soul upon her Lips, made answer, Yes, Madam, your Watch, your Picture, and your
Eternal Charms, shall all be my Remembrances. But I have almost forgot my kind
and generous Tomazo, my honest Engineer in this Affair: At which calling to one
of his Attending Lords in the Drawing Room, he ordered him the Payment of
Twenty Thousand Crowns to the Marchioness of Tomazo; a Present which made her
smile; and for which she returned no small Compliment. To conclude their
present interview, all parties are so well satisfied, more especially our
over-joyed Polydorus, that he humbly besought her private Company in her Closet
at Vesper-time* to which the Queen kindly answered, That all her hours are at
his Service, when her whole Life must be so. After a parting Embrace, and a
sealing Kiss, the King takes his Leave. Well, says Tomazo, to the Queen (as
soon as the Kings Back was turned) Never was a pack of ill Cards so luckily
played out as this Nights Adventures; Twenty Thousand Crowns for a Pair of
Breeches so neatly lined with sham: In troth, would I had put the Doublet upon
him too, for half such another Sum. Well, Madam, to your everlasting Honor be
it spoken; never was Credulous Monarch so over-reacht.

Whilst this Harangue between the Queen and Tomazo went on, Sanctifiore
increased their Company, who by his spies abroad, having Learned the Kings
motions; was greedily come to inquire his Fate from his fair Oracle. The Queen
with an open [All Hail] gives him Joy of his Mareschal-Sraff, and briefly
recounts the whole Scene betwixt the King and her self. Sanctifiore was not a
little delighted with a turn of Affairs so beyond all Expectations, himself so
strangely mounted to the top of Fortunes-Wheel, by an Accident, that in all
reasonable appearance, rather threatened his utter Destruction; and therefore
first, in all the tenderest Expressions he Congratulated the miraculous
Deliverance of the Queens Honor; and then was falling at her Feet, as the sole
Foundress of his Happiness, to thank her for that endearing Character she had
been so Generously pleased to give of him; and to which alone he owed the whole
Exaltation to his present glorious Preferment; which the Queen would no ways
permit, telling him very gaily, that Polydorus, though ignorantly, had done no
more than Justice; and the Mareschals-staff he had given, was but in Honorable
amends for the Nights Joys he had robbed him of: Nay, truly, in amends for her
losses too; the intolerable tedious Nights Penance he had made her undergo;
there being certainly no dissimulation so irksome and uneasy, as playing the
Hypocrite in Love, between a pair of Sheets; especially, her dearer
Sanctifiore, the rightful Lord of the Night, lying so near, yet under so fevere
a Bill of Exclusion. The Baron was returning a compliment for all these
obliging Expressions of Messalina; but the Queen would not suffer the hearing
it, telling him, that his immediate assiduous Attendance on Polydorus, was his
present Duty, for his Commission would be Sealed to night; bidding him make
haste accordingly; only desiring him to take this one consideration with him,
that as she was engaged in an Amor with Polydorus, he would seriously reflect
on the great difference betwixt an Amor of Interest, and an Amor of Choice
and Election; the first, only the gratification of our Pride, and our Vanity
but the Last, the pleasure of our Arms and our Souls. The Baron was going to
Reply, when the Queen waved her Hand to hasten him to Polydorus. However, the
Baron remembering a Command from Aspasia, begs Pardon for three or four words
from Aspasia, who was under some trouble in mind; and humbly besought her
Majesty to Honor her with a walk in the Garden about half an hour before
Vespers, where she might fall at her Feet, and unbosom her Griefs to her Royal
Mrs. And so he takes his leave.

The Queen much concerned at any thing that should disturb the Peace of her
dear Aspasia; was impatient till the Evening drew on, that she might receive
the knowledge of her Pain, in hopes of lending her ministering help to the Cure
of it. The hour is come, and the Queen meets Aspasia; who indeed appears with
Countenance as had not much tasted of sleep last Night, the very Aspect and Air
of her Face being much changed from that natural Gayety that before was used to
sit so lively and so lovely there. Why, hownow! says the Queen, What sad, my
dear Aspasia? What saucy sorrow dares invade those Eyes; Can any thing of
Trouble uncalm thy Rest, or ruffle thy Brow, whilst thou art in a Court where
Honor waits thee; at least whilst I have any there, my dear Aspasia shall
share it. Ah, too Generous Madam, Replied Aspasia, Your Majesty cannot guess my
Load of Griefs; nor can I find a Tongue to utter them, so much my guilty shame
confounds me. Fie, Aspasia, (answers the Queen) Now you distrust my Friendship!
Can thy Heart hold a murmur or a sigh, and Messalina 's be a stranger to it! Ah
Madam (Replies Aspasia,) But am I such a Criminal against that Friendship? Yet
since my Crime must come before my Royal Judge, and stand your just Tribunal:
Know, that the King, the Great, the Glorious, the most Pagan Polydorus, did me
the Honor of a Visit last Night, in so much State and Grandeur. It was no more
that what he owed thee (answered Messalina) both as Latroon 's Lady; and
Messalina 's Friend. But my Aspasia, where is the guilty shame in this! Ah
Madam, says Aspasia, The criminal Part's to come. What, cries Messalina, Did he
make Love to thee! Love, to me Madam (answered Aspasia,) When so fair a Deity
fills up his Heaven. [Messalina] Did thou make Love to him then? [Aspasia,]
Make Love to him! No, were he Greater than he is, all the Caesar's and
Alexanders put together, I think I know my natural Pride too well, and far
above so poor a weakness. Well then, Aspasia, (says the Queen) without mincing
the matter, thou art even after all fallen in Love with Polydorus. Oh Madam,
replied Aspasia, After that Confession, that criminal Confession, how can your
Royal Eye vouchsafe to look upon so black and so ungrateful a Creature, or
suffer the vile Wretch to appear before you? Look upon thee, my Aspasia, (says
the Queen) Yes, and hug thee, kiss thee, love thee; as kind, as close, as warm
as ever. View thee all over as fair and lovely as ever thou were. Pray what has
made the change? Aspasia could hardly forbear falling at her Feet, at this
obliging answer; and the Queen continued her Caresses to her Aspasia, in so
many endearing Terms; that Aspasia unfolded the whole Root of her Pain; told
her, That the Imperial Polydorus appeared with so much Majesty, and addressed
with so much Gallantry, and moved with such a Port; his Mien, his Person, his
Glory, all so dazzling, that her own Charms drove not more rapid to the
Captivating of Polydorus Heart, then Polydorus to the undoing of hers. In fine,
the Hand of Fate was in it, and irresistible was the Influence.

As the continuation of this Discourse raised a great deal of Passion from the
murmuring Aspasia, complaining of her hard Fate in so ill-placed a Love; and as
great Attention in the Queen, that listened with no small pity to all her sighs:
we must be forced to leave them to their solitary walk; and recount a little of
the farther History of our Lord Laforse, our Lactilla, the Cambrian Nurses,
Inamorato. This unhappy Gentleman as you have heard at large, had his the other
Nights Vesper-Assignation defeated by Polydorus, ordained by blind chance to
leap into his Saddle, though Heaven knows full sore against his will, when his
mistake of a Nurse for the Queen, (so poor a Cloud for so bright a Juno) cost
him so many hard words and hearty sobs for it -- But poor Laforse knowing
nothing of the matter, is resolved to Visit his Mrs. this very Vesper-time, and
after his Excuse for his two Days absence, reap those Blisses, the possession
of which have only thus long been deferred to heighten their Expectation, and
enhance their Transport. Accordingly, the Bell ringing just now for Vespers, up
to the Queens Bedchamber he boldly marches, and to his wish finds no body
there but his Lactilla all alone, and the young Prince asleep in the Cradle by
her. Lactilla was very much pleased at Sight of so dear a Face; but remembering
in what an abrupt sort of manner he had flung from her Arms the last time, a
little unkind (as she thought) after such kind Embraces as she fancied she had
given him, that deserved better from him, was resolved to behave her self a
little reserved to him. The Count who observed her shighness, and imagined it
to spring from a quite contrary Cause, fancying his two Days absence the only
occasion of her present sullen look; thought it Prudence to soften her Aspect
by his just Apology. Well, my Lactilla, (says he) You may have reason to deny
your good looks to your Laforse, but I assure you, punish me as severely as you
please, I have this innocence on my side, that you frown not upon a criminal,
but an unfortunate Lover. For upon my Soul, dear Rogue, 'twas envious cruel
Destiny, interposing Fate, that barred my Joy; that I could not possibly see
thee these two whole Days; for that dear intended happy Evening the other Day,
I heard the Queen was indisposed, and went not to Prayers, and then, I durst
not, thou know, I durst not approach thee; and all Day Yesterday I was out
of Town, sent forty miles unluckily abroad with an Express from the King; and
came home Post not half an hour ago. After this honest frank Confession, I hope
my dear will not now debar my happiness, but generously grant me all those
Golden Blisses, for which I have sighed so long. Lactilla who was a little
amazed at this Narrative, to hear him talk of tasting his First Joys now, when
his memory must be either very treacherous, or himself very ungrateful, that
could not, or would not remember, how kindly she had entertained him in her
Bosom before, and how profusely she had melted her Soul in his Arms on this
very Bed, and not Forty Eight hours ago. (For the Devil a shadow of her mistake
of the King for Laforse could enter into her Soul.) Accordingly turning a
little scornfully toward him: How Sir, (says she,) was not you here the other
Night? I here my Dear, (says Laforse) thou know my Love I was not.
[Lactilla] Oh you base man you, disown my Favors, slight my Love, base and
ungrateful -- [Laforse] I, I slight my dear Lactilla! disown her Favors!
[Lactilla] Yes treacherous, false ungrateful wretch -- [Laforse] Treacherous and
False! by Heaven, all Love all Constancy. Fie, my dear Love, no more; Oh take
me, take me to thy Arms, and let me breath my Life, my Love, my Soul, into thy
Bosom. [Lactilla] Stand off Dissembler, [pushing him from her] I loath thy very
sight. My Love not worth your Remembrance! Alas, I am but a poor Country-Woman,
and you a Lord Forsooth; a proud forgetful Devil. That fall of Lucifer, Pride,
and worst of sins, Ingratitude! No, you were not here the other Night, not you.
What the Devil (thinks Laforce to himself, does this raving Woman mean.) Pride
of Lucifer, and Ingratitude, and the rest of her unintelligible Gibberish.
[Lactilla] No, my false recanting Loon, my Equivocating Jebusitick Pagan proud
Lord you were not here the other Night. [Laforse] No Madam, if that will satisfy
you, by all that is Sacred, or what is a properer Oath at this time; by all the
Wind-mills in your Head, I was no more here then, than I was at the
East Indies. But what in the name of Frenzy is the meaning of all this, unless
you have a mind to make us both run mad with Noise and Nonsense? Lactilla who
hears him so heartily swear he was not there, has another new biting Maggot
that stings ten times deeper than before; for now nothing less will serve her
fancy, but that this false Lord has only abused her all this while, and he a
Lord, and she but a poor Countrywoman, has put only a trick upon her, has
wrought her up to the yielding up of her Love, and instead of enjoying her
himself, he basely and vilanously sent one of his Footmen or Grooms to act
their filthy Lust upon her: (such a piece of wickedness being no new thing, for
she had heard stories of poor Women in Albion that had been so abused by
ungrateful Debauches) and what confirms her that the Villain sent by Laforse
the other Night to abuse her must be some such impostor, was that no sooner (who
e're he was) had he gained his beastly ends upon her, but he left her so
basely, clapped the Door after him so sliely, and run away lo like a guilty Rogue
as he was (which nothing of a Gentleman could ever have so served her) that at
best he was some Varlet or Scoundrel. This imagination fell so violent and so
strong upon her, that now she runs stark staring mad. And all the Rogues, Dogs,
Villians, Traitors, Devils, is the best Language she can afford him. What was
she a Woman to be abused by Laqueys and Foot-boyes. No, she would have him to know
when she was in Albion, she had Marquesses, nay Dukes and Princes sued for her
Favors; put his Rascals and Paultrons upon her! The Count that understood not
one Syllable of all this medley, was however several times endeavoring to
thrust in a word or two toward bringing her to her right Wits again. But all
in vain, for she talks all, rayls on, and will hear nothing: was she a Woman he
had the Impudence to think deserved no better, she that had Honorable Milk run
in her Breasts, worthy to suckle a Prince, and the Heir of three Kingdoms: And
sham his Scanderoons, his Taterdemallions upon her! Out on him for a Villain.
To conclude, she fell a bellowing so heartily, and scolding so loud, till she
even soamed at both corners of her Mouth; and after she had bethundered him,
round the whole points of the compass, in all the indignation and scorn she
could rowze, she flings from him, and quite forgetting the charge of her
Nursery, led by Despair and Frenzy she runs in a distracted Rage cross the Room
of State; and the Door of the Queens Closet happening to stand a jarr; without
any thought whither led, or how carried, she flounces into the Closet, and
throws her self upon the Couch. Laforse all this while in a perfect maze did
not think it worth his while to follow her, but sat musing in the Bedchamber
to think what Tarantula had stung her to run her into all these unaccountable
Deliriums.

The King, who remembering his assignation with the Queen at Vesper Time, and
who indeed had fortified even with Cock-broath and Jellies, for the meeting of
his Messalina, had just now approach the Closet, the appointed Scene of Bliss;
and entering in the Dark, had just a glimmering of light enough to perceive a
Lady upon the Couch; who at that hour in that place, and in that posture, his
Reason told him could be no other than his Divine Messalina. Accordingly, he
makes his advance toward her in his Customary Prologue of, Life of my Life, my
dearest Guardian-Angel -- Lact illa hearing the very same style from the very
same voice (for her Ears were now grown critical) and finding him the very same
Counterfeit Laforse, the audacious Impostor that had deceived her before,
presently thought no less than that her Arch-fiend and Devil of a Lord, had
impudently sent the same Villain to abuse her once again. That very imagination
in half a moment had turned her into so absolute a Fury, that with only a short
Salute of, Monster, Ruffian, Traitor, she flew like a Tygress upon him, and
with the first seize of her Talons, (which were not over-well pared) caught him
by the Face, and tore him from the Eyes to the Chin. Polydorus at so strange an
Assault, could hardly imagine less than the whole Confederate Army upon him.
All he could do, was to disentangle our Milch-bear from his Face, and hold her
Paws fast from farther Outrage. At which, she fell into so bellowing an
outcry, kicking and spitting in his Face, calling him all the Rogues and
Rascals, Sons of Whores, pitiful Slaves, and what not: a shabby beggarly
Scoundrel, as he was, to abuse a Woman of her Quality, that was too good for
his Betters. Just at this very Instant, the Queen (who had over-slipt some few
minutes of her appointment with the King, by listening a little too zealously to
Aspasia's Amorous Complaint in the Garden,) was with her Tomazo with a light in
her Hand gotten to the Door of her Closet; where certainly never so Comical a
sight encountered her. The Great and Mighty Polydorus, the Terror of the World,
that had driven whole Nations before him, now Fencing against a poor filly
Woman; and so much of the beaten side, his Wig stamped under her Feet, his
Cravat all torn, and his Face all over Bloody; a Trophy that all his Enemies
could never boast of; (for indeed, though his Victories resound through the
Universe, he had always the Prudence to keep personal danger at a distance,
having ever the Caution of Fighting beyond reach of Cannon shot.) At the
approach of the Queen, and the Light that had discovered our Lactilla's
mistake, the poor Nurse to think what she had done, fell down dead in a
Swoon'd, and then into a fit; insomuch that Tomazo was forced to call in help
to bring her to her Senses again. The King in the mean while was gotten into
the Queen's Bedchamber; (from whence poor Laforse at the beginning of the
scuffle had very wisely drawn off) and was washing his Face, where he found so
many shameful marks of her Indignation left, and so many not over Honorable
Scars, the remains of her mortal Dugdeon; that he could hardly see him self in
a Glass, without frightning himself. He very well remembered what poor Rogues
and Dogs she had called him; and truly he fancied she was resoived to make him
some such despicable Wretch; for he had so little a Face of a Gentleman left,
that really he was hardly fit for Conversation. The concern of spoiling his
Beauty, in so ignominious a manner made him stark mad: As for his appointed
Amor, it put him so out of all humor of Love, that all the strong Broth and
Chocolate he had Eat or Drank that Day, was at present thrown away upon him.
The Queen a little pitying her Imperial Servant, in his present distress,
humbly befought him to inform her the occasion of so outrageous a Behavior
from Lactilla. Outrageous, Madam, Replied Polydorus! Hell confound her, for
never was Monarch in all kinds so handled by Rubbish, as I have been. The
Occasions! say you? To satisfy that Curiosity, pray ask your Madam Trowel, your
Brick-kill Cinder her self: the occasions so shameful, and the accident so
scandalous, that it is fit for no other Mouth but her own. The King upon advice
of laying something to his Face to prevent, as much as possible, the marks of
her Nails, takes his leave, with no little grumbling about him, cursing his
very Stars, that their malice should have the Impudence to raise up so sordid a
Reptile to give him disquiet: Our Lactilla is no sooner got to Life again, but
she is in fear of a worse Death: For Wracks and Wild Horses are the least of her
Visions, to think what vengeance hangs over her Head for an assault upon
Polydorus; and though on the better side, she finds by the whole matter she has
now had a Monarch instead of a Footboy in her Arms, the rectifying of that
mistake makes little to her Satisfaction. For though her Ambition a^pired to a
young Lord, as her dear, (and now poor wronged) Laforse was; yet Polydorus, was
so much above her Desires, that she fancies (if she scapes otherwise) she shall
dye with shame. The very thought of so cruel a Pagan Tyrant (such was her
apprehension of him) had created that Aversion that so Great a Man under so
little a Character with her, was a more nauseous disquieting Thought, than the
coursest Amor she could have made. But her greatest Torment is yet to come;
for poor Lactilla is called to Examination by the Queen; where in down right
simplicity, interlarded with a great deal of blubbering and Begging Pardons,
she confesses her weakness to the Lord Laforse, and the mistakes that had
occasioned all this hurly-burly. The Queen, as serious a Face as she put upon
it, could hardly forbear smiling; for now the mystery of Polydorus's first
Impotence in her Arms is all unfolded; nor truly could she well be angry, the
whole Anventure was so comical; however, she gave her a short Reprimand;
telling her, that if she played such tricks any more, she must be forced to
wean her Prince, and take her Nursery from her. Poor Lactilla fell upon her
knees, and heartily besought her Majesty's forgiveness, Vowing and Protesting
all the future innocence in the World.

But come to the more important part of our History, the following Day is the
expected Lycogenes Arrived at the Court of Gothland. I shall not be tedious in
Recital of the Universal Addresses to so Imperial a Guest; and all the
Panegyricks made him on so Divine a Subject, as that memorable Constancy to his
Pagan Zeal, which will one Day give him that bright Starry Crown as shall more
than compensate his Loss of three poorer Earthly Diadems; nor shall I recount
what part our Polydorus bears in the magnificence of Lycogenes's Entertainment.
Let it suffice the World resounds his Gallantry on that occasion, which
Gallantry paid by Polydorus, not only as a Debt to the long sworn friendship
between them, was possibly heightened by his private Gratitude to Lycogenes for
his borrowed Felicities in his Messalinas Arms, as owing only to Lycogenes's
happy Sanctuary taken in the Court of Gothland. In this State of Matters in the
Gallick Court, our Messalina has a great many Irons in the Fire; to flatter and
deceive her Lycogenes, to humor and caress her Polydorus, and to please and be
pleased with her dear Sanctifiore; her forgotten Count Dauliah, being at
present, dispatched with a negotiation to Boanerges, and that worn-out-Lover,
thanks Heaven, taken off of her Hands. Messalina's whole true Happiness seems
bounded in her Darling Sanctifiore's Embraces, whom she sees every Day more
Resplendant, and every Hour more passionately Doats upon; insomuch that she
envies her compelled Favors to Polydorus, as all Invasion upon the only Sacred
Right of her dear Baron; and which on no other account she could forgive her
self than the Satisfaction of the usury they were repaid with, in the
extraordinary Advancement of her Sanctifiore; the profuse Polydorus having with
a more than common Munificence furnished out her Barons Equipage and Grandeur in
his new post of Honor; a consideration that softened her into easier
compliances to Polydorus than otherwise she could so well have brooked with
patience. During this manage of Affairs some Days were past, when Sanctifiore
surprised with an immediate and unexpected Command from Polydorus, of repairing
to the Army, comes to Messalina just after Dinner, and tells her, that with no
longer warning than early to morrow Morning, he was Commanded to the Banks of
the Rhine. The Queen, who though she knew the envious Day must come, that Love
must truck to Glory, yet not prepared for so sudden an Alarm from the Trumpet
of Honor; was not a little staggered at the sound. The concern it put her
into, she was compelled at present to stifle, this visit of her Baron being
received in public; so that all at present between 'em, was little more than
usual Compliment in wishing Prosperity to his Sword, etc. only she whispered in
his Ear to let him know, that about an hour hence, she desired to speak with
him alone. The Baron accordingly makes his obeisance, and retires. No sooner
was he gone, but getting loose, alone with her Tomazo, she poured forth those
tender Lamentations for the Fatal blow that must ravish her dear Sanctifiore
from her Arms, in such mournful Accents, as might have extorted compassion
almost from a Rivals Eyes. She knew not but to Morrow might be his eternal
Farewell; the chance of War, so uncertain, and the undistinguishing Bullet and
Sword such relentless Destroyers, that Merit or Worth are no Plea at their
Arbitrary Tribunal. These and many other Reflections drew a great many sighs
from her; and what added to her misfortune, upon her resolving to have her
Sanctifiore this last parting Night in her Arms, at least one Riotous Night of
Pleasure, before their Fatal Divorce; in the transport of that Thought, to
compensate if possible the abstinence of a whole Fasting Age to come; to her no
small distraction, she remembers that this very Night she has unfortunately
made an appointment with Polydorus; an Obligation that it is almost impossible to
disengage her self from; and which, if she performs, under so cruel an
Exclusion from the Arms of her parting Sanctifiore, must give her in the
Embraces of Polydorus, a Night of so much Sacrifice and Penance, as she can
hardly think of, but with Impatience and Reluctance: Tomazo her helf could not
forbear telling her, that indeed to keep an Assignation with Rolydorus to
Night, and part with Sanctifiore to morrow, without one fare well Blessing,
would be very hard. No, my Tomazo, answered the Queeen, Not Wild-Horses shall
draw me to an Act of such Ingratitude; in short, Sink Nations, and Perish
Worlds, nothing shall make her so wretched a Victim. Whilst she is a Fortifying
her self with this Resolution; her Sanctifiore approaches; where the Queen with
so many tender Kisses; and twining Embraces, enricht with a Chain of flowing
Pearl from her Eyes, entertaines him so passionately, and so bewails and
condols the impending hour of their separation, that nothing could be more
moving. When the mutual sighings and murmurings between 'em had vented the
tendrest sentiments of their Souls; the Queen to improve the few short minutes
left, tells him, That this last Night must be Dedicated to Love, and
accordingly, bids him order his Affairs. Sanctifiore receiving the seraphick
Summons with all duteous Humility and Veneration, is compelled to tell his
Messalina, That his preparation for such exalted Bliss, and some little hurry
toward his Journey to Morrow, which must be dispatched in the short remainder
of the Day, call him away at present. The positive Hour of being ready at call,
in the Gallery, at Ten at Night assigned, our Sanctifiore till that blessed hour,
bids her adieu. He is no sooner marched off, but our Polydorus big with the
Expectation of this Nights Ecstasies, makes a visit to Messalina; who with a
sorrowful Face, tells him, She is very unhappy; for this very Night, which with
so much satisfaction to her self she had assigned to the Arms of her dear
Polydorus, had her cruel Lycogenes sent her Word that he intended to Bed with
her; desiring him withal to consider what uneasiness her defeated Joys must
give her in so killing a Disappointment. Rolydorus who was touched to the Heart
at this surprising News, though at the same time delighted with his dear
Messalina's sensible Regret so visible in her Looks, after some few Revilings
at his persecuting Stars, in the Debarment of his Joys, told her, He must be
forced, how unwillingly soever, to acquiesce to irresistible Destiny; For if
the interposing Lycogenes was fated to Rob him of this Nights Felicity; the
Distresses of Love must inure him to that Patience, as to attend the slower,
but surer Hand of Fortune to Crown his Love some happier Hour. No, my dear
Polydorus, (replied the Queen,) This Night my Lycogenes Beds with Messalina;
and yet this Night shall Messalina Lodge in the Arms of Polydorus. How, Madam!
Answered the amazed King. Yes, my Polydorus, continued Messalina: Shall a dull
Husband bar my Joys? Shall Messalina Love as I do? And such a feeble Bar have
Power to hold her from her dear Darling Polydorus Arms! No -- In fine to
unriddle this transcending kindness, which how unintelligible soever at
present, had nevertheless already translated our Polydorus to the very
Battlements of no common Heaven; she told him, that she loved him so
passionately, that she could not content her self with any poor or common
Testimonials of it. Her Husband, it is true, bedded with her to Night, but her
burning Love for Polydorus, had formed such a Design, that should over pass
that Obstruction, and the Bosom of her Polydorus should be her this Nights
pillow. To explain her self, she had so ordered it that Polydorus about half an
hour past Nine at Night, should be privately let in to Tomazo's Bed, where with
the Curtains close round him, and the Darkness to shroud him, he should lie
safe and unsuspected; and when her self had seen her Lycogenes fast asleep,
(his Custom being never to wake after his first sleep till Day break) she would
steal from his, to her Polydorus's Arms; and though perhaps a little silenter
than otherwise in his Embraces, she would come all Love and Rapture to his
Bosom, and devote the whole Night to unspeakable Delights. As for any Danger,
there was not the least shadow in it: but if there were, she desired only such
an occasion to testify the Courage, as well as the Ardence of her passion,
which only wanted Hazard to win her Glory, having yet done too little in so
dear a Cause. Polydorus was entirely lost in astonishment, and too poor in all
the Eloquence of Love to answer so transcendently endearing an Engagement.
Polydorus after recovery of Sense enough to express his amazeing Sentiments of
such inspiring Charms, poured forth his ravished Soul in a whole Torrent of
acknowledgements; and after as many Sealing kisses, promises his impatient
waiting the Blessed Minute. No sooner was the King retired, but Messalina
designing to send for Aspasia, has that trouble saved; for the sight of her
dear Friend is the next object she meets. After other introductory Caresses.
Well my Aspasia, (says Mesialina,) When shall I convince you that Rivals can be
hearty Friends? Thou pinest, and sighest, and languishest for my Polydorus; and
yet I Value, Esteem, and Love my dearest Aspasia, nay, with that Beauty, those
dangerous Eyes thou love him too; and yet my Aspasia is my best, trusted,
dearest Friend still. Oh, Madam, replied Aspasia, Your unexampled Friendship
amazes and confounds me; and perhaps, my utter want of all hopes to repay your
astonishing Goodness to your poor Aspasia, added to the weight of my Despair in
Love, may make the only pressing Load to sink me quite. She finished this short
Period with so hearty a sigh, that the Queen could not forbear in mere Pity to
Echo her with another; when turning kindly to her, with a gayer Air in her
Face. Well, says Messalina, What if my Friendship should give thee stronger
Proofs? What would thou give this Night to sleep in Polydorus Arms, and the
Generous Messalina 's the Gracious Hand to lead thee to his Bed. O Cruel
Messalina, Replied Aspasia, This is severe to mock my Misery. Can she that is
blessed with Polydorus Love, that happy, happy Woman, yield but one Minutes
Resignation of such a Treasure! No, Madam, This is unkind to make my Griefs
your Pastime. Fie, my Aspasia (says the Queen) Why this unjust suspicion! What
see thou in thy Messalina 's Friendship so mean, to charge me with so
wretched an Hypocrisy? No, my Aspasia, I am in Earnest with thee. This Night my
Polydorus is thy own; by this kind kiss, thy own. The Queen who spoke so
heartily, and looked so much the Generous Friend she acted, had now dissipated
our Aspasia's suspicion; and continuing to tell her, how she had laid the whole
Scene, snatched her up to such a pinnacle of Joy, till her delight redden'd and
bloomed so lovely in her Cheeks, that half an hours such Cordial, was enough to
cure a whole Months Consumption. Embracing the Queens Knees, and kissing the
very Hem of her Robes, was the least acknowledgment she made her. But the Queen
utterly forbidding any such thing, ordered her to leave Ceremonies, and hasten
to important Instructions that must make her way. Yes, any thing, thought she,
to lead to such a Bliss. All things prepared, at just half an hour past Nine,
the punctual Polydorus is admitted to Tomazo's Bed, the Curtains closed about
him, the Candle put out, and the Door between the two Bed-Chambers softly shut.
In less than half an hour after, the Queen with her Sanctifiore are likewise
put to Bed, and the Lights all put out; who privy to the Plot, and not a little
indeared by so Generous an Artifice practiced for his own dear sake, behaves
himself with Caution and Silence. They are not long in Bed, till Aspasia
undrest, covered only with her Nightgown, according to Instruction, gently
opens the Door between the two Chambers, and goes to Bed to the King. Never was
Night on all sides so deliciously melted down. Sanctifiore and Messalina are
laying such Riotous Foundations of Love and Pleasure, that (foreseeing their to
Morrows separation) may make basis-work enough for the pleasing Dreams of a
Month; our Aspasia, it being the first Night of her Bliss, and for ought she
knows the last, is so beatified; so rapt in Delight, that she resolves to play
the politician in Luxury, and to make a Mahumetan Paradise in Miniature of it,
circle the Thousand Years of Rapture within the circumference of a Night. Our
Polydorus is likewise under the like Rapidity of Happiness: For besides, the
Pleasure of a sound-sleeping unthinking Lycogenes so near him, (as he fancies)
the Titillation of the Theft, and the endearing Hazard of the fair Thief (the
supposed Messalina) thus stolen into his Bosom; he finds something so
extraordinary caressing in her Embraces, above all she had given him before;
that he fancies no less than that he grows every day dearer and dearer to her,
and accordingly, accumulates to himself additional Delights from so elevating a
contemplation. The Night thus past over; our Aspasia according to full
Instructions, having not only all the Night kept an entire Seal of silence on
her Lips, (a Counsel that even her safety Instructed her, as well knowing the
discovery of her Voice, had been as fatal as that of a cloven-foot, to the
Detection of the false Angel in his Arms, and consequently to the excluding her
from her Paradise) at the first peep of day likewise steals from his Arms, and
shutting the Door softly after her, as if she retired to her Lycogenes Bed,
leaves our Polydorus's imagination so filled with the Image of his Visionary
Messalina, till his roving Meditations at last, had lulled him into a slumber.

About an hour after, when Day began to look out a little broader; our
Sanctifiore Rises and Dresses himself. The Queen in her Nightgown and
Petticoat leads him into her Closet on the other side of the Room of State;
where at that distant she might give her self freedom of unlocking that
silence, which so near the dangerous Polydorus had before been under Restraint.
Her design being only a parting Farewell with her Sanctifiore, she has leisure
to talk but few words, only co conjure him to preserve her Memory; and not to
be Jealous of Polydorus in his absence; her putting this Nights Imposition upon
him, being an ample Testimonial how unformidable a Rival he is. And Sir,
continued Messalina, For one convincing Argument of my Love to Sactifiore above
all the World besides; as my Husbands Inclinations are leading him to Ibernia,
no sooner shall be move that way, but I will lock my self up in a Cloister,
which though indeed my Honor may seem to exact from me; Remember it is my Love to
Sanctisiore, performs that Abstinential Penance, to show you that no Polydorus
is, or can be dangerous, in the absence of Sanctifiore. The Answer of her Baron
was infinitely tender. But the envious Day now called him away, and their,
meeting Lips, too close for any words between them, Seal their Farewell.
Messalina returning to her Bed, orders Tomazo (who had been a watcher all
Night) to wake Polydorus, and tell him, that Lycogenes had left the Queen, and
was retired to his own Bed; and now was the only Minute of Rising, and
Retreating with Safety; which is accordingly performed. The amorous Polydorus,
entirely ravished with the whole Series of his Felicities, especially his Last
Nights Entertainment, had fortunately after Dinner met his Messalina alone in
the Garden; and thinking it now a favorable Minute to unbosom his whole Soul
to her, he told her 'twas his Destiny so strangely to Love the Divine
Messalina, that even his enjoyment of her Charms could not content him; even
yet he must be the unhappiest of Men, unless he might be permitted to flatter
himself with the hopes that one Day he should live to plant his Messalina on
the Throne of Gothland. The Queen who took this for no more than common
Gallantry, made a generous Answer. But Polydorus not contented with that
Answer, pressed her to a farther Declaration; when, telling her that he was so
indebted for all, but especially her Last Nights Favors, that he could not
answer his very Accounts to Heaven, nor pay his Arrears to the Providence that
had so signally smiled upon him, unless she would Generously please to Promise
him, that when the Gods should make her capable of accepting it, she would
vouchsase to share the Gothic Crown with him; and by a stronger Hymeneal Tie
between 'em, publish the Glory of that Love to the whole World, which at
present with only so private a vanity he yet possessed. For, alas, he had
hitherto, only satisfied his Love; but he had his Ambition too, to gratify;
which nothing but the circling his Messalina in the Gallick Diadem, could
consummate. The Queen could by no means refuse him that Promise, assuring him,
that if ever kind Fortune obliged her with the Capacity of Granting it, he need
not doubt but she who could not refuse him, even her guilty Favors, would be
proud of conceding her Honorable ones; the Bed of such a Monarch being an
Honor that the most haughty Beauty of the Universe, would thankfully accept.
Nay then, Divine Madam, I have your Promise, and will Challenge the
Performance. And for your Capacity of Granting it; yes, Fortune, smiling
Fortune does and will oblige me; and even this very moment, she presents the
glittering Prospect of that Glorious Day, Recorded in the fairest Register of
Heaven, when I shall mount my Messalina to the Throne of Gallia. In short, he
told her how the obstinate selfwill'd Lycogenes, deaf to all Councels, all
persuasions, was resolved for Ibernia, in hopes not only to reduce that
Kingdom, but by the Ibernian Army recover his Lost Albion. He desired her to
consider, what a hopeless Attempt he had undertaken, and to what certain Fate
we would expose himself. It Is true, Polydorus would be no ways wanting in Arms
and Assistance, but alas, to no purpose; the Christian Albionites were now too
Potent, and all the Aids he could spare, in his present Engagements against the
Confederated Bands of Europe, would be only so many Sacrifices to the Headlong
rash Despair of Lycogenes. And as her self was sensible how inexorable
Lycogenes was to all lutreaties or Prayers to with hold him from the Design; so
he implored his Messalina^s solemn Engagement, that when the unhappy Lycogenes,
by his own Fault alone, had pulled down his Ruin, and fallen in this mad Attempt;
that the Widdowed Messalina would condescend to Reign the Sovereign Mrs. of
Gotbland. The approach of Company which interrupted them, permitted only her
short Reply, viz. If his Stars had so ordered for her unfortunate Lycogenes,
Messalina, and the whole disposal of her Fate were in the Hands of Polydorus.
Polydorus was now as good as fully Arrived at the Haven of his utmost wishes;
for Lycogenes's Doom is Sealed. Yes, to Ibernia he will send him, and with
assistance too; but with the irrevocable Fate of falling there. For by
challenging and placing all Power and Trust in that Kingdom, in Gothic Hands
(as agreed by the over-reacht Lycogenes) so naturally hated, and the Gothic
Government so suspected by the Ibernians; the very disgusted Pagans themselves
shall fall from his Cause, whilst with the certain Destruction and Fate of
Lycogenes, the certain Messalina is his own. Nay, to secure all, when once he
has gotten him mewed up there, he will leave him so embarass in necessities,
and so shortn'd in that only Strongest Sinew War, MONEY, that he should be
compelled to Coin Copper for Silver, even the value of a Marvedis, enhanched to
a Ducatoon; and when that poor brazen Payment of his Army shall fail, his Royal
Stamp in Leather (sometime an Antique Coynage of Albion) must be his Last
Resuge. In short, if all fail, Lycogenes his Life, is in his own Power, and
Messalina must and shall be his own. The Queen, who could no less stisle her
Joys at the Kings Last Declaration, singles out her dear Aspasia, to make her
share in her Delight; and after recounting the whole Scene between Polydorus
and her self: Oh my dear Aspasia, says she, I shall be the happiest Woman in
the World. My poor Lycogenes, too headstrong to his own Destruction, is by his
sullen, or rather commiserating Destiny burried to the certain Period of all
his sorrows, to make way to mount thy Royal Mrs. the happy Messalina, to the
Bed and Throne of the Great Polydorus. Nor do my Eagle Joys perch only there;
for in his Bed, that poor unenvied Happiness I could even spare a share to my
dear Aspasia. No, my Aspasia, I have a higher flight of Pleasure. My Husband,
my poor pitied Husbands fall, mounts me to Polydorus 's Throne; and Polydorus
's Throne, to the elevating Felicity of dressing up the Empress of Gotland, a
more Glorious Messalina for the Arms of her Sanctisiore; whilst, by the
Advantage of so Royal a Husband, I shall be enricht with the brighter Golden
Mines to exhaust with my Sanctifiore, and with the Spoils of Empire adore the
Man I Love.

Oh, Thou unmatcht Original of High Mind!
And, oh, the Depths of Glorious Womankind!
Let boasting Man to profound Wit, Plot, Sense,
And deep Intrigue, lay his long false Pretense.
Let Faction and Cabal their Embryo's hatch,
No Politics can Wit of Woman match:
Her teeming Brain, such vaster Products fill,
That LOVE alone's the immortal Macchiavil.
Let Heroes mine, trench, ambuscade: so far
Outreacht are all the Stratagems of War,
By those which subtler Love more Nobly weilds;
That Mighty Mars to Mightier Venus yields.
This ingenuous Declaration of our fair Messalina, that so frankly opened the
rich Cabinet of her Soul, and discovered the prodigious Reach of resolving
Love, being the Subject of no common Wonder, nor indeed less praise, had
created Matter of a longer Entertainment between our two fair faithful
Confidants; nor had the grateful Aspasia been wanting in a very Dutious
acknowledging Return to her Royal Mrs. for that part of it that related so near
to her self, in the kind Queen's so willing a Resignation of her Polydorus
unenvied Caresses to her enamored Favorite, had not a crowd of Intruders
interrupted, and broke off the Conference. For her Lycogenes, in the Head of a
small Troop of Captains (being the Disbanded Remnants of his Pagan Albion
Officers) was come to visit her: Advancing therefore a little from them, who
dutifully kept at Distance, and lending her his Hand, He told her, he was come
to take his Leave; and, in a long and passionate Harangue, he fell to extolling
the unexampled Generosity of Polydorns. His Favors, he told her, both to
himself, his Messalina, and his sweet Cambrian Infant, were Obligations that
Providence, by all her kindest showers of Blessings, would hardly ever enable
him with a Capacity of requiting: His Debt was a Score he must be forced to
leave to Heaven, to pay for him. In short, he told her, how heartily Polydorus
had resented his Wrongs, and espoused his Quarrels; and that, with these few
scattered Royal Relics (pointing to the Officers behind him) of his late
Infidel- Albion Army, joined with what Gothic Leaders Polydorus was pleased to
lend him, together with those Gallick Hands his own present involved Affairs at
home could spare him, he had already fixed his Expedition for Ibernia; where he
doubted not but quickly to raise that formidable Power, as should not only
recover him that Loyal Pagan Realm, but likewise, in time, by their Hands, be
able to shock the whole Strength of Albion, and Reduce his Three revolted
apostatized Kingdoms. Alas, my Dear, continued Lycogenes, The heretic Fools
may idly think I droop too low beneath the loss of Empire, and my Exclusion
from three glorious Diadems has struck so near my Heart, that my declining Age,
and my dejected Soul, will never bear so hardy a Fatigue, nor live to see that
Day. How the dull dull World is all mistaken! I droop? Ah no! Perhaps my Loss
of Empire has, for some Sacred Considerations, been more my Pleasure, than my
Pain. Does the mad World believe in that stolen Flight, in which I left the
Albion Shore, 'twas any Personal Fear, or Dread of Life or Dignity, that made
me fly! No; as I knew the Church of Albion called over the Great Anaximander,
the Guarranly both of my Life and Crown, with such sound Principles, and in
such untainted Hands, had been so safe, that had I stayed in Albion, my Crown
had yet been upon my Head. Yes; with that Fetter at my Heels, of Ruling by LAW,
by cursed Heretic Laws, and all my Great Arcana called to Account by SENATES,
those everlasting Objects of my Aversion; and shackled down to a
Coronation Oath; with those unkindly Clogs and Manaches, and all my soaring
Pagan Wings quite clipped; I know I might have Reigned still; yes: I might so.
No, my Dear Messalina, a Crown at such hard Terms not worthy of my wearing. My
prouder Spirit, and sublimer Faith to our Great Pagan Gods, disdained so poor a
Thought. Yes; Honor, and the dearer Call of Heaven withdrew me from my Native
Albion Soil; I left a Deserted and Abdicated Throne. Alas, I only quitted a a
worthless Empire to gain a Glorious one; Deserted a sordid truckling BOUNDED
Monarchy, that by the long Sworn Fidelity, and the resolved Assistance of the
Royal Polydorus, I might return like my true God-like self; and by that mighty
Founders Arm, build up an ABSOLUTE one. If our kind Pagan Gods assist me, and I
once Reign by Conquest; Oh, the Immortal Charms of Royalty so Divine; Farewell
to the dull Scepter of poorer feeble Succession: A nauseating slavish Thought,
below the Great Lycogenes. A Limited Government! No; that very Minute I set my
Foot into the Hoysting Bark to waft me over into Gothland; I hope I made a
Nobler Declaration, when I owned my generous Indignation and just Contempt of
such a Servile Sovereignty, by avowing the true Sentiments of my Soul, That I
had rather be but a Captain of a Troop of Light Horse under Polydorus, than
Reign the Monarch of Albion, and Albania under the Check and Curb of Senates.
That single Sentence spoke the whole Lycogenes: He spoke it, and he thought it.
Senates and Senate-Laws? No; we have formed and resolved Things more Glorious.
In that great Day of Conquest, then shall our Altars smoke, smoke uncontrouled;
and tottering tumbling Heresy crumble to Dust, beneath the Wheels of our
Triumphant Chariot. With this Forethought and this Resolve, I deserted my
abandoned Albion, not by Force, but by Choice. Alas, if once the Conquered
Albion we recover, the long-vow'd Erection of our Pagan Altars will then be all
our own: For by that SWORD we Enter, we must Hold; and holding by the Sword, my
Messalina, what is it I cannot Act? Yes, my Dear Lycogenes, Replied the Albion
Queen, proud Albion once Subjected and Governed by a Gothic and an Ibernian
Army, what can you fear! Fear, my Messalina (answered Lycogenes) No; a true
Faithful, Zealous Pagan Army will play my Game out, though a false Renegado
Christian one threw up my Cards. Besides, I shall have this manifest Advantage
by this Reaccession to Empire, which that of Birthright could not yield me,
when above the Tenure of Conquest, which throws off all Obligation of Law, and
consequently, leaves the whole Administration to my own Despotick Will, to Act,
Model, Transform, and Govern at my own Arbitrary Pleasure. Besides, I say, this
opened Gate to the whole Ambition of my Soul, the Pagan Resurrection; by my
Return to my Kingdoms on the Necks of my Defeated Heretic Enemies, my
Establishment of the Pagan Religion will carry its own Justification so
clearly, that even Malice and Murmur it self shall be hushed; and the most
repining Tongue want Matter to reproach or revile me. For then, if I demolish
the Heretic Church of Albion; it is their own Crimes, not I, have pulled it
down; their Revolt and Rebellion has deserved it from me, and it is my Royal
condescending Mercy that I shall exact no more. Then, as I once told the
Heretic Academicks [they should feel the weight of an angry Prince] they shall
thank me that I fall no heavier, when so easy a Vengeance against their Treason
and Apostasy shall be all their punishment. It Is true, indeed, continued
Lycogenes, I am under some private Covenants, and Stipulations with Polydorus;
nor do I murmur at the utmost Concessions and Condescensions I have made him;
for that, and more, he merits from me. For since that Heroic Champion Embarked
in the Recovery of my Crowns, fights the Battles of our Gods too, what can I
pay too much? Gothland indeed of old, was a long Tributary to Albion. Nor let
mistaken History Record it the Effieminacy of Lycogenes, that not only in his
present misfortune, but also through the whole study of his Life, he has so
indefatigably labored to efface that Jewel in the Albion Diadem. For in this
Heavenly Cause it is Lycogenes 's greater Pride and Glory to hold the Feodatory
Crown of Albion, a Dependant upon Gothland (a Reward too little for so great a
Service) when thou know, my Messalina, I had rather admit Great Polydorus a
Sharer in my Diadem, and sit even on the Left Hand of a Throne with that Great
Monarch by my side, whilst by his Sword I build the Altars of our Pagan Gods
up; than Reign with all the Grandeur, Conquests, Glories of all my Royal
Ancestors, once the Arbiters of Europe, heaped and massed together with that
one only Trophy wanting. Since the Extirpation of Heresy is so eminently the
never dying Renown of Polydorus, my humblest submissions even to Vassalage it
self under so Illustrious a Leader, were not a little Meritorious, when they
bring me the Honor of lying a Pupil at the Feet of that Great Gamaliel.

The Queen, who ('it is true) felt an inward Delight, at so Enthusiastic and
Religious a Transport of her Lycogenes in the Pagan Cause, returned him all the
due Acknowledgments to so resolved a Champion. But as her own quite contrary
prospect of Success from an Attempt of that kind (how well soev^r Designed and
Endeavored) led her to wandering Thoughts of a far different Nature; the Hazard
of the Enterprise renewed the pleasing Contemplation of the late Great
Foundation of Glory, laid her by the Amorous Polydorus, and her own Greater one
of Love and Felicity in the Arms of her Sanctifiore.

Lycogenes now hastening to a Farewell, tells his Messalina, that all
preparations were already made, the Gallick Navy was ready for setting Sail,
the Forces being all Embarked, and himself and some of his Officers only
wanting to go aboard; that accordingly, his, and their immediate dispatch, was
called for; and this very day, his Departure was Assigned, in order to his
speediest setting forward for the Fleet. He desires her therefore to look upon
his necessitated absence, as no other than the ordinance of his Governing
Stars, in which not only his own Vindication, but that of Heaven too, was
Engaged. That, that consideration would not only expedite his Zeal, and make
his Toil and Labor light, but also, he hoped, would interess aiding Providence
it self, to facilitate his Atcheivements, as its own peculiar Care to
Consummate so Pious and Holy an undertaking.

The Queen, receiving this Farewell Summons, with a shock befitting the
Character she bore, attended the King to the Palace, where retiring with him
alone into her Closet, for a Recess of Privacy to unbosome those mournful
Plaints at so sad a Divorce, a Scene of sorrow, which admitted no hearer nor
spectators, she entertained him with so many tender and wailing Accents, which
seconded with an additional Eloquence of the most melting shower of Tears,
wanted no Appearances of the most cordial Concern. With the most endearing
Embraces she recommended his Cause, but more particularly the preservation of
his Person to the tendrest charge of his best Guardian Angels: She conjured him
to believe her Life was wholly wound up in his; and that every wound that
should hurt her Lycogenes, must strike through the Heart of Messalina; for all
his personal Dangers could have no other passage. She desired him likewise to
reflect on the few short broken slumbers her sad Pillow must now give her,
whilst he left behind him the most melancholy of Widows; for as Pleasure and
Delight from any other Object but her Lycogenes had ever been strangers to her
Soul, he must believe his absence could have no less Effect, than to banish all
joy from her Life, and all smiles from her Cheeks till his return, whilst the
continued business of her whole Days and Nights, till that blessed hour, should
wholly be spent in Prayers for his Prosperity; and that with every Bead to
Heaven, she would drop a Tear for her Lycogenes. In short, the cooing murmurs
of our fair Turtle may well be believed to be very passionate, when it is always
observed that Art, when the Imitatour of Nature, paints with the boldest
strokes, even beyond the Life. Her commanded Sighs and Tears therefore were not
a little extravagant on this occasion.

But to leave our mourning Royal Mates to their parting Scene, our History
calls us to some few Affairs of Aspasia. The Reader may remember in the first
Treatise that Father Sebastian had been a long favored Inamorat of Aspasias;
who being one of those Albion Fugitives, who escaping the Universal Pagan Wrack
in that revolted Kingdom, was Landed safe on the Gothic shore, and at present
a shelterer in the Gallick Court, you may imagine, was not wanting with all
Assiduity and Address (after so long a separation as his dear Aspasias late
absence in Ibernia) ever since her Arrival in Gothland, to renew his amorous
Visits, in hopes of gathering his old Golden Fruit from so fair a Tree. But as
ill Fortune, the malice of Cupid, or some other (if possible) blinder Deity was
his Enemy; or rather the ill Humor of Aspasia, or some other Feminine Devil
about her, envied him his old Felicities, he could never yet get one private
minute alone with her. Whether the multiplicity of her Visitants, as so new a
Guest in that Court, might be some interposing Debarment to a private Access,
or no; however, his good opinion both of her and himself, made him for some
time impute his misfortune to no other Cause. But that flattering Excuse at
long run being not altogether satisfactory, he discovered at last, that by her
Artful shunning of all opportunities, 'twas her palpable slight of him, if not
her downright Aversion that excluded him: For in all his Conversation with
her, which hitherto had been only in public, he could not obtain so much as a
smile, nay, not a look, a glance, or a civility from her, that expressed the
least remaining spark of her former Graces and Kindness. For to tell you the
Truth, our enamored Aspasia ever since her Captivity to Polydorus, had
entertained so burning a passion for that Great Man, even little less than
absolutely Romantic. For though naturally, a professed Wanton, yet, but to look
upon that Idol of her Soul, her very Platonic Delights in that adored Object
(for Enjoyment she never durst hope, her whole Translation to her last nights
Paradise, being purely and altogether miraculous) carried those infinite
Transports, all along with them, that all other humbler, though more substantial
Feasts of Love, were utterly despised, for that more pleasing, though aierier
Food. Soaring therefore so high, she disdained all lower ignoble Quarries; and
her Concession of a Favor (such was her Craprice of Fancy) to Sebastian, or
any other meaner Favorite, she thought so notorious an Invasion of the Sacred
Right of Polydorus (for she owed him all, though she never hoped to pay him any)
as she could not ever forgive her self for: And Love it self, though with no
other accuser, than her own conscious Soul, would fly in her Face, and arraign
and condemn her for absolute Impiety and Profanation.

This unaccountable Frenzy of Love, had made her very carefully avoid the
Company of Sebastian, as the Object of her least Thought; and being of a better
Temper, than to use him rudely, though she very well knew her Command (if laid
upon him) might repel all troublesome Visits, yet partly through better
breeding, and partly to avoid all tumultutuous Resentments that might arise
from severity, she thought it her wisest course to wean him from the desire of
her Conversation, by more moderate methods; and accordingly, when pressed too
much by him, with no other ways left of escaping him, sometimes in her
Retirements, she has pretended Indisposition, nay, often made her self be
denied to shun him; and at all other times, she studiously crowded her self
into all public Company, to be free from importunities.

However, this Policy had not its desired Effect upon Sebastian, for though Men
of his Figure and Gown, can never want Female Game in so amorous a Court, as
that of Gothland; however, at present, he is for only flying here, and no other
impression could efface his Passion for Aspasia. And all her present slights,
now too plainly visible in her whole Conduct, served only to give him the most
vexatious Disquiets, and run him at last into a most tormenting Jealousy. Some
other Favorite (he considered) and more grateful Choice, undoubtedly could be
the only Cause of her coldness to him. With this new Load upon his Soul, his
discovery of his more happy Rival (a knowledge always much desired, though very
little serviceable to slighted Lovers) was now his whole study; insomuch, that
in all places, and at every turn, he was an absolute Spy upon all her motions,
to find out (if possible) the accursed Destroyer of his Happiness.

In all his long Watchings, but hitherto, all in vain, it fortuned that last
night, he discovered her, carried in her Chair to the Queens Apartments. And as
Jealousy makes remarks upon every thing, First, he observed that she went in an
undress, viz. in her Night Gown, a very unlikely Habit, according to the Rules
of Court, to make a visit to the Queen in; besides, no sooner had her Chair-men
set her down, but they carried off her empty Chair back again, which plainly
told him, she intended to stay all Night, and therefore a Visit to the Queen,
could be no part of her Business. Upon this Thought, he fell to considering,
what Man might lie in the Queens Apartments, and upon re-collection, remembered
that Father Pedro had Lodgings there; (a Favor which granted him in the Court
of Albion, was continued in her Court in Gothland too.) No sooner had he
started upon this unluckly remembrance, but he presently reflected, on the once
fatal mistake in Albion, that threw Father Pedro into his Aspasias Arms,
instead of himself; with the Agony of that Thought, there was not that most
ungrateful apprehension, that he did not immediately form to himself. That
Aspasia was the basest and falsest of her Sex, were the kindest Epithites he
could afford her. That Pedro had not as formerly by Fortunes blind Lot, but by
her own Lascivious Choice, now invaded his Right. That she had this Night made
an Assignation with him, and was so hot in the pursuit of her Infidelity, that
she poorly followed him to his own Bed. That all his own past Endearments, nay,
even the very Name of Sebastian was utterly razed out of her Thoughts; and
Sacrificed to her dearer Darling Pedro. That all her pretended Indispositions
and Excuses to shun his very sight, were nothing but her down right hate of the
forgotten Sebastian, to give her the freer loose to her riotous Lewdness with
Pedro. All that Jealousy could forge, or rage inspire, was now fermenting in
his Soul: One while, he was thinking to stop the Chair-men to ask Questions of
them, for his compleater Satisfaction: But that folly was soon corrected, for
undoubtedly, their simple ignorance knew no more of her privacies, than the
Carriers-Horse does the Treasure he carries. Besides, the conviction was plain
enough; but to be more amply informed beyond all staggering or doubts, he
resolved to attend below at the Palace Door all Night, till the Chair-men
fetched her back again. The Evening blew a little cool, but whether the
Agitations of his Soul were so busied, that the minding his Body was not any
part of his care, or that his Heat within had influence enough to keep him warm
without, he contented himself with the cold Entertainment of Fayries and
Goblins, and very demurely, walked all Night under the Palace Window. What
Furies and Specter were his Familiars, you may easily conjecture; for Jealousy
Rampant had an entire Ascendant over him, and all the Devils of Revenge, like
so many Cyclops at the Anvil, were hammering all the Bolts he could invent
against Pedro. The Morning was scarce awake, before the Chair-men were
returned, and the glowing Aspasia more ruddy than the blushing Rose, soon after
came nimbly tripping down Stairs, and instantly bolted into her Sedan, and so
marched off. This the undiscovered Sebastian standing perdieu, no sooner saw,
but Demonstration, Oracles, and Brazen-heads, had now spoken: The Truth is too
palpable, and the accursed Pedro is the Villainous Riffer of all her melting
sweets; and she came but this moment, with all her guilty Bloom in her Face,
just wreeking from his Arms.

This Resentment of her Falsehood, as it had lighted a whole Mine of Sulphur
within him, he had watched this opportunity of following the Queen and Aspasia
into the Garden; where at the approach of Lycogenes to Messalina, Aspasia
withdrawing, at the turn of a walk in the Garden, he had the Fortune just full
in the Face to meet her all alone; and resolving that no pretense should now
hinder him, not to slip the offered minute, he advanced up to her, and desired
her to do him the Justice of half a score words with her. Aspasia possibly
suspecting some Reprimands for her late cold looks to her neglected old
Servant, was nevertheless so pufft up with the vanity of her last Nights
Happiness in her Imperial Polydorus's Arms, that she was prepared to stand all
Batteries of that kind, and laugh at so little, and so pitied a wretch as
Sebastian; and accordingly, in answer to the half score words, desired with
her, she told him half a hundred, if he pleased, were at his service.
Sebastian, at first dissembling his Resentments, began calmly to ask her, what
Envious Planets had maligned him in so long debarring him the Felicity of her
Conversation ever since her return from Ibernia? Planets, replied Aspasia;
Alas, Sir, those higher Powers, have other weightier work to mind, than to
intermeddle in so poor, and so trivial a Matter. Well, Madam, answered
Sebastian, I find that not only their Higher Powers, as you tell me, but
Aspasias Higher Thoughts too, have weightier work to mind, when Sebastian is
grown so indifferent to her. There was a Day, when I stood fairer and warmer in
your Thoughts. There was a Day you Loved Sebastian; was there not cruel
Aspasia? Faith, Sir, replied Aspasia, Such a Day perhaps may have been, but at
present I carry no Almanac in my Head, for my particular remembrance in that
Affair. If there has been such a Day in your Calendar, pray, mark it down for a
very idle one, when I played the Fool because I had nothing else to do
[Sebastian] How, Ungrateful, False, Inhumane -- [Aspasia] No hard Words
(interrupting him) all things in this World, have their Period; and Folly, the
sooner the better. And if this Declaration displease you, look upon your Gown,
consider, you are a Churchman, Repent and Mortify, and carry your Prayer Book
to Bed with you, and Sleep contented. How, my rallying Infidel, answered
Sebastian, If I may be bold to ask, did you and your last Nights Bedfellow,
carry your Prayer-Books to Bed too? [Aspasia] How, Insolent! -- Yes, Madam,
(continued Sebastian) were you and your New Stallion at Mortification too, last
Night? If you were, you were very close and warm at it, that he sent you away
so piping hot, so early in your Chair this Morning. Aspasia was struck with
such Confusion to hear him talk thus, that in the suddenness of her surprise,
she thought no less, than that he had dealt in Witchcraft and Magic, and
discovered the whole last Nights Adventures with Polydorus, a Secret of that
value, that she would not have disclosed, for half his Kingdom, much less, have
it Lodged in so dangerous a Breast as Sebastians; insomuch, that at the first
shock, struck almost dumb, and without one word to answer, so strong a
Vermilion painted her Cheeks, as if the whole Blood in her Heart, had flusht
into her Face. Sebastian (perceiving her Disorder, continued) well, Madam, by
the extraordinary Scarlet in your Face, a sign of Grace (as they tell us) the
Prayer Book you talk of, would not do amiss with you now. Grace, did I say! Cry
you mercy, Madam, I am afraid I am mistaken, Those confessing Blushes of
yours, I fear proceed from a quite contrary Cause. Your hot Blood, has been so
stirred up to Night, that a little thing sets it a circling, and that is the
reason your Ladyship reddens so easily, and so naturally; Well, much good may
do you with your Pedro, your darling Villain, Pedro. But know fair Devil, the
time may come, when your Sanctified Jmp and you -- Aspasia at that word,
recovering her Tongue, and pertly interrupting him (for since she found that
Pedro was the supposed Man, it took so great a weight from her Spirits, that
she cared not if she confirmed him in it, rather than disabused him from that
mistake; that kind Error possibly being her only Fence, against a more
dangerous Inquisition into her last Nights Arcana, and a necessary Guard
against so prying a Spy.) Well, says she, If I do Love Pedro, and came so warm
from him this Morning, as you tell me, snarle on, feeble Envy, and make your
best on it. Sebastian, at that word, was just upon launching into a great deal
of outrageous Language, had not approaching Company come to her Deliverance,
when, starting from him, she left him to the venting his Gall to himself, and
bursting with his own Venom at his own Leisure and Pleasure.

Sebastian, from this hardened Impudence of her own Confession, had now no
farther scruple: Pedro was the happy man; and himself the outcast of her hate
and scorn. His Love for Aspasia, now cankering into the most rancrous Malice
and Revenge; the first thing he resolves, is the Destruction of Pedro. For the
effecting of which, after a hundred several roving Fancies upon that Subject,
he fixed at last upon traducing him to Polydorus, as a Plotter against the
Gothic State, and rather than want Proof to condemn him, to start up an
Evidence himself against him. This Project fully resolved, he very speedlly
gains private. Access to Polydorus, and after a great deal of other
Introductory matter, to soften him for the Impression, such as the unfortunate
Affarrs of Albion, he fell very Artfully to haranging upon the restless Spirit
of Pedro, and specifying in several particulars, how highly his False and
Clandestine Management, had been instrumental in the Fall and Ruin of
Lycogenes; he insinuated at last that Plotting and Faction were his Study and
Delight, and that in short, uneasy and turbulent in all Governments, he this
very day held Correspondence with the Enemies of Polydorus, and was a person
unfit to be trusted in his Kingdom, much less in his Court, if that only were
all he deserved. And this charge he himself was ready (though unwilling to be
seen in such an Affair, if other Testimony might satisfy) to make out against
him. In fine, he pressed on the matter so far, that Polydorus inclining to
believe him, returned Sebastian thanks for his Zeal, and promising his speedy
inquiry into the matter, Sebastian humbly advised the immediate seizing of his
Papers, which would make ample and sufficient Demonstrations against him, and
excuse himself from that ungrateful Office of his Accuser.

The King reflecting on the Albion miscarriages, as so highly and particularly
the Fault of Pedro, and relying on the Integrity of Sebastian, for whom he had
a special Value and Esteem, immediately applies himself to Messalina, telling
her the whole Accusation against him, and his own Inclination to Credit the
Truth of it. The Queen whose Pride could no less than naturally resent her
Albion Misfortunes, and (though her self their Principal Cause) she looked upon
the hot Councils and Violent Measures of Pedro, as not a little Criminal in
that Affair: And though his Extraordinary Zeal for the Pagan Cause, had raised
him so great in her Esteem, his Success and Conduct however, were no little
allay to her Favor and Graces toward him insomuch that Doubt and Suspicion
might easily be Entertained against him, and a little Breath would go to the
lighting that Coal. Besides, her absolute Resignation to the Pleasure of
Polydorus, silenced all Questions and Disputes. 'Twas enough he Believed, and
'twas not her Qu to Doubt. Accordingly with an immediate Concurrence to
Polydorus, she her self advised the seizing, not only of his Papers, but his
Person too, and doing himself open Justice. No Madam (replied Polydorus) Your
Sacred Roof, is a Sanctuary against all such Violence; for since he has the
Honor of Sleeping under that Protection, the public Apprehension either of
himself or his Papers, though on the most Criminal Account, would be too
Profane an Intrusion in a Place so Sacred. The King therefore humbly besought
her permission, that himself might give Pedro a Visit in his own Lodgings at
his first uprising next Morning, and in respect to the Place as the Palace of
Messalina, make that privater Scrutiny, and those less noisy Demands of him,
that might give as full, though not so public a satisfaction into the Truth of
the Matter alleged against him. The Queen instantly complying with the Kings
Desire, and likewise humbly thanking him for the Great Respect he was pleased
to show to her self, in this manner of Process against so treacherous a wretch,
told him that his Pleasure therein, or what else should not only be punctually
observed, but also she her self would Accompany him thither, as proud to
confront so impious an Infidelity as durst in the least conspire against the
Glory or Peace of her dear Polydorus.

In pursuit of this Resolve, early next Morning, Polydorus and Messalina enter
Pedro's Chamber, who receives them with a profound Reverence, not a little
pleased, if not astonished at so unusual a Favor. But the Queen to undeceive
him in that point, desired him not to mistake the occasion of this Honor they
did him, commanding the Keys of his Closet and Cabinets; Pedro Thunderstruck
at such a sound, and finding by her Looks, that the want of his Keys was not to
search for Bracelets or Love Letters, but more important matters, fell
instantly upon his Knees, and with a long repetition of his Zeal and Services,
and a thousand Protestations of his Truth and Fidelity, humbly remonstrated his
whole Innocence and Loyalty, and the meaness of her Suspicion against so known
and tried Integrity. Well, Sir, says the Queen (who as an endearment to
Polydorus, resolved to be the forwardest in Pedro's Prosecution) If you are
that Honest and Loyal Man, the Innocence of your Papers, which we come hither
to see, will be your Confirmation, and as so many Records in your behalf, stand
the Monuments of your Glory. Pedro, now almost dead, was going to use the
little feeble Breath he had left, to diswade her from her purpose; but as she
would hear no more, but be obeyed, he was forced at last to give her the Keys,
where, whilst the King and She entered the Closet, himself stood rooted like a
Stature in his Chamber without, both dumb and motionless, attending his
approaching Fate.

No sooner had the Queen unlockt the first Drawer of his Cabinet, but a dazzling
appearance of Jewels glared in her Eyes; which she no sooner saw, but she
instantly cried out. Oh Polydorus, my own Albion Jewels! O Villain Pedro,
Villain, Villain! How Madam, answered Polydorus amazed, Your Jewels! Yes, Sir,
replied the Queen, the very same I lost at my Landing in Gothland, and for
which you published so many Thousand Crowns Reward, for the Discovery of. This
very Monster advised me to trust them with an Italian Priest of his own
Recommendation, since run away: and be-like, by the quantity I here find of
them, has conspired in the Robbery, and went shares and snacks with the very
Thief that stole 'em. Oh Execrable Miscreant! Was It not enough, that thy
Villainy has ravished my Glory, rifled my Crown from me, and lost me three
Kingdoms, but thy low-born wretched Soul, could stoop to so petty a Larceny as
to steal my very Jewels from me? The Queen had went on with a great many more
bitter Expressions, on so pregnant a Subject; had not her farther Curiosity
sound her other Employment. The first Papers they lighted of, proved to be
Accounts of Moneys laid out, and a Journal of Domestic Expenses, and not
worthy of their Inspection: only unfortunately the first Paper of them that
fell into the Queens Hand, and the first Line she cast her Eye upon, was the
Account of what Moneys he had paid to his Landlord an Innkeeper at the Waters
of Bajae in Albion (when the Queen was last there) for the Maintenance of a
Child gotten by him upon the Body of the said Landlord's Daughter. This
innocent Discovery occasioned a comical smile or two, and some few jocose
Remarks between Polydorus and Messalina. The next Papers they came to (being a
very large Bundle) were an Account of Sums of Money received, part seperately
to himself; and others in Paternship with Polyorchetes the Chancellor, for
Pardons, Sold to the Western Rebels in Perkins Insurrection. Ah, Sir, says the
Queen to Polydorus, what wicked Papers are here? You may see how Kings are
abused, when the Mercy of my poor Eycogenes to those Western Wretches, though God
knows, that Mercy was but Little, yet even that Little was Bought and Sold. The
following Papers they met, were a List and Computation of the Number of the
Officers, and private Soldiers of the Pagan Religion in Lycogenes Albion.
Army, taken at the last Campaign by the King's Special Order and Command. Ah,
Sir, says Messalina, that very Paper undid my poor Lycogenes: For as you know
the Design of keeping up that Army, so, poor zealous good Man, being desirous
to learn the Strength of what Pagan Hands he had to trust to, in order for the
good of his Cause, he sent his Command to every Captain, to bring him in the
Number of the Pagans in their each respective Company or Troop* and, would you
think it? those false insinuating Villains, to humor, as they called it, the
Kings weak side, and thereby ingratiate themselves into his Favor, made the
Computation of the Pagans amount to the full Moiety of the whole Army, within
600; when, God knows, not a Seventh of 'em were of that Faith, as sad
Experience has since convinced him; whilst, by these, and several other false
and flattering Reports of the Pagan Strength, was my poor Lycogenes drawn into
that Confidence, and consequently, those Snares, that lost him his Kingdoms.

Polydorus, had not searched much farther, till he discovered the Mine he
desired, viz. A Correspondence between Father Pedro, both with the Imperial and
the Arragonian Court, the present sworn Enemies of Polydorus. A great many
Letters filled with promises of large Golden Rewards, were the first that
occurred; and though part of them were Written in Characters, and others of less
dangerous Import, were more bare-sac'd; the first Eye into them plainly
detected an Intelligence held with both those Enemies of the Crown of Gothland;
and this mercinary Villain and Spy, had for Foreign Gold, betrayed the Secrets
of his Kingdom.

The King, could not forbear some just Resentments at so surpizing a Discovery;
but the Queen, for her part, could hardly contain her self from being down
right outrageous, in mere Indignation against such infernal Treachery, and
what is yet blacker, such monstrous Ingratitude; a Villain, so kindly
Entertained and cherisht, as he had been, in that only Sanctuary, that thorough
his own Demerits, and the universal Hatred of Mankind the whole World had left
him and yet scarce warm in his Nest, to play so venomous and treacherous a
Serpent. And to heighten her bitterness she did not in the least doubt all his
soul play in Gothland any more (if the Truth were known) than a second Part of
his old Game in Albion. In short, being almost ashamed to defile her Breath
with so Poisonous a Name, she desired Polydorus to take him instantly and hang
him, or break him upon the Wheels, for a moments Life was too great a Mercy for
such a Monster. No, Madam, replied Polydorus, If you will permit me to Sentence
him, his Deem shall be to Live. The Truth on it is, I always believed him a
Rogue at the bottom, and though his Dependence and Relation to Messalina, as in
Duty, gave him so Favorable a Reception here, yet I assure you, Madam, I never
trusted him with any thing of Importance, my Cabinet secrets were never Lodged
in such Hands; and though the Contents of these Letters, when I have leisure to
peruse them, will I doubt not, show his hearty good will to be the basest of
Traitors, and most ungrateful of Men, yet, whatever his Inclination has been,
his Power has not had it in his reach to hurt me much, and therefore I am the
less concerned at so stingless a Falsehood. But Madam, since year Displeasure
is that Sacred Thunder that should never breathe without Execution, in my
Opinion, the giving him his Life will be his greatest Punishment* for when I
Banish him my Kingdom, all the Would beside, will give him so unsafe a Retreat,
and cold a Reception, that he will be forced to wander in Shade and Covert,
that deplorable wretch, as to fear every hand be meets will be his Executiner.
This lingering Torment, as the outcast of the Creation, to a spirit so restless,
and so ambitious, will outdo any sho^-paind stroke of Justice. Besides
(continued Polydorus) all public and exemplary Punishment, would in a measure,
leave a blemish on the Fair Messalina, in publishing and proclaiming to the
World, Hers, and her Lycogenes 's weakness and folly (Pardon the harshness of
the Word) in so highly Exalting, so undeserving a Favorite. Princes in some
Cases ought not to tell too broadly, how grossly they have been deceived and
imposed upon. His Trust in Albion was so Great, and his Ascendance so High,
that his open Fall will not so much expose his Guilt, as the shallowness of
that Credulity that raised him.

The Kings farther Reasonings upon this Argument, made the incensed Messalina
acquiesce in the Pleasure of Polydorus. And taking the Queens Jewels (a very
honest Reprizal) and those Last Papers along with them; as he left the Chamber,
he bid Pedro, avoid his Presence, and let his Court and Kingdom see his hated
Face no more. Pedro, who wanted Power and indeed Courage to speak to him,
remained mute; however, as the escaping of an expected immediate Death, an Exit
he was not over-well at this time prepared for, recovered him Strength enough
to hold up his Head from not quite drooping under so fatal a shock; he began to
recollect Sense enough to provide for his speedy Decampment from his present
too hot a Post; and accordingly with no small hurry and precipitation, he left
the Court, and it is much suspected the Kingdom too; for we have never heard of
him since. And truly (the Cause of his departure being hushed by Polydorus, and
concealed by himself) in what disguise he sculked, or which way he traveled,
our Intelligence is wholly in the Dark. However, though we now Live in ignorance
what Corner of the World has at present the Honor of his Company, his loss is
not very considerable; there being very few over-fond of his Face, unless to
make Money of his Head.

FINIS.

