MIRMAH, OR, THE Deceitful Witness.

A PROPHECY of SOLOMON Now first and seasonably discovered; wherein the
Deceitful Witnesses of Rome are made manifest to all; And our Protestant
Witnesses are Justified, Praised, and Defended; chiefly the late happy
Discoverers of the Romish Plots and Deceits.

By WILLIAM RAMSAY, B. D. Lecturer in Istleworth, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable Thomas Earl of Ossory.

BEING A SERMON Preached November. 5. on PROVE. 14.25.

A true Witness d^l^vereth Souls: but a Deceitful Witness speaks lies. Or, as
the Original signifies, The Lord of Rome speaks lies.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Billingsley at the Printing-Press within the
South-west Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1679.

TO JOHN RAMSAY of Bewick in Northumberland, Esquire AND TO Major ROBERT RAMSAY His
Brother, Health and Felicity.
Dear Brothers,
THis Dedication becomes both you and me, being designed for a public
engagement of such mutual affection, as becomes three only Relics of a most
ancient Family, never yet stained with any spot of Dishonor or Disloyalty. The
one of you God has made Steward of the Estate of the Family; which though
greatly diminisht by the death of our Great uncle, John Ramsay late Earl of
Holderness, etc. without Issue, and too soon after by the death of his Brother
and Heir Sir George Ramsay our Grandfather, who left my Father too young to
manage Affairs; and by the last Kings Wars, in which my Father raised a Troop
of Horse at his own sole Charge, and suffered much; and by the death of our
Eldest Brother before the Kings Return, and of our Dear Father quickly after;
yet the God of our Family is the same still, and can raise it again in due
time: Only be we thankful for his present great favors; and serve we him in
the advantageous stations wherein he has placed us. The other of you, God has
renowned with Military Skill and Action at home and abroad, as he did many of
our Family before, and lately two great unkles, Colonel Ramsay and Major
General Ramsay under Gustavus Adolphus. I am placed between you, as in Age, so
in Station; a Steward and a Soldier too, but in Spiritual matters; wherefore
let me now be as a mediant term of union to join ye in one. I think I am the
first of our Family of this Function, at least in England. Wherefore, as the
Function it self is Honorable and Divine, give me leave, to the Honor of my
Choice, to essay something in Vindication of the Truth; I may say, in
Vindication of our Church and State. For the Truth, which I here assert, has
received such solemn Attestations from King and Parliament, from all manner of
Testimony, that to deny or oppose it, were to give the Lie to Church and State,
and to affront the Throne as well as the Pulpit. I particularly stand engaged
to bear this Testimony, being more intimately acquainted with the Principles
and Practices of the Church of Rome, by occasion of my Forain Travel for twelve
years among them. Now this Plot is justified by those Principles, and highly
praised, defended and rewarded by that Church: Therefore those Principles are
manifestly condemned by this Plot, and that Church to be detested for it, to be
denied, and utterly forsaken by all that love the Truth and the Gospel of the
Peace of Jesus, to whom you are daily commended by the most earnest and hearty
Prayers of

Your truly loving Brother and Servant in Christ Jesus, W. Ramsay.

A SERMON PREACHED November. V. 1679.
PROVE. xiv. 25. A true Witness delivers Souls: but a deceitful Witness
speaks Lies.
THis is a Prophecy, as well as a Proverb; and Solomon was a Prophet as well as
a Proverbialist; as appears in many other places.

We shall first consider it as a Proverb. So it contains two Propositions; The
first, the Character of a True Witness: A true Witness delivers Souls. The
second, the Character of a Deceitful Witness; But a Deceitful Witness speaks
lies. Both Characters are very compendious, and very distinctive, as Characters
ought to be.

The Character of a true Witness consists in two things; the one expressed, the
other immediately employed. The thing expressed is the Motive, End, and Effect of
his Testimony, To deliver Souls. A True Witness delivers Souls. Matsiel
nephashoth, that is, rescueth others from Oppression or destruction: and this
is the motive and end of his Testimony; not to hurt or oppress any, or to
condemn or to destroy the guilty: but to deliver the guiltless, to maintain the
Truth, to defend Innocence, and to deliver the Innocent from those that would
oppress them. A True Witness accuses a Murderer, bears evidence against him,
and the Murderer is justly sentenced and condemned to death: But the end of the
Testimony of the true Witness, is not the death or destruction of the Murderer,
but the preservation of men, that the evil of Murder may be taken away. This
then is an essential Character of a True Witness, the end of his testimony is
to deliver Souls; A True Witness delivers Souls.

Whence follows a Second thing, an individual Property of a True Witness. The
end of his Testimony being Truth and Innocence, the preservation and
deliverance of Souls; He will never stain his testimony with a Lie, nor harm
his own Soul, or wrong his Neighbors Cause with an untruth. This is evidently
included in the first, as also in the term of a True Witness; especially as the
Hebrews term it, Hedemeth, that is, A Witness of Truth. If then he be caught in
a Lie in his Testimony, he cannot have the credit of a true Witness. For that is
a sure Proverb which went a little before the Text, Prove. 14.5. A faithful
Witness will not lie. The end of his Testimony is not his own profit, much less
another harm. The Guilty man deserves death; yet a true Witness accuses him
not that he may dye: but as Hed-emeth, as a Witness of Truth, he speaks the
truth for truths sake; and accuses the guilty to deliver the Innocent. So this
Character is essential, A true Witness delivers Souls; that is, the end and
effect of a Witness of Truth is this, to deliver them that are Innocent.

From this, The Character of a Deceitful Witness is plain, consisting in the
two opposite points. The end of a Deceitful Witness is not to deliver Souls,
but to draw Souls into harm* and his means to that end is always a lie; yea, he
attains not his end easily without many lies. Therefore his Character is this,
A deceitful Witness speaks lies: Japhiac chesabim, that is, breaths lies,
as he breaths the air; or utters lies easily, or rather of necessity, even
as a man breaths: and so the word is rendered, v. 5. A false Witness will
utter lies: Which is to be understood too; that a false Witness cannot be long
hid: for his own lies shall discover him. So were the two Elders, the false
Accusers of Susanna, discovered by Daniel. And God the Great lover of Truth
will not suffer the truth to be long oppressed by the lies of men. Therefore
Solomon tells us, Prove. 19.5. A false Witness shall not be unpunished, and he
that speaks lies shall not escape; and repeats it again v. 9. A false Witness
shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall perish.

Thus much of the Text, as it is a Proverb, and contains the Characters of a
True and of a Deceitful Witness. We shall now discover in it a double
combination of Prophecies. First, A Prophecy of Christ, the Great Witness of
Truth on one hand; and of Antichrist, the Great Deceitful Witness on the other.
Secondly, A Prophecy of true Protestant Witnesses, on one hand; and of
Deceitful Romish Witnesses on the other.

First, We have here a distinct Prophecy of Christ the Great Witness of Truth;
as we gather clearly from the Property of the terms in themselves, and from
conference of them with other Scriptures. The terms in themselves are proper to
Christ. He only is properly, Hed-emeth matsiel nephashoth, The Witness of Truth
that delivers Souls, whom the Spirit knew when Solomon thus wrote. Every
other true Witness is termed Hed-emunim, as v. 5. that is, a Witness of truths,
or of true things, a faithful Witness; but Christ is Hed-emeth, The Witness of
Truth, or Truth it self, or the Prime-Witness, or the Witness of all Truth.
This is likewise the style of the Prophets and of the Apostles, Isa. 55.4.
Behold, I have given him for a Witness to the People, etc. Rev. 1.5. Jesus
Christ the faithful Witness. Rev. 3.14. The faithful and true Witness. Likewise
Jesus Christ is properly he that delivers Souls: for he came to that purpose,
and therefore is he called Jesus. And in the style of the Prophets too, this
term of Matsiel is appropriated to God. As Dan. 6.27. when God had delivered
Daniel from the Lions, God is there styled, Meshesib ou Matsiel, He that
delivers and rescueth, that is, Souls from destruction, as Daniel from the
Lions. Then this Proverb of Solomon is a distinct Prophecy of Christ, A True
Witness delivers Souls; that is, The great witness of Truth, Christ the Truth
it self, shall come; and shall deliver the Souls that believe on him.

From this it is easy by the Rule of Opposites to interpret the second part of
the Proverb, which is a Prophecy of Antichrist the great Deceitful Witness. And
a very remarkable Prophecy. For the Spirit of God in Solomon, not only here
foretells the obvious signification of the words, that there shall be an
Antichrist, a great Witness of Deceit, who shall seduce Souls with Lies, in
opposition to Hed-emeth, that great Witness of Truth, who saves Souls by
Truth. But Solomon further by the words (if he, that reads, understands)
points out that Antichrist who he is; and by the name he gives that Deceitful
Witness in the Text, tells us distinctly, that it is the Lord of Rome, or the
Great one of Rome. For the Word of the Holy Ghost, the Hebrew word, which the
Vulgar Translation renders, a Deceitful Witness, is in the Masorethan
contraction Mirmah, in Original latitude Maromah, in Radical expression Maroum,
and signifies every way, literally and grammatically, the Lord of Rome, or, the
great one of Rome. This, though I think never observed before; yet to him that
will inspect the Hebrew Tongue, will be as clear as Columbus his Land to the
first Discoverers. I have writ a peculiar Discourse which makes this fully
plain, and intelligible, and certain, and shows the Mysterious Number of the
Beast to be undeniably proper to this Name in the Text; which Discourse shall
follow this in the Press: At present I shall only take occasion to give you a
passing view of the thing it self.

The thing asserted is this. These words of Solomon, A Deceitful Witness
speaks lies, are to be rendered from the Hebrew, The Lord of Rome speaks
lies. The proof depends wholly upon the understanding of the Hebrew word; and
we know that in difficult or obscure places, especially in Prophecies, and most
peculiarly in such as concern the Name or Discovery of Antichrist, it is said,
Let him that reads understand; and, Here is wisdom. Let him that has
understanding count the Number, etc. So that we must not expect the thing to be
obvious; but rather a thing hid a long time; but when once discovered, very
clear to all. So is this present Word of the Text, in the Hebrew Mirmah, or
Maromah, or Maroum. This plainly, literally, and grammatically, signifies the
Lord of Rome. For Mar in Hebrew is a Lord, and often used for Baal or for Adon,
says Buxtorfius; as Dan. 2.47. Mare-malchin, A Lord of Kings. 1 Cor. 16.22.
Maranatha: The Lord comes. And Romah or Roum in Hebrew is the same with Rome
in Greek, Roma in Latin, and Rome in English. Then Maromah plainly, literally,
and grammatically signifies the Lord of Rome. Therefore the Text is to be
rendered thus: The Witness of truth, which is Christ, delivers Souls. But
Maromah, The Lord of Rome speaks lies. Both words and sense agreeing thus, I
can see no difficulty in the thing: yet I shall add another fair Etymology of
the Word, and but another can be given.

The Word, however contracted or dilated, Mirmah, Maromah, or Maroum, has in it
the force and signification of three radical words, Marah, Roum, and Ramah:
From the second the Name of Rome is Originally derived, and Romulus from Rome;
not Rome from Romulus. The first signifies to rebel; the second to be lofty in
pride; the third, to supplant or to deceive. Now if Rebellion, Pride, and
Deceit, be not the properest characters both of the City, and of the Lord of
Rome, let all judge that know Rome; certainly characters, by which the Spirit
of God has distinguished that City from all others. And we know that Rome, with
the Lord-Popes thereof, has openly rebelled against the Kings and Emperors to
which it was subject, and has exalted it self in pride above their heads, and
has deceived the Nations of the Christian World with all manner of
deceivableness, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Then the Lord of Rome is
that Mirmah, Maromah, or Maroum, of which Solomon prophesies, A Deceitful
Witness speaks lies. That is, Maromah shall seduce and destroy Souls with
lies; as Hed-emeth shall save and deliver Souls through the truth.

From this results a secondary Prophecy, of true Protestant Witnesses, on one
hand; and of deceitful Romish Witnesses, on the other. For, as the Lord of
Rome is found here to be the great deceitful Witness opposite to Christ; so the
subordinate Romish Witnesses must needs be those deceitful Witnesses, which are
opposite to the subordinate VVitnesses of Christ; which as they are called
Christians from Christ, so are they called Protestants from their opposition
and protestation against the VVitnesses of Rome. Thus the Text will import
this. A True Witness, that is, a Protestant Witness, delivers Souls, but a
Mirmah, a Romish Witness speaks lies.

This Prophecy might be made good throughout all the points of Controversy
between us and them, which concern Souls: But I shall confine my Discourse to
two most eminent causes of Fact, that is, the Powder Plot of Ann. 1605; and the
Plot of 78. or of the last year, if it may not rather be termed a Plot of
present being. My business will be this: To prove unto ye, that in both Plots,
no less in this than in that, the Prophecy of Solomon is fulfilled; That the
Protestant VVitness is the true VVitness, and delivers Souls: but Mirmah, the
Romish VVitness is the deceitful Witness, and speaks lies.

First, That our Protestant VVitness was the true VVitness, as touching the
Powder Plot; We have three unquestionable Arguments: 1. The Unanimous
Declaration of the whole Kingdom by Public Vote in Parliament, by virtue
whereof this Fifth of November has been observed now Seventy four years. 2.
Matter of Fact; The Plot was not only contrived, but carried so far on, that
there wanted nothing but the Sitting of the Parliament, which scarce a day
before was prevented by an obscure Letter which gave occasion to search under
the Parliament House, and the Powder in sufficient quantity was found ready
laid, Man and Match ready, nothing wanting to blow up King and both Houses of
Parliament the first moment of their Meeting. 3. The Confession of some eminent
Plotters who gloried in the fact, though the rest utterly denied it, or
extenuated to nothing the guilt of the Roman Church: and of late they seem
ready to confess that Plot, that they may better be believed in their obstinate
denial of this.

But Secondly, I say of this Plot of 78. We have no less, yea, we have greater
Evidence of this, than ever England had of that. 1. As touching the first kind
of Argument.

That of the Gunpowder-Treason was declared by the Vote of One Parliament,
which was sufficient: but this by several Votes of several Parliaments, Nemine
contradicente. And by public Edict all the Churches of England kept solemn the
11th. day of April last, and I doubt not but will have a Memorial as perpetual
as that of November 5th.

2. As for matter of Fact, we have more real evidence of Fact in this, than was
in the Powder Plot. For, though the Powder, Man, and Match were ready; yet no
Execution was done, not a hair of any man's head singed, nor did the smell of
Fire pass on any man: But in this Plot, most fearful Execution has been done.
The chief of our Cities, and the chief Emporium of Europe, turned to Ashes,
with the most dreadful combustion that the Fireworks of Hell and Rome could
effect. Great Conflagrations of our best Buroughs, and of many other most
considerable, and some rebuilt, places. Yea, this Plot has drawn the Sword
too, to a dreadful Execution; to the most horrid Murder of the most
considerable and worthy Magistrate of the Royal City and County. In whose Blood
we may read aforehand the bloody Sentence which shall be pronounced against us,
if Papists by Plot, Policy, or Power, can ever be Masters over us.

In the Gunpowder-treason the design was discovered by way of Riddle, only in
one obscure Letter no man knew whence: but in this Plot we read their horrid
Designs at large, in many Letters, packets of Letters, Colemans, Harcourts, and
several others.

In the Powder Plot a few obscure Actors were discovered: but in this not a
few, nor obscure; whereof several have been tried with excess of Clemency, and
found guilty by the fairest Evidence. Many yet expect a Trial, of whom we can
say nothing: but this is certain, much more matter of Fact is already proved in
this Plot, than ever was proved in the Gunpowder-treason.

As to the third kind of Argument, the Confession of the Guilty. If we take not
things superficially, we shall find more considerable Confessions of the
Papists, and of the Plotters themselves in this Plot, than was in the
Powder Treason. For, 1. In the Powder Treason we find but One, and him for a
short time too, that in abhorrence of that Plot (which was evident before) came
and made discovery of the Accomplices, and of their designs and proceedings. But
in this Plot we have at least six considerable persons, who were for some years
active among the Plotters, and privy to all or most of their designs, and these
men, in a Conscionable dread and abhorrency of the hellish plot, have
discovered it, to the full satisfaction of King and Kingdom, as appears by many
public Declarations. That we may truly say, to the Papists and plotters, We
judge and condemn ye from your own mouths: your selves are your own Witnesses.

2. As for those executed Plotters, who at their death and Execution denied the
Fact, and with most fearful Execrations professed their Innocence: if we weigh
their words well, which are but words; we will find them to contain a
Confession most suitable to themselves, and more convincing to us, than if they
had confessed in plain terms, as some of the Powder-plotters did. For, 1. The
constant Form that they used in their Protestations, did not deny the real
thing, which is the plot; but they denied that which we mean by the plot; that
is, they denied all design to murder the King, or to subvert the Kingdom, or by
any rebellious way to alter Religion. For in plain English, according to their
principles, without Equivocation, they deny our King to be King, or that his is
the Kingdom, or that to Kill him is Murder, or that to raise an Army against
him is Rebellion, or that to bring in Popery is to subvert the Kingdom or
Church: But on the contrary, they are ready to maintain to death, and to
profess in flames, that the Pope has the Right of this Kingdom, and can give it
to whom he pleases; and that Charles Stuart is an Heretic, and no King; and
(which is an horror to speak) that it is no Murder, but a most Godly and
Heroic Act to stab, shoot, or poison him. Wherefore, although they designed
all these things most earnestly, yet this was not to plot against Church or
State, but to defend both. Therefore, they dyed not as guilty of the least Act
or Thought against King, Church or State; but as the true Subjects and zealous
Instruments of both, and so they commended their Souls into the hands of God,
expecting a Crown of Martyrdom in Heaven, and the Worship of Martyrs on Earth.
And, as for some extern Acts, of meeting, consulting, subscribing, etc. they
were not bound to give their Enemies advantage by Acknowledging such things;
but rather utterly to Deny them all, for the advantage of so good a Cause, and
for the glory of the holy Church. Thus, I say, that very Form of Denial, which
the dying plotters used, is a fair Confession suitable to themselves, and more
convincing to us (especially of the guilt of that Church) than if they had
confessed the fact in plain terms, as some Powder-plotters did. And I have yet
further reason to say so.

For in the Powder Plot, those that confessed it, confessed it to glory in it.
Not one Priest confessed it to repent of it. Which is more wonderful than our
present case. They dyed glorying openly in that horrid Plot, as one of them
boasted, that he had wrought under ground in his Shirt till he sweat. But now
in this plot, the eyes of the Nation are so opened, and all discern so clearly
the horror of such Facts, that the most impudent Devils of Hell could not
openly glory in such things. The Jesuits then and Romish Plotters had good
reason to change their Council since the Powder Plot, and to prescribe to their
Martyrs another Form of Confession to be used at their Martyrdoms: and that
they did so, is to me a certain thing. Indeed the Form they used was very
subtly contrived, but is not wonderful at all to them that are acquainted
with their methods of Equivocation; which is an Art of no small Circle, and
teaches how to equivocate most, when they most protest against it; as the Liar
never lies more, than when he swears he lies not at all. And what is
Equivocation but the most deceitful Art of Lying? proper to these deceitful
Witnesses.

Yet I say this; That holding the Principles of the Church of Rome to be true,
as these men certainly held, even at their death; they might protest themselves
to be innocent from all manner of plotting or acting against the King or
Kingdom, without any Equivocation at all. For without all Equivocation, this is
certainly true in their principles, that the Pope has the Right of the Kingdom
of England, and he that acts for the Pope, cannot act against the Kingdom: And
I dare say, that for this very principle, there are hundreds of Priests ready
to dye, and would expect the Worship and Crowns of Martyrs should they dye so.
For among them, he that dies for the Cause of the Pope, is a more glorious
Martyr than he that dies for the bare Cause of Christ. So Anselm and Becket,
those Rebels, are as glorious Saints as any in the Romish Calendar; and Beckets
Feast is primae Classis, equal to Christ's; but the Feasts of the Apostles are
secundae Classis, a Form below.

I say then, those that dyed for this Plot, made more Confession than those of
the Powder Plot. For those of the Powder Plot made but one Confession of the
Fact, glorying openly in it. But these have confessed both Fact and Crime; for by
a subtle artificial Form of Justification they made a Confession of the thing:
And also, by not daring to boast in it openly, as their Brethren had done
before, they made a Confession of the Crime; and of the shameful horror of
it. And certainly the horror of the Fact, and public shame, was the only
reason, why these new kind of Martyrs, Martyrs of Maromah, made no more open
Confession. And I verily believe, if England do its part, to make this Romish
plot evident to the world, it will prove sufficient to make Rome and her
Religion stink, that no King or people in the World shall endure it.

Thus we have all the Evidence we can require concerning these horrid plots of
Rome. And this plot of 78. has no less, yea much more Evidence than that of the
Powder Treason, and greater Evidence cannot reasonably be demanded: yet greater
Evidence I doubt not but a short time will produce. But we have produced enough
to our purpose, to show, that according to Solomon's Prophecy, the Protestant
Witnesses are true Witnesses, but Maromah's Witnesses deceitful.

I need not say much more to explain the Epithete of the Prophecy: That the
Protestant Witness delivers Souls; but Maromah's Witness speaks lies. For
it is plain, our Witnesses, God be blessed, have delivered our Souls, even the
Soul of our King, and of the best of his people, from most fearful
destruction. And in this late Plot, our Witness has delivered us, not from one
way, but from many ways of destruction. For the Plotters had prepared all the
Instruments of Death that Hell could produce; Fire and Sword, Jesuit-powder and
Balls, and all the new Ignatian Inventions: Nay, Poison and Dagger too, even
for the King; Armies at home, Armies from abroad. They had gathered men of all
Professions, and almost of all Nations, to carry on the work. We cannot now
instance so much, as future times may. But this we can say, Englishmen,
Irishmen, Scotchmen, Frenchmen, and very probably men of the other neighboring
Nations, not only Martial men, but Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, Astrologers,
Religious of all Orders, all have been deeply plotting against us. And from the
mouths of all these devouring Beasts our Witnesses have delivered our Souls.
Well then may that be repeated to their praise; A True Witness delivers Souls.

I will add, that in all probability the very Motive and End of the Testimony
of our Witnesses was to deliver Souls, not their own, but ours. For, whosoever
will consider the certain Dangers which these Witnesses underwent by offering
such a Discovery, and the uncertain Issue of making out their Evidence, and
withstanding their Adversaries, which they could not be ignorant of; must needs
conclude, that nothing could move these men to offer at such a Discovery, but
either the force of an affrighting Conscience, or an invincible love of Truth,
or a natural Sympathy and heart-melting Compassion toward their King,
Country, Friends and Acquaintance, all ready to be fearfully Massacred; or in
fine, an irresistible Impulse from God, who by thus defeating the Plots of Men
and Satan, and by making their own Tongues to fall upon them, would show
himself to be God indeed; a God that loves to save and not to destroy; a God
that can punish the Wicked by their own works, and preserve his own as it
pleases him; A God who loves to do good and great things by his own hand, and
for his own Names sake, who exalts his Mercy above all his other Works, who
only disposes of Kings and Kingdoms; whom all Kings and Kingdoms, ours
especially, ought to serve and fear, to praise and magnify for ever and ever.
Let then Solomon's Proverb be spoken in earnest of our Witnesses, by way of
prophecy and of praise; A true Witness delivers Souls: But, of Romish
Witnesses, the other part is no less verified, Maromah, A Deceitful Witness
speaks lies. He will do it on his Deathbed, at the Bar, on the Gallows; and
which is more, at the Sacrament. Nay, these men were bound by the Sacrament to
lie, both in Life and in Death, and that by a Triple Sacrament, of an Oath, of
Confession, and of the Eucharist. They died like Judas, as wickedly, but more
politickly. He confessed, and was ashamed, and hanged himself. They were ashamed,
and would be hanged rather than confess.

I might add, to seal the veracity of our Witnesses; that whereas the Romish
Witnesses, even packs of them, as that pack of St. Omers, and that of
Staffordshire too, have been overtaken in palpable Lies and Contradictions:
yet the minutest Critics of our time, and those not a few, nor a little busy,
have not been able to fix, scarce a seeming Contradiction, on the Testimonies
of our Witnesses; no, not on their longest Narratives, which is a strong
evidence of their sincere Veracity. But because perhaps neither their
Narratives nor their Testimony is yet at an end, I shall say no more of that,
but conclude,

First, with a word to these Witnesses. Let them proceed in a faithful
Testimony, with courage and confidence in the God of Truth, speaking and
avowing the Truth for Truths sake; not to confound their Enemies, (yet the
Confusion of their enemies will justly follow;) but let their design be to
preserve the Innocent, to serve the Church of God, to save their King, and his
People, to Deliver Souls. Following the Example of their Lord and Master, that
Hed-emeth, That Great Witness of Truth, whose glory is to save, and not to
destroy, and who came to save his Enemies, if they would have been saved.

Secondly, A word to these deceitful Witnesses of Rome, and to all Papists that
are led by their Deceits. O ye Bar-Jesuses! The Word of God is fulfilled
concerning you, which he spoke by his Servant Paul, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and
Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. You first
began to equivocate with God and your own Consciences, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having your Consciences seared as with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. Then
you proceeded to equivocate with one another, The Pope with the Priest, and the
Priest with the Pope; and the Priest with the People, and the People with the
Priest; deceiving each other with great and glittering words, of Catholic, and
Infallible, of Papal and Apostolical power, of almighty Bulls and Briefs, of
Jubilees, Pardons, Dispensations, Indulgences plenary, semiplenary,
superplenary, with all the Market-stuff-terms of Penance, Mass and Purgatory;
and you have deceived many Nations with these your deceitful Lies, poor England
for many Ages. At last you came to that Supremacy of Equivocation, that your
very Head and most holy Lord, calling himself, The Servant of the Servants of
God, and the most humble Servant of Kings, means to serve them only as his
Vassals, to destroy them at his pleasure, and to Curse all them that serve them
in a better sense. And see what progress you have made in that Service. First,
you took upon you to Crown Kings; you soon took leave to Censure the Kings you
Crowned; then to Excommunicate them, then to Depose them, and to raise and arm
their Subjects against them; and this way failing, you take the Crown into your
own hand, and give it to what Vassal of yours you please. But all these open
methods failing, you proceeded to Fraud and Stratagems; but Frauds above ground
failing, you went under the Earth as deep as Hell, to blow up King and People
with Powder-mines: But these too failing, you brought the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone on the Earth, and refined double and treble all the Arts of Hell, and
you laid a Plot which you thought invincible, and that Heaven and Earth could
not defeat it. But Heaven has shown its power in England, and you are utterly
confounded; and the God of Heaven seems now to say of you, 2 Timothy 3.9. They
shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest unto all men.

And now, You Papists of England, I hope the Folly, the Deceitfulness, the
hellish Cheats, the damnable Principles, the Devilish Practices, the
Antichristian Religion of Rome is manifest to you all: And that whether you
have been concerned in this Plot or no, yet you will never be concerned with
such Teachers more, to be led by their Deceits; nor continue Members of so
hellish a Body, under the influence of so devilish a Head.

Now we, for whom God has done such wonderful things, what manner of persons
ought we to be? How ought we to love, to serve, to praise, to fear, to obey, to
follow to death, our God and Lord Christ Jesus! who is the true and faithful
Witness, who delivers our Souls from Death, who has so often and so
wonderfully delivered this Kingdom, and I believe will deliver it from all its
enemies, especially the Enemies of his Gospel, and has promised to do great
things for us, and seems to provoke us to love, even while we provoke him to
Anger. That he may make us fit to receive his Favors to the end,

Let us pray.
O God, who gave the Son of thy Love to the World, to be the Witness of
Truth, that by the power of his Grace, and by the light of his Gospel, all men
might be delivered from Darkness and eternal Death: But men receiving not the
Truth in love, thou did send them strong delusion to believe the lies of
Antichrist the deceitful Witness. But in great and tender Mercy thou
deliveredst this Nation from that Delusion, and have by late and miraculous
Providence delivered our King and People from the horrid Plots of that Man of
Deceit: O let the Glory of thy Truth still shine upon us, and be thou our God,
and we thy People, and let the Great Witness of Truth seal this Mercy for ever.
And let every faithful Soul say, Amen.

FINIS.
Books sold by Benj. Billingsley at the Printing-press in Cornhill.
CHristian Religions Appeal from the Groundless Prejudices of the Sceptick to
the Bar of Common Reason: Wherein is proved, That,

1. The Apostles did not delude the World.

2. Nor were themselves deluded.

3. That Scripture matters of fact have the best Evidence.

4. The Divinity of Scripture is as demonstrable as the Being of a Deity. By
John Smith Rector of St. Mary's in Colchester. Fol. Price 12. s.

Of Baptism and the Lords Supper: Two short Discourses, opening the Nature,
Design and Ends of those two great Gospel Ordinances, and teaching the Holy use
and Improvement of them. 12o. Price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of
London, at Guild Hall Chapel, August 18. 1678. By Robert Neville, B. D. Rector
of Ansly in Hertford-shire. 4o. Price 6 d.

The Necessity of Receiving the Holy Sacrament, that great Test both of the
Christian and Protestant Religion: Declared in a Sermon at a Conference of the
several Ministers of the Deanery of Braughin in the County of Hertford;
appointed by the Right Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, to
be held at Ware, August 28. 1678. By R. Neville Rector of Ansly. 4o. Price 6 d.


