AN ANSWER TO A Scandalous Paper OF T. Hicks, termed A Rebuke to T. R. etc.

With a Reassumption our former COMPLAINT and CHARGE against T. Hicks.

By a Lover of Truth, Thomas Rudyard.

Printed in the Year 1674.

Reader,
NOt long since came to my Hands a printed Paper, subscribed Tho. Hicks, the
Title, termed A Rebuke to Tho. Rudyard 's Folly and Impertinency: Its Design to
answer a small Piece of mine, which was a Discussion of the Anabaptists printed
Proposals of the 12th of October last, pretended by them, in Order to Meeting
twixt them and us ( to debate and prosecute our Charge of Forgeries against T.
Hicks) As to his late Piece (weighing the Author and his present Circumstances)
it is not at all unlike him; for him, who has by Forgeries, Lies, Slanders and
Perversions traduced an entire Body of People (as well in their Civil as
Religious Capacities) who of all others (as many of his own Party will frankly
acknowledge) have merited better Terms from him and his Brethren; from such a
Person to expect Candid Dealing, was beyond my Expectation: And truly, he who
reads his last with the whole Series of his prior Discourses, must conclude
with me, that T. Hicks hitherto appears no Changling; his Faculty being with
Confidence to Abuse, and Recriminate his Opponent, and that unjustly, which
comprehends the Sum of his Assertions and Probations against me. I might need
no other Compurgators to acquit me of most of his Charge, but the Reader's
comparing of my printed Paper with his pretended Answer: But inasmuch as many
of these may fail to meet in one and the same Hand, and may meet with some not
of Capacity to discern the present Disingenuity and Unworthy Abuse of T. Hicks
toward me and my Friends, and he having inserted some New Matter therein, am I
pressed to publish this Reply; the Material Particulars of his I shall briefly
examine, and refer the Reader for more ample Satisfaction to each of our former
Discourses already in Print.

T. R.

AN ANSWER TO A Scandalous Paper Of T. Hicks, etc.
Sect. I.
HE first insinuates, that my late Paper was not a Discussion of the
Anabaptists Proposals; and to pursue his Charge, says further, That the whole
of those Pages wherein I concern my self with the above named Proposals, gave
the Lie to my Title Page.

For the Reason of his first, he says, I had not mentioned one Third of them:
And for the Reason of his second, I did not mention what they were.

To which I say, In Case there is no answering of a Letter, without an entire
Transcription in its Response (a Method of Writing this our Age uses not, nor
does T. H. use it) I grant my self under a Mistake; but certainly, when in mine
I acquainted T. Hicks and my Reader, 1. That the Proposals were the
Anabaptists. 2. I nominated the particular Subscribers. 3. Instanced the Time
they boar Date. 4. And that they were by them printed and published.


1. I might be excused a Transcription, and so T. H's Censure, my reference
being sufficient to direct what Proposals I then discussed, and intended to
surview. 2. As to his Allegation, that each Page gives the Lie to the
Title Page.
I answer, That if T. H. will please to review his and mine, he may know
whether the Lie belongs to me. or himself; but sure I am he is grandly
mistaken, and I fear, wilfully.

Sect. II.
He proceeds, next, to quarrel me for acquainting him of his Unwillingness to
meet us in Public to discuss our Charge of Forgeries against him; He would
persuade me or his Reader, that I know to the contrary. To which I say, I never
denied but T. H. has been frequent in Boasting in Print, and behind our Backs,
how ready he would be to abide a Public Hearing; but I must ever affirm my
Belief, that he intends nothing less, witness one Meeting at Barbican the 9th
of the 8th Month, where he strove to avoid our Charge against him, by charging
us; and we being Earnest in our Charge, he hastily left the Pulpet and
Assembly: And another Meeting at Wheeler-Street, the 16th of the same Month, he
came no nearer then a Neighboring AleHouse, though the Meeting was appointed,
and he was expected six or seven Hours: So till his Words and Actions
correspond, he must excuse me, if I (with many more) hear his Words, and
measure him by his Actions.

Sect. III.
His next Quarrel is, that I alleged that the Anabaptists proposed fifty or
sixty, excluding all others, as Witnesses to hear the Debate; whereas, says T.
H. It was fifty or sixty of a Siae.

To which I answer, If he had not mistaken or abused my Words, he had wanted
his Objection: What I discoursed of, as to Number of fifty or sixty related to
his Party only, whom he called at the first Barbican Meeting and not to us at
all; and that but fifty or sixty of a Side are allowed in the printed Proposals
is very clear: And as to any Consent of a Hundred, or a Hundred and fifty of a
Side, if the former Number were too few, sure I am there was no such Provision
in the Proposals, nor Consent of larger Number (as I ever heard of) when I
published mine; if any Thing to that Effect has since passed in Private I,
questian its Performance; for all I have observed from T. H. is, that 1. We had
a Public Meeting, and then but a few Hours with him. And 2dly, a second
Assembly where he met us not at; thence from Public proposed a Private, and at
the Closewould shuffle us from having either public or private.

Sect. IIII.
Then he insinuates as if I had not answered the Proposals at all, alleging I
passed them over in deep Silence, not in the least taking notice of my general
Answer, yet comprehensive, viz. The Proposals for private, etc. with small
Amendment might pass as fit Mediums for an Orderly Dispute -- But to the 9th
Proposition, I had Just Reason to make my Objection against it, which is the
next Particular he quarrels me for.

Sect. V.
The Proposition was in these words, And when your Paper is answered, that G.
W. and W. P. be obliged to give their Answers to such Charges as T. H. shall
exhibit against them. This Proposition I fully and largely discust; withal
telling him, that it was both against the Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical to be
oblieg'd to answer, before they know their Charge, before they understand
whether the Charge would relate to Civil or Religious Concerns to Matters
proper for their Debate, or Things Inquisitory inconsistent to their present
Contest. T. H. with this is so fumed and fretted, that he engages all the
Forces of his unclean Genius to bespatter me with the Terms of Talking Idly,
Dishonesty, Want of Wit, and such like Epithetes, which his Rage can vent
against me, which as much hurt me as if he had said nothing: with no less
Incivility he alike treats G. W. and W. P. insinuating (from my Demand of the
Matters charged, or to be charged) That they are certainly Tardy and Conscious
to themselves of Guilt, as well in Civil as Religious Concerns, and therefore
(says T. H.) demand the Charge aforehand. It were tedious, else I might also
write the many conceited Expressions and borrowed Phrases, he has vented upon
this Subject, which are as suitably applied as the former: But surely in my
Apprehension he might have better spared his Proposition, then by abusive and
shuffling Reflect seek to maintain it: Says T. H. They are afraid to engage
before they know what it is, let the Reader judge whether Innocence would talk
at this Rate. Could more quaint Expressions come from a Master of Inquisition,
or the Chairman of an Ecclesiastic or high Commission Court? He can
prognosticate Guilt from a just Defense, and insinuate that Innocence needs no
prudent Guard: what says T. H? Does not your Pleading to hear your Charge
first argue Guilt? and would Innocence talk at this Rate? Notable Doctrine in
Spain, but not in England, where (Nemo tenetur prodere se ipsum) no Man is
bound to betray himself; but according to the Command of our Lord Christ, to be
as wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. And to close his Paragraph with his
Abuse on this Subject, T. H. falsely insinuates, That if T. Rudyard had either
the Wit or Honesty, to have taken Notice of it, a Copy of their Charge was
promised, upon Condition they would be obliged to answer; When there not such a
Word, or any Thing of that Tendency in the printed Proposals.

But that we may see how correspondent his late Impositions upon us, are to
those Propositions he and his Brethren, made in his own behalf, upon our
demands against him, take these two Instances:

1. In their pretended Answer to our Appeal W. Kiffin, D. Dike, etc. in their
Epistle say, If W. P. or G. W. or any other Leading Quaker, have any New Matter
to object against T. Hicks -- if they please to signify the Particulars to us
in writing with their Hands to it, we shall return such Answer thereto, either
by a public Meeting or otherwise, as to us may seem just. Again in the same
Persons Letter, the 25th of the 7th Month, 1674. -- or any New Matter to be
objected against T. H. we are ready to give them such a Meeting for the
Examination thereof, provided they give us an Account of those Particulars in
writing before hand: A Particular of which was accordingly delivered.

Now Reader, compare but the Terms made for himself, and Propositions made to
us, and make the genuine Application.

Sect. VI.
His next Exception was occasioned upon my Distinguishing 'twixt writing a
Discourse or Dialogue, and writing Dialogue-wise; which I thus briefly expressed:
viz.

1. That a Dialogue is nothing else but a Discourse between Two, Three, or
more, which a Stander-by may write for others Information. 2. But to write
Dialogue-wise is, to inform that there was no such real Discourse, but only my
own Sentiments of the Persons and Things I would represent. 3. Tho. Hicks 's
Books were really his own Sentiments; yet he represents them to the World as a
Real Discourse, page 9.
This we complained of as an Abuse, which T. H. is pleased to term a mere
Cavil, and for Demonstration, thus speaks for himself: for (says he) I do
assure him that it was not so understood, or intended by me in the publishing
of it.

1. To this then I say, that our first Article or Charge exhibited against T.
Hicks (viz. A Dialogue betwixt a Christian and a Quaker, and yet made by T. H.
therefore but a mere Fiction) It is now determined by his own frank Concession;
and we accept of his Condemnation from his own Mouth: Herein has he made good
our first Charge against him; It was not (says T. H.) so intended by me, it
was not intended a real or true Dialogue; if not, then False and Fictitious, as
we affirm, and not True or Real.

2. But to mend the matter, or cover his Unreconcilable Contradiction, he tells
us, that (though it was not a Real Dialogue) it was as True and Real, as if it
had been a verbal Discourse.

Answ. A strange Assertion! I have not before met with the like: What! a
Fiction as true as a Reality it self? A man's own Sentiments of Persons or
Things as true and real as the Persons and Things are in themselves? After this
rate of T. H's Logic, 'twere not uneasy to affirm Pictures to be Real, Living
Creatures; and Images or Representatives to be Real, Living Men and Women.

But the Case is briefly thus 'twixt Us and him: 1. T. Hicks promulgeth his
Pamphlets as Real Discourses, terms them, Dialogues between a Christian and a
Quaker. 2. Alleges, That therein is Faithfully represented some of their
chief, etc. Opinions. 3. Their Method of Reasoning. 4. No other Answers then
what the Quakers give. 5. But now tells us, That it was not so intended or
understood (as a Real Discourse or Dialogue) by him, when he published it. And
yet to cover himself again, says he, It is as True and Real, as if it had been
a verbal Discourse. So that according to the Sense of his Discourse Falsity may
cope with Verity, and Fiction out-brave Reality; and in his Sense also have the
Preheminency, or at least, an Equal Authority.


Not far unlike unto this, is T. H's after Argumentation, in Response to these
Words of his Brother W. Loddington, viz. There is a Vast Difference betwixt a
Dialogue composed for Informaties, and one for Disputation: In the first I
write my own Judgment, in the other an Adversaries. To this T. H. responds
thus, Then my Title Page is innocent, and their Quarrel is a needless Cavil,
for as much as the Dialogue was writ altogether for Information, etc.

To which I reply and pursue the Argument: In Case thy Books were writ for
Information (and not for Disputation) as thou affirmest; then (as before) thou
writest thy own Judgment, and not thine Adversaries; yet notwithstanding have
thou frequently insinuated and affirmed therein, That thou have faithfully
represented their Opinions, Practice, Reasonings, Defenses, etc. And faithfully
to do this (without Abuse or Injury to thy self or Adversary) in writing thy
own Judgment only, and not thy Adversaries Judgment, is such a Piece of
confused Contradiction and Non. Consequence, that it exceeds my Reason of
Reconciliation: And in short, it has been T. H's Work, Labor and Practice to
make and feign a Quaker, with Doctrines, Principles, and Reasonings in behalf
of himself, and all called by that Name; and this, says he, now for
Information Only, and so his own Judgment, and not ours; for this Fact we
desire to have a Public and Free Auditory, to manifest his Abuse, and clear
our selves of the many Forgeries, Lies and Slanders, which by writing his own,
and not our Judgment, he has unworthily aspersed us withal, and unjustly
imposed upon us and our Religion.

Sect. VII.
But T. H. is very hot upon me for telling him, that W. K. and J. I. in
Principles (although now Confederates) differ more then a Real Christian and a
Quaker: This accounts T. H. so great a Crime, that it is the filling up of my
Measure, I suppose he means of Iniquity: And tells me for Answer, My Dictate is
notoriously false, and then gives in his Reason; For, says T. H. they differ
not in these Essential Points ^^ Christianity, as that Jesus Christ is a
distinct Person without us; that the H^ly Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and
Practice unto Christians; and of the Resurrection of the dead Body, and the
Life to come; they are in Unity in these, wherein the discriminating Difference
between a Christian and a Quaker lies.

I reply; Thus we have T. H's Definition of Essential Principles, or (as his
Words will bear) only Essential; for my Charge was, That W. K. and J. I.
differed more in Principles then a Real Christian and Quaker: This, he tells
me, is notoriously false, and offers for Reason thereof, they agree in those;
and therefore if there be more Principles Essential then these before named,
they may differ in them, and so my Dictate not notoriously false, though in
these they agree: but there are many more Principles then these before named,
wherein they may differ, so my Dictate not notoriously false (for all T. H. his
Reason, that in these they agree) I need not search far for Proof, but the
Anabaptists several Sistems of Faith, wherein they have many more pretended
Essential Articles of Faith, then these aforementioned, will evidence their far
greater Number of Principles, and their Difference therein; particularly, about
the Death of Christ, one, affirming him an Universal Sacrifice for all Mankind,
the other Denying it, etc. one, that he came to save All, the other, but to
save a Few; but as to the before mentioned particular Essential Principles, as
T. H. terms them, they have been often answered by our Friends, and his Abuses
often by them refelled.

Sect. VIII.
He then quarrels against my Enquiry, what Sort of Christian the Quaker was
not? And wholly waving my prior Expostulation, he most abusively answers me:
But I must tell him, that the Reason for my Enquiry justifies my Question, and
returns his Inquisition, etc. upon himself, as I may hereafter show: My Just
Complaint and Enquiry in page 13. was thus, But suppose we are no Christians in
your sense, or of your Dipping, are we therefore none? But suppose none at all,
according to your present Sentiments of us, but Jews, professed Turks or Heathens
(as you would have us) shall not your Brother answer for his Forgeries, Lies
and Slanders? It is your Belief that an Heretic deserves no Law, no Justice,
no Equity from or against men of your Cast; ye should do well to explain, for I
assure you it smells of your Predecessors: To this T. Hicks returns not a
Word in Answer, but stands as a condemned Mute, being loath to come to a fair
Trial, whether Innocent or Guilty.

But I further argued, That if no Argument will induce you to do us that common
Right, that equal Justice that a Heathen would not deny us; But you still
divert our Charge, and interpose such Discourse as may tire the Auditory, and
cover your Infamous Brother, and consequently his Abettors; If instead of
Hearing our Charge, and Answering our reasonable Demands, you would prove Us NO
Christians, and bid us take that for Answer, I propose as necessary in order
therio, that you tell us, what sort of Christian the Quaker is not? explain
your selves to the World, What and Who is a True Christian? These were the
Grounds and Reasons of my Question (the Particulars whereof follow after) and I
presume not impertinent to our present Business, and no more then the Nature of
the Contest, and the Anabaptist Mannagement thereof, directly called for from
our hands; But how correspondent his Answer is to my Question, will be evident
by due Comparison of them together. But inasmuch as his is general, and not
answering my particular queries, to know a True and False, a Real or Counterfit
Christian; I shall first in sert his Confession, being but an evasive Response
to my particular Question, and then again give him mine as really it is, for
which I yet count him my Debtor for a more distinct Answer; but first take his
Definition of a Christian: Said T. Hicks, For the Christian, I do hereby
acquaint him that I do account such (by whatever Name they may be distinguished
amongst men) who as Disciples of Christ being redeemed by his Blood, profess
themselves obliged in order to their Eternal Salvation, to learn and believe
the Doctrine, Obey the Precepts revealed in the Scriptures, and follow the holy
Life of the Christ of God, that is, that Person who only is and is known by
that Name, and is called the Christ of God by God the Father, by himself, by
his Holy and Inspired Penmen and Apostles, by men of all Nations, as being the
only Person accounted and ordained by God to be the Lord, Master and Savior of
men, who was the Seed of Abraham and David, born of the Virgin Mary at
Bethlehem, crucified to Death at Jerusalem, rose from the Dead the third Day,
and was afterward seen of the Apostles and many hundred of his Disciples, with
whom he personally talked and conversed, and before whose Eyes he ascended into
the Heavens, where he lives to make Intercession, and governs as Lord and
Head over all, and whence he shall come to judge the World in Righteousness
with an Eternal Judgment, and render to every man according to his Works.

It seems this is T. Hicks's Christian! Now, I have four things to remark:

1. He has calculated his Confession to the Socinian Creed, in that he leaves
out Christ's Divinity as any part or Article of his Faith; either because he is
a Socinian, or to do them a good Turn at this juncture for their Hearty
Endeavors for his Cause. This very Article once distinguished Heretics from
Orthodox: See Eusebius. But T. Hicks is not of that mind.

2. He has not distinguished about Precepts, between Shadowy and Substantial,
Temporary and Eternal, Legal and Gospel.

3. That He is NOT this Christian, because He does Not obey all those Precepts:
He does Not as he would be done by: He walks Not by the Rule of the New
Creature; He does More then an Eye for an Eye; He washes Not Feet; anointeth
Not with Oil; sings Not Psalms: He confesses and holds, That no man can keep
those Precepts.

4. If this be a true Christian in Tho. Hicks's Account, the Quaker must needs
be a Christian, since he ever held and maintained on Occasion, That Christ came
of Abraham's Seed; and more, to wit, that he is God over all; that Redemption
is in his Blood; that he dyed, rose and ascended into Heaven, is there at God's
right Hand, the Mediator and Intercessor; that the Scripture contains Godly
Precepts that ought to be believed and ^beyed; yea, that the Fundamental
Doctrines of the Gospel are therein expressed; and that there shall be a great
Day of general Judgment to Eternal Felicity or Misery, according to the Deeds
done in the Body.

This I say, the true Quaker ever owned and believed, and therefore a Christian
by T. Hicks's Concession: But T. Hicks, this is not the Chrisiian thou have
printed in Opposition to the Quaker; for he is an arrant Counterfeit. Forger,
Perverter and Slanderer, which is far from keeping the Precepts contained in
Holy Scripture; that falsely said, Our Christ was a Mystical Romance; that our
Religion was calculated to the Service of the Devil and our own Lusts; that we
were as grand Impostors as ever were; that we refase Just Debts on Revelation;
that we hold the Soul to be God; that me were as perfect as ever; that there is
no Resurrection or Eternal Rewards; that we should confess, We rail on our
Adversaries, on purpose to make our Friends believe we have the better, etc.
This was thy printed Christian; see how thy Christians contradict each other;
but Thomas, if all thy Duties be Sin (as it is one general Maxim among you) thy
Christian Confession is one among the rest.

I shall now assume my former Query, That you tell us what Sort of Christian ye
mean, the Quaker is not? explain your selves to the World, and not, who is a
true Christian? 'And you (denying Inward Evidence and Revelation) tell us,
whether Faith and Works, or Principle and Practice, or Pretended Faith and
Principles without Works or Practice, make a Real Christian? which may serve
for a Looking Glass, as well for your selves as for us: I speak particularly to
you, who are many Heads confederated this Day against us; Each Sort claims the
Name, but who has the Nature in your Sense? Therefore answer plainly, without
Equivocation or Evasion, what you mean by Christian?

1: Do you mean the Presbyterian (so called) with the Directory? 2. Or, do you
mean the Independent with his Savoy-Confession? 3. Or, do you mean the
Anabaptist with his several and various promulged Sistems of Faith? 4. Or, do
you mean those that tell us, We must be DIPPED with them, as necessary to
Salvation? 5. Or, do you mean Such that hold, That Christ dyed not for all, nor
was an Universal Sacrifice for all Mankind? 6. Or, do you mean Such that
profess their Faith, That Millions of People are Damned; or at least, left
without Means of Salvation by Eternal Decree, before they Knew or Acted Good or
Evil? 7. Or, do you mean Such that Deny the Divinity of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and that he was not One with the Father in Glory before the World
was?
It is not my Purpose to draw you out beyond the Bounds of the Faiths or
Beliefs of the present Confederacy, therefore I wave to mention such Sorts as
are termed, the Church of England, etc. All I desire or expect from you at
present is, to be plain and particular, which of these forementioned, or what
others by Faith and Practice are the real and true, and which are, and how many
of these Impostors, or if all? declare it that our Auditors upon your Attempts
to prove us no real Christians, may be capable to judge whether you act like
real Christians or Stagers against Christianity, that we may see, whether
whilst you are Unchristianing others, you Heathenize not your Confederates, or
others that merit the Name better then your selves: Let us have it under all
your Hands, that other Judicious and Indifferent Persons, as well as your
selves, may be capable to Judge betwixt you and us in this Matter of
Controversy.

But T. H. to close the Discourse, thus vents himself against me, Whereas T. R.
has made so great an Outcry against Forgery, I would only acquaint him, That
if he knows the Quaker as well as he knows himself that did publish in Print
the Attestation of several Persons without their Knowledge or Consent, merely
to serv^ the Quakers Interest, then I count it n^ Wonder that either my self or
any other Person should be abused by T. R. or a Quaker.

To which I answer: It is much (...) man of T. H's Circumstances would not
speak directly as well as thus insinuatingly (or with an If) to fix a Scandal
upon me; were it true, why should he fear to tell me, I counterfited some
Persons hands, as the thing he written may probably bear amongst man who may
have a good Share of Honesty, though not sufficient Craft (...) espy the
Promulger's Subtilty? B^ briesly I shall answer both as to the supposed
Attestation it self, and Ca^ of it. It was thus; In the Year 167^ One R. James,
an Anabaptist Preacher, published in print a Pamphlet, termed A true and
impartial Narrative of the eminent Hand of God that befell a Quaker and his
Family at the Town of Panton in Lincolnshire, who (says the Pamphlet)
affirmed he was commanded of God to pronounce Mr R. James, Preacher of the
Gospel, a Leaper from the Crown of the Head to the Soal of the Foot; the same
Judgment of Leprosy shortly after falling upon one of his Children, himself,
Wife, and the rest of his Children being also afflicted with a painful
Distemper, attested under the Hand of several credible Persons, Eye and Ear
Witnesses: This Leprose Child and sore afflicted Family, the Anabaptists
pretend that they Cured, or were presently cured by their Prayers on purpose
made for them, as their Pamphlet affirms; (but as for producing any Eye or
Ear-Witnesses, that this Man or his Child was so really Afflicted or Healed by
them, they failed in) This coming to London, was entertained with great
Acclamation amongst the Anabaptists and other Professors, and pressed upon us and
the Reader, as a Decision of the Controversy 'twixt Us and the Anabaptists, A
Landmark of Providence and Finger of God, as their Pamphlet boasted: And truly
when it came to my hands, I judged it a very strange Prodigy, if true, and a
Miracle exceeding all I have read of in the holy Scriptures, done by the
Prophets, Christ or his Apostles; and more especially, that when our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, could not do many Wondrous Works in his own Country
because of Unbelief, That the Anabaptists, whose Belief is that Miracles are
absolutely ceased, should work such a miraculous Cure upon a leprous and
afflicted Family, and that upon a Quakers, who still continued a Quaker (as
they insinuated) Men whom they wholely conclude in Unbelief, was such a mighty
Miracle, that I had not Faith to believe it, and therefore questioned its
Verity; and upon Inquiry it was found a Deceitful piece of Imposture, and a
most abominable Forgery, and the Forger of it to be the aforesaid R. James.

But the Anabaptists confident attesting the Verity thereof, stirred such a
Tumultuous Spirit with Uproars and Outcries against our Friends, that several
of them from far distant Places traveled to Panton in Lincolnshire, to
enquire out the Verity thereof, and with some diligent search they found the
Person (viz. R. Anderton) upon whom and his Family, the An baptists pretended
they had wrought this great Miracle, or in truth had acted a ^i^ce of Cheat and
Imposture: whereupon this said R. Anderton in the Presence of Dr. Lincoln, the
Parish Parson, and above twenty of his Neighbors, declared that he never was a
Quaker, or known by them, and never at their Meetings, except about a Quarter
of an Hour at the Castle of Lincoln (when Ral^h James, the Forger of the Story
was with him) and affirmed, he never had any Leprous Child, which his
Neighbors with him then unanimously confirmed, and showed the Child alive,
whom the Anabaptist affirmed to be Dead; and further affirmed, that neither
himself nor any of his Family was troubled with any such Painful Distemper, as
the Baptist say they had: The Tenor of which Account, with other material
Circumstances that confirmed the Truth thereof, was committed in Writing by the
Persons who travailed thither, to certify us at London and elsewhere, how the
Case really stood, and what the Persons and Inhabitants declared, concerning
the Matter: And at the Close of their Testimonial they declared, these Things
were affirmed by the said R. A. and confirmed by the Inhabitants of the Town,
whose Names (not Hands) thereto subscribed; and under the Title Inhabitants,
the said Person writ down the Inhabitants Names; and at the Close of the
Writing subscribed their own ^ands, as further Witnesses thereto; ^his or a
Copy thereof, being sent to ^ondon, as pertinent to detect their ^buse, and
undeceive the World of ^uch a Piece of Imposture and abomi^ible Fraud, that
they had forged, I ^serted in a small Pamphlet, titul'd, ^he Anabaptist
Preacher Unmaskt, in a ^rther Discovery of his lying Wonder out of
^incoln-shire, to which I further refer ^e Reader for Satisfaction: This is ^e
naked Truth, and the State of that ^ase, as well to the Matter it self, as
^inner of its Detection; and had ^ose Persons declared that such Dis^urse and
Circumstances had been (...), and passed before the Judges of (...) Land
(admitting it had been done their Presence) and given an Ac^^pt thereof; I know
not why T. H. ^^uld cavil, so long as the Fact was (...), as well to
Circumstance as Sub^^ce, or reflect on T. R. for publish^^g the Certificate or
Account thereof sent him, and imputed that as a Piece of Crime, which was
really an Act of Justice.

I might now enumerate the many palpable Untruths despersively mixed in T. H 's
Rebuke of T. R. such as his changing, Not only the Pages, but that the whole of
them (wherein I concerned my self with the above-named Proposal) gives the Lie
to my Title Page; -- And his charging me in passing over eight Proposals with
deep Silence: These I am bold to say, T. H. if in his Wits or tolerable
Understanding, knows are untrue Impositions, and nothing else the Roman-like
flourishes to adorn his abusive Discourse, as too frequently the Wild Gallants
in our Age mix their with profane Oaths; an ill Patter^ to imitate: But that
he may present himself an apt Scholar in that (...) the like School, he gives
us a pregnant Instance of his Proficiency, ins^nuating, That one in the Name of
an (...) Friend of ours had given us Counsel to be^ (...) out with Huffing, to
affirm or deny any thing, and that with the Highest Confi^^ence, etc. Who was
it T. H. that ^ave this Counsel? Was it any other ^hen a nameless Libeller? and
the ^retended Friend of ours, Was it ^ot a feigned Jesuit? A Piece patcht ^p
and promulged by your selves, to ^raduce us here and throughout this City and
Nation? Was this Work Christian? Thy Brother Loddington ^old you, with much
more, That the ^heet it self smelt of the Spirit of Perse^ution, which was the
very worst Part of Popery; and gave you a due Rebuke ^or introducing us into
your Meeting ^ith such first Entertainment: -- Therefore as to the Advice of
thy Confederate, and not our Friend, and ^^ou who would thus traduce us,
(...) answer with the Honest Moralist, ^^rpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit
^^sum.

Thus having acquitted my self and Friends from T. H. and his abusive Paper, I
can do no less then briefly to acquaint him and the Reader, That ou^ Contest
and Controversy at this Day against him, and with his Confederates, is not, 1.
For opposing his Christian and Quaker; but making a Counterfeit Christian and a
False Quaker. 2. Not for Truly stating our Principles, and attempting to refel
them But for feigning and forging Principle that are not ours, thereby
traducing us. 3. Not for his not having Confidence in Press and Pulpit, and in
other Assemblies in our Absence, to charg^ us with holding Doctrines and
Opinions inconsistent with Christian Religion; But not having Courage to mee^
us in Public to debate the Matters (...) Controversy betwixt us in a Free an^
Open Assembly. 4. Not for his not pretending to b^ ready to meet us in Public;
But his re^ avoiding to appear answerable to hi^ Pretenses, of which we have
had a pregnant Instance.


What shall I say? His Promises and Performances, his Words and Actions, are as
correspondent as his and his Confederates have usually been, when they have
been brought to Public Trial, as most Parts of this Nation can plentifully
witness; like those of old, Who were strong to draw the Bow, but turned their
Backs in the Day of Battle.

But surely, were T. H's Diatogues and Discourses as True and Real as if they
had been a Verbal Discourse, and his Authorities taken from our Books and
Writings, as he not only in Words, but in Print has confidently, though falsely
affirmed, what need he fear to give us a Public Meeting, to make an Open
Disquisition of those Controversies? I must tell him, let him evade and shuffle
as long as he can, we look upon it as our Right to have a fair and open
Discussion of those Instances of Forgeries, Lies, Standers and Perversions, we
have in Print exhibited against him: And I must say, were he really Innocent
(according to the English Laws) his flying a Fair Trial will breed (and not
without good Cause) great Suspicion of his Guilt.

I with many more discern with what Artifice the Confederates would divert our
present Pursuit from T. Hicks, viz. with Forging, venting, promulging renewed
scurrilous and abusive Eibels, nameless Pamphlets; and others, with forged or
unknown Authors, Lampoons, Ballads and such like Weapons; how Manly, Spiritual
or Christian the Generous Minds abroad, as well as the Honest and
Simple-hearted amongst themselves, can discern, some to Derision, others to
Sorrow of Hearts and Spirits: And to complete T. H's Defense, J. I. a
Confederate, must single out and dare us to Battle with him, that the while T.
H. might escape our Pursuit, or whilst the Eyes of the People are upon some new
Encounter, T. H. might slip out of a Back Door: And truly, if the Night were
come upon our Understandings, or our Eyes Purblind, we might gaze at these
Cords of light Matches, and so divert our Battle to encounter a Cheat. Alas! In
all that is written against us, I desire no more of the Unprejudiced Reader
then to compare the Citations (observing the prior and subsequent Discourse) to
consider the Author's Circumstances and Ends, and his Judgment I will abide;
but as to him or any other, although (Articulariter) they might be answered on
that or other Subject, his and their Ends being discovered: I shall (not
abridging the Freedom of any other) renew my former Resolve, That if J. Ives
will still appear as a Privateer against us, thinking by his Brawling Outcries
to still the Noise of our Charge of Forgery, etc. exhibited against T. H. and
stiffle our Just Complaints against W. K. etc. by my Consent he shall rail on,
Rabshekah-like, etc. till the Just Hand of the Lord overtake him: This is still
my Mind, and other Answer I design him not; but expect, and cannot but press T.
Hicks to give us a Public Meeting, and in a Free and Open Assembly answer our
Charge exhibited against him; he knows, and so many of his Brethren, that our
Request in this case is but reasonable: And that the Reader may know it is not
without good Cause that we press to public Hearing and Discussion of the
Controversies betwixt us and T. H. I shall instance some of the many abominable
wretched, and as I may say, Hellish Doctrines, Opinions and Practices, which he
feigned and forged, falsely imposed, and maliciously insinuated to be ours.

1. That notwithstanding we have ever (since, and before we were reproachfully
called Quakers) declared and owned the Holy Scriptures contained in the Old and
New Testament, to be of Divine Authority, and that the Holy Men of God gave
them forth as they were moved of the Holy Ghost; and that they are the Words of
God, though Christ, according to the Holy Scriptures, is only called the Word
of God, Joh. 1. it being his proper Name; as Rev. 19.13. Yet T. Hicks has
maliciously insinuated and affirmed, that we render the Holy Scriptures to be
of no more Authority then Esop 's Fables, and esteem them inferior to our own
pamphlets.

2. That although we really and truly believe, and have ever in Words and
Writing openly attested, and witnessed that the Blood of Christ only cleanses
from Sins, and that his Blood was shed upon the Cross as an Universal
Sacrifice; yet T. H. wickedly affirmed, That the Blood of Christ in our Esteem
is worse then the Blood of a common Thief.

3. That although we have ever declared, that by Faith In Christ and his Grace
are we saved, and that there is no other Name given, by which Salvation is
brought to our Souls; Yet T. H. has falsely and abusively affirmed, That the
Quakers owning Jesus Christ, is indeed no other then a mere Mystical Romance.

4. And although the Lord by his mighty Hand and outstretched Arm, has redeemed
his Remnant from a vain Conversation, and separated us from the many and
unfruitful Works of Darkness, which not only grieved his Good Spirit, but kept
us in Bondage to the Enemy of our Souls and Mankind, and instead thereof has
raised and begotten in us a Desire, and earnest Breathing, that the whole
Creation may return to God, and come under the Government of that just, holy
and equal Law, To do as they would be done unto; yet T. Hicks, to vilify,
scandalize and traduce us as well in our Civil as Religious Capacities in the
Hearts and Spirits of the Generation in which we live, has falsely and
maliciously, and without just Cause insinuated and promulg'd these Wicked and
Abominable Positions of and concerning us, viz.

1. That the Tendency of all the Quakers Reasoning about instituted Religion,
is to debauch Mankind.

2. That their Meetings are only and principally to Decoy, Trapan and inviegle
others.

3. That their Principles improved are Destructive to all Human Society.

4. That their Religion is a mere Cheat calculated only to the Service of the
Devil and their own Lusts.

5. He falsely insinuates that they pretend Revelation, to excuse them the
Paying of their just Debts; thereby presenting it Dangerous for Persons to deal
with them. These, with many more, are the Matters in Charge against him,
already exhibited in Print, for which we can do no less then require a Free,
Open and Public Meeting and Auditory, that if we prove him not a Forger, Liar
and Slanderer, he may be fairly acquitted, else, that if upon a Disquisition of
these and many others he be found Guilty, that he may bear the Weight and
Burden of his own Work, according to that just and equal Law, Deuteronomy. 19.16. If
a False Witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which is
Wrong. Verse. 7. Then both the men between whom the Controver^^e is, shall stand
before the Lord, before the Friest and the Judges that shall be in those Days.
Verse. 18. And the Judges shall make diligent Inquisition; and behold, if the
Witness be a False Witness, and has testified falsely against his Brother.
Verse. 19. Then shall you do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his
Brother, so shall thou put the Evil away from among you. Verse. 20. And those
which remain shall hear and fear, and shall henceforth no more commit any such
Evil among you. Verse. 21. And thine Eye shall not pity, but Life shall go for
Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, Foot for Foot.

London, the 16th of the 9th Month, 1674. By T. Rudyard.


