A BRIEF RELATION OF HIS Majesty's, AND THE FRENCH KINGS FORCES UNDER MY
COMMAND, WITH THE DUTCH

The 11 th. of August, 1673.

Near the TEXEL.

Printed in the Year, 1673.

A brief Relation of His Majesty's, and the French Kings Forces under my
Command, with the Dutch, the 11 th. of August, 1673. near the Texel.
UPon Monday, the 11th. of August, at Daybreak, we say the Dutch Fleet about a
League and a Half to Windward, being then at E. S. E. fair Weather, and not far
from the Shore, at which time both their Fleet and ours were standing to the
Northward. About Six of the Clock, I put Aboard the Signal for our Fleet to
Tack to the South; which they did. Then the French had the Van, and my Self was
in the Middle, and Sir Edward Sprage in the Rear. About the same time the Dutch
Fleet Bore down upon us; and De Ruyter sent the Vice Admiral of Zealand, with
Seven Men of War to Engage the whole French Squadron: Admiral Trump with his
Squadron (being about Twenty Six Men of War, and Seven Fireships) Engaged Sir
Edward Sprage: And the Blew Squadron (who laid their Top-sail to the Mast to
stay for them) contrary to my Express Order, and his own Duty. De Ruyter, and
Bankuret, with all the rest of the Fleet, Fireships, and Men of War, came on
upon Me, and my Squadron. About Eight of the Clock the Fight began, and about
Nine there fell a Fog, with small Rain, which Continued till Twelve of the
Clock: Then it Cleared up, and the Wind came to the South, which put the French
Squadron (being a Head) to VVindward of the Dutch: At which time all the French
(having the Wind) in stead of Tacking and Engaging the Enemy (as I expected
from them) stood away to the S. E. the VVind then at S. S. VV. and stood full
Two Leagues away before they Tacked again, and the Vice Admiral of Zealand had
lest them, and came down upon us. At this time I saw Sir John Chichley,
Reer-Admiral of the Red, to Leeward a great way: The whole Force of De Ruyters,
and Bankurets Squadrons, lay upon my Division, and Sir John Harmons; the Enemy
having left off Sir John Chichley, and his Division, so that about Twelve a
Clock I had upon me De Ruyter, and his Squadron on my Lee-quarter, and the
Zealand Squadron upon my Broadside, to the VVindward. Having Fought thus some
time with both my Broadsides, to VVindward and to Leeward, I edged down toward
the Reer-Admiral of the Red, forcing the Enemy to give me way, and so Joined
with them.

After this, about Two a Clock, I discovered the Blew Squadron at a distance
near three Leagues to Leeward, bearing N. N. E. and I not knowing what
condition the Suadron was in, and finding the Guns not well plied, I made all
the Sail I could to them, both to Join the Fleet, and to Help them, if Occasion
required; the VVind then being S. S. VV. De Ruyter no sooner perceived my
Resolutions, but he Bore away with all the Fleet to the Relief of Trump, so
that we came Down side by side within Range of Cannon Shot, without Firing on
either side. And as we were Sailing down, we saw a great many of the Blew
Squadron; which we judged had received so no Damaage, to VVindward of the Body,
and likewise some of the Red, to which I Fired a Gun for them to Bear down to
us: Notwithstanding which, they did not. About Four a Clock, we came near the
Blew Squadron, where we found the Royal Prince wholly disabled, her Mainmast,
Mizen-mast, and the Fore-top-mast Shot away, and discovered more Ships
disabled. The Vice Admiral of the Blew mending her Rigging, the Reer-Admiral
(the Earl of Ossery) lying a Stern of the Royal Prince, between her and the
Enemy, and two Friggots by him; upon which I sent immediately two Frigots to
take the Royal Prince in a Toow, Trumps Squadron lying to the Eastward of them,
some of them disabled in their Top-masts, and Yards, part of his Squadron with
the Vice Admiral, and Reer-Admiral standing to the Eastward, close to the wind
with all the Sail they could to gain them, so I Tacked again upon the Blew:
when we came near them (being about Four a Clock) De Ruyter fired a Gun, upon
which Trump Taced, and De Ruyter bore down with all the Sail he could with all
his whole Fleet, to make himself Master of our lame Ships. Upon which we lay by
before to the windward of Sir John Kempthorn, to get our Fleet in Order to
Ataque the Enemy again; I putting out the usual Signal, viz. the Blew Flag upon
the Mizen Peke, to bring all our Ships into the general Wake, or Grains.

I sent also Ketches, Slopes, and Boats, to Ships that were to windward, to
Command them in: whereupon we Bore up, and Sheered in between De Ruyter and our
Lame Ships, and fired Guns to some of our own Ships to windward to Bear down,
but none of them came near to Assist me except the Earl of Ossery, and Sir John
Kempthorn, so that I had great Reason to believe that the Blew Squadron had
been totally Lost, except I had so happily come to their Relief; since they
were so Disabled, as no more of them but their two Flag Ships only gave me
Assistance, after I came down.

About Five a Clock, De Ruyter with all his Flags and Fleet, came Side by Side
close up with me, so there began again a very sharp Encounter. This Evenings
Engagement I had none to Second me, besides the Vice Admiral, and Reer-Admiral
of the Blew, but Sir John Harmon, Captain Davis, in the Triumph, and Captain
Stout, in the Warspike: And of my own Division, Sir John Holmes, in the Raven,
Captain Leg, in the Royal Katherine, Sir John Berry, in the Resolution, Sir
John Emsly, in the Henry, Sir Roger Strickland, in the Mary, Captain Carter, in
the Crow, a Fourth-rate, and Captain Bath, in the Pearl, a Fifth rate, in all
not above Thirteen or Fourteen Ships.

The Fight was very Sharp, and Close, I forced the Enemy into a great Disorder,
and then sent two Fireships amongst them, which encreast it: And if the French
then Lying within Distance, had obeyed my Signal, and Born down upon the Enemy
according to their duty, I must have Routed them, and Torn them all to Pieces.
It was the plainest, and greatest Opportunity was ever lost at Sea.

The Fight continued till the day was near spent, and the Sun was just Setting,
when I Edged off with an easy Sail, so as to Carry off the disabled Ships, and
the Dutch also laid their Heads to the Eastward, and so the Battle ended,

Then came a Messenger from Count de Estrees, to receive Orders, and to know
what was the Meaning of the Blew Flags being put upon the Mizen Peek: Which I
could not but wonder at, since there was no Instruction plainer to be
understood, or more necessary amongst the general Instructions for Fighting,
which he had before hand. Besides, it wanted neither Signal, nor Instructions
to tell him what he should have done at a time when the Case was so plain to
every man's Eye in the whole Fleet.

The Enemy, when dark Night came, stood off to their own Coast, which I had
reason to be glad of, resolving if I could avoid it, not to Venture an
Engagement the next day, unless I could have had a better Assurance, what Count
de Estrees meant to do, who so shamefully failed me in the Battle.

Neither English, nor French, lost one Ship of War, nor do I think the Dutch
had much cause to Rejoice. And considering the Horrible and Apparent Treachery,
or Cowardice of the French, I reckon it the greatest Providence, that ever
befell me in my Life, that I brought off his Majesty's Fleet so.

FINIS.

