The Cry of the Oppressed FOR JUSTICE: OR, The CASE of Thomas Rudd, Who was
Imprisoned and Whipped through several Streets of the Town of Leverpool, in the
County of Lancaster, by the Order of the then Mayor of the said Town, for going
through the Streets thereof, and Exhorting the People to Fear God.

WITH A Letter written by the said Thomas Rudd, to Thomas Sweeting, Mayor of
Leverpool.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Graciousstreet,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1700.

THE CASE of Thomas Rudd.
WHEREAS Thomas Rudd of Wharf, near Settle, in Yorkshire, by Trade a Miller, of
a sober Life, and orderly Conversation, one of the People called Quakers, had a
Concern upon his Mind, in a Serious and Religious manner, to go through the
Streets of Leverpool in Lancashire, to Warn the People to Fear and Dread the
great God; was, by the Mayor of that Town, Thomas Sweeting, by Trade a
Linnen-Draper, several times taken up, and committed to Prison; and by other
Magistrates of the same Town was sent to the House of Correction; and had his
Mare taken from him, and sold, and no part of the Money given or tendered to
him, but pretended part thereof to be expended for Charges, in carrying him to
the House of Correction, and the rest to be given to the Poor.

And after this, being again concerned to go through the Streets of the same
Town, was again taken up, and put in Prison, by the aforesaid Mayor's Order,
and kept above Two Weeks in Prison; where Thomas Roe, Sergeant, that keeps the
Prison, would not suffer the Iron Door of the said Prison to be opened, to get
a Bed in for him to lie upon, all the time, nor any other thing, but what could
be got through the the Square Grates of the said Door, or Hole in the Wall;
pretending the Mayor's Order for the same.

And when other Justices Signed a Warrant for to send him from Constable to
Constable, to his own home; Nevertheless, The said Mayor caused Thomas Rudd to
be Whipped (without the other Justices Knowledge, and contrary to their Order,
as they said) through some of the Streets of the said Town of Leverpool; and
called to the Man that whipped him, ( You or Thou Rogue) Lay on, because Thomas
demanded Justice of him. Which Cruelty, how becoming it is for any pretending
to be Christian Magistrates, to execute upon any sober Man, only for Exhorting
People to Fear and Dread the great God, or Demanding Justice, we leave to the
Truly Christian to judge; and whether hereby these Magistrates have not acted
contrary to the Christian Doctrine of the Holy Apostle, who says, Rulers are
not a Terror to Good Works, but to Evil: He is the Minister of God, a Revenger,
to Execute Wrath upon him that does Evil; not upon them that do Well, and
Exhort to Fear God; as King Jehosaphat charged them that he set for Judgment,
to Act in the Fear of the Lord.

And our present King William, in his late Proclamation, says, We do expect,
that all Persons of Honor or Authority should contribute to the
Discountenancing Men of Dissolute and Debauched Lives; and strictly Charges and
Commands all his Mayors, Justices, etc. to be Vigilant in Punishing all Persons
guilty of Excessive Drinking, Profane Swearing, etc. as they will answer it
upon Pain of his Highest Displeasure.

And the late Queen, in her Letter, complained of the Neglect and Connivance of
the Magistrates, in not putting in Execution those Laws against Profane
Swearing and Cursing, and all other Lewd and Erroneous Practices.

And the House of Commons, in their Address to the King, desires, That His
Majesty would Effectually Discourage Profaneness; and that he would Issue out
his Royal Proclamation, Commanding all Justices of the Peace, and other
Magistrates, to put in speedy Execution these Laws in Force against Profaneness
and Immorality.

But the Mayor of Leverpool has Imprisoned, and caused a Man to be Whipped, not
for Profane Swearing, Cursing, or any Lewd or Erroneous Action, but for
Exhorting People to Fear God, and telling them, the Lord would Punish, because
of Sin: Which the King, in his Proclamation, declares, Nothing is likelier to
Provoke God to withdraw his Mercy, and to Inflict Heavy and Severe Judgments
upon this Kingdom, than the open and avowed Practice of Vice.

And the Queen did Require, That where any Officer of Justice shall be guilty
of any of these Offenses aforementioned, that such Officer by his Punishment
may serve for an Example to others. But she never directed, That Men, Fearing
God, of Honest Lives, and Christian Conversations, should be Imprisoned and
Whipped, for Exhorting People to Fear God, which is every Christian's Duty.

But this Mayor of Leverpool has caused a Man to be Imprisoned and Whipped,
for Exhorting People to Fear God. But how many he has (in discharge of his
Duty, pursuant to Law, and in Obedience to the King's Proclamation, and the
Queen's Letter, and his own Oath) Prosecuted for Swearing, Cursing, or any
other Vice, or Lewd Disorderly Practices, let the Inhabitants of that Town
witness.

And how true he has been to his Oath, and the other Justices of the Peace of
Leverpool, have answered theirs, who are Sworn to keep, as well as cause to be
kept, all Ordinances and Statutes, made for the good of the Peace; and to
Chastize and Punish all Persons in the said County offending; but not to punish
any contrary to Law, and for Exhorting People to Fear God.

And can any believe this is the way to carry on the Reformation, so Earnestly
Pressed for by the Church of England, and by Twenty Seven Lords, Seven Bishops,
and Seven Judges, Espoused by the City of London? Or to Unite the Hearts of the
King's Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection, thus to Treat a Man for
Exhorting People to Fear God? How agreeable is this to his Oath, as Recited in
Page 36. of the Account of the Society for Reformation of Manners, etc. That he
shall do Legal Right to the Poor, and to the Rich after his Cunning, Wit, and
Power, and after the Laws and Customs of the Realm? Which is not to punish any
for Fearing God, or Exhorting thereunto; but those that Curse or Swear in
Alehouses, Taverns, Bowling-Greens, Coffee-Houses, or other Pulick Places, as
Markets, or Streets, or Fairs; and are Drunk, and found in Lewd, Debauched and
Disorderly Practices. And how many has this Mayor, pursuant to his Oath, and
in discharge of his Duty, Punished for these Offenses, as aforesaid, let the
Town of Leverpool witness for, or against him herein.

And this Thomas Rudd has been concerned, in like manner, to go through the
Streets of London, and met with no such Treatment from any of the Magistrates
there; and he has also gone through the Streets of Bristol, and met with no
such Treatment: The Mayor of that City did not discourage him in that Service.
And surely there is great need of it in all the Cities, Towns and Villages of
this Nation; for many, that have not this Fear of God before their Eyes, are
too frequently found in many of the Evils aforementioned; which is not only to
the Dishonor of God, and Scandal of the Christian Religion, but contracts
Guilt upon the Souls of them that are found therein, and Provokes God to send
Judgments upon this Nation, and the Inhabitants thereof: Which, it is our
Earnest Cry, and Fervent Prayer unto God, That he would Divert, if it be his
Blessed Will, and Incline the Hearts of the People to Live in his Fear, that
they may know him to Teach them, so that they may Live therein, and Enjoy his
Blessing here, and Dye in his Favor, that they may be Eternally Happy
hereafter.

Here follows a Letter from the said Thomas Rudd, to the said Mayor.
Thomas Sweeting,
As thou art Mayor, and Professes to be a Christian Magistrate, I Desire and
Demand of thee my Christian Liberty, to Clear my Conscience in Obedience to
God; and that I may have Justice done me, in what has been wrongfully taken
from me; and that thou may put a stop to Evildoers in their Evil-doings. This
last Night, in this very House, they were Drinking, Fiddling, Dancing, Cursing
and Swearing, and calling upon God to Damn them, not only till Midnight, but
until Daylight: And if such Evildoers and Evil-doings be Tolerated, or
suffered to go Free; and the Innocent, and such as come in Obedience to God, to
call to People to Fear God, made to Suffer, will not God Judge for such things?

From thy Friend, and all Peoples, In Sincerity and Truth, Thomas Rudd.
Leverpool-Prison, the 6th of the 4th Month, 1699,
THE END.

