A JUST and MODEST REPROOF OF A Pamphlet, CALLED, The Scotch PRESBYTERIAN
Eloquence.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Closs. Anno Dom. M, DC. XCIII

TO THE READER.
Reader,
AFTER I had finished these Sheets, I met with a Paper in Answer to the same
Pamphlet that here I deal with, which at first made me lay aside thoughts of
publishing this Piece: Yet I after considered, that few things are coincident
in that and this Paper: And that though the Pamphlet it self deserves no such
notice: Yet some may either through prejudice, and a bias to the one side, or
through unacquaintedness with our Affairs, receive undue impressions of
Presbyterians and their way from the confident affirmations of that Author.
For, Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit. Therefore I was willing to suffer
it to go Abroad after it, and the Appendix to it, had been ready for the Press,
now more than 13 or 14 Months: Several things concurred to occasion this
procrastination, which I shall not trouble the Reader with.

A Just and Modest Reproof of a Pamphlet called, The Scottish Presbyterian
Eloquence.
IT is to be lamented, that men who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel
(being laid aside from their work) employ their time so ill, as to hatch false
and railing Accusations against their Brethren, to render them odious and
useless in the Church. And if the Author of this Pamphlet were of another
Character, yet it is unsuitable to Christianity to use such Artifices: But it is
no new thing, but has always been one of Satan's Methods for hindering the
progress of the Gospel: The Pamphlet under consideration is an evidence, that
Ill men and Seducers use to wax worse and worse. For this man has outdone all
that went before him in this Hellish way of managing his cause, and himself
too; (if he was one of the former Scriblers of this strain, as is supposed) in
malicious Railing; in the Characters that he gives to Presbyterians, (and that
without exception of any among them) and in the most groundless fictions, in
the Historical part of his Book, that ever the Press groaned under. I cannot
imagine how such Stories have been framed: For few of them were ever commonly
talked of, even among the Mockers of this age, till this worthy book saw the
light, which has furnished profane Wits, with better helps to ridicule all
that is serious, or sacred, than the World has hitherto been acquainted with,
and no doubt the Author shall have his reward, for such a singular work, from
the Lord, as he deserves it from Man: If this Collection of Historical
Passages, had been this, Authors alone, his Invention must have been singularly
fertile, when employed about this subject; exposing Preaching and Prayer: But I
find, by page 116, it was the product of many Drunken Meetings, where each Man
has given in his Symbol, out of which our Author has made up this Bundle of
Lies, as the Creed of these Lone-Companions.

He has in this latter Age engaged in this same work against Presbyterians,
(and through their side, against them who regard the truth, in opposition to
Popery, and the practice of Religion, as contrary to Atheism and Profaneness)
which their common Master of old employed Porphyry and others in against
Christianity, and afterward not a few of the Popish Writers, against our
Reformers, and Reformation, who endeavored to make Luther, and Calvin, and
other worthy Servants of God, as black, and as Ridiculous as this Man does the
Presbyterian Ministers: Neither has his own party escaped the Lash of such
Pens as his; and that from such as disliked it, not as Episcopal, but as
Protestant, as is to be seen in a piece called Causes of the Contempt of the
Clergy, whose Ape this Author seems to be: Though I do not know, that so many
untruths in matters of Fact, are in that Book, as I am sure there are in this.

They who read this Book, and are Strangers in Scotland (for none else is
capable to believe one of many of his Stories) will think him an unnatural
wretch, so to expose his native Country: For can any rational Man be
persuaded, (that Scotland, being divided into Presbyterians, and Episcopalians,
and whatever may be said of the Lat^er, the former are so considerable a party
of all Ran^s, and owned as the Legal Church, by King and Parliament) that I say
all the Latter should be such learned and polite Men, and the former such silly
Noddies, and illiterate Fools: Or will they not rather think, that Scots Men
are a contemptiable Crew, or that this Man is a foul mouthed Reviler of his
Nation, and a degenerat Son, that so bespattereth his Mother.

No wise Man will be at pains, to consider every passage in this Pamphlet, nor
could once reading it over be excusable; but that it was needful to know what
he says: His general assertions concerning the Presbyterians, need not another
refutation than denying them, and appealing to all that know us, and are
capable to judge impartially. Neither his particular Histories; but by denying
the matter of Fact, and leaving it to him to prove them: Together with the
improbability of the thing, to all that know the persons whom he so belyeth;
that thousands who had Causam sc^entiae of these passages do disown that they
knew them, or heard such words as he alleges: if these Topics may have
place, we can make it appear that seldom has a Book appeared in print, stuffed
with more falsehoods and Calumnies, and these manifestly and notourly such:
which I hope will reflect that shame on himself, and his Partners in these
Inventions, which he thinks to throw on others.

I come now to take some more particular Notice of his Book. What First
occureth is, His mock Dedication to the E. of C. where he treats that Noble
and truly Honorable Person with that petulant Contempt, which none but a Man
of this Author's Temper and Breeding could be capable of. And he racketh his
Wit to say all the ill of his Lordship, that is imputable to any Person, not
considering either Truth or Probability of what he writes; nor sparing to mock
at the Exercise of Religion in that Family, which has been for many
Generations, and continues to be, Honored for their Zeal for, and Practice of
Religion. His whole Dedication deserves no other Refutation, but to be marked
with a Nigrum Theta, as purely Lies and Railing.

His First Section pretends, to give us a Character of the Presbyteria^
Pastors and People in Scotland: Which he performs most Unjustly, and without
either Truth or Candor. Page 1. He asserteth that Presbyterian Preachers labor
not to make good Christians, but rigid Presbyterians. This is so remote from
Truth, that no Evidence of it can be given: And it is known to all their
Hearers, that in their Sermons, Catechizing, and other Instructions, and
Converse with their People, they insist constantly on such Subjects as tend to
Awaken and Humble Sinners, and to let them see their Need of Christ; and in
Directing and Persuading them to come to God by him; and on the Duties that Men
owe to God and their Neighbors: And that it is but rarely, that they insist on
the Differences that are among us, about Church Government. And their
Consciences bear them Witness, that though they desire that all the People may
be Presbyterians, yet that desire bears small, or no proportion, with the
desire they have that Christ may be Formed in the Hearts of their Hearers.

Next Page 2. He gives us the Character of the Presbyterian People (whom he
most falsely affirms to be The Guides of the Church and that The Ministers
must follow them) and that we assert the Power of Calling and Constituting
Ministers is in the Mob that they are Void of Sense and Reason, and are led by
Fancy and ^regular Passions. If this had been said of some, this Author might
have saved his Credit: For what Party of Men have not among them some
unintelligent Persons? But when it is said of the Presbyterians in general, and
no exception made, it is sufficient to derogate from the Truth of all that he
affirms, and to expose him as a Person who has no regard to Truth. I Appeal
to all who Converse in Scotland, if the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, Physicians,
Merchants, and even the meaner sort of the People who are Presbyterians, may
not Vye in all commendable Accomplishments with them of the same Ranks and
Stations, who are of the other Persuasion. He gives an Instance of their want
of Common Sense, that they will tell you, That ye ought to fight the Battles of
the Lord, because it is said in Epistle to the Hebrews, Without sheading of
Blood there is no Remission. That ever any Man talked at this rate, is more
than I know or heard before; nor am I obliged to believe it, because this
Author's Veracity is pledged for it: but that he imputes it as the Sentiment
of the Party in general, and as a part of their Character, is a piece of
Effrontery peculiar to this Scribler. He next calls them Covetous and
Deceitful, with the same Truth that hitherto he had used. It is to be lamented
that these Vices are so common every where, but the World knows that his own
Party has a full Share of them; and that as much of the contrary Virtues are
found among the Presbyterians in Scotland, as among any Party of Men on Earth
That they are not taught Morality in the Sermons that they hear, is so false as
nothing can be more. It Is true, we Preach not Morality alone, as some do; but
Instruct People in the Mystery of Christ, that they may look after
Righteousness in him, and attain Gospel Obedience to the Law of God by
dependence on him for Strength to obey: But we Preach the Necessity of Good
Works, and that Moral Virtues are not only the great Ornament of practical
Religion, but a necessary part of it, without which all Pretenses to it, or
Appearances of it, are but Hypocrisy. The Debate he says he had with one of
them (who must not be Named lest the Truth of the Matter of Fact be enquired
into) proves no more (if what he says be true,) but that there was once an
ignorant Presbyterian in the World: And if we cannot find one as Ignorant among
his Party, we shall confess that, so far, be has the better of us. He had very
little to say, when he blotted Paper with the Story of George Flint, and the
Names he gave to his Dogs: Are we to Answer for every Indiscretion any Plebe^an
is guilty of.

His next Charge of Perjury, Cheating, Lying, Murder, etc. is of the same
stamp with the former, that is, Calumnious Falsehoods. The Ignorance that he
alleges to be found among them is not (generally speaking* to be compared
with that found among his own Party. Neither is it asserted with any Truth or
Modesty, That Our People are not taught the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and the
Ten Commandments. His Instance of a Shee-Saint (which with his mention of the
Sighing Fraternity, are some of the Flowers of his Profane Mocking Rhetoric)
is either his own invention, or a single instance of an Ignorant Girl among
the Presbyterians, to prove that all the Party is such: Which is a frequent way
of Reasoning with this Learned Author.

What follows P 5. Of their Conventicles producing many Bastards, and the
Blasphemous abusing of Scripture, whereby he says, They defended it, is a
parcel of the most Horrid and Wicked Lies that ever were invented on Earth, or
in Hell. Our Souls abhor such Principles: And for these Practices, though we
do not deny that such Scandals have fallen out among Presbyterians, yet through
the Mercy of God, it is rare, and is severly Censured when it happens:
Whereas among his own Party, it is common to a Degree far beyond what has been
seen among us: And when they were in Power, such Scandals were but slackly
Censured; so that one thing that makes the Looser sort of People dislike the
Presbyterians, is, That such Immoralities are more strictly Observed and
Censured than before. The Odious Story that he (in his usual Jeering Strain)
tells of Mr. Williamson, has been indeed talked of among many Men of this
Author's Kidney; but we Challenge him, or any other* to bring any rational
Evidence of the Truth of it, as may easily be done, if the thing be as he
says: But this was never yet attempted by any of them; which is a sufficient
Exculpation of him, even by his Adversaries. If they will attempt it and get
not a fair Hearing, or if they will prove it, and do not see Justice done on
the Offender, then let them Reflect on Presbyterians: But without this they are
to be held as Malicious Calumniatours: This very Story was Answered in another
Paper, which this Author pretends to Answer: But he takes no notice of what
was there said; but is resolved it shall be Believed, with, or against Reason.
What Impudence is it to say, That Mr. Williamson was admired for this Fact, or
that he used Scripture to defend, or excuse it. We are not ashamed of the Gloss
on Romans 7. which he pretends to Ridicule (though never any of us used it to
defend Sin) that the Apostle there speaks in the person of an Unregenerat
Man, is the Gloss of Arminians, contrary to the Sentiments of all other
Reformed Divines, as well as Presbyterians. I wish this Author had given us a
Specimen of his Learning, to confirm what he alleges: But he is shie of that,
for some Reasons; thinking it enough to disparage the Learning of Others,
without showing his own, in Refuting of what they hold. But his Consequence
that he draws from the Opinion that the Apostle speaks of himself in that
place, shows no small degree of Ignorance, That this Place is a good Defense
for For^^cation: Does it follow in the Regenerate there are Inclinations to
Sin, Ergo, They may Sin, and are to be excused in it. It is as Ignorant and
Wide a Consequence, that he infers, that the hieght of Carnality ^s
consistent with the greatest Grace: For Grace. especially the greatest Grace,
is employed in resisting, and mortifying these inclinations: Whereas the hieght
of Carnality lies in giving way to and fulfilling them.

The two instances that follow of two Women guilty of Uncleanness, and odious
Hypocrisy joined with it, look like his own invention: He is sure they cannot
be disproved, because no person is named, if he will prove the Fact against any
persons, he shall see Presbyterians vindicated from this imputation, by the
Censures of the Church duly executed on so vile persons. What he tells us of
Peoples being moved with a loud and a Whineing, tone and being affected with
what they understand not, is another of his Calumnies. None preach more
intelligibly then Presbyterians ordinarily do: And no People judge of Preaching
by the truth and usefulness of the matter, more then the more intelligent
Presbyterians: and if any are commoved by what they understand not, (as
sometimes is observed among some of the Ignorant Vulgar) this is far more
frequently found among them who cleaved to the Episcopalians when they had the
Churches, than among them who owned the Presbyterians. What he says of
S^uffing and twang of the Nose (a notion borrowed out of Cleavland, another
such profane Mocker as himself) and being more affected with a Sermon of
Railing and Nonsense than with Christ's Sermon on the Mount; is like the rest of
his affirmations, pure Railing and falsehoods: The confirmation of this from
what he alleges Mr. D. D. to have said, is not concludent, for we have but
his word for the truth of the Story (and his Reader by this time know of what
value that is) and that good Man once an eminent Preacher, has been for many
years under Hypochondriack Melancholy, and often speaks at Random.

Nothing can be more false then what is said p. 8. That They take it for a sure
evidence on their Deathbeds that it is well with them, because they never
heard a Curate in their Lifetime If any have said, or thought so, we judge them
deluded as he does But we meet with no such person, nor do we own any such
Opinion. His citation out of Review of History of Indulgence, is a full proof
against him, that these are not the sentiments of Presbyterians; but reproved
by them, when found among some who had gone out from among the Presbyterians.
The Stories about two persons Executed for B^stiality; I am not obliged to
believe, unless I hear them from better hands, which I never did, but supposing
the truth of them, they prove no more but that some of the v^lest of Men might,
on design, personate Presbyterians: Or that there were some strangely deluded
persons that went out from among that party; as they were who were called the
Sweet Singers, some of whom (as has been reported) tore outsome places of the
Bible where words were found that displeased them. But it is the height of
Malice, to impute these things to Presbyterians, who did always testify their
dislike of such principles and practices, more than other men did: And do
reckon the whole Bible and all the other parts of it Sacred.

He brings the rising in Arms at Bothwelb^^dge as a proof of their delusion:
But this is not to be imputed to Presbyterians in general, seeing it was the
deed of a few: And was no formed design; but was the effect of horrid and
unsupportable persecution from the Episcopal Party: The Doctrines Preached at
that season, which he mentions, may rationally be looked on as his own
invention, of what he thought probable: As better Historians than he, do often
make speeches and attribute them to Generals of Armies, as spoken by them to
animate the Soldiers. That any of the Presbyterians ever thought that all
Bishops were Cloven Footed: That they had no Shadow: Is what I never heard
before: But I am sure if this Book should obtain belief in the World (as I hope
it shall not, while Men are Rational) Strangers will look on Scotch
Presbyterians as more monstrous than ever any ignorant persons among us could
imagine Bishops to be: And it will be little Credit to his party, that the
Learned Writters among them, have as absurd Imaginations of Men, and things, as
he can impute (though falsely) to the most ignorant among us. The long Story
that fills up Page 11 and 12: of a Preacher who came to the Merse, and there
discoursed most absurdly, on Ezekiel. 1. And reasoned as Ridiculously with a
Minister; this Tale I say, I never heard before. And though our Author tells
us, it was proved before very many famous Witnesses in Edinburgh; yet is he
neither pleased to name the Preacher, nor what place of the Merse (which is a
large Country) this happened in, nor the Minister with whom he reasoned, nor
these famous Witnesses in Edinburgh: So that we are wholly out of Capacity to
enquire into the truth of this Fact. If such a person were known, the
Presbyterian Church would soon stop his mouth from Preaching, for they abhor
such Ridiculous Nonsense.

His next essay in which he labors from Page 12. to 14. Is to give a true
Character of the Presbyterian Preachers; where he spueth out all the Gall
against them that he is capable to vent: About which I observe 1. That he
feigneth a strange uniformity among them, as if not only the practice and
natural temper of them all; but their very Looks were the same, as Page 12.
which is a plain evidence that the man has as little Judgment to contrive a
Fiction well, as he has veracity to oblidge him to speak nothing but truth. 2.
most of his Instances whereby he proves his strange assertions, are but one or
two to prove one part of their Character: And if ye will not believe, sic de
ceateris, he will be puzzled to convince any one of the truth of what he
affirms: If we should do so by his party, how black could we make them all:
But we abhore such injustice to the Reputations of Men. 3. Most of his
instances are taken from some of the Hill Preachers, who then were in a perfect
separation from all the rest of the Presbyterians, and spoke as much against
them, as against those whom they called Curats. 4. His whole Discourse is
stuffed with the most notorious falsehoods that can be devised, as will appear
as we go along. The Author seems to have but one design, to disparage the
Presbyterians: And his Impetus this way makes him not only forget veracity,
which may be expected from a Christian; but that Decorum which becomes a wise
Man: And the civility that a Man of breeding would show to the worst of Men. It
seems he cares not what he say, if he can but say ill of the Presbyterians:
And an impartial Reader will think that the Author has sufficiently
characterized himself; while he pretends to give a Character of the
Presbyterian Ministers. 5. When he has a mind to expose any of our Ministers
as absurd, or ridiculous; he is then pleased (most disingenuously) to advance
him to be one of the most eminent among us, that so he may make the World
believe (if their credulity be as large as his boldness in asserting) that we
are all such: But this silly artifice will fail of its design among them who
are acquainted with us.

He first accuses them (and that without exception) as Proud, Sour,
unconversible. Here is not one true word: where one is such among us (and never
a party consisted of all its individuals so well tempered as they should be)
many are such among his own party, and yet we are far from being so unmanly as
to make this the Character of the party. I leave it to the Reader to judge what
Humility or sweetness of mind our Author has showed in what he has said, or
in what follows: That they have faces like their horrid Decree of
Reprobation. Where he venteth his spite against the truth of God, as well as
against the Men against whom he has indignation. Do not all the Reformed
Divines, except Arminians, own a Decree of Reprobation? yea does not the
Apostle so too? Romans 9. I wonder what a Face he thinks the Apostle Paul had.
He, and Presbyterians need not be ashamed to have their Pictures drawn, and
showed with that of this Momus. If a Presbyterian had spoken so ignorantly, and
indistinctly of such a head of Divinity, how would he have accused them of
Ignorance? For who can own Election, but they must at the same time acknowledge
a preterition, or Non-election, and that as a positive Act of the Divine will:
See Romans 9. 13. And who can say that some are Damned in time, and yet this
Damnation was not foreknown and foreappointed, or decreed by him who works
all things according to the Counsel of his own will.

If this Author will show his Argumentative Talent, as well as he has that of
Railing, on this head, it would be more easy to Answer him. Their want of
Humanity and common Civility and Catholic Charity, are as many calumnies as
words: He asserteth: I deny it, and appeal to all that converse commonly among
them: But it is evident that what he asserteth of them he abundantly proves of
himself: such Assertions being remote from all these virtues and good
qualities. That they dare not converse with them who differ from them, lest the
people take it ill, is false. They not only converse with them (such of them as
are Sober) but have received some of them into a share of the Government of the
Church: And do not shun to converse with others of them as occasion requires.
And if any people be displeased at this (as I am sure the more intelligent are
not) they instruct them of the reasonableness of this practice. His certainty
that we have as little Learning as good nature, which is next to none, is a
proof this Authors good Nature; as many other passages of this Book are of his
Learning: about the measure I shall not determine; seeing it is easy for any
unbyassed Reader to judge.

Presbyterians differing from all other Churches, he boldly asserteth. I deny
not but there are some circumstantial things in which all the Churches in the
World do differ one from another; and our Church (may be) has, in some of the
inferior things, her peculiar customs: But in her Confession of Faith, in her
Government of the Church, and in the worship of God, it is evident that we are,
(for the substance of these) exactly one with the generality of the Reformed
Churches. And for the circumstances, we are far nearer to the Reformed Churches
than the Church of E. is, which he gloryeth so much in, and which indeed has a
Government, Discipline, and Worship, widely different from the whole Reformed
World, yea on the matter they unchurch all other Churches, by denying the
validity of their Ordination; and re-ordaining all who have not a Bishops hand
laid on them. We are far from carrying so toward Her, or any other Church.

That which goes for a proof of this absurd Assertion, I shall now consider.
It is that we have banished the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten
Commandments, the Doxology, and the public reading of the Scripture. For the
first of these, It is false: for we endeavor to make the people understand it:
And tell them the true use of it; which is to direct them what to Pray for, and
also in most other things that concern Prayer. Its true we do not commonly
repeat the words of it, but we neither condemn them who do it, nor forbid to do
it, Our reason is, There is no command for using these words, nor do we find
that the Apostles or the Church in their time did repeat the words. Our reason
for the other is, these words are as fit to be used as any other. It is false
that the Author of the Answer to the ten Questions, (which he is pleased to
ascribe to Dr. Rule, on what grounds he best knows; for it bears no name)
used this as a reason against Repeating the Lords Prayer, that it is
inconvenient: It is only said Quest: 4, P. 20. That We are not tied to what had
been injoined, if afterward it be found inconvenient while the discourse was of
the use of the Doxology, the Creed at Baptism, and the Lord's Prayer; now if
any of these be inconvenient, that Assertion is pertinent, though the rest were
not, but were forborne on other grounds. Yea, If none of them were inconvenient,
what is said there is enough to free us from nonconformity to the Presbyterian
Churches on this head; with which that Antagonist charge us; The words are
plainly Hypothetick, and therefore assert nothing Categorically. Them who use
the words of the Lord's Prayer we do not Judge, either as acting against what
is lawful, or what is expedient. If Mr. K. said, that he forbore Repeating the
Lord's Prayer, because it is a Badge of the Episcopal Worship; and did mean, it
was pressed in Scotland as such distinguishing mark, perhaps it were not so
absurd as our Author pretends, though I had rather say, we forbear it because
it has not now of a long time been the practice of the Presbyterian Church in
Scotland; and we know no Command or other Principle that makes it necessary.
What follows, imputed to Mr. James Urquhart, we reckon horrid Blasphemy: And
if any will make it appear that Mr. U. said such words, he ought to be
desposed, or to make very solemn profession of his Repentance for this Scandal:
But Mr. U. denies it, and bids defiance to any who will attempt to prove it
against him* the other Blasphemies to the same purpose which follow, we abhore
as much as he or any other can do. And I affirm that it is the grossest of
Falsehoods that it is ordinary to hear our People speak so, for my part I have
never heard such words from any, nor have I heard by Report that any did speak
them, and I assure the World that if any among us were heard to utter such
words they could not escape a severe Censure.

He says the Creed is not mentioned at Baptism. This we deny not, but was it
ever forbidden by our Church, or were any ever Censured for using it. We take
Parents bound to Educate their Children in the Knowledge of the Chief Truths
contained in the Scriptures: And do often mention the Confession of Faith of
this Church, as containing a more full and plain System of Scripture Doctrine
than the Creed does; though not differing in any Point from it. For our
National Engagements they are rarely mentioned at Baptism, and but by few: But
if they were, I know no Hurt in it, except it be, offending some tender Ears,
who love not to hear of the Ties which they have so little regarded, after they
had taken them on. What he imputes to Mr. Rule in denying this, we regard not.
I am guilty of the same Dishonesty, in saying what he (or who ever that Writer
is) says in the place cited by our Author: For these other honester
Presbyterians, whatever be their Honesty we are not of their Opinion. Nor are
the Sentiments of Presbyterians to be judged of by what they say, who had lest
the Presbyterians, and stood in opposition to them, when the Papers he
mentions were written. His Imputation on Mr. Dickson (that He called the
Lords Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments, rotten Wheel-barrows to carry Souls
to Hell) I am not foreward to believe it, having nothing for it but this
Author's Word: But if he said so, it was ill worded at best: And if he meant
any more than to express the danger of Peoples resting on having these by
Heart, as if that were to be Religious: He deserves to be Censured: None of us
dissuade People from Learning them; but do seriously press it, and labor to
make them understand them. That we have abolished Public Reading of Scripture,
is a Calumny: It is true in stead of Reading by a private Person* we have the
Scripture Read and Expounded by the Minister; and that a Chapter or Psalm at
once: And if any Read but two or three Verses, it is an Abuse not allowed by
us. That the Precenter Reads a Sermon in stead of Reading Scripture, is two
Falsehoods in one Breath, one is that this is done: I have heard indeed that
one has Read a written Sermon while the people were conveening: But that this
is either commonly, or always done, I never heard: also that this is in stead
of Reading the Scriptures, is false: For as has been said the Minister Reads
and expounds Scripture, in stead of what had wont to be Read without
Exposition by a private person, who has no Authority to teach publicly. The
Doxology we use not, because we think Scripture Songs fittest to be sung as the
public Worship of God: And this is not such; though the matter of it be
consonant to Scripture. The Idle Story that he tells of Maggy twitting a
Minister with this, is probable enough to be one of his Inventions: But if it
were true, we think the Minister was undiscreet, in calling it a Malignant
Song. We confess the matter of it is sung in Heaven: If he will prove that the
words are so too, we shall use it: They talk much of the Antiquity of this Hymn
which I am not now at leisure to enquire into: One of their Divinity Professors
Mr. William Douglas at Aberdeen (a diligent searcher into Antiquity) Psalm^d.
Eccles. vindicata. Q. 13. P. 69. brings testimonies for it out of Tertul:
Basil. etc. who speak not of that Formula; but Glorifying the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. And he cites Baronius, asserting it to have been used from the
Apostles time: But his Authority in such things has little weight with
Protestants: Pope Damasus in the 4 Century, enjoined it: And it is probable
that it was invented as a Testimony against Arianism: But so was the Trina
Immersio; which the Episcopal Church does not think fit to retain. I Assent to
the Author now cited: Who after an heap of Authorities that he had collected,
says, it is no defect of Worship where it is left out: And that none should be
offended with these Churches that use it. We constantly do the same thing
materially, naming the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in the Conclusion of our
Prayers. Another quarrel he has with Presbyterian Ministers is, they have no
distinguishing Garb from the lay Men, I hope this is no singularity: What
Churches except these of Rome and England, do distinguish their Clergy by their
Garb: Our Ministers wear a Grave and Decent Habit, and are mainly distinguished
from the People, by the Gravity and Edifyingness of their Conversation, which
is a better Characteristick, than a close sleeved Gown on a Drunken and
Swearing Priest* That they reproved the King's Commissioner for appearing among
them in a Scarle^ Cloak, is a notorious Falsehoood; to call it no worse. His
saying They did it, seems to make it a public Rebuke in the Assembly; or
that it was done by the consent of all. We do not know that ever any did so
much as reprove his Grace privately for this; and if any did, they were
impertinent in so doing: I never heard that any so much as whispered against it
among themselves; nor do I know a Reason why the Kings Commissioner is obliged
to use another Garb than other persons of his Rank. The long Story that he
brings in about Mr. Lesks call, for the sake of a quible used by my Lord R.
to the Presbytry, is a silly piece of impertinency: only I take notice, that he
alleges, that Mr. Lesk, had for him the Elders; which is false; for none, in
the sense of the Law of Scotland, are Elders; but such as are received by the
Presbyterians; so as these men were not and for the Episcopal Church, they own
no Ruling Elders; and the Law that set up that party (having abolished all
Presbyterian Judicatures) did only allow Ministers to choose such of the People
as they thought fit to assist them: Which can be no true notion of a Ruling
Elder: nor did ever such Elders sit; or vote, in their Syn^ds. His denying us
to be Ministers, is an impudent Assertion, which he does not attempt to prove:
and how it consists with the Catholic Charity, which he blames us for the
want of, I cannot apprehend. That we are called by the People we think it more
suitable to the Gospel way than to be imposed on the People by a Patron: that we
are sent by the people, or our fitness judged of and determined by them, is an
impudent Falsehood: Our Ministers are tried and sent, or ordained, by the
Presbytry, who has better warrant for so doing than a Bishop has: But if I
should enlarge on every controverted point which this Pamphletteer starteth in
his Rambling Discourse, this Paper should swell to a Volume.

He charge them P* 16 with Preaching still on the Government, and the times:
and that they call their Kirk Government Christ, the Crow^, the Scepter, and
Government of Christ. I deny not, but that there was a time when these
controverted points were too much the subject of the Sermons of some, and there
may be need that they should be more insisted on at one time than at another:
but that this is now so practiced is most false. I am afraid we are rather
defective that way, though I would not have these controversies made either the
whole or the main part of Sermons. In comparison, we should know nothing among
the People but Christ and him crucified. And I am sure that this is the strain
of the Presbytorian Preachings that I have occasion to hear: that they call the
Government of the Church, Christ, and that is was not the design of their
Sermons, nor ever is like to be, to Preach up Christ and Eternity (which he
asserteth, P. 17.) is most false and calumnious: He pretends to trace them in
their Politics Morals, Mysticks and Metaphysics (a distinction of his own
coining) and he says, they are selfish, singular, full of nonsensick
Rapsod^es, which is a false and wicked Calumny.

He begins with their Politics, he says no Government could tolerat them.
whereas we know that the Government and Governors of Scotland have tolerated
and owned them many ages: and there is now as happy a Government as ever
Scotland saw, which does not only tolerat them but has settled them by Law. To
prove his assertion he brings an instance of Mr. Donald Cargill, a Hill
Preacher whom yet he confesses to have been disowned by the sober
Presbyterians: which makes this instance wholly impertinent: but somewhat he
must have to fill up his Paper. The sober Presbyterians are foully by him
misrepresented that they disowned the Hill Men on account of their refusing to
thank K. J. for his Tolleration: Whereas it is known that they disowned them on
account of their wild Principles, inconsistent with the Government both of the
State and of the Church; and that this they did long before K. J. came to the
Crown, or gave Indulgence.

It is also false that none but Cameronians suffered any thing: and that all
the Sober Presbyterians were settled by the Indulgence. For many of the Soberest
were put to hard Sufferings both for Preaching, and for not complying with the
way then set up. And when the Indulgence came, which freed some who had
suffered before; it was at first granted but to a few: and when it was enlarged
by K. Charles some were permitted to enjoy it but a short time. it is unfair
dealing, that when the Review of Hist. of Indulgence (which he cites) does
condemn and refute these Principles, he should yet charge us with them. If Mr.
D. did so condemn (as this Author alleges) paying Cess to the K. (the truth
of which I know not) his Brethren with whom he now joineth, did never approve
of such Doctrine. He tells us of Acts of Assemblies and Covenants, which
prove our unpeaceableness such of them as have been cited in other places by
his party, have been Answered: We cannot Answer such general alledgances, but
by denying that either the Acts of the Assemblies, or the Covenants, contain
any thing that prove what he asserteth. The Book he mentions (which I have
not seen) it is like may have an Answer, if it deserve it. If it assert that
Presbyterians renounce Monarchy, and all Power save that of the Kirk: so absurd
a position is to be despised, being abundantly refuted by our due subjection to
our present Rulers, which Sober Presbyterians paid also to them under whose
heavy hand they groaned. For farther proof of this imputation he mentions
Murders committed in 3 Rebellions: But he must know that his own party gave
the rise to all these, by their horrid cruelty, and injustice which forced
people beyond the bounds of that patience that was fit.

He blames their flying to Arms in the time of the late Revolution; but does
not tell his Reader, that it was by public Authority, and for defense of the
States of the Nation, against them who were ready to destroy them, or hinder
their meeting. All this has been alleged and Answered in other Papers. The
men who he alleges did last year endeavor to have the Solemn League and
Covenant by force renewed and imposed, were none of the Presbyterians: Though
they call themselves such; nor can this be charged on us, more than all the
practices of the Anabaptists in Germany can be rationally imputed to the
Protestants, which yet his Friends the Papists do, and that from the same
Spirit by which this Man is acted.

He considers P. 19 the Learning of the Presbyterians: which he is pleased to
confine to two heads, Antiarminian Metaphisick, and practical Divinity, which
they pretend to draw from the heads of Election and Reprobation; whereby they
Preach Men out of their Wits, and very often into Despair, and self Murder.
Nothing can be more falsely, more disingenuously, nor more Maliciously uttered.
The former he barely asserteth. We acknowledge that Scotch Presbyterians are
generally Antiarminians; but that they bring no Arguments against that way but
from the Metaphysics (which may be useful in the controversies about
Predetermination. Free will, and scientia media) is false, although it is a
wonder that he will allow so much Learning to be among us. We can, and do,
disprove all the Arminian Doctrines from the Scripture, and sound Reason, as
Augustine, Bradwardine, and others before us had refuted the Pelagians, their
Ancestors.

On the other Calumny he insisteth at length, but with weak and Ridiculous
proofs. The design of his Discourse seems to be to Ridicule all Soul-trouble,
and Fears and doubts about ones Souls case, and about Salvation, as Melancboly
and Distraction. What Service some Men of his Atheistical temper have done to
the Kingdom of Satan, by thus skarring People from serious considering the
state and danger of their Souls, is too well known: Our Opinion and practice in
this matter I shall briefly declare, and then consider what he brings against
either. We believe that the Lord has, of his own Sovereign Pleasure, chosen
some from Eternity to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ in the way of Repentance
and believing in Christ, and perseverance in Holy walking; and we believe also
that he has passed by others and from Eternity Decreed not to give them Grace,
and Decreed to Damn them, because of the Sins that he foresaw would follow on
this preterition, or on their not getting Grace from him. These deep Mysteries
of the Divine Providence we do not often, nor without necessity insist on in
Sermons; though we think we ought not to be wholly silent where the Lord has
spoken in his word: Far less is it our practice to draw consequences from these
Decrees, to frighten People, or to lead them to Despair: But on the contrary
(whereas troubled Souls do often abuse these Truths, and Satan assists them in
it, to move them to cast of thoughts of Believing in Christ, as a hopeless and
bootless thing) we use to tell them, that though the Election of a particular
person may be known by the fruits of Holiness, yet that such a person, in
particular, is a Reprobate, cannot be known before their Death by themselves
nor by others (except they be guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which
is rarely known) and therefore none can rationally say, I am a Reprobate, and
therefore need not come to Christ; We inform them from the Gospel that whoever
will come to Christ shall be accepted of him and shall find that they are no
Reprobates: We tell them of Christ's being able to save to the uttermost, of the
Free, Gracious, Cordial, Universal offer of Christ made in the Gospel: of his
undertaking in the Covenant of Grace to draw the Soul to him, to give it
strength to come, as well as to accept of them who come: And it is evident to
all that know us, that none do more encourage Sinners, even the worst of them,
to close with the offers of Christ by Faith on the terms of the Gospel, then
Presbyterians do. It is true, it is no small part of our work to awaken the
Consciences of secure Sinners: and this is that which this Man, and such as he,
carp at: But this we do, not by telling them of Reprobation, but by laying
before them the sinfulness of their nature, and of their way, their lyableness
to the Wrath of God because of Sin: And the Holy Justice of God that pursues
Sinners while they live without Christ: and the impossibility of escaping Wrath
without Believing, and of Believing without conviction of sin and Repentance,
and turning from Sin unto God: And if this Doctrine were considered it would
make awakening of Conscience to be more frequent than it is; but not that
Doctrine, but peoples own obstinacy and unbelief, will drive them into
Desperation: Which we deny not may be the effect, though per accidens, of the
Preaching of the Gospel, as sometimes Hardening is.

These things being considered it is easy to blow away all the obloquy that he
casts on us from this topic. If Mr. Brody called a man, on the brink of
Desperation, a Good Man: If Mr. Kir^oun called Soul-trouble for Sin a wholesome
Disease. I hope they did not mean that Desperation is such; but that it is a
more hopeful thing to see a Man to have his Conscience frightened with the sense
of sin and Soul danger; than that he should be lying in stupid presumption and
delusion, or unconcerned about Salvation; as a Fever coming upon a Palsy is no
desirable Disease of it self, nor without danger; yet it gives more hope than
if the Palsy should continue and resist all remedies: and as no wise Physician
will designedly procure a Fever to a Paralytick person, but endeavor the cure
by more safe and gentle means, so we do not endeavor to beget Desperation; but
to prevent it, by Preaching the Gospel with the Law, yet the Conscience must be
awakened, or the Soul is undone for ever. That any of us represent God in this
Man's Blasphemous notion, as a Sour, Severe, and Unmerciful Being; is a false*
and wicked imputation: We proclaim his Mercy through Christ, and offer it in
his name, to all that hear us, good and bad, on the terms of the Gospel, indeed
we tell people that there is no Mercy in God for them while they live
impenitently in sin, and live without Christ, and if this make Men Despair, we
Lament it. That Mr. Vetch said of 2000 who were hearing them, 80 would not be
saved, I do not believe; it is unwarrantable boldness so to determine; neither
is it our way to go farther in this head, than to say, there are few that shall
be saved, which is our Lords own Doctrine. What he imputes to Mr. Selkrig is
none of our Doctrine we know that God sees Sin in the Elect before Conversion,
and imputes it to them too, though after Conversion he knows that they Sin*
and is angry with them because of it, yet their Sin is pardoned on their
Repentance and flying to Christ* Their Iniquity shall not be their Ruin, Ezekiel.
18. 30. We mantain that no Sin shall hinder the Conversion of the Elect, nor
Damn them who are converted: Yet there is no encouragement to Sin: Because they
who go on in Sin to the end, can be none of Gods Elect: Nor can they be in the
state of Grace who live in Sin, or allow any sin in themselves. Mr.
Rutherfurd's expression which he quarrelleth, is parallel with that of Ezekiel.
last cited.

For the Story of two Self-murderers in the Parish of Leswade: We know nothing
of it, if true, what does it make against us: Have not many of his own way come
to that woeful End; and must that he made an Argument against Episcopacy? That
the Presbyterian Preacher in that Parish discoursed at the rate that this
Author mentions, we have no ground to belive, nor do we approve such
Discourse. That Presbyterians decry solid Learning, and particularly Antiquity,
is said with a Brow of brass. That we condemn Morality, is a horrid Calumny: We
preach it up: And I wish that he or such as he who talk so much of it, did
commend it to the People by their own Example. For the Book called, The whole
Duty of Man, we commend it as useful; and so are Seneca's Writtings: But we
desiderate in it the Doctrine of the Righteousness of Christ, and His Virtues
and Grace, by which these excellent Duties which that Book lays on us, must
be performed and accepted, and without which the highest Morality, as it is
distinguished from supernatural Grace, is not regarded by God. His Characters
of our Sermons as Nonsensick Raptures, Canting, impertinent and base Similies,
that we value no Works, but what tends to propagate Presbytry: That we make
Christ and the Gospel to be our Kirk Government: Are a parcel of such absurd
Lies as deserve no Answer, no Men do more mistake these things than we. If any
do use sometimes some Modes of expressing Things, which are too course and low;
yet these are but few, and they are not approved in that way by others: And
there are as many of his own Party who are the same way culpable. That we are
for the most part on Believe, and mistake Faith for a mere Recumbency: It is no
sign of Understanding in this Author to tax us with it, seeing it was the
Apostles work to know nothing but Christ and Him Crucified: And seeing Faith is
called the Work of God and His Commandment, above other things that are
enjoined: the ^dd way that some have of acting in the Pulpit is barely
asserted: Certainly among no Party all Ministers are uniform in this. If there
be any thing in this among us that amounts to Undecency, we reprove it; which
we rarely have occasion to do, and no doubt we might recriminate if we were so
disposed: But we think this Author's way not very imitable. That Mr. Thomas Hog
said to one that he could not be Happy till he saw the Devil, and had a
personal Converse and Combat with him: Is a pure Invention, and not to be
believed of that Wise and Good Man, who is now in Heaven: And I give assurance
that it is no Presbyterian Principle.

He comes now Page 25 to discourse of the Civility of Presbyterians, and
sets them out as Denying the common Civilities due to Mankind, to Persons of
the best Rank who differ from them: The contrary of this is known to all them
who Converse in Scotland: May be he means of such as scruple to call a Bishop
my Lord: which yet many Presbyterians have freedom to do; but do Presbyterians
carry so to the Nobility and Gentry, That they flee from the Company where a
Curat is, as a Pest, and that this is a common sign of Grace, is an Assertion
beyond the ordinary size of Impudence: That we applaud and approve the
Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andr^ws; is of the same Stamp. Now he will
give some Instances for proof of these Assertions. The first is, The
Commissioners of the General Assembly refused to appoint one to preach a Sermon
for the Anniversary Day of the Martyrdom of K. Charles the First, when the
Privy Council enjoined it, and that according to an Act of Parliament: (which
Act is a ^eer Invention of his own*) Here is an Instance of this Author's
learned way of Reasoning, rather than of the Ru^ticity of the Ministers: Had
they given the Council any harsh or unbecoming words in this their Refusal* ^is
Instance had been pertinent: If a Presbyterian had so reasoned, he would have
called it Nonsense: Were the three Children Rude or Uncivil when they refused
to fall down before an Image at the Kings Command? I suppose he will not say
it, though their Answer was not half so smoothly worded as that of the
Ministers to the Council: (I do not compare the things ^njoyned, but only the
Carriage in both cases, of them who could not obey) It is matter of Conscience
to us, to observe Anniversary Holy Days without Divine Warrant: If any spoke
indiscreetly in their Sermons on that Day, themselves are to Answer for it: The
Answer that he makes the Ministers to give to the Council, is purely of his
own coining: If Civility ly in subjecting the Conscience to whatever Men shall
please to enjoin* we willingly yield to this Man and his Party, in that good
Quality. His Second Instance, of what Mr. Areskine said, the Day after the
Adjournment of the Assembly, is as little to the purpose: For what ever it may
prove of Mr. A -- 's dissatisfaction with what had past, it proves nothing of
Ru^ticity, on of our denying to them we converse with, the common Civilities
due to Mankind Beside I deny that Mr. Areskine's words are here fairly
represented; and he is not no^^ to Answer for himself: But they who heard him
deny that he spoke such words His 3d. Instance is a gross Untruth, the
Moderator said no such words as he alleges, That the Terms of Communion
proposed by the King, for taking in the Conformists, was insolently rejected by
all the Assembly, except Mr. Orrock; is another Falsehood: For 1. The
Consideration of this Matter never came before the Assembly: It was Referred to
a Committee; and the Committees Determination was never suffered by his Grace
my Lord Commissioner* to come before the Assembly. 2. The Committee did not
reject these Terms of Communion, but agreed to them, provided they who should
be taken in would explain some dubious Expressions in them, which they refused
to do. Another thing he falsely asserteth is, That the common Discourse and
Preaching of Presbyterians was, That King William designed to Dethrone King
JESUS: That any Formula but the Covenant, was of the Devil's making. I wish he
could tell us who said so; for we know them not. He says also, That the who^^
Assembly Protested against the King's Power to Dissolve the Assembly, where as
many in the Assembly said nothing; but were grieved for what others said, i^
the manner in which it was spoken: And what was said, did no way amoun^ to a
Protestation; but was an Assertion of the Churches intrinsic Power to mee^ in
her Assemblies. That they went to the Cross of Edinburgh, and took a formal
Protestation against the King; is so notoriously false, that all Edinburgh
knows the contrary. It was indeed reported (whether true or false, I know
not) that a certain obscure Person (who he was, of what Principle, or whence he
came, we know not; or whether he were not set on by this Author, or some of his
Gang) on the Street, near the Cross, did Protest against the Dissolution of the
Assembly; But I hope the Presbyterians are not to Answer for every thing that
is done at the Cross of Edinburgh. The several Stories P. 28. and 29. that he
has either Coined, or picked up from Men of the same Talent of Invention with
himself, we are little concerned in. I am sure Presbyterians generally do Love,
Honor, and Pray Cordially for King William, and do hope that as the the Lord
has made him an Instrument of Good for his Church, that so he will do still.

He has another Fling at them for not observing Anniversary Days, which he
repeateth, it seems, for the sake of a new Notion that had come into his Head;
That we Preach an Anniversary Sermon on Mr. Heriot, because the Preacher
gets 5 lib. a new Hat, and Bible. I pass in silence his Mistake about the
Reward for the Sermon, as not material. The real difference lies in this; that
the Days that we have refused to keep are holy Days, or pretended to be such,
and separated by Men's Authority from the other Days of the Year: This that he
objecteth, is not so; only a Sermon is that Day Preached to put People in mind
of the Works of Charity, in which the Pious Founder of that Hospital had been
examplary. The rest of the Day is employed as other Days are. He charge us
with Disingenuity, Hypocrisy and Covetousness (according to his Catholic
Charity, which he elsewhere denies to be in us) his proof of this is, we are
against Pluralities; and yet Dr. Rule, Mr. John Vetch, Mr. William Vetch, Mr.
David Williamson, Mr. John Dickson, are sueing for 5 or 6 Stipends at once: And
Mr. Ki^ton in Edinburgh went to Marten where he had been Preacher, and got the
Incumbent put out, and a Right to his Stipend, and to that in Edinburgh too.
Answ. 1. I have heard indeed that one of these named did Petition the Lords of
Council for one or two Vacand Stipends for one Year, to make up some great
Losses that he had sustained; what he obtained I am not certain. But even the
motion was disrelished by his Brethren: But this is far from approving
Pluralities where one Man takes up yearly the Revenue of diverse places, by
which a Minister in each of these places should be maintained. 2. Some of these
whom he names are most shamefully abused by him (for it seems he throws
his Darts at random not caring where they hit, if they light but on a
Presbyterian) Mr. David Williamson had no accession to this practice; nor did
Mr, Rule ever seek a Stipend, or receive any, except what fell yearly due, and
when it was due, in the place where he labored. 3. As for Mr. Kirton, the
Stipend that became due to him at Marten, most of it he freely gave to the
Episcopal Minister that was put out; the rest to the Poor; which this Author
might have known by a Book, which he in this Pamphlet pretends to Answer.
Another Story he has to the same purpose of Mr. Anthony Murray, who is now at
rest from his Labor, and whom he grossly belieth; Mr. Murray having lived
(during his being put from his Charge, at Coulter) in Dunsire, and Preached
there: When he was to return to his own Charge, he got the half of 1689, in
Dunsire, and the other half of it in Coulter: Here is no plurality; most of
which he bestowed on the Poor of these Parishes; for he was neither Needy nor a
Niggard. The Episcopal incumbent in Dunsire, though put out, yet got the half
of the Stipend of the Year 1691. The Story of Mr. George Johnston is too famous
among us: He grew Rich by the beneficence of good People, who valued him highly
for his excellent Gift of Preaching, and his good Conversation in all things
else, only he overlooked in his Wife many Covetous Practices, which were a
grief of Heart to Presbyterians, when they came to be known. The Passages at
the dying Man's Bedside, that our Author imputes to Mr. Johnston, is a most
wicked Invention: Such horrid Hypocrisy had been enough among Presbyterians to
render a Man incapable to exercise the Ministry.

The Story of Mr. Balf^ur we deny not, but lament: He was for it Deposed by the
Presbytry; and for many Lords Days did publicly profess his Repentance at the
several Churches where he had occasionally preached. as well as at Eccles,
where he was fixed in a Meeting House; and yet this Author has the Impudence
to Charge Presbyterians with this blame, and to bring them in, excusing or
extenuating it as a Slip of the Saints: I wish Scandals were as duly Censured
among his own party. What he tells us of Injury done to Mr. Heriot in
Dalkeith, is abundantly Vindicated in a Paper Printed last year on that
Subject; to which I referr the Reader: He was first Deposed by the Presbytry,
not for Dancing about a Bonfire (tho that was mentioned also in his Lybel) but
for other Immoralities: He Appealed to the General Assembly, who referred his
Case to the Synod; they Examined it, and Ratified the Sentence. He made
Application to the Privy Counsel, who desired the following Synod to review
their own sentence: Which they did and again confirmed it. He has taken it on
trust (because he hates us) that we are of a Malicious and crabbed Nature: And
he strains at assigning the cause of it; viz. that we never suffered
Affliction: Which he largely insisteth on in his mocking style: That the Godly
Sisters supplied them so that they lived better than before: This our party
needs not be ashamed of: this Mocker would have Ridiculed Christ also, to
whom Women (the Godly Sisters that he flouteth) Ministered of their substance.
The Charity of his party is not so commendable by far. The Railing and Mocking
that on this occasion he farther venteth, is not to be Answered but to be
despised, as the the Froth of a Distempered Mind. It is not to be overlookt
that he says P. 84. that we disown the practices of the wild Men, and yet
magnify that persecution that they underwent, as if we had shared in it, which
we did not. Here are several Mistakes (to use the softest words that such
Absurdities are capable of) first that we counted them all Wild Men who had an
hand in the insurrections and suffered: We know many of them were Good and
Sober Men otherwise, though in these practices we do not approve their conduct;
yet pity them, as being forced on these courses by the highest degree of
Hardship, that they were put to for their Consciences. 2dly. That none but they
who took Arms suffered any thing, how many were Fined in a fourth part of their
yearly Rent for hearing one Sermon: How many intercommuned, Imprisoned, forced
to flee, for not hearing? Yea the spite of that party appeared more against the
Soberest than against others. 3dly. These whom the Book that he ascribes to
Mr. Rule calls Wild-Men, were a party which sprung out of them who took Arms,
and disowned the Presbyterian Church as well as the Episcopal Men, and State:
Of these indeed some suffered for disowning the Kings Authority; but few in
comparison of others. As for Mr. Wisharts Sufferings, we do not approve the
severity that was used against him; but do commend his Moderation and Charity
after he was advanced: But I am sure many Presbyterians suffered as much, and
showed as much meekness to their Persecutors. He compares the Meekness, and
Moderation of Episcopal Men when in power, with the ingratitude of
Presbyterians, who now are the Instruments of persecuting them that saved them:
And he brings two instances; one of a nameless person who informed against
Mr. Monro of Stirling; Another, of one Ronaldson against on Mr. Burnet,
Minister at Cranston. I deny not but some few of the Episcopal Ministers had
aversion from that horrid Persecution that their Brethren practiced, and did
some Acts of Kindness to some of the Sufferers; and I am sure when these
persons had to do with Presbyterian Judicatories, they had respect to them for
that their Moderation; but if one or two were not so thankful as was fit to
their Benefactors (which yet is not sufficiently proved by this Authors
assertion) the Presbyterians blame such Actions, and are not to be blamed for
them. His citation out of Mr. D. D. Sermon, is Answered, as Another of the same
persons above. He charge us that singly we condemn the proceedings of our
party, But in meettings we approve them; this is a gross Calumny; if he can
charge any individual among us with such disingenuous dealing, and make it
appear in any particular Act, we shall blame such practices as much as he can;
but that he has not attempted. In what remains of this Section, though there
is nothing of truth, yet the Author is secure from a Refutation of his Lies;
because they are a bundle of Calumnies in general terms, without either
instances, or any thing that looks like a proof. That the Presbyterian
Ministers do either Preach so fillily as he says, or are deserted by their
Hearers, or even by persons of the best Rank and Understanding, is most false:
And I am sure their people are generally of better Morals than they are who
leave them. That we condemn making use of Books in composing Sermons; is false:
We disprove Repeating of other Men's Sermons, as it is known some of their most
eminent Men have done, and that ordinarily: But there is an other use of Books
then Transcribing large parcells of them: If any of ours have done so, let them
bear their blame; I am sure it is not so common with us, as it is with his own
party. After all these Falsehoods, he has the impudence to say that these
things are too well known to be denied among us: I appeal to all the Nation if
ever they heard of most of his Stories, till his Book brought them to light;
yea it is known among us, that many of them are down right Lies.

Our Author in his second Section (having said so much against Presbyterians
without Book in his first) will now make surer work, and expose them out of
their Printed Books, which every one may Read, and Judge whether he deals
fairly with them or not. But even here his Candor will be found short of that
which becomes a Christian; for he charge some things on the Presbyterians,
on account of things written by Men who were as opposite to the Sober
Presbyterians as to Episcopal Men; what is in others of their Books he does
often misrepresent. But the thing will appear more clearly in particulars, to
be observed as we go along. The first he deals with is a Sermon of Mr.
William Guthry; who was an eminent Servant of God; he has now been Dead 20 or
30 years. The Sermon be says is fall of Curse^, and he cites one passage in
it, which I am sure no Presbyterian will approve. He says that Sermon is
mightily applauded in the West. He is not ashamed to Reproach the Living and
the Dead. For all that knew Mr. William Guthry, will averr that such horrid and
rude expressions are not like to have dropped from his mouth. I have indeed
heard of a Sermon that went under Mr. Guthries Name; which was pretended to
have been written from his Mouth, (but by some ignorant and unskilful person)
and Printed without his Knowledge whether this may not be the Sermon he
speaks of I know not; that Sermon I have never seen, and therefore cannot
tell how faithfully the words are cited by our Author. And surely if the people
in the West were so taken with it, we should have heard more of it, I cannot
meet with any person who knows any thing of it. His next citation we are
little concerned in, Mr. Walwood was one of the Hill Preachers who did not much
favor the Soberer sort of Presbyterians; neither do I know the truth of what
is alleged, having never seen that Sermon. He comes next to some of the
Sermons that were Preached before the Parliament (where he unmannerly and
calumniously Reflecteth on a person of great worth, and Honor His Majesty's
high Commissioner the Earl of Melvill: others of them, which were also Printed,
he takes no notice of: He falsely (as well as in a wickedly scoffing (strain
asserteth that these Sermons were carefully kept from Malignant Hands: For they
were exposed to public Sale, and called in the streets, as other Prints use to
be: So that every one who pleased might have them. That these Sermons, Extol
Presbyterian Government with Epithites due to the Gospel, as Christ's Bride,
etc. is impudently asserted: He is challenged to show where this is done: They
commend Christ's Bride, Gods House etc. But do never give ground to think that
they mean only of Church Government, but evidence that they mean the
Reformation of the Church, in Doctrine Worship, and Discipline; whereof
Presbyterian Government is but a part, and not the chief part: These Preachers
spoke to a Parliament who had under consideration the Christian Reformed
Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith, and therefore had good ground
to put them in mind of the great weight of what was before them, though
Presbytry had deserved no regard. What he cites out of Mr. Spaldings Sermon is
very applicable to what I have mentioned: Indeed if the Reader will allow all
this Man's glosses on these Sermons, and think that they mean whatever he
fancieth, they may be looked on as absurd enough: But let this be observed once
for all, that though Presbyterians never thought that the whole of the Interest
of Religion, nor the chief part of it, lay in the setting up Presbytry; yet
they look on it as Christ's Ordinance and therefore the setting it up is one
thing that belongs to building of the House of God: And if he can disprove
this Notion of things, let him produce his strong Reasons.

He next deals with Mr. Rules Sermon: Where first he quarreleth with the
Text, and from it observes that their (the Presbyterians) Texts are generally
out of the obscurest places of the old Testament, where an intelligent Reader
will laugh at his Folly, unless he can make it appear, first that Mr. R. is
Presbyterians in general, or either that he always has such Texts; or
Presbyterians generally do as he did at this time, in choosing their Texts. 2.
That Isai. 2. 2. is one of the obscurest places of the Old Testament. He next
affirms that Mr. R. takes it for granted that the Mountain of the Lord, there
spoken of, is expressly meant of Scottish Presbytry: How he can make this appear
is hard to guess: for no such thing is said, or hinted or employed, in any part
or passage of that Sermon: Yea nor is Presbytry so much as once mentioned,
either expressly or by circumlocution in it, but what the Parliament is there
exhorted to, is, to settle the true Religion among us, and to establish the
Church in Purity: To which we deny not the setting up of Presbytry does belong.
It is then a strange notion that he has, that to us, the only true Religion is
Scotch Presbytry, but he thinks his Tongue is his own, who is Lord over him.
Let any Man read that Sermon, and compare it, with this Authors Marginal, and
other Notes he has on it, and he will find that the Man can find no way to
reach it, but by his own Additions to it, not by any thing brought out of the
Discourse itself: And it may be observed that in that Sermon the Preacher did
purposely shun mentioning our differences; but pressed in general a Reformation
of the Church by Scripture, as may be gathered from the Conclusion of his
Sermon in these words, I have not in this Discourse been very particular, in
bespeaking your care and zeal for the things controverted among us: Partly
because time does not allow to insist on such Debates: And partly, because I am
confident they were Men cordially for the advancement of the Life and power of
Religion, they would readily fall in to accord about the things that have been
the matter of our differences. These considered all his quibbles against this
Sermon will evanish like Smoke.

He uses this same quibbling way with Mr. D. Williamson's Sermon: Nothing that
is in any degree to purpose he brings against it, save on passage. viz. That
Presbyterian Government is no light matter it is an ordinance of God the Royal
Diadem of Christ; He was a Martyr on this head, for it was his ditty on the
Cross, John. 19. 19. Jesus of Nazereth the King of the Jews. A. It is evident
that Mr. W. does there (P. 17.) speak in the general of a Government in the
Church: And that Christ was a Martyr for his Kingly Office, one part of the
exercise of which, is to appoint a Government in his house: And if we can make
appear (as has been done by several) that the Government of the Church by the
parity of Presbyters is that Government which Christ insituted ^. And that this
parity is observed in Scotland; then it will follow that Scotch Presbytry
(which he is thus pleased to vilify) belongs to (though it be not the whole of)
Christ's Royal Diadem; and that they who would set up another way do usurp upon
the prerogative of Christ.

The Sermon that he next makes his Observations on, and that from P. 45. to 49
seems to be done (if his Citations out of it be just, for I have not seen this
Sermon) by one of too hot a temper: And there are many things in it that the
more intelligent and Sober Presbyterians do not own: Wherefore there needs no
more be said in Answer to what he asserteth against us from that Discourse;
only on his Margin he takes notice, that Mr. Rule (for all along he is
pleased to suppose him to be the Author of the Answer to the five Pamphlets)
denies that it has been used to take Parents engaged, when their Children are
Baptized, to the Covenant. Mr. Rule (or who ever be the Author of this Book)
says only, that this is not the common practice in the Presbyterian Church now
settled: And I do join with him in that assertion. Neither do I know the
contrary, as this Author impudently imputes to Mr. R. The next Book he takes
to task, the Hind let loose, we also disown, as done by one who then headed a
party who separated from almost all the Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland: so
that I have no more to Answer of his Book till P. 71 where he blames us, that
the Author of the Vindication disowneth that Book, and yet it was never
condemned by any public deed of the Presbyterians, A. Will this Author disown
no Book written by an Episcopal Man, unless it has been condemned by some
public Deed of their Church, I suppose he will not say so. No Church is
obliged to condemn every faculty Book in particular: It is a sufficient general
Condemnation of every error, that a Church do approve the truth, and do not
teach any error. Before I pass from his Notes on this Book, I observe one
Falsehood twice asserted; viz. on the Margin of P. 56. and of 58. That the
late Assembly refused, at King Williams desire, to admit any of the Episcopal
Clergy with them into the Exercise of the Ministry; and that they refused to
receive them into any terms of Peace, and Communion. This I say is false; For
1. The Assembly were not suffered to bring in the Resolution of their Committee
about that Affair, nor to determine any thing in it. 2. Their Committee had
concerted terms of Communion with these Men, but they would come into no terms
with the Assembly: For they refused to explain any one word in that Formula
which they proposed to the Assembly: but of this a little was said before, and
more afterward may be said.

P. 71. He begins to deal with another Book, which he was pleased to make
Mr. Rule the Author of; though it has no name prefixed to it; with this Book
he is very Angry, and does what his wit and Malice (which are very
disproportioned) can reach, to disparage the Author: That we do not much reckon
upon; for we defend not Men, but Principles. If Mr. Rule were the Author of
that Book, and if he had leisure for such work; it is like this Pamphlet had
received a more exact Answer: The Book spoken of is, The second Vindication
etc. in Answer to 5 Pamphlets. he gives it a very slight Refutation, passing
over the most material parts of it: And using his Critical skill about some few
things which fall in on the By, or that he thought to have more advantage
against. He begineth with P. 125 of that Book: where the Author had said, that
none of the Ministers were Murdered by the Camer^nians (for his words are not
faithfully here cited) he affirms that the Author knows that Instances
might be given of Ministers Murdered by them. This is false, for we all know
the contrary and it is strange that this Author should be so confident in this,
when he knows (if he read the Book that he refuteth any farther than here and
there one Line of ten) that the Author does in the very next Line challenge his
Antagonist to bring any such instance. And this Man says instances might be
brought, but attempteth not to do it. What seems to be the proof of this
confident assertion is a notable instance of our Authors skill in Logic: It is
confessed (postser: of 2d vindication) that some Men and Women invaded the house
of a Minister, tore off his Clothes, and beat him on the Head and Legs, which
looked but too like a design to Murder him. The consequent must be, E. they
Murdered him: On this strong Argument he calls the Authors Answers to what
was charged on the Presbyterians, a Ridiculous disguising of what he could not
deny: whether it be so or not, I hope Readers will judge, by comparing what is
said pro and contra, and not take it on this Man's word: That Mr. P. refused to
Answer the Pamphlets, because he found it impossible to speak any thing in
their (Presbyterians) Vindication but what all Scotland knew to be false: This
I say, is a bold assertion: Mr. P. expressed no such Reason for his Refusal:
But this pretender can by guess, assign the most secret Reasons of things.

He undertaketh to show that in every page that Book abounds with scurrilous
Railings, Untruths, Contradictions, and Nonsense: And will charge these on the
whole party, because they enjoined the writting of this by him who did write
it: This is like our Authors way of Reasoning. I am persuaded that one shall
not find so much Nonsense in all that Book as he has here presented us with:
For what Sense is it, the party bid such an one Answer such ^amphlets E. all
the faults in the manner of Writting are the blame of the whole party: If our
Author would make it appear that the General Assembly enjoined the Answerer to
Rail, write Lies, Contradictions, and Nonsense, then indeed he spoke to the
purpose: If not, these Faults, if they be, are only chargeable on the Author;
as the halting of the Horse is on his being Lame, not on the Rider: And it is
Nonsense to lay the blame on them who are so innocent.

The first of these Accusations (which he insisteth on P. 73, 74, 75. is
Scurrtlous Railing. This he endeavors to make out, because Preface P. 1. he
calls Prelatists the Seed of the Serpent etc. let any one Read that Passage,
and see whether either Prelatists be named, or the words can be drawn to
signify either all Prelaticts, or that party in general. It is plain that they
who are spoken of are a party of Men (who it is like may be found among the
Prelatists) who had always disquieted the Church of Scotland, and do now
bespatter her with all the Calumnies they can invent: The Pamphlets Answered in
that Book, and this, now under consideration, are a sufficient proof that such
Men there are among them: Though we are far from thinking that all Prelatists are
such: For some we know who differ from us soberly and maintain their
Principles, not with such a Spirit as appears in this Pamphlet, but abhor
such ways, and are ashamed that their cause should be so patronized: This
considered, all that he collecteth out of the Preface falls to the ground:
Men of his kidney, we say, use the stratagems of Heathens, Papists, yea that
they do the Devils work; and what follows: if he can disprove this, let him
do. What he says of the Authors of their late Books being charged with some
ill things P. 73 if they be not retracted by the Author of that Book, shall be
disowned by us all, if they can be made appear to be either false or
unnecessary truths, who could shun calling these things Lies,
Misrepresentations, etc. which are manifestly such, and made appear to be such:
let any impartial Reader compare what is said of these Pamphlets with the
passages to which they are applied, and we are not afraid to endure his
Censure. We know Moses could be provoked: The Apostle Paul spoke harsh words
to one who endeavored to Pervert the right ways of God: And our Lord himself
called some Men a Generation of Vipers. What he observes out of P. 21. that it
is said, that the Prelatical party is eminent for Spite is a Misrepresentation,
like what has gone before: It is said of his party, that it is a degenerate
sort of furious Men* that are a Reproach to either Episcopal, or any other
party they own: And truly though i had not been said, this Book is a proof,
that such Men may be met with in Scotland The same is Answered to what he
objecteth out of P. 25 where Episcopalians are not so much as mentioned. What
he cites out of P. 51 I do not find, if I knew where else to seek after it, I
should consider it: But if the Author he deals with have spoke so
Reproachfully of any worthy Man, whose words are not manifestly such as he
calls them, let him hear his own blame. I wonder where the Contradiction
lies between P. 146. that our differences are irreconcilable without the
yiedling of one party (these last words he leaves out) and P. 1. they own the
same Religion with us: May not lesser difference be irreconcilable as well, as
greater? Are not many differences in Philosophy irreconcilable, and yet the
persons differing may agree well enough, though not about that thing. Out of P.
168 he cites these words Prelatists spend their short Glass: Whereas the words
are his party spend -- if this be fair dealing, let the Reader judge. What is
said of a Snarling Cur, P. 191, was but the expression of a just Indignation
against a most vile Reproach cast on a person famous in his day in all the
Churches, now when he has many years been in Glory, what he ranteth with
(while he charge Ranting on others) throughout P. 75 is not worthy of an
Answer.

P. 76, He falls on another head of the Faults he finds with that Book:
Whether it be the Falsehoods, or the Contradictions of it, is not easy to
discern, he does so jumble things together, but I shall take things as they
come to hand. We disown that principle on which he says much of that Book is
founded, Dods you have been done by he might see (sed impedit ira Animum ne
possit cernere verum) that that very Book does blame the Rabble who did to
others; but a small part of what they had suffered from them: And if it do at
any time excuse them by their sufferings, so far as to say, that they were to
be pitied, and that it was but suitable to humane infirmity: I hope this is far
from establishing such a Principle as he mentions, or from building on it;
neither is their any (much less a shameful) Contradiction here, or at every
turn. It is rather a shameful Ignorance of the nature of a Contradiction to
assert this. If Cameronians be sometimes called Godly, and sometimes Wild and
ungovernable: A Contradiction is easily shuned, unless both propositions were
universal; which neither is nor can be alleged: There are of both sort among
them: And we deny not but some degree of Wildness may consist with a degree of
Godliness, though it is to be Lamented that they should meet in one person: It
is not easy to determine what degree of Sinfulness (especially that which
consists in, or flows from Error in the understanding) may consist with
the least degree of Grace: Hence we have Charity to some Episcopal Men, who we
think have made very foul steps. Another Contradiction he either finds or
makes, is, Treating the Adversaries as Brethren, and at the same time calling
them the seed of the Serpent, Devils, Drunkards, etc. What is more obvious to
them who will understand, than that it is the Episcopal Party whom we own as
Brethren, and would gladly engage to an Union with us, on good Terms: And yet
there is a Party among them (especially of their late Writers) who deserve all
these Epithites that are alleged to be given them (only they were never called
Devils in that Book) save that his work of false Accusing is ascribed to them;
and if he pleases to draw this Consequence, they are false Accusers, E.
Devils, we shall not reclaim. Yea, it is no inconsistency to treat these
Adversaries civilly, and yet tell them what they say or do amiss, and that in
plain and proper Terms.

Another great Contradiction he brings, P. 77. I build not on Hearsay or
common Fame: And I take many of the Matters of Fact from others: And the
veracity of my Informers, not mine, is pledged for them. I wish this Author
would study Logic before he would undertake to write Books any more. Where is
the Contradiction between not asserting any thing on common Report, and
building on a particular Report or Information: A Judge will not pass Sentence
on a common Report. I have heard; and it is reported, and an unnamed person
told me so; which is the strain of the Pamphlets Answered by that Book: And yet
he gives a Decree on the testimony of particular Witnesses; though he has no
personal knowledge of the matter of Fact. And why may not one who vindicateth
others from false Imputations, disown the one way of procedure, and yet make
use of the other? It must likeways be a Contradiction with this Learned Author,
That we do not interpose in the Affairs of the Church of England, though some of
them have meddled with ours beyond their Line; and yet we call them
Superstitious, Popish, etc. Has he so little Wit, as that he cannot
distinguish between telling our Opinion of a Way, and meddling in the Affairs of
them of that Way: the one is matter of Opinion, the other of Practice. We think
the Popish Way is wrong, but we manage no Intrigues to pull down the Triple
Crown, we leave that to them who are called by God for that work: Some of the
Church of England have Consulted, and Contrived with our Enemies in Scotland,
how to disquiet and over-turn us: We have done no such thing toward them. His
Construction on our asserting, That the Covenant only Binds us to concur
with England when called by them, in the Reformation of the Church: is his own,
none of ours: And will be despised by impartial Readers. He makes it also a
Contradiction, That King James Abdicated the Government, and that The Nation
took away His Royal Authority. It is just such a Contradiction as to say, That
a Man deserteth his Wife, and will not dwell with her; and therefore she
obtains a Divorce by Course of Law; but these high Points I unwillingly meddle
with. That the Book he Refuteth says any where, That we owe no Allegiance to
King William, but in so far as he supporteth Presbytry, is denied: I wish he
had cited the Page where such words were to be found. This will no way follow
from what is cited out of the Acts of the Convention of Estates. For Episcopacy
may never he restored, and yet Presbytry not supported. What he is angry with,
as reflecting on Heredetary Monarchy, the Estates of the Nation must answer for
it, not the Ministers of the Gospel.

Another Contradiction he fancieth, P. 79. it is said in that Book P. 36.
Parag. 11. Most of the Episcopal Ministers (the words are, most of them who
went out. For very many Episcopal Ministers neither went out, nor were put out)
were put out by their own Consciences; for they deserted their Charges without
threatening, sentence or Compulsion. And yet P. 26. it is owned the Presbyterian
Rabble did persecute and drive them away. A Child could tell him that there is
no incoherency: for some left their charges the one way, and some the other
way. But what most angereth him is, that it is said, these things were in an
Interegnum. Which he says is impossible in an heredetary Kingdom, where the
King never Dies. Whether the Author of the 2d Vindication, spoke properly in
this, let Lawyers determine: I will not judge in such mat^ers: But I am sure
there was then no exercise of Government; either in the State, or in Church,
which could take course with what was amiss; and if the King cannot Die in Law;
how another could be set up, let the Estates of the Nation inform this bold
Asserter, by defending their own Deed in a way suitable to their place: If our
Foundations may be thus shaken, Impune, at the pleasure of Private Persons; and
K. ^'s Interest so plainly, and publicly pleaded for, under King W. the
Government is in no safe Condition. It is said 2d Vindication, P. 26, the
oppressed people having Potentiam, though not Potestatem, it was not to be
wondered at, that they relieved themselves: Whence our Author very wisely
observes; it is no new thing for Presbyterians to think power a sufficient
Call to Act Illegally: As if these were Equivalent Terms; it is not to be
wondered at, if such a thing be done: And there is a sufficient Call to do it:
The one imports no more, but that there was Provocation; which we affirm that
the Rabble had, The other that they had warrant, and that they did well in what
they did: Which was never Asserted in the Book that he Refuteth; but often, and
expressly disowned.

He does indeed make a real Contradiction (which it seems he behooved to do;
for he could find none) whereas he alleges that P. ^61. it is said, in
Galloway the Incumbents were generally driven away: And yet elsewhere, they
deserted without Threatening, or Compulsion. The strength of this Contradiction
lies in his leaving out half of the Sentence that he cites (by the like means
he might make the Scripture speak Blasphemy: And so the Devil cited it when he
tempted Christ to cast himself Headlong) the Authors words are in Galloway the
Incumbents were generally driven away, or Deserted. We have next P. 80 a
horrible Contradiction: it is said P. 34 That the Rabble went away from Mr.
Skinners House after they had Eaten. and P. 27. they took the Poors Box by
force out of the House of Mr. Russel, and yet it is said P, 29, that they are
misrepresented, when it is said that they did Eat and Drink at the Expense of
them whom they Rabled: And that all the Reports of them, give account of their
not laying their hands on the Prey Est. 2. 15. A. At Mr. Skinners House, they
did Eat at the Invitation of the Mr of the Family: Neither did they any
violence to that Family; both which are expressed in the place that our Author
cites: But it was not fit to take notice of these Circumstances, for it would
have spoiled the designed Contradiction: If he can instance, where they took
Meat or Drink by force, than may be Glory in a Contradiction, at lest a
Falsehood. For taking the Poors Box, it was not laying hand on the Prey; for
they offered Security, that the Box, and Money and other Utensils of the
Church, should be safely kept, and restored to them who should be concerned in
that Church: But this also must be overlookt for the former Reason: If he can
make it appear, that they put any of these Goods to any other than the proper
use, or disposed of them to themselves, he should say somewhat to the purpose.

Yet another Contradiction, P. 80* it is said 2 Vind, P, 145. it is better that
England and Scotland be not united, than that the Institutions of Christ should
be thwarted; And yet it is said, may not two Nations Trade together, and be
Governed by the same Laws: And yet bear with one another, as to Church ways? I
confess my shallow wit cannot reach a Contradiction in these two Assertions.
The Author is there Answering an Argument brought why Episcopacy should be the
Church Government of Scotland, because without it we can not have a National
Union with England; and he brings these two Answers; either of which is
sufficient. If he think that the Author of the 2d Vindication meant, that
England, and Scotland might be united in Trade, and Civil Government; and yet
not so united: Then certainly, either that Author or this, must be a very
Dunse. On this occasion he asks; may not the West of Scotland, and the other
parts of that Kingdom Trade together, and be Governed by the same Laws, And yet
the West not impose their Kirk ways on the rest of the Kingdom: And here he
Triumphs, with a Responde Gilberte.

-- Some will think this fine Notion no great matter of triumph; but rather it
exposes the meanness of the Authors understanding. I hope he will accept of a
rational Answer, though it be from another hand then Mr. Rules, whom he there
insulteth over. I say first; there were no inconsistency, nor would imply both
parts of a Contradiction, if Presbytry should be in the West, and Episcopacy in
other parts of the Nation: though it might breed much breed much Confusion; and
were an irrational setlement, Scotland being one National Church. 2. The Reason
why the same Government should be settled all the Nation over, is, because there
is but one Government instituted, or warranted in Scripture. If our Rulers had
other grounds for this determination, these do not weaken, but strengthen this.
3. It is false that the West imposes on the rest of the Nation: The Law has
settled the same Church Government through the whole Nation; and it is not in
the West only that that Government is desired by Ministers and People.

Amidst his pretended Contradictions he finds P. 81. some other faults, with
this Book, that it says P, 151, Presbyterian Government was settled by Christ:
And this he doubts whether it be an Oath, or not: but says* that it is an
Oath is most natural to the words. An intelligent Reader will wonder how such a
Construction could be put upon such words by one whose wit is not a
wool-gathering: But his wonder shall be increased if he shall Read the whole
passage out of the Book it self, which is, we desired to meet for other ends,
than settling the Presbyterian Government, we know it was settled long before by
Christ as his institution But fain he would disprove the truth of this
assertion which he endeavors by two Topics, well suited to the size of his
Learning: The former is, he sets down a most Ridiculous parcel of Arguments
against Episcopacy; which he says, is our ordinary Cant: Can he produce any
Author among us that ever used such a way of a Reasoning? And this he is
obliged to do, seeing that which he professes to be now on, is, to give some
expressions out of their Printed Books, as the Title of this his second Section
bears: If the meannest of our party should talk at that Rate, we would
sharply Rebuke them: If there be not on our side found stronger Arguments
against Episcopacy, we shall yield the cause. If he cannot tell us where these
passages are to be found (as he has not done) I leave to the World to pass a
Judgment on his Conscience and Honesty; I take notice of two things that he
observes, before I come to his other mighty Argument. One is, we never call
the Apostle St. Paul; because he never Swore the Solemn League and Covenant:
This is to talk Ridiculously, I will give him better Reasons for this our
Practice (though we can bear with them that do otherwise than we do) one is we
usually give that Glorious Instrument in the work of the Gospel, a more
peculiar Title than that of Saint; the Apostle Paul. Every Good Man is a Saint;
and every one Canonized is called Saint: But every one is not called an
Apostle: Again the Title of Saint before the name of any person does (in the
Popish Church from whence we derive this Custom) absolutely depend on the Popes
Canonizing that person, as that of Sir prefixed to ones name, on the Kings
Knighting of him. They do not call a Man Saint only because he lived a Holy
Life on Earth, and is now in Heaven: For then Moses, Aaron, David, etc. should
have this Title prefixed to their Name, which the Men I now debate with will
not allow, nor do they practice it. Farther it may be made appear that the
Primitive Church did not thus Saint. Men, but when she also Worshipped them, and
their Relicts. As the Learned Mede Comment in Clav Apocal^pt shows out of
Surios in T: 6. No: 28. That when from Council: Constant: under Comstantin:
Iconomach: Some were sent to convince Stephen the Monk, he accused them, that
they had banished the Name of (...), Saint, and would have these Holy Men
called only Apostles and Martyrs. And Cedrenus tells us, That the same
Constantine made an universal Law (which, says Mede, was no doubt according to
the Sentence of the Council) that none of the Servants of the Lord should be
called Saint, but that their Relicts, if found, should be neglected. Hence some
will infer, that the use of this Praenomen began with St. Worship, though
afterward it was confirmed by Canonization, as St. Worship also was by the
Pope; and therefore they ought to be laid aside together. It is true Mr. Mede
labors to appropriate this Prohibition to the word (...) as signifying the
honor of Intercession: But I would gladly know what other Epithete, which can
betranslated St. they put in the stead of it. Neither do I find ground from any
good Author that ever (...) signified an Intercessor, But enough of this
Digression, which is sufficient to excuse Presbyterians, in this matter.
Another thing I note on this first Argument of our Author, that he says, the
Author of the 2d Vind. from these (viz. the senseless Discourse that he had
framed for us) and such like Arguments: Allows no Church, but the Presbyterian
to be of Divine Institution; and unchurcheth all the Episcopal Churches; while
yet he denies not Papists to be lawful Ministers. The absurdity of this
Allegation is manifest to any that have Read the Book he mentions; for from
the beginning to the end of it, neither any of these Arguments, nor any such
Arguments are mentioned, if he can point to the place where they are to be
found, I shall bear what blame he pleases to affix upon me, on this account.
The Conclusion also that he draws from these, and such like Arguments is
falsely, and Disingeniously ascribed to that Author: For no such Conclusion is
to be found in his Book, we ever acknowledged Episcopal Churches* to be true
Churches, and their Ministers to be true Ministers. His other Argument is, if
he can but refure the Learned Dr. Pearsons Defense of Ignatius Epistles, or
show us any authentic record, or received Ancient History, that Presbytry was
ever the Government of the Church; than we shall yield the Cause. If he will
not be of our Opinion without this condition, let him even enjoy his own: For
all that can be demanded that way having been abundantly done by several of our
Persuasion: neither that Author, nor I, think it with our while to essay any
thing farther for the sake of such a pitiful Pamphlets as this: But if he will
please to Answer what our Men have Written; it is like what he brings may be
considered. It had been asserted by some of the Pamphleters Answered in the ^d
Vind, that in stead of 14 Bishops, 60 were set up to Rule the Church: And he is
pleased to call the Answer to this, Quibbles, but thinks not fit to give any
return to what is said in disproving of that absurd Assertion: And so the whole
of it stands in its entire strength: only he affirms that all there said
depends on this Supposition, that the Parliament is the Church, because that
the Parliament put the Government into the hand of those 60. It is strange that
this Writter will needs have the Presbyterian Ministers, and Elders in
Scotland, when the Government was settled by Parliament to be but 60. Where in
the Book he pretends to Answer, it was told him that their Representative,
the General Assembly, consisted of 116 Ministers, and 47 Ruling Elders; and
nothing said to disprove it: But some will keep to the Conclusion, let the
premises be what they will; We are far from making the Parliament the Church:
The Presbyterians had intrinsic Power to Govern the Church, and what the
Parliament did was no more but allowing the Exercise of this Power, and adding
their civil Sanction to it. P. 82 P. 83. He is very Angry with an Assertion,
that We are for Moderation; and on the contrary he brings a multitude of
Accusations against us, partly false, and all of them abundantly answered, as
of old* when things were recent, so lately in the 1st and 2d Vind: To which
Answers he does not pretend to Reply any thing, but confidently repeateth the
former Imputations. It is in vain to debate with Men of this strain, or to
Answer what they say: I have seen some Scolds so insist, in spite of all Reason
that could be brought against them: But for Men pretending to Learning to use
such a Method, is not usual. He speaks P. 83. of an Answer given in 2d. Vind:
P. 157 about a Protestation given by some Presbyters against the King, and some
Acts of Parliament. I have looked over that Page, and some before and after it,
and can find no such Passage: and therefore must leave it till he give us a
more distinct Information about it. He finds (as he fancieth) a plain
Contradiction; That it is said ibid: That the fatal Division about Protestation
and Remonstrance was not so much as mentioned among us: And yet it was moved
that some of the Sentences of the Remonstrators should be taken off What was
moved in the Assembly was, That some Brethren had been deposed in the time of
our late Differences, and these Sentences were taken off by other Judicatories,
that this might be confirmed by the General Assembly, which was done. Is here
any reviving of these Differences: If he Childishly lay the Stress on the Word
[mentioning these Differences] he may know that old Debates are said not to be
mentioned, when they are sopite, not contended about, nor do divide the Church
into Factions; though they be discoursed of, as things that once had a Being.
He quarrelleth P. 84, with the Constitution of the General Assembly; but will
not be at the pains to Answer what has been answered to either himself, or
some of his Brethren, making the same objection, in their former Pamphlets. It
was a General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, which had the ruling Power
by Law, as it always had a Right to it by the Gospel. ^f he had proved that
Fasting on the Lord's Day, is making bold with it, he had spoken somewhat to
the next purpose he falls on; or that he could show that Feasting is
necessary on the Lord's Day, otherwise what he brings is not ad rem, What
follows P. 84, 85. about Purging Work, is a piece of Booff^nry, and a taste
of the Man's Spirit and Skill in Reasoning: For what he adds about Complyers
with Episcopacy, professing Repentance; we do not controvert: Only it is seen
since that time, that others have followed the Man's footsteps, of whom, he
speaks.

What remains of his Observations on that Book, is, partly about the Witnesses
that are brought on both sides, for the matters of Fact in Rabling. It was
alleged in the 2^d Vind. that the Witnesses to attest the Rablings were
generally the persons Rabled: We not only derogate from their Testimony on this
account; but we disprove what they affirm: On the other side, they are mostly
other persons and if he can disprove what they testify, we shall, so far yield
to him. For his Gentry, or Ministers who are not parties in that particular; we
never rejected their Testimony; except when he tells us a Gentle Man, or
Credible person, said so and so; but we must not know who he is, nor enquire
whether he said it or not. He next has a long harangue to Ridicule Mr. Rule;
(whom he will needs have to be the Author of that Book) as commending himself,
and that pretty odly. For his Vindication I recommend it to any who in this
would be satisfied, to Read the Book, as to these passages Where he will find
half Sentences, or passages dismembered without the antecedentia and
consequentia, to give the whole an odious aspect. next that what was said
(whether by himself or another) was se Defendendo: Or in defense of a Brother,
who was (in these things) Reproached, and through his side the Cause that he
owned was exposed the Apostle Paul is a precedent in that Case si liceat magnis
componere parva. If the wrong numbering of the pages be taken notice of, for
the Readers better direction, This cannot escape our Authors Critical Eye; but
must be placed among the Faults of the 2d Vindication. When he begun his
Censures on this Book he promised (magno hiatu) to find, in every page,
Scurrilous Railing, Untruths, Contradictions, and Nonsense: For the* 1st, and
3d, he has tried his skill; but I hope without success: On the 2d head he has
said little; but for the 4th, though that be the Talent they confidently ascribe
to all Presbyterians, he has not so much as attempted any thing. It were well
if this would make them more Modest in their Censures of us.

Mr. Meldrum is the next person he deals with; whose letter (annexed to the
former Book, containing a vindication of himself from the false aspersions cast
on him in the Pamphlets this Author would fain say some thing against: But
finds little matter for his Wit, and Malice to work upon: The 1st thing he
quarrelleth is, a Complaint that the Pamphlets which Reproach him are spread in
England and hardly to be found in Scotland: Which he excuses, because they have
not the Liberty of the Press, nor importing such Books: And that some of them
were taken in Berwick. A. These of their Railing Pamphlets which have been
imported were never challenged; none ever came to trouble for them, though we
well know who brought them into the Country. The Books taken at Berwick were
some Copies of a piece against the Civil State; and striking at the Foundation
of the present setlement. It was not Presbyterians that arrested them; but
those in chief Authority under the King, who are not all Presbyterians. Next he
blames Mr. M. for calling the Covenant a Sacred Oath: against which he
Raileth, but does not argue. I hope the want of the Kings Authority could not
make the matter of the Oath to be bad, if it be otherwise good. Neither did the
Covenant want the Royal Authority: The National Covenant was signed by K. I.
and by C. 2. and the League and Covenant also by the Latter.

Again it is said by Mr. M. that the submitting of some to Reordination is
Scandalous All that he has in Answer to this is, some of the Reformed French
did submit to it, E. It is not Scandalous. If this be a good Argument I could
tell him some of the French Protestant Ministers, and those of the most Eminent
that came to England refused to submit to it, E. It is Scandalous; His account
of Subscribing a Paper that was said to be the Oath of Canonical Obedience, our
Author is pleased to call Shufting and Shifting: And this is all the Refutation
he thinks needful to to that Discourse; and so it stands in its entire
strength. That he lamented and yet continued in his Canonical obedience. Is an
invidious Representation. He Lamented his signing of that Paper: he did nothing
but what he thought himself obliged to though he had never signed such a Paper,
which was not formal Canonical Obedience; but performing of these Duties that
his office obliged him to, though there had been no Bishop in the World. He
puts off all the rest of this Letter and the Book in which it is, by telling
us it needed no Answer; whether it be so or not, let the Readers judge.

He now undertaketh another Antagonist, the famous Learned and Holy Mr Samuel
Rutherfo^rd, who has now a long time been, I hope, in Glory: And whose same
shall remain in the Learned World, when the name of such an One as this
Scribler shall Rot. Among the many excellent ^^rks of that Author, he singleth
out his Letters; which were written on several occasions, in a familiar (but
most Heavenly and affecting Style) to private persons, some of them but of
ordinary Capacity, though of eminent Piety: And without any design of being made
more public then between the Writer and Receiver. These were many years after
his Death collected, and printed by a great Honourer of Mr. Rutherfo^rd. In
these Letters there are many passages that are expressed in words not very
Common but very apt and significant, and many homely similitudes are used; but
these most plain and expressive of the thing designed. But I challenge this
Moinus, with all his Critical skill, to show any thing in them that is unsound,
that is derogatory from the Majesty of God, or the Glorious Excellency of our
Redeemer, or that tends to corrupt the Soul; and not to engage it to Christ,
and to the way of Holiness. There are indeed many passages uninte ligible by
two sorts of persons, viz. by English Men, who are not thoroughly acquainted
with our Language: And by Men who are unacquainted with the Exercises of a
believing Soul, and its Communion with God in Christ: which I suppose gave the
occasion of this Writters Laborious transcribing these passages. There are many
who speak Evil of the things they know not. Let them who are acquainted with
the Mystery and power of Religion, consider these Letters, and I am persuaded
that, so far as they understand the Language they are written in, they will
have other thoug^ts of them than this Author has* In the end of these
citations, our Author has one short observation, which if ye will believe it
(and ye have his word for it) will make all these Letters most absurd: that is
P. 95 all that is meant here by Christ* is Presbyterian Government. If
Presbyterians know, nor mind no more of Christ but that, Let them be hissed at
and abhorred by all the World; can the Man who uttered this word have any
regard to Conscience, or Credit? Is he to be looked on as one who understands
what he re^deth, or cares what he says? And not rather as a profane Mocker
whose Bands shall one day be made strong?

He concludes this Section with our Principles about Civil Government, which
he proves out of some passages in public Papers in time of the late War
between King and Parliament. These were the effect of the unhappy differences,
that then were; which were man^ged by Statesmen, and these not all
Presbyteri^ns: and the Church, that was drawn along with them, did not consist
of Presbyterians wholly (though that was then the public profession) as did
appear when Episcopacy was after set up. What he cites out of the Hind let
loose, and Jus Populi, we will not Answer: For these Books were never owned by
all, nor the generality of the more judicious Presbyterians.

I now proceed to his third, and last Section, in the former of which he has
made a Collection of Notes of Sermons; and in the latter of passages in Prayer
said to be uttered by Presbyterian Ministers. I join these Sections together,
because they contain things of the same nature, and the Answer to them is the
same. To examine all the particular stories here set down (considering to what
distant times and places they relate) would take much time, much pains, and
also no small expense, for intelligence: And when all this were bestowed, the
result would not be Operae pretium; though we should find all to be Lies; for
many of them carry their improbability and falsehood in their face, and will be
believed by none who is acquainted with Scotland nor by Strangers who have not
enslaved their Credulity to a party, whose work it is to disparage their
Opposits, and to get esteem to themselves* by Lies and Forgeries, Nor can the
impudence of this Author, expressed P. 116. in his asserting the truth of what
he has written, be able to impose upon judicious and unbyassed persons.

I shall not say, that all that he has here narrated is Lies, and pure
Forgeries; (though I solemnly declare that I know not any one passage among them
to be folly true, as he relates them; nor can I meet with any person who has
such knowledge of them) for I know there are among us some who are not: so
polished as they should be, who may be guilty of some expressions that are
rude, unexact, or too course or bald, and unbesee^ing the gravity and greatness
of Gospel Truths. But I gladly would know what party of Men are, or ever were
in the World consisting of so many Individuals, among whom some such might not
be found. I am sure the Episcopalians cannot pretend to it: if we were
disposed, so to employ our selves (but we abhore to ^ake in such a Dunghill* we
could muster up as long a list of passages, unbecoming the Gospel^ and that
without Lying or Forgery; I do not say we could equalize him for vile, and
absurd Stories: For I do not believe that it is incident to Men who bear the
Christian name, or that ever stepped into a Pulpit in Scotland, to speak some of
the things he here relates: and therefore we will not vie with him in the
Talent of Writing at this rate. But we could make it appear that his party has
no cause to Glory over ours, in the matter of freedom from indecencies in
Preaching and Prayer. Wherefore it is evident that the tendency of this part of
his Book is to expose his Nation to the contempt of Strangers; yea to make the
work of Preaching Ridiculous to a profane, Atheistical Generation* who already
misregard it

The Stories that he (with the help of a Cabal of the same spirit with himself)
has collected for P. 116. he mentions the Collectors of these Notes are not
all alike absurd, some of them being horrid Blasphemies; others Ridiculous
Nonsense; some false Doctrine: Some scurrilously obscene; and there are some
which have no other evil in them, but that the manner of expression is
undecent, and too mean. So what is here narrated is not equal, as to truth or
ground and occasion given for such Stories. Sometimes he disguiseth what was
truly said, and puts it in another dress, to make it Ridiculous or absurd:
others he makes up, by tacking 2 or 3 passages together, which might be spoken
at diverse times, and diverse occasions, and little harm in them: but when
blended into one, they appear odd and become unsavory. Others again are pure
fiction, and no occasion given for such Report; but the wit of the Caball is
both Father and Mother to them, and this Scribler is the Midwife at least. If I
give a few instances of this kind, and bid him (or any else) defiance to prove
them by any credible Testimony, I hope the Reader will think his whole
Collections sufficiently discredited, and this part of his Book refuted. I give
for instances two Stories of Mr. Kirton, P. 105. another of his P. 107. and of
Mr. Kennedy, Ibid. also these of Mr. Artkine, and Mr. Kirton P. 108. and one of
him in the top of P: 110, and the 1st two of him P. 111. that Prayer of Mr.
Blair P, 113, and especially what the Author affirms that several in the
Meeting Houses of late have made use of the same expression: That Prayer
ascribed to a head of a College, P. 114. and that which follows, beginning,
Good Lord what have ye been doing etc. That Prayer about the Election of
Parliament Members at Edinburgh, P, 115. and the 1st of Mr. Areskine, Ibid,
that of Mr. Rule Ibid, that Prayer of the Minister at the Dissolution of the
Assembly: I might mention abundance more of them, which are as false and
groundless Forgeries as ever were uttered by any Tongue: But these may suffice
for a taste of the honesty of this Author, and his Collectors.

What follows in the last page shows to what an height of Boldness one may
come in averring known falsehoods, when he is left of God, to invent and spread
them. Hence this Author has the Brow to say these are but a few of many
thousand instances and that these are daily used in their Preachings and
Prayers: Also, that though Strangers will hardly believe these, yet they who
are unfortunatly bound to converse with them are sadly sensible that all is
true. And that many of the worst expressions are purposely left out: And this
forfooth, under pretense of tenderness to offend the Ears and Eyes of Modest
Readers, (O horrid Hypocrisy) and that thousands in Scotland of the best Rank
and Reputation are ready to attest these. Also, that Presbyterians will not
deny what they so much Glory in, viz. This extraordinary way of Preaching and
Praying, which they think an excellency and perfection, and call it a Holy
Familiarity with God; and a peculiar privilege of the most refined Saints. Not
one word of truth is in all this: The Presbyterians are so far from Glorying in
such Praying and Preaching, that they abhore it, and Judge, that they against
whom such things can be proved, ought to be severly Rebuked for the least of
these: And for others of them, cast out of the Ministry and no more be suffered
to profane so Holy a Work, as Preaching is.

APPENDIX
OUR Adversaries are not satisfied to Reproach us at Home, and in England; but
it seems have made it their Business to misrepresent us all the World over, as
far as the public Intelligence can reach: Therefore have they prevailed upon
the Simplicity and Credulity (if it may not be imputed to a worse Quality) of
the public News-man, who writes the Monthly Mercury in his News for April
1692; first to belie, and then to rail upon, the Presbyterian Church of
Scotland with open Mouth: The former in his Historical Part, the other in his
Reflections, P. 147. and 149. If the Writer be ignorant of the unhappy
Division, and Difference of Parties, and Sentiments that are now in Scotland,
such ignorance rendereth him unqualified for his Undertaking: If he know these
things, he must either be strangely biased to the one side (and that side they
every one knows is not generally inclined to the Interest of King William and
of the United Netherland, but rather to that of King James and of France) or he
is wonderfully receptive of whatever is told him: None of which are proper
Inducements for an Historian; especially such an one as makes so bold with all
Affairs. Sacred and Civil, as to subject them to his criti^al and decisive
Conclusions, and who so Magisterially passes Sentence about them. If what he
writes about Scotch Affairs, in the places above mentioned, be duly
considered, and if Men will receive due and imparti^l ^nformation about them,
This was written long before his ^eath.
it will be enough to discredit all that he has written; unless he make a
public Recantation of the Injury he has done to a whole Church (and
consequently to the Authority of King and Parliament, who have thought fit to
Own that Church, and Establish her by Law) which has deservedly been famous
among the Churches of the Reformation; To receive all his Informations from one
side, and neither to consider the probability of the matter, nor to hear what
the other Party has to say for themselves, is such a Conduct as is
intolerable in one who pretends to inform the World of the Truth and
Certainty of all Occurrences.

I intended farther to expose this Author, but hearing that by his Death we are
out of hazard of being Injured by him a second time, I only shall give a true
Account of what he has misrepresented: And for some other Reasons I shall
forbear a more full narrative which once was intended. He says P. 147. That a
Synod of the Presbyterians in Scotland, met (I suppose he means of the
General Assembly, which was indicted by Royal Authority, with consent of the
former Assembly, which begun at Edinburgh January 15. 1690) that they came to
some Heats in that Assembly; so that the Earl of Lothian, finding their Heats
increase, dissolved the Synod. Here are two palpable Falsehoods in one Breath;
One is, That they came to Heats in that Assembly; and that these Heats
increased. Nothing could be affirmed with less semblance of Truth. I believe
seldom have so great a body of Men met about so weighty and difficult Affairs,
among whom less did appear that could be called Heat. They had no Heat with the
Episcopal Men, who made Address to them; but treated them with all Respect and
Civility, (which they themselves did publicly acknowledge) though they could not
yield to what they demanded, for good and weighty Reasons, which they gave for
their determination. Neither was there any Heat among themselves, but did
Brotherly debate Matters in the Committee, and concluded on what Course should
be taken: In the Assembly it self, the Matter was not so much as debated: The
Opinion of the Committee not being brought in before they were dissolved. The
other Falsehood is. That the Earl of Lothian dissolved the Assembly on account
of their Heats. This is so far from Truth, that his Grace never complained of
any Heats, nor mentioned any such cause of his dissolving them, but only that
they had sat long, and had not brought their Business to a period. There was
indeed some confusion at the dissolution of the Assembly, by a Cry that was
raised in the House: but that was the effect of the Dissolution (or rather of
the manner of it) not the moving Cause.

The Mercury does farther Injure the Church of Scotland, in the Remarks that he
makes on his own false History: Calling the Presbyterians A Terrible sort of
People, that for the most part we find nothing in their Assemblies but
Disunion, Discord, and a Spirit of Persecution. No Answer is fit for such an
indefinite Charge against a whole Church, but to deny the truth of it; and bid
defyance to her Adversaries (whose Tool this Man was) to prove what they lybel
against her: Every one will see that this pitiful Historian has brought
nothing that can bear such a Conclusion. It is also too great Impudence and
Petulancy for a Stranger to talk at this rate, against a Church so much
honored by all Learned and Good Men, who have known her, or her Principles and
Way; and that on so slender Ground, as the Information of her sworn Enemies:
And when even what Account he has given (which is wholly false) if true, could
not amount to what deserves such a Censure: What if they had unreasonably
refused Communion with a sort of Men who had stepped out of the way, and who
generally had so heavily persecuted them? Is this the whole of their Actings in
their Assemblies? Make they no good Acts? Do they nothing for bearing down Sin
and advancing of Holiness? He next compares them to the Priests of Spain, and
says, They would erect an Inquisition Tribunal if they were not restrained. If
the Tongue and ^en be let loose at this ra^e, the best of Men shall be made as
black as Hell, by such scandalous Libellers, Can he tell us what is in our way
that is like the Inquisition Tribunal? Whom have we Imprisoned? Whom have we
Burnt, or Fined, or Banished? What Civil Punishments have we inflicted? Or have
we Censured any person for Truth? Or forced any to tell the secret Thoughts of
their Heart, and then taken their Lives for them? But why do I take so much
notice of his spite against us: It is also spued out against Protestants in
general; and these in other places as well as Scotland. What Religion he was of
for his Principles. I know not; but I am sure in this Narrative, and Censure,
he has not showed a Christian Spirit. How odiously does he compare the
Presbyterians in Scotland, and them who adher^d to the Synod of D^rt in the
Netherlands, with the Bishops and Clergy of France. Did ever either of these
endeavor the extirpation of them who differed from them; and that by so Bloody
and Barbarous Means as was the French Dragooning. The Scots Presbyterians and
the Reformed in Holland^ must also be like the Jesuits, who keep up the War
between the Emperor and the Pope. But wherein, I pray you, lies this
Similitnde, do any of us meddle in the Affairs of State, or in the making of
Peace or War? Do also the Ministers of Holland intermix in these Affairs? The
design of all this Clamor is evident to be that the Church, as well as the
State, should give a vast Toleration, and that of all kind of Opinions and
Church Practices, that the Presbyterians should allow them who are for the Jus
Divinum of Episcopacy to Govern the Presbyterian Church; and suffer Arminians
to Teach, and spread their Doctrine in the Congregations which are entrusted to
the care of the Presbyterians, and of whose Souls they must give an account:
And the Ministers of Holland should allow Arminians to be Ministers and Elders,
to Teach and Rule their Flocks. And that it is not enough that they do not
trouble them while they seduce their own followers; but they must incorporate
with them, as one Body, both for Teaching and Ruling* And nothing will please
this Man but the Magistrates persecuting the Church, unless she will take
Vipers into her Bosom. We plead not that Ministers may be suffered to do what
they please; as he invidiously represents the Matter: If Ministers transgress
the Laws, let them be punished: If they oppress their Neighbors, let them be
restrained. But it is no good service to the interest of Religion, to stir up
the Magistrate to restrain the Church from exercising that Government and
Discipline that Christ has instituted, and the Law does allow. It may rather
be said, That it will not be well with the Reformed World, if one of this Man's
Temper be suffered to write what he pleases; and that as the public
Intelligence.

FINIS.

