THE QUAKERS REFUGE Fixed upon the Rock of Ages, Though the Swelling Waters
Dash never so Violently to Overturn it.

Wherein is proved, that the Narrative of Ralph James is an absolute
Lying-Wonder, according to his own Definition.

And also, The great Controversy between the People of God called Quakers, and
others, about the holy Spirit of God and the Scriptures; truly stated, and very
briefly discoursed, as it is owned by the Quakers.

And the Truth Cleared from the False Suggestions and Deceitful Insinuations of
the Anabaptists about the said Controversy.

^n Answer to a subtle Pamphlet, lately published, Entitled, The Quakers
Subterfuge or Evasion Overturned.

Also, A few Queries propounded unto Ralph James, and the Author of the
Subterfuge, etc. By ROBERT RUCKHILL.

To which is added another Postscript in Answer to some Queries propounded in
the said Pamphlet, wherein many Untruths are suggested; but herein the Truth is
cleared, and the Evasion and Deceit of the Baptists made more fully manifest.

By JOHN WHITEHEAD.

The Lip of Truth shall be Established forever; but a Lying Tongue is but for a
Moment, Prove. 12.19. Righteous Man hates Lying Words; but the Wicked causes
Slander and Shame, Prove. 13.5. Printed in the Year, 1673.

Honest Impartial Reader;
WHen first the There being about Nine Years between the Generation and the
Birth.
Monstrous Production of the Anabaptists Lying-Wonder (extant in their
Narrative and prefixed Letters) had so Vigorously alarmed, the Nation; I was
under some exercise of Mind, as having the Ground and Design of the Anabaptists
opened in me in that their Undertaking, which I feared could not be so obvious
to that Southern Friend, who was first engaged in the Detection of their
Slanders, by reason of his remote Residence from those Parts, where those
things were pretended to be acted.

But when I had seen the first and second Books of T. R. where their Deceits
were so evidently discovered, and so signally detected (although their Ground
was not so much perceived) I did acquiesce in a patient Hope, and Expectation
of a Succesful Issue on the Truth's behalf.

Afterward came forth another Book, put forth, as I conceive, by a Clandestine
Author, entitled, The Quakers Subterfuge or Evasion Overturned, etc. whereat I
was much stirred in mind, to observe somewhat concerning the said Book, but was
still stayed by a certain Expectation, shortly to see the Answer by that Friend
who was already engaged in that Service. But being at Lincoln the 25th of
December last, where I expected to have sound the said Answer, I not only
understood that the Book was unanswered; but (much contrary to my Expectation)
the Work it self brought to my Hands, which I accepted not without Fear and
Trembling: wherefore my Soul humbly implores the Assistance of the Eternal
Wisdom, without which I am both unable and unfit to do Him any Service.

And now Reader, since the all-disposing Providence has thus ordered things, I
shall heartily address my self to communicate unto thee (and to the whole
Nation, if they please) what I have observed to be the original true Ground and
Cause, why the Anabaptists at this Season should produce their Lying-Wonder,
which the Author in hand affirms was brought ONLY to oppose the spirit of
Falsehood in Richard Anderson; when as about Nine Years, by this Authors
Confession, have expired since the Matter contained in their Narrative was
acted; see their Subterfuge, p. 9 and 13. Surely, if the Anabaptists had been
as slow in the cure of Leprosies, Pains, Exstasies, etc. as they have been in
opposing R.A's false spirit, what had become of him, his Leprous Child, Wife
and Family, or of Mary Brown, long ere this day? But I proceed.

About the 26th day of the 6th Month, 1669. was the Dispute at Wrawby
(mentioned by the Anabaptists) and upon the last day of the same Month,
William Smith of Eltham late a Brother of the Baptists; but now a faithful
Follower of the Light of Christ, that Light of the World) gave forth a Writing
thus dedicated:

To all such as deny, that the holy Spirit ought to be Supreme Judge in Man,
and in Matters of Faith above the holy Scriptures.

This was directed in particular to Ralph James and John Kirk by of Brigg; but
they have not answered it to this day, though J. K. did promise to answer it.
At last (after some Provocation used) J. K. writes a reviling Letter, about 17
Months after, while R. James is implied to bring forth into the World this
Monstrous Birth, the Narrative, which had lain in the dark womb of Oblivion
about 9. Years; thus (after the mode of Antichrist) to establish their false
Doctrines by Signs and Lying Wonders, and at one fatal Blow to assassinate the
Innocent Name and Cause of the Quakers forever.

In this seeming Distress the Quakers flee to the Name of the Lord, their
strong Tower, there to repose in Safety, until a just Defense might advance in
their Vindication, which no sooner appears under the hand of T. R. but
presently advances another Opposer of God's Everlasting Truth, charges the
Quakers in their chiefest Strength, intending by fine Force to overturn their
Subterfuge, and render them obnoxious to the Pursuit and Chase (at least) of
every insulting Enemy, that none might forever hereafter dare to assert the
Dignity and Power of the Spirit of God above the Writings of Men, lest their
Children should be smitten with Leprosy, and themselves with intolerable
Pains. This (R^ader) is the Ground and Design (as I perceive) of the
Anabaptists Envy and Wrath against an Innocent People; and in all probability,
had it not been for the Writing aforesaid (which they have not been able to
answer, and are therefore vexed and gaul'd) the Matter of their Narrative and
Lying-Wonder might have rotted in the Grave forever, without all Hope of a
Resurrection; whereas now (after the Second Death thereof) it must unburied
stink above Ground, to the Shame and Reproach of the Anabaptists in all
succeeding Generations.

For the Truth on the Quakers behalf, and the Anabaptists Deceits, are so
Perspicuous (in two Books written by T. R. entitled, The Anabaptists
Lying-Wonder; and, The Anabaptists Preacher Unmasked: unto the serious Perusal
whereof I refer the Reader for ample Satisfaction) that its verily hoped, their
Envy against us in this Particular will not survive another Paroxism. Lets
therefore leave it on its Deathbed a while, and examine, what considerable
Supplies the Author under Consideration has brought to their Dying Cause, in
his last Expedition.

From Adlingfleet in Merceland, the 8th day of the 11th Month, 1672. Robert
Ruckhill.

THE Quakers Refuge Fixed upon the Rock of Ages, etc.
FOrasmuch as the Matter of Fact, with its Circumstances contained in the two
first Books of the Anabaptists, with the Additions; and also, so much as
concerns their Cross Examination of their own Member Richard Anderson, extant
in this Book now under search, called, The Quakers Subterfuge, etc. has been
sufficienly answered by my Friend T. R. I shall not need pedetentim to tract
this Author, only shall endeavor to wipe away that immerited Aspertion of
Untruth and Immodesty, which the Author under hand has cast upon the Title
Page of T. R's Book, by proving their Narrative to be worthily styled, The
Anabaptists Lying-Wonder, and so proceed to such other Particulars as lie in my
way.

That the Narrative of R. James is deservedly called, A Lying-Wonder (and that
by their own Definition of a Lying-Wonder) appears thus.

First, Because it is False in it self. 2dly, It is brought to maintain a
Falsehood. 3dly, To Oppose a Truth.

That the Narrative is False in it self, has abundantly appeared in the two
Books of T. R. beforesaid, both by Testimonies and Certificates sufficiently
witnessed, beyond all Contradiction. But in regard this Author, and some
Independents in these Parts still urge, That Rich. Anderson was a Quaker, at
least in Principle; let us hear what they say for themselves, wherefore they
should be believed.

This Author in the 10th page of his Subterfuge urges, That R. A. was a Quaker
n Principle, and that for these Reasons. First, In that he restifies at a high
rate for the Light Within. 2. In that he has proclaimed the Quakers to be the
People of God, and owned of God, as was Moses. 3. Because R. A. went in the
Conceits of his own Heart on an Unsent Errand. But what is this to the Quakers?

Here is all the united Strength the Anabaptists and other Professors are able
to make, to prove R. A. a Quaker: But will these poor Remains of their
shattered Forces do it? Surely nay. Will the Devil's frequent and open
Confession, that Christ is the Holy One of God, prove him to be a Christian? Or
will that Pythoniss ( Acts 16.) her following Paul and Silas many days
(perhaps more then they affirm R. A. conversed with the Quakers) crying, These
Men are the Servants of the Most High God, which show unto you the Way of
Salvation, prove her a true Proselite, and Convert to that Way of Salvation,
unto which (with the Preachers thereof) she had born so clear a Testimony? Let
the Sober-minded judge. And if so ample Testimonies (as clear and full as any
they instance R. A. gave to the Quakers) will not prove the said Conclusions;
then let Shame cover the Faces of the Anabaptists, and their envious
Confederates, until they have Repented, and taken as much Pains in the
Vindication of God's Eternal Truth, owned by the Quakers, as they have taken in
Opposing it.

Neither ought R. Anderson his pronouncing R. J. a Leper (from the
consideration of a Scripture, as he confesses, and they own, see Subterfuge.
p. 11. and then not sent by the Light the Quakers witness to (to their own
Contradiction) as they before suggested) nor his falfe Pretending to Heal the
Sick, which they urge he attempted, but sailed, I say, neither of these ought
of Right to reflect upon the Principles or Doctrines of the Quakers, or prove
him one of their Prophets, any more then the Sons of Sceva the Jew, their
naming over them that had Evil spirits, the Name o^ Je^us and Paul, was
reflective upon the Principles and Doctrine of Paul, or proved them to be
Prophets of the Christians; who, though they were not smitten with Leprosy, or
other inward Pains, yet got they their Coats rent off their Backs, and their
Bones Beaten for their Presumption.

Thus it is manifest, their Narrative is false in respect of the Father; and no
truer in the Child, which R. J. affirms (in his Narrative) was smitten all over
with Spots, which they call Leprosy, and since Dead, as his Letter affirms;
but now (after their Cross Examination of R. A.), they are glad with Shame
enough to exchange their Lepresie for a Simple Sore; and the Dead Child is yet
Above to the shame of chose Impostors, were they not past Shame. See
Subterfuge, p. 13.

As Impious also is their Pretense, That the Child was smitten with Leprosy
for the Father's Offense (since R. A. has affirmed before two credible
Witnesses, men of honest Repution, namely, Tho. Markam and Edw. Gilliat, both
of Brigg, That the Sore (which they call Leprosy) was upon the Child some time
before the Father pronounced the Leprosy. And the Truth of this is yet further
demonstrable from R. Anderson's own word, as recited by this Author himself in
the 13th page of his Subtersuge, where (as in a vain flourish pretending to
produce some considerable Proof of the Child's Reprosie) he has these words,
But now (says he) let us hear what R. Anderson himself says, who being asked
(by their own Witnesses there named) Whether he had not a Child that was
smitten with Leprosy, after he had pronounced R. James a Leper? R. Anderson
answers (as this Author records it) That he had a Child THEN, that did break
out into Sores. Mark Reader, he does not answer directly to the Question, as
they expected he would; for then he should have said, His Child was smitten
with Leprosy afterward; but on the contrary, his Answer clearly implies what
is before proved, (viz.) That the Child had the Sore upon it even THEN, when
the Father pronounced the Leprosy. And here R. James and his Adherents have
not only Abused the World with their Lying-Wonder, but also falsely Accused the
Impartial Justice of the Most Righteous God, who never yet would edge the Teeth
of any Child, when the Father only had eaten Sower Grapes; much less would
smite an Innocent Child, for the Father's Offense, with so Sore a Punishment as
Spots, which they call Leprosy, all over, whilst yet the Father's Sin was not
Committed. Let every sober man consider what spirit these men are of.

As for the Eye and Ear-witnesses of the Asslictions of R. A. and his Family,
which the Quakors with good Reason called for, this Author proceeds in his old
mode of Subtilty; and instead of producing them, he tells us, That there are
Neighbors that say, They door member some Afflictions in R. A 's Family about
Nine Years since, but would not be brought into Question, etc. Would any man in
his Wits bring such pitiful stuff, as this in such a Concern? Who knows not,
but most Families, where Children are, at one time or another are under some
Affliction? This is just like the Author. But doubtless, if he had any
Witnesses to the Purpose, he would not fail to produce them in such a Case as
this, where the Credit of their whole Party lies at stake: therefore since he
produces none, Reason must needs conclude, he has none; for in such Cases the
Maxim hold true, De non apparentibus et non ex^^^e^^ibus eadem est Ratio.

And thus, as their Narrative is proved salfe in it self, so it was brought to
maintain all the Falsehood, before said, to wit, concerning R. A 's Leprous
Child, afflicted Family, and the Manner of their Healing; all proved Falsehoods:
And it was brought to oppose this Truth, that the holy Spirit of God is the
only true Standard to Judge and try both the Scripture, and all other spirits,
and doctrines by. And that this is substantial Truth, by the assistance of the
same holy Spirit I shall prove, when I come to state the great Controversy. In
the mean time both my self, and all unbyas'd persons may safely and modestly
conclude, that the Narrative of R. James is a Lying wonder, and that the Title
of T. R. his Book is True.

And here it well worth our serious Observation, what a near Resemblance there
is between the Anabaptists, in their precited Impostures, and pretended Cures
of R. A. and his Family, Mary Brown, etc. and the old Popish Priests and Friars
in times past, with their Consederate Impostors and Cheats, as the Boy of
Bilson, and other Female Impostors, who seemed to be possessed with strange
Devils; See the Book called, A Guide to Grand-Jury-Men, published by a Person
of Reputation -- Barnerd of Batcomb.
they acted Mad Prancks, even beyond Wonder, and Strange Frisks, above
Admiration: but then, in the height of all their Counterfeit Ecstasies, and
seeming deplorable Passions, in comes the Exorcising Priest with his, Et verbum
caro factum est, and with that as with an effectual Charm, sets all at rights
again, to the great Honor and Reputation of his declining Religion. How near a
kin the Practices of these Parties are (however different in their Principles)
I will not take upon me to determine, but leave it to their own Consideration,
that they may unfeignedly Repent, and do so no more; only showing this
Difference between them, That the Anabaptists by preaching the Flesh of Christ,
put their Mary Brown into her Stiff-necked Ecstasy, and Delphick Fit: But the
other cured their Confederates by the same Means. See the Narrative of that
Edition, where the Story of M. B. is, page 15. and the Title Page.

In the next place is considerable, what a great Noise (to no purpose) this
Author makes about the Evidences brought by the Quakers to invalidate the
Narrative, and affirms, that they are either abused, or forged; but instead of
proving this Charge, he merely trifles, and spends two whole Pages to no
purpose at all: but sure he either has not seen, or else will not see T. R.
his 2d Book, wherein there are so full and pregnant Testimonies and
Certificates, and so heartily obtained, that Envy it self cannot detect them.
And here ^sith it is no more then Justice and Duty to render unto all men their
Due, I cannot (without the merited Reproach of Odious Ingratitude and
Injustice) any longer deser the Payment of the just Debt of a Sober
Acknowledgment of that Generosity and Nobleness of Mind, which at that time
Appeared in an old Acquaintance Doctor Lincoln Parson of Panton, where R. A.
dwells, who calling the said Richard Anderson in the presence of above twenty
of his Neighbors into the open Street, there publicly examined R. A. in the
presence of his Neighbors, and before five other Witnesses concerning all
things, in the said Certificate expressed, and after a full hearing of the
whole matter, dismissed the five Witnesses with words to this Effect.

Gentlemen (say^^ he) you have heard the Examination and Testimons o^ R. A.
concerning the Business, ^e are come to enquire about, I know you will improve
it to the best Advanture of your cause, I perceive some of you are come very
^ar, therefore being unwilling you should return without good Satisfaction, I
have taken this pains with him. Anderson cannot deny, what he has here
testified before us all, but if he should recede from any thing he has said,
we shall all bear witness against him. Thus Dr. Lincoln: and I hope it will be
no offense to him, or any of his Friends, that I have thus far presumed (in
discharge of my duty) to render him his due.

Hereupon the five Witnesses above said set down twelve of the Neighbors
Names, who were there present, not as Witnesses, but as Indifferent Spectators
of the whole Transaction, to the end that if any Person seeing the Certificate,
should Question or Scruple the truth of any thing there specified, by having
recourse to any or all the persons there nominated, they might with more
Facility inform themselves of the Verity of all things there certified: this
was their real End in setting down the Names, without the least Purpose of
Injury or Offense unto any, as (its said) some do indiscretly surmize: and
because one Book may come where another does not, I conceive it not amiss to
insert the said Certificate in this place.

The Certificate.
THese are to certify all Persons, that desire to know the Truth, That upon
the Six and Twentieth Day of the Month called June, 1672. Richard Anderson of
the Town of Panton in Lincoln shire, in the Presence of above Twenty of his
Neighbors, Dr. Lincoln, Parson of the Parish, being also present, did
declare, That he never was at a Quakers Meeting, but Once in his Life time; and
that at an Assize-time at the Castle of Lincoln he did hear them declare about
a Quarter of an Hour, and says, that Ralph James was then with him; and
further says, That he never was a Quaker, nor owned by any of that People;
for, he says, they never knew him: and further did affirm, That he had no
Child Leprous; and that Child the Baptists did say was Leprous, and since Dead,
he showed us alive, and in Health: and the said R. Anderson, and his Neighhours
did unanimously affirm, That the Child had not any Deprosie, nor other
Distemper, save only some Running Sore, which was cured by Directions from one
called Ms. Bouer, so far as they understand: the said R. Anderson further
affirming, that neither himself, nor any of his Family were troubled with any
such Painful Distemper, as the Baptists say they had. These things were not
only affirmed by the Man himself, but confirmed also by diverse Inhahitants of
the Town, in the open Street in Panton in Lincolnshire.

The Five Witnesses then and there present; William Garland, Joseph Pope,
Augustine Smith, William Baldwin, Nathaniel Ball.


These Persons, whose Names are underwritten, were Inhabitants in Panton, and
present at the Examination and Answers of Richard Anderson, before Doctor
Lincoln their Parson; and they, with diverse others then present, said, If
Anderson altered from what he had there said, they should be Witnesses against
him, and assert what is above certified.

William Dorrin, Robert Minto, Henry Walch, John Emming, Robert Drink, Richard
Walesby, Richard Horton, Katherine Hall, Samuel Mathers, George Anderson, James
Hall, John Chapman.
Now it being so eminently clear, that R. Anderson never was a Quaker, neither
in Principle nor Practice; I demand, what though R. A. pronounced R. James a
leper? What though his Child had been Leprous? What though himself, his Wise
and his Family were afflicted with grevious Pains? what though Ralph James and
his Brethren had cured them? Yet what were all this to the Quakers? How is this
reflective upon them, who are wholly unconcerned in R. Anderson? For if R. A.
were any thing at all, he was most certainly an Anabaptist, whereof T. R. in
both his Books has given evident Demonstration.

Upon the whole matter it is worth remarking;

First, That the Glory of the Anabaptist Churches is in its swift Declination
toward the Western Horizon; forasmuch as they are sai to fly to Signs and Lying
Wonders to oppose the ^^th, and to countenance their false Ways and ^o^trines.

Secondly, That the Anabaptists Cause in this hot Conflict between them and the
^^akers, is now at the very utmost Crisis (...) this Champion (who is mostly
engaged, when the ^^se grows desperate) is constrained (in so eminent a Danger)
to make use of such poor Matter, such pitiful shifts as are the Contents of
this whole book now under trial, to the great Regret (doubtless) of their whole
Party, or such of them as have not yet sacrificed their Intellects to their
Envy. For it was foolishly boasted by diverse Professors, and others, That the
Book now under examination would be like Hercules 's Club, or Goliath 's Spear;
in a word, Unanswerable: And this brings me to the very Heart of the great
Controversy, Whether the Holy Spirit, or the Scriptures ought to have Priority?

The Controversy between the Anabaptists, Independents, together with other
Professors, and the People of God called (in Scorn) Quakers, concerning the
Authority of the Holy Spirit, in Judging or Discerning the Mind of God in the
Holy Scriptures, truly stated as owned by the Quakers.
WHether the first Penman of the Scriptures was Moses or Hermes, or whether
both these are not one; or whether there are not many words contained in the
Scriptures, which were not spoken by Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; whether
some words were not spoken by the grand Impostor; some by Wicked Men; some by
Wise Men, ill applied; some by Good Men, ill expressed, some by False Prophets,
and yet true; some by True Prophets, and yet false, is not the Subject of my
Argument at this time: But such Scriptures and Prophecyes as have been written
and prophesied by the Holy Men of God, as they were moved by the Spirit of God,
treating of the Mystery of God in the Redemption and Salvation of Mankind by
Jesus Christ, and the Duty of Man in his Obedience to, and Worship of the same
God, as his reasonable Service for the Gift of so great Salvation, are the
great Concerns now under our most serious Consideration.

The People of God (scornfully called Quakers) have unseignedly believed, and
often declared to the World, That the Scriptures (as above distinguished) are a
true Record and Declaration of the Love of God in the Redemption and Salvation
of Mankind by Jesus Christ; and also of the Duty of Man (as before recited) But
they also believe, and have declared to all the World, That the Carnal Mind of
Man (being at Enmity with God, and darkened by reason of Wicked Works) cannot
perceive nor discern the Mystery of God in the Scriptures declared and
testified of: For there is a Vail spread over the Hearts of all Men, even in
their Reading of the Scriptures, so as they cannot see through the Letter unto
the Mystery, either in abolishing the old Covenant, with its carnal Ordinances,
and Beggarly Elements; or in introducing the new Covenant, with its Spiritual
Worship and Services; and so being intricated and bewildered in the Letter,
cannot possibly attain unto the Knowledge of the Spiritual Mystery. Now this
most excellent Truth having by the Spirit of the Lord been opened and revealed
to the Quakers, they must of necessity be of this Faith (viz.) That without a
Measure of the holy Spirit of God received and turned unto, whereby the Vail is
removed from the Heart, no Man living can possibly discern or understand the
great Mystery of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ (which was exhibited in
Shadow under the old, but in lively Substance under the new Covenant) although
he had a Thousand Bibles in his House, and every word of them at his Fingers
ends,

So that upon this Consideration, the People of God (scornfully) called Quakers
do unanimously conclude and declare, and testify unto the whole World, That
the Holy Spirit of God is the only supreme Judge, Opener and Revealer of the
Mind and Mystery of God, and Duty of Man treated of in the Scriptures.

This, (oh ye Anabaptists and Independents, and all other Opposers of this
eternal Truth in the whole World) this is the true State of the great
Controversy betwixt the Quakers and you; and if you will join issue with the
Quakers in this Controversy, you must do it as it is here stated (at least in
Substance; for I am willing to give place to better words and order from
whomsoever) and you must lay aside all your prodigious Signs, and lying
Wonders, and pretended Cures; for these will not decide this great
Controversy, as ye vainly imagine. And you must bring forth your strong
Reasons and sound Arguments, grounded upon plain Demonstrations of Truth, and
clear Evidence of Scripture; and if the Truth be on your part, you will be able
to make it appear before wise understanding Men (whoever your Opposers are) and
you will overcome us if you have the Truth; for great is the Truth, and will
prevail; and we must and will submit unto the Truth, and to you. But if the
Truth appear on our part, we (in the Wisdom of God) shall make it manifest, and
the Truth will stand over your Heads, and we will thresh you and winnow, as the
Chaff on the Threshing-Floor; and the Wind of the Lord will blow you away, with
your Refuge of Lies, and your Nakedness will be discovered in the sight of all
Men.

Again, This Author ( Subter. page 5.) falsely suggests to his too credulous
Readers, as if the Controversy depending between the Baptists Churches, and
the People called Quakers, was touching the holy Scriptures (or to express it
more fully (says he) The Authority of the Holy Ghost, as he speaks in the
Scriptures, to try and judge the Spirits of Men, which they term the Spirit of
God: Thus he.

But whether there be not a Lying Spirit (however a Lying Tongue) in the Mouth
of this False Prophet, let the Sober-minded judge. And I here challenge him
upon his Credit and Reputation with his own People, either to produce in open
view one clear Proof, at least of any Declaration, either by word or writing,
where any of the Quakers have termed the spirits of Men the Spirit of God; or
else let his stand opon record among his own People, as a Liar and a Slanderer
to all Generations.

Again, The Deceit of this Author further appears in his recital of the
Narrative; for the first Copy renders R. James and R. A. contending, Whether
the Spirit should try the Scripture, or the Scripture the Spirit? [mark, here
is Spirit, Spirit in the singular number, as the Spirit of God is but one] but
in his recital Subter. p. 7. he renders them contending, Whether the Scriptures
were to try the Spirits, or the Spirits to try the Scriptures? Its possible
some Readers may judge me too Nice and Critical in this Observe; but I must beg
their Excuse (if it be worth begging) for I see his Design in it is, to steal a
Conceit unperceived into the Reader's Mind, that the Quakers hold, That the
Multifarious Spirits of Men were to try the Scriptures, and not the Scriptures
to try that Many-headed Monster. Let all sober People take notice of his spirit
in this.

But its worth our Consideration, what should be the bottom of this Man's
Meaning, where he so often makes use of this unusual manner of speaking (viz.)
The Authority of the spirit, as he speaks in the Scripture, to try and judge
etc. Does he mean that the Authority and Mind of the holy Spirit, respecting
the Truths recorded in the Scriptures, is the same at this day as it was in old
time when it indicted the Scriptures in the Hearts of the holy Men of God? If
so, I must confess, I cannot assign him an Opposite for (saving the change of
Dispensations and Rudiments) the blessed Truths revealed or declared of in the
Scriptures, are the same now as ever, and with the holy Spirit there is no
Variableness, neither any shadow of Turning. Or, if he intend thus (for I
would not mistake him, Judging all labor lost that is spent upon mistakes)
That seeing it is true, that the holy Spirit gave forth the Scriptures at the
first, there is unto this day, such an inseparable and intrinsecal Conjunction,
between the Authority and Mind of the Holy Spirit, and the Scriptures, that he
that has the Scriptures, has the Authority and Mind of the Holy Spirit also.
This I confess of the two seems to be nearest his meaning, by how much it is
furthest from the Truth; yet, forasmuch as I have it not as his sense, under
his own hand, (and also have cause to fear, that if it be his sense, yet when
he perceives a Quaker owns it, he will recede from it) he shall find me a fair
Opposite.

That there is an inseparable Conjunction, or Union between the Authority and
Mind of the holy Spirit, and the essential or substantial Truth declared in the
Scriptures, I grant, and confess unto it (but do not start back now, because a
Quaker confesses the Truth, as the manner of most of you is) but that therefore
he that has the Scriptures has also the Authority and Mind of the holy Spirit,
I deny. If I have hit right of his meaning (as till I know the contrary under
his Hand I believe I have) he ought to prove that part of his Position which is
denied; but seeing Truth is precious, as well as Time, and the green-Grass to
day, may be withered to morrow; I shall invert my Capacity, take the sword by
the Point, and endeavor to prove,

That a Man may have the Scriptures in his Mother Tongue and yet be utterly
without or ignorant of the Authority and Mind of the holy Spirit.

For Proof of this Position I shall not stir one Foot from my Opposite, who (in
p. 7. of his Subterfuge now under search) tells us, That after R. Anderson had
made his Confession of the Anabaptists Faith in that Cardinal Point of
Water Baptism, he met with the Quakers, who told him (as he said) that these
things, i. e. Water Baptism was low. Now here my Opposite interposes his own
Faith and Judgment in the Case, and is not afraid to tell the Quakers, and the
whole Nation, That the Water Baptism is the Way of Life above to the Wise, so
to procure their more reverend esteem of it; and because he perceived such a
bold Averment stood need of Scripture-Authority to back it, he cites Prove.
15.24. the words run thus -- The Way of Life is above to the Wise, to avoid
from Hell beneath. Now let the Spiritual Man judge in this case; Is
Water Baptism (to take it at the best) the Way of Life? Did the holy Spirit in
the Wise Man mean so? Can Water Baptism deliver or save from Hell? Is that the
Authority or Mind of the holy Spirit in that Scripture? Let the Spiritual Man
judge.

I am the Way, says Christ; Water Baptism is the Way, says this Author. I was
manifest to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to save from Death and Hell,
says Christ; Water Baptism is the Way on high to avoid from Hell beneath,
says my Opposite, Now whose Testimony will ye receive? Let the sober Christian
judge, whither these Anabaptists are going The parallel Scriptures with this
are, Phil. 3.20. and Col. 3.1. both which direct us to set our Assections on
things above, where Christ is at the Right Hand of God our Savior.

Hence (of necessity) will follow these Conclusions:

First, Though this Author has the Scriptures, yet he is ignorant of the
Authority and Mind of the Holy Spirit.

Secondly, Through Ignorance of the Authority and Mind of the Holy Spirit, he
has erred from the Truth, and fairly convict himself, 1. Of a most gross
Idolatry, as has been fully manifest. 2. Of a Ridiculous Solecism, in terming
Submersion or Plunging under Water, a Way on high. From his Idolatry nothing
but a Re-baptization in the Tears of Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ can redeem him. But for his Solecism (that Offense being
rather against Grammar, then Scripture) if the intelligent Reader will please
but to indulge him with a favorable Aspect, the Quakers will pass it by.


The Third and Last Conclusion is clearly this, as before asserted; That
without a Measure of the holy Spirit of God, received and turned unto, whereby
the Vail is ^ent from the Heart, no Man living can understand or discern the
Authority and Mind of the holy Spirit, as he spoke in old time by his Prophets
of the great Mystery now revealed, to wit, Christ in you the Hope of Glory.

And this gives a full and undeniable Probation unto that grand Position, the
Ground and Original of the Anabaptists great Controversy with the Quakers;

That the holy Spirit of God is the only Supreme Judge, Discerner and Revealer
of the Mind and Mystery of God, and of the Duty of Man required in the
Scriptures.

Now if any Man object against this, and say, I have been too rash and hasty to
conclude thus, only upon one Man's Error and Mistake, and that many others may
notwithstanding be more clear. I answer, Be it far from me to conclude all
under this Man's Error and Idolatry; nay, I know there are many of the People
of the Lord, who by the Illumination of his good Spirit are enabled to discern
in measure, what his Mind and Will is; but if you do but impartially consider
the Ground and Cause of this Man's Error and Idolatry; you may perceive the
Argument will hold from Particulars to Generals, as thus; If one Man be blind
for want of his Eyes, then ten thousand Men, wanting their Eyes, must be blind
also. If this Author has committed a gross Idolatry, for want of the Light of
the holy Spirit, then may a whole Nation, wanting the Guidance of the holy
Spirit, be Idolaters also. Here you see the Ground and Cause of Blindness and
Idolatry is, their Eyes not being opened by the holy Spirit to understand the
Scriptures: so the Argument holds true throughout all, and the aforesaid
Position is clearly proved, as before was promised.

And now, oh ye Anabaptists and Independents, who affirm, That the Scriptures
are to try and judge of the holy Spirit; come let me expostulate with you a
little; What Assurance can you give the Quakers, or what Grounds or
Encouragements to believe, in case the Judicial Power were in your Hands, that
in your Trial of the holy Spirit by the Scriptures, as he appears in the
Quakers, or in whomsoever, your proceedings will be more equal, just and clear,
and your selves more free from Mistakes of him then the professing Jews were,
when by the same Rule they would try the same holy Spirit, as it appeared (in
an immeasurable Measure) in Jesus of Nazareth? Show us (I pray you) wherein you
are better, wiser, juster, clearer in your Principles and Judgments, then they?
Do you account your selves the Church of God? So did they. Do you say you have
his Commandments and Ordinances? So said they. Have you Anabaptists such a high
Esteem of your Baptism, as to account it the Way of Life, to avoid from Hell
beneath? The like Esteem had they of their Fleshly Circumcision, as to teach,
that without it Men could not be saved. Have you the Scriptures, and do you
reckon them a Competent Judge of the Spirit of God? So had they, and in them
thought they had Eternal Life; and yet for all this, they knew not the Messiah,
of whom the Scriptures testified; but having most wickedly Betrayed,
Apprehended and Arraigned him before the Roman Tribunal, methinks I hear the
Deputy and them thus implead each other in the Case of the true Messiah.

Pilate, What Accusation bring ye against this Man?


Jews, If he were not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee.


Pilate, Deceit lurks in generals; what Evil has he done?


Jews, He perverts the Nation; forbids to pay Tribute to Caesar; saying, himself
is Christ a King -- In Design (doutbless) to usurp the Empire, and assume
Cesar's Revenue.


Pilate, Away, away for Shame -- What, nothing but Lies and Slanders? I now
perceive your Envy. I find no Fault in him at all -- ^^le release him.


Jews, Crucify him, crucify him.


Pilate, Why, what Evil has he done?


Jews, He is a Blasphemer -- A horrible Blasphemer, and he ought to dye for it.


Pilate, Take ye him then, and Crucify him; for I find no Fault in him.


Jews, By our Law he should be Stoned to Death, but ye Romans have taken away
that Power; it is not lawful for us to put any man to Death.


Pilate, Say then what is his Blasphemy?


Jews, He is but a Carpenter's Son, we know his Pedigree; and yet he made
himself the Son of God, and the Savior of the World, and that is horrid
Blasphemy.


Pilate, Son of God! my Heart Trembles at that word, ye obdurate Wretches; how
appears it that he ought to dye for this?


Jews, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, because he made himself
the Son of God.


Pilate, Produce your Law, that I may see it.


Jews, It is in the four and twentieth Chapter of Leviticus, and the sixteenth
Verse.


Pilate, Read it verbatim.


Jews, And he that Blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall surely be put to
Death; all the Congregation shall Stone him to Death, as well the Stranger, as
he that is born in the Land; when he Blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, let him
be Slain.


And now ye Anabaptists and Independents, and thou Author of the Subterfuge, be
ingenuous, and tell the Quakers and the whole Nation truly, Whether ye do
believe, that the Authority of the holy Spirit, as he speaks in this precited
Scripture, did really intend the Murder of the Messiah as a Blasphemer, yea, or
nay? if nay (as most certainly nay) then tell us, How it came to pass the Jews
should so grossly mistake and misapply it? and show unto us, and to all the
World, if you can, what they wanted which might show them the true Mind of the
Lord in that place, and in all other Prophesies which spoke of the Messiah;
seeing you cannot deny, but they had the Scripture (and according to your
deceitful way of wording it the Authority of the holy Spirit, as he speaks in
the Scriptures) not only read, but expounded unto them every Sabbath Day.

If the Jews mistake arose from their Ignorance of the Authority and Mind of
the holy Spirit as he spoke forth the Scriptures, as sure enough it did, which
it could not have done had they receiv d the Spirit then, behold, the Jews also
are found misunderstanding the Scriptures for want of the holy Spirit, as well
as my Opposite was, and here is one clear proof more (come unlooked for) of my
former position (viz.) That a Man, nay a whole Nation of Men may have the
Scriptures in his or their Mother Tongue, and yet be utterly ignorant of the
Authority and Mind of the holy Spirit. And therefore the matter standing thus,
ye are hereby required and obliged to produce some satisfactory and convincing
Reason, why the Quakers should expect more equal proceeding at your hands in
the Judgment aforesaid, in case you had the civil Power, then our Lord Jesus
Christ found at the Hands of the Jews, seeing you have no more then they had
(to wit, the Letter of the Scriptures) to judge withal; and that you have no
more then they, appears in this, that you deny the holy Spirit as he appears in
his Servants to be the Revealer of the Scriptures and supreme judge of the
Spirits and Doctrines of Men: and if ye can produce no such convincing Reason
as may give the Quakers reasonable acquiescence in this Concern, forasmuch as
they are verily persuaded that although you have the Scriptures, you want the
Guidance of the holy Spirit truly to discern them, it lies upon you as a Work
of absolute necessity (ye Anabaptists, and thou Author of this Subterfuge) to
exhibit unto the Quakers in the Sight of the whole Nation, some pregnant Proof,
and infallible Demonstration, that you are not deceitful Sophisters and cunning
Jugglers in your doubtful and ambiguous Expressions, and Amphibologies
dispersed in sundry places of your Books, and particularly in that called the
Subterfuge, as before is noted, about the Scriptures, the Spirits of Men, and
the holy Spirit, as he speaks in the Scriptures, etc. which is corrupt and
uncertain Language, as you use it; and it is apparent you do it not only of
Ignorance, but Wilfulness; and your Deceits therein are made manifest unto all.
You are also obliged and required to prove (if you can) positively and
plainly, to the Satisfaction of all Men that may doubt thereof, that all Men
whosoever, that have the Scriptures, have also the Authority of the Holy
Spirit, as he speaks in them: And show us also how it comes to pass, that
Men mistake them notwithstanding: And you must also prove, That the Scriptures
are indeed a Competent Judge of the Holy Spirit, as he appears in his
Servants: And you must invalidate all, whatsoever is here written, and proved
to the contrary. And if you shall fail to do all this by clear Proofs, and
evident Demonstrations of Truth (for Trifling and Impertinency will not serve
your turn, nor Lies shall no longer be your Refuge) then will your Vizards be
taken off your Faces, and your Refuge of Lies will be swept away; and in the
sight of the Quakers (whom you Despise) and of the whole Nation, you will
appear (to your great Shame and Contempt) to be what indeed you are.

For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their Rulers, because they knew him not,
nor yet the Voices of the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath Day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning of him, Acts 13.27.
A few Queries to Ralph James, and the Author of the Subterfuge Overturned,
etc. by them to be Answered in Truth and Plainness.
I. WHether is our Lord Jesus Christ (whom the Scriptures testify to be the
Light and Salvation of God to the Ends of the Earth) the only true Way of Life
on high to avoid from Hell beneath, yea, or nay? If yea, then whether to affirm
Water Baptism to be the Way of Life on high, to avoid from Hell beneath, be not
abominable Idolatry at least, if not Blasphemy?

II. Supposing Water Baptism were the Appointment of God (as other things of
like signification in former Dispensations have been) yet if the Ministers
thereof should Idolatrously intrude it into the Place and Office of Christ our
Savior; that is, affirm it to be the Way of Life, to avoid from Hell beneath;
whether such Idolatrous intrusion be not as signal a Pollution of the said
Ordinance of Water Baptism, as the like Abuse of the Ordinances of God Isa. 1.
did pollute, and render them abominable unto the Lord? If yea, then whether it
be not high time for all and every Man concerned therein to arise, and depart
thence, as not being their Rest, it being so filthily polluted?

III. Seeing the Latin Verb, baptizo, is synonimous with the Greek (...), which
signifies to dip or plunge; whether T. R. his calling your Water Baptism
dipping in Water, or your calling it the Way of Life on high to avoid from Hell
beneath, be the greater Abuse of the Way of the Lord, and therein of God
himself? Answer plainly.

IV. Seeing it appears by the Scriptures, that the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
Christ wrought their Miracles, Acts. 3.6.
and cured Diseases by the Name of Jesus of Nazareth; then, Whether the Sons of
Sceva, their pretending to do the like Miracles by the same Name, does prove
them to speak the very Language, and Spirit of the Apostles, yea, or nay? If
nay, (as most certainly nay) then with what Reason or Conscience can thou
affirm, that R. Anderson in exhorting R. James to turn to the Light within,
spoke the very Language and Spirit of the Quakers? this Query is to the Author
of the Subterfuge, etc. that he may clear himself from Deceit, if he can.

V. Whether the Testimony which that Pythoness gave unto the Persons and
Doctrine of the Apostle Paul and Sylas, is not given as fully, Acts 16.
and at as high a Rate, as any Testimony ye can pretend R. Anderson gave to the
Persons or Doctrine of the Quakers? And whether in such Testimony she appeared
as a Proselite of the Christian Faith, and as a Prophetess of the Christians,
yea, or nay? if nay, then show unto the Quakers, and the whole Nation, if you
can, why R. Anderson his testifying for the Persons and Way of the Quakers (as
ye pretend he did, but prove it not) should prove him a Quaker; or appearing as
one of their Prophets? he being (by your own Confession) at that Time possessed
with a Spirit of Delusion, as she was then with a Spirit of Divination.

VI. Seeing R. James avers in his Narrative, That R. Anderson pronounced him a
Leper from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, and that the same
Judgment (as he said) was fallen upon one of his Children: Whether you are not
very deceitful, and unworthy Persons, thus to abuse the Quakers, and the whole
Nation, with a Counterfeit and ^orged Story of such a horrid Leprosy, since in
exchange thereof you are (now at last) glad to accept of a Simple Sore? And if
ye think to avoid the Horror of your Guilt and Shame with this Evasion, He said
so, he said so, (charging the poor Man your own Member with a Lie) Then Whither
does not this evidence to the whole Nation your implacable Envy, and Malice
against an Innocent People, that durst (with so great Confidence) attempt to
asperse and slander them, only upon the false and single say so, of such a
Person as even your selves then judged to be a false Prophet, and possessed
with a Spirit of Delusion? And if your inveterate Envy and Malice herein be
manifest to the Nation, as doubtless it is, then let the Nation and the whole
World judge, whether R. James be not infected with a more dangerous Leprosy
then ever Mirjam was, and like to continue so (without Repentance) until his
Dying Day.

VII. It being evident to the Nation that R. Anderson was no Quaker, his Child
not leprous, his Wife and Family not so diseased, as you pretended, nor your
Church such Workers of Miracles, as you boasted; but your whole pretense a mere
malicious Juggle and Imposture, which yet you pretend to be an Eminent Hand of
God! Such a Witness of God, little less then a Miracle, tending to the Honor
of God, Exaltation of his Ways, and Appointments, Establishments of his
People, Decision of the great Controversy, Strength to the weak Hands, and
feeble Knees of his poor People, etc. and then to conclude thus, And the Lord
was mercifully pleased to hear our poor Prayers for them, and to restore them,
etc. with such like seeming devout Words wherewith your Letters and Narrative
are repleat: All this considered, its queried, whether the Quakers, and the
whole Nation, may not (without the least Breach of Charity) safely conclude,
that ye Anabaptists and Independents, who have been either Actors, Contrivers,
Asserters of, or Witnesses to this Mischievous piece of Pageantry, are the most
notorious Dissemblers with God and the World, and the very'st Hypocrites that
ever our Lord Jesus Christ pronounced Woe against? Quit your selves if you can.

VIII. Whether they that make no Conscience to be Jugglers, Liars, Hypocrites,
proud Boasters, and the like; or they that discover, detect and affirm them to
be such, are the great Offenders?

IX. Whether they that call and are called Rabbi, Rabbi, do not break that
express Command of Christ, Mat. 23.8, 10. yea, or nay? If nay, then show, when
that Precept was abrogated? and if yea, then whether are not they that call,
and are called, Mr. Ralph James, Mr. Ben. Morley, Mr. John Green, etc. Breakers
of that plain Command, and being guilty of that, are guilty of all,
notwithstanding their Water Baptism?

Let these Queries be answered plainly, and in sound words; and think not to
solve one Query by propounding another.

R. R.

Another Postscript TO RALPH JAMES; And those which have taken part with him,
by JOHN WHITEHEAD.
AS in a Postscript annexed to the Answer to your Narrative, of the Eminent
Hand of God that besel a Quaker and his Family, called Richard Anderson, at the
Town of Panton in Lincolnshire, I queried, and that upon just Grounds, Why thou
and thy Brethren had conspired together, to utter a Slander and Reproach
against the People of God called Quakers, in affirming Richard Anderson to be
one of them? And again, in a Book entitled, The Quakers Subterfuge or Evasion
Overturned; ye have given me just Ground to say, How long will you make Lies,
your Refuge, and under Falsehood seek to cover your Selves? For instead of
Answering what was Righteously and Reasonably propounded to you, which ye
should have done, if ye would have approved your selves Innocent Men, ye have
utterred more deceitful and pernicious Slanders against me, as is manisest in
your Anti-queries to me, whilst ye have utterly declined proving your former,
not being able to mention one of the People of God called Quakers, that ever
owned Richard Anderson, nor any of their Meetings, to which he did belong; nor
who of them he did ever join with in the Worship of God; nor any thing in
Proof, That his Child was smitten with Leprosy, nor himself and Family with a
grievous Malady, saving his own word, whom you conclude was a false Prophet,
and deluded Creature, both subject to speak and believe Lies. And therefore
your Narrative and ye are justly fallen under Censure, having no better
Foundation whereon to stand, then the Testimony of a Simple Deluded Man, whom
ye have manifest to be a Lying Prophet; which Testimony ye have by cross
Examination, if not Subornation obtained; and therefore not any can give credit
to it, but such as are willing to believe a thing, because a Lying Ignorant Man
says it, who has unsaid it again before many Witnesses, as before is
manifest: And therefore I shall not further insist upon it, but proceed to
answer your Anti-Queries. In the first of which ye affirm, that I hold, That
the Gospel was never Preached in England, till George Fox preached it; and then
queries, Whether I did not assert it? thereby manifesting your Rashness and
Injustice, who first Condemn, and then make Enquiry; not being able to prove,
what ye have charged me with: For sure I am, That I never thought, that George
Fox was the first that ever preached the Gospel in England; and therefore have
been far from affirming it; for there have been Openings and Breakings forth of
the Gospel, Light and Power in diverse Ages, in England, in a Despised Suffering
Remnant, though not in that Fullness a^ in our Age. I am also sensible ever
since I knew God, or was acquainted with him, how the Glorious Gospel was
preached to, or in every Creature which is under Heaven, Col. 1.23. and its own
Light shined in Men's Hearts (as the Apostles testified) in their days, about
which time there were also Witnesses of that Glorious Gospel came to preach it
in this Island (according to History) who turned People from Darkness to Light,
as we do, and from Satan's power to the Power of God; in which Power a Remnant
have been preserved through Ages and Generations, though many who have got the
Form have denied the Power, and reproached and perfecuted those, which have
been in the Power, Light and Life, which the Apostles and primitive Christians
were in. From which Power, Light and Life there has been an Apostasy, so that
Darkness has covered the Earth, and gross Darkness has bin upon the generallity
of People, who have been estranged from the Life of the Prophets, and Apostles,
and primitive Christians and Martyrs of Jesus: since which Apostasy, or Falling
away from the Life, which the Witnesses and Martyrs of Jesus were in, George
Fox was the first stable Minister of the true Light in this Age, that God
raised up in his Power to turn People from Darkness to the True Light, and from
Satan's power to God; unto which he first, and many more since in these latter
days have given witness, That he lights every Man that comes into the
World, that all through him might believe, and receive the Remission of Sins.
And in this Gospel I have Labored, and not in vain, and of it am not ashamed;
for it is the Power of God to Salvation in all them that believe: Though unto
those that are Disobedient, it is a Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of Offense.
And it is no marvel that those, which stumble at the Word, which is nigh in
their Hearts, and are unsensible of its Power and Virtue, stumble at the
Testimony, which is given of it by those, which have felt and handled it, and
do know it is the same Glorious Gospel, which in the Apostles days shined in
their Hearts, and gave them the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ: and this Treasure they had, and we have in Earthen Vessels, that
the Excellency of the Power may be of God, to whom be the Praise forever, 2
Cor. 4.6, 7.

Secondly, thou inquire, whether he that holds, that nothing which was mortal
was called Christ, does not thereby deny the Death of Christ: thereby
intimating that I asserted, That nothing which was Mortal was called Christ.
But what Occasion, thou Thomas Grantham (who was then my Opposite) and I am
persuaded, Opposite to Truth it self) gave me to speak Words to that Purpose,
with other Words, that did declare my Sense of them, thou say nothing, nor
have thou been so ingenuous as to declare, what I writ many Years ago to
William Smith of Elshem to be communicated to thee and thy Brethren, wherein
the Truth of what I said in that Case, and also the other, whereupon thou
groundest thy third Query concerning Christ's having no Body of Flesh (as thou
imaginest) besides his Church is made apparent; and therefore I shall here
insert the substance of it, seeing it stands upon thy Head unanswered; so that
the intelligent Reader may understand, that he who says, that I told him,
nothing which was mortal was called Christ, has both wronged me and the Truth
it self, by relating some of my Words out of that Order and Sense wherein they
were spoken, as also in that he has left out and not declared the rest of my
Words, which were spoken at the same Time, whereby the true Sense of those
Words which he relates might and may be understood, and therein he has showed,
First, That his Mind is so prejudiced and by assed against us, that he would
for advantage, rather wilfully mistake our Principles, then have a right
Understanding of them: And he has further showed his Dishonesty and Malice, in
that he would misinform others, and prejudice them against the Truth it self,
by wresting my Words out of the Sense wherein they were spoken: Wherefore that
you may rightly understand this case, I declare, that the Words which were
spoken by me, were spoken in an Exclusive Sense, and that upon the Occasion of
T. G's. Magnifying the Body of Christ equal with or above him for whom the Body
was prepared: whereupon I still say, that the Christ or Son of God is not made
up of that which is or was mortal, and that nothing which was mortal, was
(properly or strictly) called Christ; and he neither understood my Words right,
nor would admit me to explain them, till he had rashly condemned them as
Heresy. Which notwithstanding I still look upon the Words to be very true
Words in that Sense that they were spoken in; for I say still, that the Body of
Christ, which was mortal (excluding the Soul and Spirit) was not, nor could
properly be called Christ, or Man anointed, because that the Immortal Soul and
Spirit of man are the more Noble part of Man, and therefore may Justly
challenge the Prerogative to denominate; for without Soul and Spirit a mortal
Body neither is, nor can truly be termed Man: no more can the mortal Body of
Christ without the Soul, Spirit and Life of Christ, which is Immortal, be
termed Christ: which if you do but understand and mark well, that although I
said, nothing which was mortal, was called Christ, but that Christ had once a
mortal Body, which dyed upon the Cross: then may ye more easily judge, whether
it be possible forem or any other, which Thomas Grantham has a Mind to
slander, to escape the Scourge of his Tongue, since he is so blindly rash, upon
no better Grounds to charge me both with grevious Heresy and denying the Body
of Christ; and that for no other Reason, but because I distinguish betwixt
Christ, and the Body of Christ, which was prepared for him to do his Fathers
Will in, Heb. 10.

And the Eternal Word or Son of God, which was glorified with the Father before
the World began, John 17. Who took upon him the Form of a Servant, and in that
prepared Body did his Fathers Will, is more noble both in Glory and Dignity,
then either the Soul, Spirit or Body of Man, in as much as by and for him Man
was made, and by him only Redeemed and Restored.

Therefore may and ought he ( who was and is that true Light, that lights
every Man that comes into the World, Joh. 1.9.) to be held forth and preached
as the only Lord and Savior of Mankind: and the Manhood which through Mercy
to us was taken into Union with this Eternal Power and Godhead, should not be
divided from, nor cried up in Opposition to the Eternal Word or Son of God, as
they who only know Christ after the Flesh, are too subject to do. And of them
is he who in his 3d Query renders me unfit to preach the Resurrection,
Ascension, and second Coming of Christ, because I could not own, that he has
such a Body, as he had imagined; but did testify of and have showed unto
People that Eternal Life, which was with the Father, as the Apostles did 1 John
1.1, 2. by and in which Life Mortality was swallowed up, after Christ had
finished what the Father gave him to do on Earth. Then he who came down from
Heaven to bring Man to God, ascended into Heaven to his Father, and our Father,
at whose right Hand, having accomplished his Work, he sits down, and is
glorified with that Glory which he had with the Father before the World began
in a Body suitable to his Spirit, consisting of heavenly Flesh and Bone; of
which Body neither T.G. the Author of these Queries, nor Natural Philosophers
in their Wisdom do comprehend the Dimensions; and therefore would limit him in
some thing; who ascended, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4.10. and is not
contained in any Created Being, so as to be absent from other created Beings,
Ep. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. and much less is he absent from his faithful Disciples,
and Followers, who whilst on Earth were and are made to sit together in
Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. And that Christ has such a
Celestial Body, as I have here described, I never denied neither at Spilsby,
Sleeford, nor elsewhere, as Thomas Grantham, with whom I have publicly
Disputed in those Places, slanderously reports I did: but I am persuaded that
he cannot bring one of these several Hundreds of People, that heard us, which
is not biased to his Judgment, or influenced by him, that will say, I denied
Christ to have now any Body besides his Church: though I have several times
denied T. G's Assertion, wherein he has affirmed, That Christ has now a Body
of Flesh and Bones circumscript, or limited in that Heaven which is above, and
out of every Man on Earth. And perceiving that he stood conceited in his
Fleshly Apprehension and Knowledge, wherein he had conceived the Lord of Glory
to be like unto Corruptible Man, I asked him, Since be denied Christ to be in
and with Believers whilst upon Earth, where that Body was he spoke on, and how
big, or what a one it was? To which he answered in his haste, That it was such
a one as his, consisting of Flesh and Bones and in yonder Heaven, which is
above, pointing toward the Clouds: to which I replied, Nay thy Flesh is
sinful, and corruptible, and Rotteness shall enter into thy Bones; neither can
thy Body come in the doors being shut, nor appear in another Form, as Christ
did, whereupon he mended his Words, and did except Sin and Corruption; but
still stood in that which discerns not the Lords Body, but would limit it to a
particular Place, and out of every Man on Earth, showing his Ignorance both of
the Kingdom of God which is within, and of Christ within, who is not a Spirit
without a Body as Believers do experience, who were and are true Members of his
Heavenly Body of his Flesh and of his Bones, Ep. 5.30. and these do eat Christ's
Flesh, and drink his Blood, and dwell in Christ, and Christ in them. John. 6.
and the Spirit and Body of Christ is not divided; but wheresoever the Spirit
and Life of Christ is, it is in the Body of Christ; and they which believe,
have Eternal Life abiding in them, whereby they are quickened, and joined to the
Heavenly Body of Christ, and also supplied with Nourishment in him, who is the
Head of the Body, the Fullness of him that fills all in all.

But notwithstanding I have freely declared that, which was and is my faith
concerning the Body of Christ, I perceive that T. G. has very uncharitably
resolved (because he cannot discern the Lord s Body, of which we speak) to
believe, That I own no Body of Christ, but the Church; and what ever I say to
the contrary, he would have to be obscured, or else he might have had the
honesty to have printed this Answer to his Second and Third Queries with the
Queries thmselves: for it has been in the Hands of him, or his brethren above
seven Years. Wherefore I shall now appeal to God and spiritually minded men to
judge, Whether I, who did, and do confess Christ's Glorious heavenly Body, or
he who cannot discern it; but hold forth a Circumscript human Body of Flesh and
Bones out of every believer, whilst on Earth, we are Worthy to be rendered as
denyers of the Body of Christ, and unfit to preach the Resurrection, Ascension
and Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.

4. Query. Whether by the Words people of God thou meanest the Church of Christ
in visible profession of the Gospel according to the pattern of the Churches in
the Apostles Days?

Answ. by the words People of God I mean such, as are in the new Covenant of
Light, in whose Heart God has written his Laws, and in whose inward Parts he
has put his Fear, who know and believe Christ in them, and do hear his Voice,
and follow him as their Head and Leader, as did the true Churches in the
Apostles Days; but I do not believe every gathering of people, that are got
into an outward or visible Profession of the Scriptures, and in Imitation have
gotten into some outward things, which the true Church in the Apostles Days
practiced, are the People of God. because I am sensible, such as are Aliens in
their minds from the Life of God, which the Apostles and primitive Christians
were in, may get their Words, and imitate them in Outward Forms, and Practices,
whilst they deny the Power of Godliness, which they lived in.

5th Query. Whether the People called Quakers are gathered, constituted and
governed in Church-Capacity, according to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles?

Answ. Yea: for we are gathered in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
present with us, as he promised to be always to the end of the World; and we
are governed by him, who is given to be the Head over all Things, to the
Church, of which we are Members, and have Elders ordained in every Country, who
take the Oversight of the Flock of God not by Constraint, but willngly, and in
the Power of the Lord Jesus receives True Believers, and rejects Heretics, who
have refused Admonition, according to the Apostle's Doctrine, who was an able
Minister, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. And notwithstanding Christ's
bidding the other Apostles before his Ascension, Go, Teach and Baptize all
Nations, said: He was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; and how
ye, who are so much for Water Baptism, come to take your selves concerned to
Baptize with Water by Virtue of that Commission given before Christ's
Ascension, ye may do well to manifest; since the Apostle Paul did not so take
himself concerned in it: but according to that Commission, which he received
from the Lord, who appeared unto him, delivering him from the People, and the
Gentiles, he labored to open the blind Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from Satan's power to God, Acts 16, 17, 18. as we do according to
the Call and Precepts given us of the Lord, who is also manifest in us, by whom
we are taught not to run, because others were sent; nor to act without Power
from on High: but to go as we are led and commanded by the Lord, and act in the
Motion of his Power, whereby we have been made a Sweet Savor to God in them
that believe, and in them that perish; though in one the Savor of Life unto
Life, and in the other the Savor of Death unto Death: and God has so blessed
our Labor, that many Thousands are brought to the Knowledge of the Son of God,
and to Unity in the Faith, which gives Victory over the World, wherein they are
growing to a perfect Man, and to the Measure, Fullness and Stature of Christ:
Though we thank God, we have Baptized none of them in Water, but have
instructed them to the blessed Appearing of the Lord. Jesus Christ, who
Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, having his Fan in his Hand,
thoroughly to purge the Floor; and those which have waited for the Appearing of
the Lord, and received him to be their Leader, Way and Baptizer, are baptized
with one Spirit into that one Body which is his Church, of which they are
Living Members, fitly joined together by Christ, who is their Head, who gives
them Life, and sills them with the Virtue of his Love, wherein they Edisie one
another. So Christ is the Door into the Sheep-sold, whereat all that are
accepted by him, do enter. And this way of gathering, constituting and
governing the Church is according to the Doctrine of Christ, his Evangelists
and Apostles, as appears at large in their Writings.

And although thou in thy 6th Query say, doubtless it is not, because we are
not gathered according to thy Apprehension of some particular Verses quoted by
thee. I must tell thee, thou therein take that granted, which we never gave
thee; and therefore we need show no Authority for the Abrogating that Order of
Gathering, Constituting and Governing the Church of Christ, which was in the
Apostles days; since our Practice does more establish it in the Substantial
Part, then yours, who have visible Doors whereat to enter, as your
Water Baptism instead of Christ's Baptism, and other Ways whereat to climb up
like Thieves and Robbers, Joh. 1. which steal the Saints words, and imitate
their Practices, as in all Ages False Prophets have imitated the True, and
False Worshippers have imitated the True Worshippers, as ye do; thinking
because Christ said before his Ascension, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit; therefore Thomas Grantham and
Ralph James must go Teach and Baptize in Water, though they have neither seen
the Lord Jesus Christ, nor heard him speak. Nor will they believe in the holy
Spirit, as the principal Guide, but have the Boldness to try its Doctrine or
Teaching in these days by their own understanding of the Scriptures, which
ever leads men to speak Evil of, and condemn those things, which they cannot
understand to be according to Scriptures, though they be never so consonant to
the Mind of the Spirit, which they received which gave forth the Scriptures:
And therefore, laying aside all vain Jangling, we would persuade you, and all
men, to learn of Christ Jesus, the Second Man, that is a Quickening Spirit, by
whom ye are reproved, when ye do Evil, that ye may know his Mind in your
selves, and do it, and then ye may better understand it, as declared by others.

Although thy Seventh Anti-Query is in part answered by what is before written,
yet I shall now manifest, That Richard Anderson neither was conversant with us,
nor received our Doctrine, nor acted by that Spirit which guides us, as in that
Query thou affirmest: for if he had been conversant with us, some of us at
least should have known him; but that we never did, witness this Certificate
from a Quarterly Meeting at Lincoln, who certainly know all that are or have
been of us.

From a General Meeting of the People of God called Quakers in the County of
Lincoln, the 26th Day of the 4th Month, 1672.
WHereas a Report is gone out of this County from Ralph James, and other
Persons, which have always had a Prejudice against the Truth, and People of
God called Quakers; by which Report the Nation is Abused, and those which are
overcredulous, made to believe a Lie, (viz.) That Richard Anderson of Panton
was a Quaker. These are therefore to certify, that the said Richard Anderson
did never frequent any of our Meetings, nor did he ever join with us in
Worship, nor was he ever owned by us, nor any of us; so that they have not any
just Ground to call him a Quaker. And this Testimony we give forth to preserve
the Simple-hearted from being prejudiced against Truth, and from believing a
Lie.

Given forth at a Quarterly Meeting held at Lincoln, where some Friends from
each Meeting in the County were present. William Garland, Abraham Morice,
William Everatt, Joseph Richardson, Augustine Smith, John Winklep, Samuel
Hobman, John Richardson, Tho. Summers, Rich. Baxter, John Walcot, Tho. Sowter,
John Mills, Joseph Pope, Thomas Wresle, William Ashby, William Hargate, James
Brown, William Bowman, Robert Brown, Tho. Everatt, Rich. Parnell, Joseph
Wilson.


And if Richard Anderson had received our Doctrine, he had been Still and Quiet
in the Light of God, till his Heart had been cleansed from Ignorance, Pride and
Wickedness; and that would have preserved him from that Shame and Dishonor,
which his own Folly and Madness, and your Subtilty has brought him to. And if
he had been led by the same Spirit, that leads us, it would not have let him
use his Tongue to say, The Lord says, when the Lord had not spoken to him, but
his own Imaginations in a groundless Imitation of the Scriptures, which
Imaginations he followed; and therefore both the Spirit and Scriptures, and we,
who are led thereby, are clear from all the Evil he has done, and it lies at
his and your Doors, amongst whom he both before, then, and after walked; for he
had not any Demonstrable Character of being a Quaker (as in Reproach they were
first called) nor may any be justly termed so, but those that fear God, and
tremble at his Word, who have believed in the True Light, and live in God's
Power, being exercised in Obedience to his Law written in the Heart, and in
Self-denial taking up the daily Cross to their own Wills and Wisdom, and in
Silence to that waits on God, that they may worship in Spirit, and walk after
the Spirit of God, by which they are Baptized into the Body of Christ, which is
his Church, who receives them as living Members, having the Savor of that
Life, which the Spirit has given them. And no other way do we take. Members
into the Church, but are constant in this, as is visible to those that are
conversant with us, and have the immortal Eye opened. But we shut not our Doors
to hinder any from coming into our Congregations to observe our Order and hear
our Testimony: Yet as the Apostle said concerning a Jew, I say concerning a
Quaker, He is not one, that is one Outwardly in Show only; but he is one, that
is one Inwardly, whose Baptism is that of the Spirit, and whose Praise is not
of Men, but of God. But that Richard Anderson was neither one Outwardly nor
Inwardly, is sufficiently made manifest by what has been already said.

In a Postscript writ by this Author he seems to own the Light within, but has
sufficiently showed his Ignorance of that True Light, which lights every Man
that comes into the World; as also of its Power and Efficacy, putting Darkness
instead of Light, and then tells of several things that are wholly beyond the
Common Principle of Light, Understanding or Judgment of Man; which Light being
of Man, is indeed Darkness since the Fall, and therefore the things of God
belonging to Man's Eternal Peace, are all so far beyond it, that the Natural
Man with his own Light, Understanding or Judgment that he has of himself as a
Man, perceives them not. And therefore we diswade Men from following their own
Spirit, Understanding or Judgment, and persuade them to receive and follow
Christ Jesus that True Light, which lights every man that comes into the
World, that he may give them an Understanding that is True, and a Judgment that
is Sound: And beyond him, that was and is the True Light, that lights every
man that comes into the World, there is nothing; for by him was All Things
made; and whatsoever has been known of God to Men, he has manifested or
revealed it, though at sundry Times and in diverse Manners. And though Men have
the Scriptures, which declare, what was revealed to Men by that true Light, and
an Understanding or Judgment which is Natural; yet thereby there is not any,
which truly know God, or what he requires of them, nor ever can they know him,
till they turn to that true Light, which shines in their Hearts, and is not of
Man, but of God; who in his own Light, or Son, that lights every Man that
comes into the World, manifests and reveals himself, and his Will and Mind to
Man, being wholly sufficient, and also present to teach man in this Age, what
belongs to their eternal Peace, as he was in Ages past; and also to give unto
men positive Laws and Directions, how they must Worship and Serve him; being no
more bound from altering or abolishing outward and shaddowy things at first
practiced by some in the Church since the Coming of Chist, then he was from
altering Circumcision, Sacrifices and other Jewish Orders and Observances,
which Moses, and some of the Prophets had said should continue sorever, or
throughout their Generations; but may lay aside, and draw his People from
outward Observations or visible Signs and Shaddows of Things, when he sees them
Idolized or Abused, or that the Substance of them is come, as he did
Circumcision, Sacrifices and Passover. And therefore this Author ought not to
limit him to outward Ordinances and Shaddows from Christ's Coming to the End of
the World, no more then he was limited before Abraham's time, or before the
Coming of Christ: nor ought he to accuse the Quakers, as opposing themselves
against things required by the positive Laws, because they cannot own his
Water Baptism and Breaking of Bread in Imitation of the Apostles, and primitive
Christians; no more then the professing Jews ought to have accused the Apostle
Paul, and his Fellow Laborers in the Gospel, for denying the positive Laws,
who by the Authority and Power of Christ in them cried down their Circumcision,
Temple-worship, and that Hand writing of Ordinances, which was contrary to
them. And as little Reason has he to accuse us, since we only by the Power of
the Lord cry down their Baptizing with Water by virtue of a Commission, that
was given to other men to Baptize into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit; which Baptizing with Water, and other Imitations (not to be inferred
thence) they so much Idolized, as to term them the Way of Life above, and to
deliver from Hell beneath, and press them as absolutely necessary to Salvation,
though they can show us no Scriptures, which so terms them, and holds, them
forth; and therefore should they not as such be received. So whilst this
Author would prove us opposite to the positive Laws of God, and not sincere
favorers of the Light within; he is found in that state himself, for as much
as he puts man's Changeable Understanding and Judgment, which is Darkness, for
Light, and thereby would so Obscure the Glory and Luster of that true and
unchangeable Light, which Lights every Man that comes into the World, as if
there were many things, which he has no Cognizance or Knowledge of, though
indeed no secret is hid from him, and as if he had no power now to teach and
direct people in this day (contrary to fallible Men's apprehensions of the
Scriptures) how people should worship and serve God? but were limited to
outward and shaddowy things, which he calls positive Laws, when as indeed all
who are gathered in the New Covenant, have the substance it self, the Law in
the Heart, to which they are to be Obedient, and know the Lord to be their Law
giver and Leader, who is also a Light to the Gentiles, that he may be for
Salvation to the ends of the Earth. Wherefore this Author and all people may do
well to come to that Light, that therein they all may know God, from the least
to the greatest, and be taught by him, least trusting to their own natural
understanding, and Judgment to perform worship to God, and not to his holy
Spirit, which is but the Light of their own fire, they at last be forced to lie
down in Sorrow.

Lincoln the ^2. day of ^th 11. Monteh 1672. John Whitche^d.

Something added by C. H.
TO the Intent none may stumble concerning the Contrariety, that appears by
Certificates printed o^ both hands relating to Rich. Anderson, let the Reader
observe; I being in London the 7th of the 2d Month, 1673. met with Tho. Wilson
of Atherstone in Warwickshire, who has been reputed a Baptist Teacher for many
years, who told me to this Effect, That he had been on purpose at Panton in
Lincolnshire to seek after the truth of the Matter; and making inquiry of One
of the Chief of that Place, as to the Credit of R. A. had this Answer returned;
That he did believe, if the Quakers came one Day to R. A. whatsoever he did Say
or Confess to them, yet if the Baptists did come on the Morrow, he would say
any thing) they would have him to say. Therefore all honest inquirers by this
and other things, that do appear so plain, may safely thus conclude, That the
Foundation and Bottom of all the Baptists Building here in being found so
Rotten and Deceitful, the whole Building thereupon is like unto it, and shall
all fall down together, to the Shame and Confusion of all such, who hereby have
made Lies their Refuge, and foolishly taken the Name of the Lord in vain.

C. H.

THE END.

