A Rational Defense OF Nonconformity: WHEREIN THE Practice of NON CONFORMISTS
IS Vindicated from Promoting Popery, and Ruining the CHURCH, imputed to them by
Dr. Stillingfleet in his Unreasonableness of Separation. ALSO His Arguments
from the Principles and Way of the Reformers, and first Dissenters are
Answered. And the Case of the present Separation, truly stated; and the blame
of it laid where it ought to be. And the way to Union among Protestants is
pointed at.

By GILBERT RULE, Minister of the Gospel.

Ezekiel. XLIII. 10, 11. Thou Son of Man, show the House to the House of Israel,
that they may be ashamed of their Iniquities, and let them measure the pattern,
etc.

And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, show them the form of the
House, and the fashion thereof, etc.

LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury, at the Rising- Sun, near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. M DC LXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
THE fierce Contentions of this Age about the Mint, and Annise, and Cummin of
Religion, (I mean Religious Ceremonies that men have devised and imposed) has,
in a great measure hindered people from minding, with that application that
becomes the weightier things of the Law; to wit, the love of God, and of our
Neighbor, and due regard to the promoting of true holiness, and the Salvation
of men's Souls, the heavy Sufferings of many in England, and in Scotland, for
not complying with such things, as their imposing Taskmasters did not so much
as pretend to give Scripture warrant for, are too notorious to be denied, and
too smarting to be forgotten: How many thousands have been put on this sad
Dilemma? either to wound their Consciences, or to be destroyed by taking away
their Estates, Liberties, Livelihood, and life it self. But now the Lord (in
his infinite wisdom, and tender mercy to an undeserving generation) having by
some late Revolutions, first broken the Yoke of the Oppressors, and made them,
for some time taste a little of the Cup that they had made their brethren drink
deeply of; and then graciously, and wonderfully, delivered both contending
parties from that utter ruin that was manifestly impending; and made us like
them that Dreamed, and done exceeding abundantly for us, above what we could
think, out done our faith, as was foretold, Luke 18. 8. He has by this
surprising providence, laid an Obligation on all Protestants (and they who are
such in earnest, will mind it) to turn to the Lord from every evil way, that
has been in their heart or hand; and particularly to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace; to endeavor to speak, and do the same things; and
where that cannot be attained, (through want of light, and other sinful
disorders of the Soul, not easily, nor soon removed, without that pouring out
of the Spirit from on high, promised, Isa. 33. 15. and else where; which we
should daily, and earnestly pray and wait for.) To bear with one another in
Love. They who know no other way to Unity, but Uniformity, will for ever miss
of their design, unless either all men were perfect in knowledge, and wholly
freed from irregular passions, or Conscience were wholly laid to sleep, and its
use banished out of the World.

Toward this blessed end, peace among Protestants, sober reasoning between
Dissenting Parties, may have some usefulness; even Eristick Writings, may prove
Irenick, if managed, and read, with that Spirit that becomes the gospel; that
is, with due love to truth and peace; and if I did not judge this book to be of
that tendency, I should never consent that it should see the light. The Apostle
gives us two excellent directions for attaining this end, Phil. 3. 16. (beside
the duty of forbearing one another, till the Lord clear mistakes to them who
are out of the way, which he does more than insinuate, ver. 15.) but alas, even
about these ways to peace we contend, as will appear in this Treatise: Yet in
my opinion, the Apostle does there clearly hold forth, that there is a rule to
which all are obliged to conform their actions, and principles, and
particularly, Church Administrations: Let us walk by the same rule: In all
reason, this rule must be Divine, in that it is here generally enjoined to be
minded, and that by all Christians. Is it imaginable that the Apostle intends
to oblige all the Churches to take a rule of man's making for directing them how
they shall please God? Besides, Church, or humane Canons never were, or are
like to be the same in all Churches; nor indeed can they of the things that are
left to the Church to order at her discretion, that which is fit in one place,
may be most unfit in another. Wherefore if the Apostle had aimed at these, he
would have spoken of Rules, not a rule. We have then cause to think, that the
way to Church peace is to take the Word of God for the rule by which all the
affairs of his House should be ordered: If we would enjoin nothing, peculiar to
Religion, to be observed, but what is warranted there: And would not be too
busy in making Canons, for determining these things that are Extrinsick to
Religion, its Rites common to it with other solemn actions, further than
necessity requires, and in these determinations, keep within the bounds of the
general directions of the Word of God: If we would do all things in the Church
decently and in order; and then make nothing such by our Will and Authority;
but enjoin the Observation of these things, that Scripture has declared to be
such, or nature, and civil custom has made such: If we would content our
selves with that decency and order that was in the Apostolic Church: Our
Controversy would soon be at an end. It is true, even where Scripture is taken
for the rule, there might be some different apprehensions about the meaning of
this rule, what it enjoyneth; but they who sincerely seek the mind of God in
his words, and depend on him for the light of his Spirit, readily will either
find what they seek, or will soberly and peaceably differ from their brethren.
But when this rule is laid aside, and man's wisdom must enjoin what is fit in
God's Worship, (even though they be Learned, Wise, and Holy men, and in
authority in the Church, yet not infallibly guided; and much more when any of
these Qualities are wanting) there can hardly he an end of controversy, it
will be hard to set bounds to their multiplicity (of which the Popish Church is
a fatal Witness) and hard to bring them to an end by composing them, unless
blind obedience be asserted; at least as to some things: And how many things
these shall be, who knows?

The other Direction that the Apostle gives in that place, is, let us mind the
same things: Unity in design is very conducive to Unity in Heart and Practice:
When all have one end before them, they will the more readily fall into the
same way leading to that end; as when many are traveling to the same City,
they will readily go in the same road; or if one take a gainer way, as he
thinks, then another, yet they will not fall out about that. Let us then all
make the one thing needful, our business; let us mind serious and practical
Religion; and in Subordination to that, let us mind the Conversion, and
Edification of the Souls of the people under our charge: Let us set our selves
against Immorality, Ignorance, (which, alas, does abound every where)
Atheistical and careless neglect of Religion: Let us labor to awaken the
people to mind how they shall be saved, and put them in mind of the hazard of
resting on out side Worship, whither it be with, or without the Ceremonies that
we controvert about: If we all have a true Idea of that Religion, that we
should labor to instill into the minds of people, and have that impression if
the weight, and indispensable necessity of it, that the Apostle expresses, 2
Cor. 5. 11. knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men: If we
were one in this, it would much contribute to oneness in things that are more
remote from the essence and life of Religion. But while we mind our own things
which must needs be very different) while one sort is for their Grandeur, and
Riches, and Dominion, and Ease; and another is for his Ease and Applause among
one sort of men: While we are for keeping up a party, for victory over them
that we contend with, and for maintaining our credit, so as we are ashamed to
change, least we fall under the imputation of being once in a mistake: I say,
while these different ends and motives are suffered to influence us, we must be
far from agreement about any thing that has been the Subject of our Debates,
while Lusts war in our Members, Wars, and Fightings will be the product of
them, Ja. 4. 1. As this purging of our selves, from bad things might conduce to
the Churches peace, so might a joint endeavor on both sides to purge the
Church from bad Men; an Ignorant, Scandalous, Heady, and Vnsober Ministry is a
great let to peace: God will not be at peace with the Church, while such are
countenanced, and good men cannot with any satisfaction behold such Scandals to
Religion, and such effectual Instruments of the ruin of Souls, continued in
the Church: Such Ministers are Make-bates in the Church: While some effectual
course is not taken to remove them, the Church is like to have little peace,
either with God, or in her self. Let all then (if they would see Religion
flourish, and the Church settled in peace) contribute their endeavors to get
the unsavory Salt (that has long made us unpleasing to God) cast out; and to
oppose the entrance of them into the Holy Function of the Ministry, who are
not in some tolerable measure such as the Apostle requires, and are not in a
probable capacity, by their life, and doctrine, and diligence, to do good to
Souls; and let none countenance or plead for unfit persons, either to be
admitted into, or kept in the Church: Pity to men's Persons, or Families, being
horrid cruelty, when the ruin of Souls is the necessary consequent of such
Acts: When love to the Salvation of men bears sway with us above zeal for a
Party, we will easily be prevailed with in this. If this piece of Reformation
be endeavored, all Ranks must put hand to it, the people by discovering such,
where they are, and not calling, nor countenancing them, when they want a guide
to their Souls: And Magistrates, by endeavoring the regulating of such Laws as
do in any wise open the door to such men to enter, or protect them when they
already are in places: And Ministers in their station, by rejecting such
Candidates of the Ministry, as are not duly qualified, and censuring the
immoralities of such as have made a shift to get into that Office,
notwithstanding of their notorious unworthiness.

In order to obtaining the Peace of the Church (which we all prize and desire)
Reformation is also necessary; peace and purity will not long be separated the
one from the other; personal reformation must not be wanting, if it will give
hope of Peace, even from Enemies, Prove. 16. 7. much more is it the way to be
blessed with peace from our Friends; without it there is no peace with God, nor
Man, but such as is a Curse to them who have it, 2 King. 9. 22. Isa. 32. 17,
18. Church Reformation must also truly be endeavored by us, if we would have
Church-peace; it is no token for good, when sinful Evils (Images of Jealousy,
that provoke the Lord to jealousy) are in the Church, and yet all agree in
these ways; none lament them, none reprove them, none take care to keep their
Garments clean of the Corruptions of the Time; like those whom the Lord does so
highly commend, Rev. 3. 3. If we expect peace, we must be humbled before the
Lord, for our personal and public Deviations, and be ready to confess them
before the World; we must take Shame, if we expect that he should favor, and
honor us. See Ezekiel. 4^, 10, 11. While we are fixed in evil ways, and will not
be convinced; or so proud that we are ashamed to acknowledge that we have been
out of the way: God nor Man can make no peace with us. Neither is this all, but
we must turn from our evil ways, of whatever sort they be particularly, while
Church Grievances are continued; while no effectual course is taken, and that
unanimously, and with serious application, to remove Scandals, to satisfy the
Consciences, and quiet the Minds of such as are grived; how can Attempts for
Peace have any success? I suppose it will not be denied by sober and
intelligent Men, that there are faults in the Church (though some do strangely
Hyperbolize in declaiming of her perfection; but they that are in that strain,
of whatever party they be, do little understand the Scripture Pattern, and the
Church Way that themselves own, and do not compare the one with the other)
Non-residences, Pluralities, want of Parochial Discipline, abuse of
Excommunication, making that which passes for Church Discipline and censures;
to be more destructive to men's purses, than to their vices; and other such
things, are too grossly evil to be defended, and too well known to be denied, or
dissembled. It were one good step toward peace, if there might be a prospect of
getting such Enormities done away; and the affairs of the House of God managed
in a way more like that of the Gospel. It might also make for our Peace, if all
of us, of both parties, should put on a Spirit of meekness, and rather lament
what we cannot approve, than reproach one another for such things. An unsober,
and fierce Spirit has too much appeared on both Hands; our Zeal for and
against the things controverted, is no way proportioned to the things
themselves. Many have not a different degree of Zeal against the grossest parts
of Popery, from what they use against some of the Rags of that Whors attire;
though all be unjustly charged with this, yet it is too evident to be the temper
and way of some: Its true immorality in Ministers, and visible Enmity against
the practice and power of Religion, may justly stir the indignation of a
serious Christian, but to be so affected toward all that differ from us, in the
lesser matters of Religion, is a Zeal not kindled from Heaven: On the other
Hand, the odious comparison that is made between Popery and Presbytery,
preferring the former as more Eligible, which is frequent in the Mouths, not of
the Rabble only, but of Men of Name and Authority in the Church, does not savor
of that meekness guided by a sound judgment, which becomes the Gospel: Let
them who are Godly and Sober on both sides, love and esteem one another in the
Lord; and we may hope for more peace in the Church, than yet we have seen. This
ill temper now hinted at, should be shunned by all, and reproved where it
appears, by them who would promote the peace of the Gospel.

If by all the means mentioned, or other good ways, peace cannot be obtained,
we must not step out of Gods way to obtain it; Truth must be bought at any
rate, but Peace may be too dear to be bought by a Christian: It may be
impossible, it may not lie in us to live peaceably with some men; yea, or with
a Church, Romans 12. 8. Holiness is simply necessary not Peace, Heb. 12. 14.
Wherefore it is to be expected, that we should yield in the matters of God
(however little they maybe comparatively) as one may and ought to do, for peace
sake, in his own matters; Men cannot command; their Light and Consciences, are
unplyable things to worldly, or carnal Arguments; yea, to those that seem to
have somewhat in them more divine, seeing the least Evils is not to be done, or
assented to for attaining the greatest good: Over-powering light to change our
minds, or forbearing one another, till that light arise; are the true methods
to compose Debates in the Church. Assent and Subscrption to what is required,
while an inward dislike of it remains, is away to Peace in a Church; that the
Lord does not approve, and that will not have Stability, nor a good Issue.

I have no further account to give of this book, but that it was written a few
years ago, which must excuse some passages that may seem not to suit our
present case: It was a doing when King James came to the Crown; the case of
Protestants soon after made it appear unseasonable to contend about our private
Sentiments wherein we differ, when we all were like to be undone by a Deluge of
Popery. But now after the state of the Nation has been unhinged, and is in a
hopeful way to be settled, it may seem allowable, if not necessary, that each
Party should put in their claim, and give the best reasons they can for their
prete^sions; and that with all moderation and peaceableness: And having so
done, what they should leave it to them who ought to judge, what is fittest to
be chosen. This I have endeavored ut potui, non ut debui, wishing that some
other person, by whom it might have been done to more advantage, had taken this
Task: Some may readily dislike the way of managing this debate, following the
Antagonist (...): but this I could not well shun. The Reverend Doctor's method
not being very exact, and many things that might stumble an ordinary Reader,
being brought in by him, where it could little be expected. This way I thought
most useful for them who want instruction; and others, as they do not need any
help that I can afford them, so they can suffer no prejudice by this manner of
reasoning. I submit all that I have said, to the censure of the judicious,
candid, and unbiased Reader, and to the Authority of the Church of Christ* in
any of her Lawful Assemblies. If any shall judge that I have yielded too much;
or, that I have condescended too little for the sake of unity, I am willing to
be corrected, by any who shall bring plain Scripture, or solid reason, for what
they allege.

A Rational Defense OF Nonconformity, etc.
THey who find themselves under an Obligation from the Authority of a Holy and
Jealous God, to regard the Purity of his Worship, and keep their Consciences
from being defiled with the Corruptions that Men have brought into that
Worship, are at this day under most Severe Persecution, and that from their
Fellow-Protestants, (which is no small aggravation of their Trouble) when the
common Enemy is ready to destroy us, and the Religion that we do jointly
profess: But our Brethren are not satisfied with our other Sufferings, but we
are lashed with the^r Tongues and Pens, and exposed as the most contemptible
and most unreasonable of Men; and that not only by the Common sort of Ministers
and People, that are of the opposite Party, (whose Zeal against us carries
them commonly to profess, that Papists are better than Presbyterians, and that
Religion rather to be chosen than this. A great Token of Respect to the
Protestant Religion! as if all the Principles of it, in which we agree with
them, were of less value than the Cermonies, owned as Indifferent things,
wherein we differ from them,) but even by the Reverend and Learned Dr.
Stillingfleet, a Man formerly Eminent for his Moderation; yet in this Bock, now
under examination, treats his Antagonists with that Contempt and Severity
that was not expected from a man of his worth. That poor suffering party,
though they have no Shelter against their other Afflictions, but to make that
GOD their Refuge, for Obedience to whom they suffer; yet may be allowed, I
hope, a modest Apology for their way and practice, by which that Reproach that
is cast on them may be rolled away, and their Innocence vindicated. In order to
this, I have made bold to attempt the Answering of this Book (looking for his
help whose Cause we plead.)

But before I meddle with the Book it self, it is needful to survey his long
PREFACE, consisting of 94 pages, wherein his main business is to fasten on the
Non^conformists a most heavy Charge, as if they were Promoters of the Interest
of Popery.

Sect. 2. If any Dissenters of that Time did use the Excellent B. Jewel (whose
Memory is still precious among all Protestants) ungratefully and spightfully
for preaching his Opinion, in Defense of the Church Order of England, they
deserve Blame; it had been their part to vindicate their Principles by a sober
and rational Defense against the Bishop's Arguments, but not to show Disrespect
to a person who had so well deserved for his Learned Labors against Popery.
But I do not well understand how this unworthy Carriage should consist with the
Character that the Dr. does afterward give of these Dissenters, as to their
moderation and compliance with the Church's way, when he has a mind to expose
the present Non-conformists as far degenerate from their Ancestors in the same
Profession. But of this more in its due place.

Sect. 3. He complains (p. 2.) of his own hard Usage on the like Occasion.
His Sermon entitled, The Mischief of Separation, was indeed solidly refuted by
several Non-conformists, and in that sense his Sermon was hardly used; but I
never heard before, that hard Arguments were counted hard Usage from an
Adversary; and if Bishop Jewel had no harder Usage for his Sermon, there was no
need of this Complaint, unless it were to make his own hard Fate the more
conspicuous, by so venerable a Parallel. This Reverend Author should consider,
That though we owe and give all due deference to the Memory of Bishop Jewel, and
to the Worth of Dr. Stillingfleet, for their Labors in Defense of
Protestantism; yet it is neither Ingratitude nor Incivility in us to defend the
purity of Gospel Worship Worship against their Assaults: We honor them, but
retain our Liberty of dissenting from them, and of owning our Dissent, when
they mistake, and are out of the way. We call no man Rabbi, having one Master,
CHRIST, whose written Word we make the Rule of our Faith and Worship. But one
great part of the Doctor's hard Usage lies in this, That it has been
maliciously suggested by some, and too easily believed by others, that he was
put on that Work with a design to inflame our Differences, and to raise
Persecution. I confess Malice to suggest Evil, and over-easiness to believe it,
is a thing too common among Dissenting Parties; the Lord heal these Distempers
on both hands; but the particular Ground of this Charge on his Antagonists,
should have been mentioned. If any have suspected that he was put on the Work;
if the work be good, that does extenuate the fault of such Suspicion. I know no
Evil in following either the Advice or Command of others to do our Duty: So
that hither to there is no Ground for the heavy Charge of Malice and malign
Credulousness. If any have judged his Design, that is not fair dealing, such
Secrets are to be left to the Judgment of him who knows the Hearts. But though
I have a great deal of Charity in reference to the Intentio Operantis; yet it
is not so easy to pass a favorable Judgment on the Intentio Operis; but he
endeavors afterward his Vindication in this, where I shall attend him.

Sect. 4. His professed Design in preaching that Sermon, was only his just
apprehension, That the Destruction of the Church of England, under a pretense
of Zeal against Popery, was one of the likeliest Means to bring it [Popery] in.
Here he supposes, (if I understand what he says) that the Protestant
Dissenters aim at the destruction of the Church of England; or at least, that
Nonconformity tends to destroy it, than which no imagination can be more
groundless; nor can I conceive what should give cause to such a thought, unless
it be an extravagant Idea, that some men frame to themselves of the Church of
England, as if her Essence consisted in the Ceremonies, and the removing of
these were the destruction of the Church: We, who Dissent from that which they
call the Church of England, are far from such low and dishonorable thoughts of
Her; we look on her as a Reformed part of the Church of God, professing the
Protestant Religion, in opposition to the Errors of Popery, but mixing this
True Religion with some humane Ceremonies; and therefore we think, that
opposing of these Ceremonies is so far from tending to the Destruction of the
Church, that it conduces much to reforming of Her: But suppose the Ceremonies
were good and lawful things, it is still a strange Notion, and inconsistent
with the Sentiments concerning them, that our Brethren do profess, that they
are indifferent things, and of no necessity: If they be so what hazard is there
of the destruction of the Church, from their being laid aside? If the
Non-conformists had their wish, it would infer no other Alteration in the
Church, but the removal of such Accidents, which the A betters of them do, say,
That possunt adesse vel abesse sine subjecti interitu; such Incoherences would
not have been expected from so Learned a Pen.

Sect. 5. It is also unfairly (to say no worse) hinted, That Non-conformists
Zeal against Popery is but pretended, and that the real Design is to destroy
the Church of England; we can clear our selves of both before a higher Bar, and
therefore lay little weight on such Suggestions; neither do we merely dislike
the Ceremonies, because they are Popish; he knows that we have other
Arguments against them; I hope Non-conformists show their Zeal against Popery
in other things: Nor do we desire the Destruction of the Church, that these
Ceremonies may fall to the Ground, but the removing of the Ceremonies that the
Church may be more acceptable to him, who can make her stand in despite of the
Gates of Hell. If he charge us with the Church's Ruin, because our Divisions
about the Ceremonies may tend to it: For answer; Let it be considered, who
gives culpably the Rise to these Divisions, Whether they who forbear the
Ceremonies, because Sinful; or, they who do violently impose them, though
Indifferent, in their Apprehension: But this will afterward fall to be further
discoursed. I deny not, that Papists design the Ruin of the Church of England,
but not as Ceremonious, but as Protestant; they do not design to destroy Her by
removing what the Non-conformists scruple, but by taking away what they agree
with Her in: And therefore there is no Cause to think, that the removing of the
Ceremonies (which Non-conformists desire) though under a pretense of Zeal
against Popery, or under whatever other pretense, should be one of the
likeliest means to bring it in; which our Author fears.

Sect. 6. The Learned Dr. has caught this Notion, That Non-conformists, by
their Zeal against Popery, are like to be Instruments of bringing it in; and he
seems to be very fond of this fine Conceit; runs away with it at a great
rate; is confirmed in it from the proceedings of Papists, (p. 2.) starteth a
Paradox, (p. 3.) As it seems to unthinking People, (like the Non-conformists)
that when Papists (...) appear no longer in that Work, others out of mere Zeal
against Popery, should carry it on for them; and these unthinking people are
carried away with mere no se and pretenses, and hope those will secure them
most against the Fears of Popery, who talk with most passion, and with least
understanding against is; and more to this purpose. One may think it little
Glory for the highly Learned Dr. Stillingfleet to labor in refuting such a
contemptible Adversary, as he here represents: But their Wisdom, and
Learning, and Reasons for what they hold, will (I hope) find more Equitable,
and less Supercilious Judges in the world; neither will Hectoring stop their
Mouths, though they are ready to be silent to plain Scripture or solid Reason.
He judges (p. 3, 4.) That East and West may meet, and the most furious
Antagonists (of Popery) may become of the easiest Converts: Deus avertat omen.
If we may form any Conjecture of what may be, from the Observation of what has
been, easy Conversion to Popery is liker to be found among his own party, who
are tame and gentle toward Popery, and no way furious. And if any be furious
against it, let them bear their blame. We applaud and practice Rational Zeal
against it, but not Fury, for The Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of
God. He cannot get out of this fear concerning many Thousand zealous
Protestants: I deny not, but there is cause of Fear; for many have got sound
Principles in their Heads, without saving Grace in their Hearts; and the
Knowledge and Fortitude of most is very weak, and the best have Cause to fear
themselves, and look to him who is able to make them stand; but I hope all the
Ground of Fear is not on our side.

Sect. 7. But now the Learned Author comes closer to his Design, viz. To lay
down Grounds of his Opinion, that he is so confirmed in, That the principles
and practice of Non-conformists do tend to re-introduce Popery among us; one
is, That they mistake what Popery is, being as much afraid of an innocent
Ceremony, and of the Cross, as of real Idolatry: and of Kneeling, as of Adoring
the Host.

Ans. 1. The Dr. might have known, that the learned Labors of some
Non-conformists against Popery, do sufficiently testify, that they are not
ignorant what it is. 2. We generally know, that the Ceremonies are not Popery,
but lo^k on them as a part of Popery, but are far from equalling them with some
other parts of Popery, that are far (...)re grossly evil. 3. We never counted
even the nocent Ceremonies used in England (for innocent Ceremonies, we know
none but those of God's Institution) so bad as real Idolatry; nor Crossing and
Kneeling, so bad as worshipping Images, though we count both sinful, and dare
practice neither: Therefore if we should come to see our Mistake in the one
Case (which we expect not) yet there is no Ground for the Consequence of this
alleged by him, viz. That we should suspect our selves deceived in the other
also, unless he would say that every Discovery of a Mistake that Men make about
the smallest matters in Religion, will shake the very Foundation of their
Faith; which I hope he will be very far from asserting, left they that have
read his Irenicum in former years, and now read his Sermon, and this Defense of
it, should infer that which Good Men will be far from imputing to a person of
his worth, especially when he does not deny, but rather own a Change in some
things now debated, p. 72. of the Preface.

Sect. 8. It looks like another Ground, that Non-conformists serve the
Designs of Papists, that When they find the undoubted Practices of the Ancient
Church condemned as Popish and Antichristian, by their Teachers, they must
conclude Popery to be of much greater Antiquity than really it is, and when
they can trace it so very near the Apostles Times, they will soon believe it
settled by the Apostles themselves.

Ans. 1. Here is still a confounding of something that is Popish with Popery, a
part taken for the whole, an Accident, without which Popery can well consist,
and which does subsist without Popery, with the body and substance of Popery.
He looks on his Antagonists (according to his wonted Esteem of them) as very
mean Logicians, when he will have them conclude the Antiquity of Popery in
those things that he and we do jointly dislike it in, from the Antiquity of
some Rites that were used under that Apostasy, and which we have continued
among us under the Reformatiom. 2. It were still as bad a Consequence from our
traceing some things near to the Apostles times, to infer that they were
settled by the Apostles: For we can make it appear, that not only soon after the
Apostles times, but in their times, some things were in the Church that they
did not setle; as the Love Feasts, which they reproved and abolished after that
abuse of them was observed. 3. To call those things that Non-conformists
Scruple, (Viz.) The Ceremonies, the undoubted practices of the Ancient Church
which may be traced near to the Apostles times, is gratis dictum, a bold
begging of the question: the proof of it we expect.

Sect. 9. It will, says he, (P. 5.) be very hard to persuade considering men,
that the Christian Church should degenerate so soon, so Unanimously and so
Universally, as it must do, if Episcopacy and the use of Significant Ceremonies
were any parts of the Apostasy. Here is still the great Antiquity of these
things taken for granted but not proved. But further, his Considering men, if
they read and consider the Scripture, will easily be persuaded that a Church
may very early and quickly degenerate, and that Unanimously and Universally;
especially in some things that are of lesser concern in Religion. How suddenly
did the Church of Israel degenerate, and Aaron with them, when Moses was but 40
days absent in the Mount, and that in matters of higher moment than what we
contend about; even worshipping a Calf for God? see Ex. 32. 1. and particularly
Verse. 8. And the Lord foretold to Moses their after Apostasies, Deuteronomy. 31. 16.
And Moses took notice of their Apostasies while he was yet with them, and how
soon they would break out after his departure, 27. 29. How Quickly,
Unanimously, and Universally did the ten Tribes apostatize after Solomon's
decease? And is not the whole History of the Church of Judah under her Kings, a
witness of this? When ever a bad King arose, presently the pure Worship of God
was turned to Idolatry. In the days of Joash, as soon as Jehojada was gone, how
quickly did a Faction, with a Complement to the King, turn the whole Nation to
Idolatry? 2 Chronicles. 24. 17, 18. These Apostasies were in higher points than we
now speak of; and yet, How quickly did the Church thus degenerate? And that
this should not be thought strange, even in the Gospel Church we may see, if we
consider what Christ tells us, of the Tares sown while men sleep, and growing
up insensibly, and without Observation: Also the degeneracy that the Church
fell into, even while the Apostles were alive, and faithfully watching over
her; and that, both in Doctrine and Practice, is evident in the Errors in
Corinth and Galatia; in the Abuses in public Administrations at Corinth,
insomuch as the Apostle behoved, even in his own time, to make a Reformation,
by bringing back to Apostolic Example, and the Law of Nature, for reforming
some Indecencies among them; and to Divine Institution, for reforming their
Enormities, 1 Cor. 11. 1. 20. 23. If these evils crept in under the Inspection
of the Apostles, What wonder is it if Men afterward began in some things to
deviate in Church-practice?

Sect. 10. Yea, the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. foretelling the Antichristian
Apostasy, v. 3. tells us, That that Mystery of iniquity did then work, v. 7.
This Allegation the learned Dr. puts off with a Scoff, p. 17. but we must
not therefore part with it. It is evident, that there was then a tendency among
some of the Members of the Christian Church to several of these Evils, which
being grown up to Maturity of Wickedness, Antichristianism was afterward made
up; not to speak of the gross Heresies that then were, and others that were
foretold, Act. 20. 29, 30. The Ambition of Diotrephes was a fermenting toward
Lordly Prelacy, 3 John ver. 9. So was the Idolizing of some Ministers among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3. 4. So the turning aside to the Jewish Ceremonies, a
carnal, gaudy sort of Religion, not contented with the simplicity of
Gospel Worship, for which the Galatians are reproved, Gal. 4. 9. The
worshipping of Angels, voluntary Humility, subjection to Ordinances, touch not,
taste not, handle not, Will Worship, Col. 2. 18. Forbidding of Meats and
Marriage, 1 Timothy 4. 3. and in a word, the turning the Spiritual Religion of GOD
into a Carnal outward Show. All these, I say, was a working toward the vile
Superstitions that afterward grew up under the Antichristian Apostasy, of which
our Ceremonies are some Remains. Now, if there was such a secret working of
such Evils in that time, is it any wonder that some unallowable practices
should be in the Church, soon after the Apostles, and be little taken notice of?

Sect. 11. And this is yet less to be wondered at, if we consider the defects
and uncertainty of the History of the Church in Times next after the Apostles,
as it was in the first Times of the Church, before the Law, which the Jews call
(...), Dies inanitatis, because of the want of the Light of History. It was
little better with the Christian Church at first. We have very little distinct
account of her Order; and what we have, is but in some things, not so full as
to enable us to pass a Judgment with Confidence of all their Practices in
Church-Administrations: It is no good Argument, there is no mention of Dissent
from, or Nonconformity to the Church-practices of the First Times; ^rgo there
was none; especially considering that the Writers of those Times (who were
glorious Lights, yet Men, and subject to mistakes and passions) would not
readily give account of what might make against their own practices. And it can
be made appear, that the best of the Church Guides, after the Apostles, were in
mistakes greater than what we now scruple at: But the early Degeneracy of the
Christian Church (which our Author thinks it so absurd to imagine) is witnessed
by the most ancient History, and nearest to these Times. Eusebius, lib. 3. c.
29. relating out of Egesippus the Martyrdom of Simon Son of Cleopas, second
Bishop of Jerusalem, who had seen the Lord, and was his Cousin- Germain, he
adds, that After that the Sacred Company of the Apostles were worn out, the
Church having before been a pure Vi^gin, the Conspiracy of detestable Errors,
through Deceit of such as delivered strange Doctrine, took rooting, etc. If
Heresy so soon got head, what Absurdity is it to think that lesser Evils might
early prevail? This may be also proved in reference to the Rites used in the
Church, how early there was a degeneracy in these, out of Irenaeus, who lived
in the second Century, Epist. ad Victor. Episc. Romans Quae varietas observantiae
(pascatis, and jejuniorum) non (...) primum neque nostris temporibus caepit,
sed multo aute nos (ut opinor) qui non simpliciter quod ab initio traditum est
tenentes, in alium morem vel per negligentiam, vel per imperitiam postmodum
decidere. Where it is evident, that Irenaeus imputes such negligence and
unskilfulness even to the First Age, and nearest to the Apostles, if not in the
days of some of them, as made them fall from Christ's Institution in some
things. The consideration of all which makes me wonder at the Confidence of
the learned Author, who says, that So sudden and insensible a Change of the
Church is so incredible, that they that think it could be, may on the same
Grounds believe that other parts of Popery did as soon prevail. That this
Change did soon prevail, we believe not, but that it might, we see no Absurdity
in it; and for other parts of Popery, we can tell when most of them begun, and
therefore are not obliged from the Antiquity of one part of it, to acknowledge
the same of another; neither is there any Inconveniency in asserting, that
these Mistakes crept in insensibly. Seeing the Apostle speaks of them as a
Mystery that was long working, before it came above-board. What he says of
humane Policies keeping long to their first Institution, makes little to his
purpose, both because the contrary is most frequently observed; they often
degenerate, and that unobserved by the Vulgar, through the Cunning of
Statesmen; and because corrupt Nature is not so apt to deviate from Humane
Constitutions, as from those that are Divine. Few Politic Frames have been so
often, and quickly, and easily changed, as the Religious Worship of the Jews
was, in the time of the Judges and Kings. I hope by this time it will appear,
that the Principles of the Church's Enemies (so he falsely calls the
Non-conformists, who are no Enemies to the Church, but to her humane
Ceremonies) brings no such mighty prejudice on the Cause of the Reformation,
as he with confidence infers from what he had discoursed; for we neither own
such Antiquity in the Ceremonies; nor, if we did, would that infer the
Antiquity of Popery in its grosser parts.

Sect. 12. He again charge his Adversaries, that They must forgo the
Testimony of Antiquity, and that by so doing they run into insuperable
Difficulties in dealing with the Papists, which his Principles do lead through;
for they can justly charge Popery as Innovation. And to that purpose cites
Bishop Sanderson (p. 6.) In answer to him and the Bishop too, We say, 1. That
we do not forgo the Testimony of Antiquity; though we do not Idolize it, as
some do; we will not be conclud^d by it against Scripture, and not often
without Scripture, but take its help to search into the Mind of God revealed in
His Word: Its greatest Admirers must needs forgo it sometimes, both Papists and
Prelatists; and the ancient Authors themselves do not seldom disown all
Authority in them or any men to determine in the Controversies of Religion: But
I shall not digress into this Debate, What Weight is to be laid on Antiquity;
it is enough at present that we deny, and our Adversaries have not proved (nor
shall they ever be able to prove) that Bishops and Ceremonies are so ancient as
they affirm them to be; what Instances he intends, or can give from his
present Adversaries, (the Non-conformists) that they maintain such principles
as destroy the Justice and Equity of the Reformation, I know not; when we meet
with them, we shall consider them; mean while we profess our selves ready to
disown all Principles that can be made appear to be of that tendency.

Sect. 13. Bishop Sanderson's three ways how Non-conformists promote Popery
eventually, though not intentionally, which he mentions, p. 7. are such as to
unbyassed men will seen unworthy of the learned Bishop to propose, or the
learned Dr. to applaud; the first is, By helping to pull down Episcopacy, at
which, he says, Rome rejoiced. But, will any say that this Joy of Rome was
because Episcopacy is such an Enemy to Popery; when they have it as well as we,
and when it is not to be seen in any Protestant Church as in England? yea, I
must say, Except in England. Is it not obvious, that their Joy was for our
Broils on that occasion, and not for the Ruin of that which they love so well?
Will any deny that Rome rejoiced as much at the pulling down of Presbytery in
Scotland, and the hindrance of its Settlement in England, for our Changes,
Anarchy, and Confusions are their Advantage? The Second is, Their opposing the
interest of Rome, with more Violence than Reason. The Third is, Their frequent
mistaking the Question, especially through the necessity of some false
Principles, which they will maintain, whatever come of the common Cause of the
Reformation. It is not easy to reply to these; I shall only say, there is no
Truth in what is here said, nor the Candor becoming a Disputant, in saying of
it, without any pretense to proving it. Let not the Dr. think that the Bishop's
(...) will convince us; the Folly and Indiscretion that he is pleased next to
grieve us with the Imputation of, and to back again with the same learned
Bishop's Authority, (p. 8.) is another of his Arguments, which we will not
attempt to answer, save with the words of Psalm. 123. 3, 4. Have mercy upon us,
O Lord, have mercy upon us, for we are exceedingly filled with contempt, our
Soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and
with the contempt of the proud. What he after mentions of the Popish
Instruments, being for the most violent courses, does not concern us, who
endure, but use no Violence: Let them look to it, who with such Violence do
press their Brethren in things acknowledged Indifferent, which they think
unlawful, and ruin them for not yielding. What Service this may do to the
Papists, who are such Lovers of Violent Courses, let the World judge. The Jews,
by indiscreet zeal, brought the Romans on them, which they designed to shun: If
he will prove our zeal against Popery to be also indiscreet, we shall endure
the parallel. He cannot get that Notion out of his Head, (p. 9.) that was met
before, That Non-conformists attempt to overthrow the Constitution of the
Church, because they are against the Ceremonies. What Service this may do the
Papists, may be considered: to make the Protestant Religion, which, I suppose,
does constitute the Church of England, have a Trifle (such an Indifferent
Ceremony must be) for such a part of her Constitution, as with it she is
overturned, they will be apt to infer, that we reckon our Religion a Trifle.
Let it be considered, whether talking at this rate does not look liker a
Transport, than what can be justly charged on the Non-conformists.

Sect. 14. Who doubts but the Papists envy the Church of England, and wish
her torn in pieces, and wish there were no Bishops in England, and that they
have endeavored to destroy her Constitution and Government? But what is all
that to the purpose? Does it hence follow, that they who dislike her Bishops
and Ceremonies are doing the same Work? The Tendency (much less the Designs) of
Papists and Non-conformists can never be drawn into one Channel, till he prove,
that it is the Ceremonies of the Church of England that Papists aim to destroy,
and not the Protestant Religion in it; and that their spite at the English
Bishops, is, not because they are Protestant Bishops, but because they are
Bishops. It may, with as much show of Reason, be said, That a Physician
promoteth the design of his Patient's Enemy, who aims to kill him, whereas
the Physician's Work is, to remove his Disease; both would have the Man what he
is not, but there is no Concurrence between them, either in their intention or
tendency of their Work. What follows does as little prove his point, as I
shall show by brief Answers to his Questions: Did not Cranmer, Ridley, etc.
suffer Martyrdom by their (the Papists) means? Ans. Yes, but not because
Bishops, but as Protestants. Did not they own the same Episcopacy which is now
among us, and which men by Book upon Book seek to destroy? (p. 10.) Ans. That
maybe a Question, but I now suppose they did: these worthy Servants of God had
Reformed much, but left this Unreformed; they did worthily in their Generation,
yet as men who are Imperfect, we may rather wonder, that in that time of
Darkness, which they had been born in, and under the prejudices of their
Education, they discovered so much of Error, than that they in that Crowd of
Corruptions that they had to purge out, over-looked this.

Sect. 15. Some further Argumentative Questions he moves; Is all this (writing
against Bishops and Ceremonies) done for the honor of the Reformation? Is this
the way to preserve the Protestant Religion among us, to fill men's minds with
such prejudices against the first Set^^ment of it, and to make the World
believe, that the Church Government then Established, was repugnant to the
Institution of Christ; and that our Martyr-Bishops exercised an unlawful
Authority over Diocesan Churches? But whither will Men's indiscreet Zeal carry
them? Here Is a Tragical Outcry, as if Non-conformists went about to destroy
Religion, because they are not for Bishops and Ceremonies: What a strange
unaccountable fondness have these Men for their Diana, who talk at this rate!
If this Discourse have any Nerves, it will at once condemn all these, as the
worst Enemies that true Religion has, who have found any fault in a Reformed
Church, as if it were a thing impossible, that a True Reformation should be an
Imperfect Reformation. But thus it is with Men who have left
Scripture-Guidance, and become fond of Humane Authority in Religious Matters.
We honor the Reformers, but do not Idolize their Persons; where they follow
Scripture, we follow them, (and the Apostle required no more of his Followers,
1 Cor. 11. 1.) but where they recede from the Rule we must needs Dissent.

Sect. 16. It may very much clear us, and silence such Clamours of our
Adversaries, if we consider that the English is not the only Imperfect
Reformation, that has been in the World, and that what our Author here
alleges, would equally justify all their defects, and condemn all Endeavors
after further nearness to Primitive Institution. To give some Instances, How
many Reformations do we read of in the Jewish Church, which no doubt were
approved of God, and rejoiced in by Good Men, in so far, as they were a casting
off of false Gods, and a worshipping of Jehov^h, and yet had this nigrum Theta
set on them by the Spirit of God, that the high pl^ces still remained, and the
People still Sacrificed in them; yet only to Jehovah. This is noted even of
S^lom^n, 1 Kin. 3. 2, 3. (and it is like it was one of his first Steps of
Degeneracy, though the want of a Temple might seem to have excused it; yet it is
noted as a Fault, as Pis^a^^r observes, and the Particle (...), attamen, only,
imports no less.) It is also noted of Manesseth, in his last and best days,
2 Chronicles. 33. 17. and of Azariah, 2 King. 15. 5. and of Jotham, 2 King. 15. 35.
and of many others, which need not be mentioned. Now is it imaginable, that
none of the Godly in Judah were dissatisfied with this Depra^ati^n of God's
Worship, nor scrupled to leave the Temple, and to go to the high places to
worship; and if there were any such, Might not all this be applied to them? Was
it for the Honor of the Reformation? Was that the way to preserve the Worship
of Jehovah? Mast Reformers be charged with a wrong Way of Worship? If this had
been an insig^ificant Declamation against them, so is it now against us. To
come nearer home, Do not all the soundest Protestants rejoice in the Lutheran
Reformation, as to the main, and yet blame it in some things? Were not all
English Protestants glad of what King Hen. 8. did against the Pope, and in some
other points of Religion, and yet they thought not fit so to applaud that
Setlement, as to look after no further Reformation: Why then should it be
thought in us a disgracing of the Reformation, that we desire some things to be
still mended?

Sect. 17. We thank him for his Charity, that he will not say, that we are set
on by the Jesuits, but misregard his Saying, That we do their Work; a
groundless and unproved Assertion. I wish there were no Ground for
Recrimination* which I shall forbear: If his Forty Years Meditation have
enabled him to prove the present Episcopacy agreeable to the Institution of
Christ, and to the best Churches, we must yield the Cause, but we intend to
hear his Proofs first. It is a needless Question that he asks, Wherein does
our Church differ from its first Setlen ^ut? Seeing he knows that we blame
the first Setlement, eatenus, though we applaud it in the main; and what he cited
out of Dr. Tailor the Martyr (p. 11.) says no more, but that some Holy Men
discovered the Evil of Popery, and laid down their Lives in opposition to it,
but had not yet come to see the Evil of some of the Appurtenances of Popery.
Dr. Tailor and others rejoiced to see God worshipped in English, which had been
in Latin, as by Parrots, but did not see the Evil of such a Frame of Worship,
having known no other. So the same Dr. Tay^or, when Bp. Bon^er was about
degrading him, Swore by St. Peter, (Acts and Monuments, p. 174.) as Joseph by
the Life of Pharaoh, but that does not justify such a practice.

Sect. 18. He now undertaketh (p. 11, etc.) to make it appear, that the
Jesuitical Party had a great hand in the beginning of the Separation, (as he
calls it.) How does this consist with what he had said, That he will not say,
that we are set on by the Jesuits? That Papists did not Separate at first in
Queen Elizabeth's Days, we can give no Account, knowing that Policy, not
Conscience, often governs their Actions. That Non-conformists did go along
with the Church in all her practices, he largely insisteth on afterward, and
there it is to be considered whether it was so, or not; and if o, what is our
Concern in it. He tells a long Story of Jesuits employed under the Disguise
of more zealous Trotestants, to oppose the Liturgy, etc. and to set up a
Separation; the truth of which I shall not dispute; for it has always been
the way of that active party to endeavor the Dividing of them that are not of
their Communion. But, I know not what Blame that can reflect upon the
Non-conformists, or their practices; I do not doubt, the same party had a hand
in the Divisions of Calvinists from Lutherans, and are willing to take all
occasions to divide, that they may ruin; but if the Lord turn it to Good, and
to their Disappointment, and if his Servants keep his Way, while they part from
the way of other Men, let the Jesuits do their worst, and let us do our Duty,
there is neither harm nor blame in it. Were it not very easy for us, (...) we
had any confidence in such Arguments, to show what a hand Jes^its have in
setting on our Adversaries, in such peremptory cleaving to their Indifferent
Ceremonies, that they will rather see the Church torn in a thousand pieces,
than part with one of them; and in prosecuting Men, though never so found in the
Articles of the Church's Doctrine, and Innocent and Holy in their Conversation,
because they cannot yield over the Belly of Scripture Light, and of their
Consciences, to the Use of these Trifles: Does not this look more like a Design
of Jesuits to embroil the Church, that they may ruin her; while such measures
are unaccountable, and the Admiration of all the Reformed Churches that behold
our Differences?

Sect. 19. Whether the Papers he speaks of, and the Confession of Heath the
Jesuit, and the Letter mentioned, have any thing of Truth, or be a Sham (as
many such things have been in our days) it were such a wild-Goose chase to
follow forth the Enquiry, as I do not hope to come to the end of it; and it
were not Operae pretium to find the Truth of it. That Coleman, Hallingham, and
Benson are named in the Letter, and also recorded by Mr. Fuller, and others as
forward Non-conformists, proves no more, but that the cunning Jesuits knew how
to insinuate into the most Unwary, as these with Button are represented to be,
by their forwardness beyond others, as appears, Fuller's Chapter Hist. Book 9.
Page 81. and Page 108. Where he says, they cut-did all of their own Opinion:
And was there ever a Party, among whom some might not be found fit Tools by
their Indiscretion, to be employed by cunning Artificers, for raising Troubles,
without casting a Reflection of Blame on the whole Party? But our Author should
have at the same time taken notice out of the same Historian, p. 76. that the
Bishops in 5 Eliz. 1563. being empowered by their Canons, began to urge
Subscriptions to the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Discipline of the Church, and by
so doing gave Rise to these Men's* and others, appearing as they did, and
branded the Refusers with the odious Name of Puritans. P. 102. he shows, that
the same Canons being now, (Nine Years after) ratified by Parliament; The
Bishops began to urge Subscription more severely than before, which made many
Dissenters keep their private Meetings in Fields, Words, their Friends Houses,
etc. And may not one rationally think, that the Jesuits might (in their own
way) prompt the Bishops to this Severity, as well as the Dissenters not to
yield to it?

Sect. 20. The notions that Jesuits have of Spiritual Prayer, mentioned, p. 15.
(some of them extravagant enough) the learned Dr. uses as a repreach to the
Non-conformists; how rationally, let the VVor^d judge, seeing we never vented
nor owned such Fancies; only we think Set Forms of Prayer unfit to be used,
where Ministers are tolerably gifted to pray without them; and that all the
praying that we read of, to have been either practiced or commended in the
Apostolic Church, was without Book, the Spirit, not the Book, helping their
Infirmities, even as to what they are to pray for, or the Matter of Prayer,
Romans 8. 26. When he says (p. 16.) that It is not improbable the J^suits were
the first Setters up of this way in England; and that it was never known here,
or in any other Reformed Church before this time. If he me^n Prayer without a
Set-form, (if he mean any thing else, it is not to the p^rpose*) it is a rash
and untrue Assertion; Was ever Prayer without Book condemned by any R^formed
Church? Yea; Can any Reformed Church be instanced where it has not been, and
is not used? Or, let him mention, a Reformed Church that has restrained
Extempor^^ Prayer, and imposed a Set-form. But this Debate he resumeth
afterward, and till then, we shall leave it; it does not savor of tha^ (...)
regard to the Spirit of Prayer, that is promised to be ^^ured out on the people
of God, Z^^h. 12. 10. to mock the using o^ his help, to pray without a Book, as
a Charm Effectual with j^dicious People, and to je^r the zeal and warmth of
Devotion that appears in it: Many know the Advantage of what he thinks but
a Fancy; let him abound in his own Sense, for, De gustiius non est (...). If by
me^ns of this manner of worshipping God, the Division wonderfully (...), as he
says, I hope it was not the Debauched nor Unserious that were so taken with
that way, and therefore this Increase was no reproach to it.

Sect. 21. He cites the Admonition given in to the Parliament, 14 Eliz. of
which he says the Authors (Mr. F^ller's Church History, p. 102, 103. makes
Mr. Thomas Cartwright Author both of the first and second Admonition) would
have neither Papists nor o^^ers e^^strained to communicate. I do not understand
whether any person should be constrained to partake of the Lord's Supper, (for
I suppose that is meant) otherwise than by forcible persuasions, which is the
Compulsion meant, Luke 14. 23. Brugensis says, it expresses vi^^^vangelij; so
others, That Ord^nance was never appointed by the Lord to be a Test of a Man's
Prof^ssion, while he is incapable to improve it to higher ends. But if the
Admonition plead for Tolerating of Popery, (I have not the book by me, and
therefore cannot determine in this) we are far from approving it. Though we
think we have a Right, by the Gospel, not only to Toleration, but further
Co^ntenance for our way; yet, if we might choose, we had rather be under the
severest Pe^secution, than have the least hand in obtaining Liberty to that
Idolatry: We must not do, yea, nor wish Evil, that Good may come. What he
cites out of Archb. Whit gift, and Archb. Grindal, p. 17, 18. I look on as
Invectives against the Non-conformists of the same stamp with his own; they are
Parties, and therefore not to be adduced as Witnesses. Dr. Sutclife says no
more than we will say, that our Divisions give advantage to the Papists: Let
them who are the culpable Cause of the Divisions look to it. The Prophecy cited
out of Mr. Solden, is to the same purpose, and needs no other Answer.

Sect. 22. The politic, hellish Advices given by the Jesuit Contzen, and
Seignior Ballarini, make nothing against us at all, though he fills p. 19, 20,
21. with them; for all that can be thence inferred is, That they labor to
divide Protestants, and this D^vision falls out according to their wish. Now
the Division has its Rise from the Impositions of one party that assume the
Name of the Church, and the Scruples of another party. If the Church impose
that which is lawful and necessary, and the other party scruple that, and so
divide; in that case the Dissenters must bear the blame of the Division, and
are guilty of cooperating with the common Enemy, in ruining the Protestant
Religion: But if the Church, by Her Impositions, burden the Consciences of Her
Members with things that She counts Indifferent, (i. e.) Needless, and the
Scruplers reckon as unlawful, and have just ground so to do; then the blame of
Separating, and of helping the Papists to ruin our Religion, lies at the
Church's door; wherefore all this might have been spared. Let the learned Dr.
soundly refute our Principles, and then cast what blame he will on us; but till
that be done, (which we expect not) let him ^ake heed where the blame will be
laid, when the Secrets of Men shall be judged. It may be observed in these
Advices, that the Jesuits, as their Master the Devil often does, speak some
Truths out of a bad end.

Sect. 23. Next he comes (p. 22.) to reproach us with the Indulgence that was
granted March, 1671-2. as being procured by the Papists. If any Non-conformists
had a hand in procuring Liberty (which I do not believe) to them, I think their
Brethren will disown them in that Act. That Papists had a hand in it, is not
improbable, both for their own ease, and to make the Difference among
Protestants the more conspicuous: But was it fit, that we should forbear a
necessary Duty because of their ill Design? We did not join in the practices of
the Church before that, but worshipped God after his own Institution, without
Humane Ceremonies: All the Change in our way on that Occasion was, that what
before we had done in corners, and with hazard, then we did safely and openly;
and, what fault was in this? But, One says, that the Presbyterians suspected
the kindness, and joined with the Conformists, like wise Men, and refused the
Bait: Who said so, or on what Ground, I know not; we went no further from the
Conformists, than Conscience of Duty had made us do before; but it had been a
strange thing, if when Liberty was granted us to worship God in his own way, we
had then joined with a Superstitious Worship, which we could not do before. If
that Author mean, That Presbyterians were then willing to concur with the
Conformists, as their Protestant Brethren, in all things lawful, to disappoint
the Designs of the common Enemy, we approve of that Inclination, and think the
Dr. cannot charge us with any thing to the contrary in practice: Wherefore it
is without all Reason, that he dateth the Presbyterian Separation from that
time, p. 23. Their building Meeting Houses, and using Separate Meetings, p. 24.
will not prove it; for the one they did before, and the other was but a more
public owning of what was their private practice, when under the lash of the
Persecution. Defending their practice by writing, is no proof neither: If he
can prove, that they do it on Principles that will justify any Separation, let
them be blamed; but this, I suppose dropped from his Pen without due
consideration. That they choose Ministers one after another, is as little proof
as the rest; how to judge I know not, of what his credible Person informs him,
Of ten Ministers coming into one City. It is a hard Case, when Ministers put to
great hardships by the Five Mile Act, that it being suspended, they might not
live in Corporations for their Accommodation. Let the Author of the Peaceable
Design (cited p. 25.) answer for himself; I am sure, such Non-conformists as I
have conversed with, never approved of the Tolerating of Papists.

Sect. 24. Mr. Nigh is produced (p. 27.) as owning, that Jesuits had a hand in
our Divisions (whoever denied it) in persuading the unlawfulness of hearing the
Conformists preach. Whoever broached that Principle, it was never received
among the more sober and intelligent of the Non-conformists, especially the
Presbyterians; it is their Corruptings of God's Ordinances, not their
dispensing of them, that we refuse to join with them in; and when we cannot
join in the one without the other, we must forbear both; which is by a
necessity from them, not our choice; but of this he will give fitter occasion
to speak afterward. What he cites out of Mr. Baxter, p. 28, 29. 30. though there
be Expressions of the keen Spirit of that learned Writer, which might have been
a little softened, yet all that he says, proves no more but this; From among
the Non-conformists have gone out some Sects, that by their unsound principles
have given advantage to the common Enemy, which we deny not, but lament; but if
this prove our way evil, and tending to Popery, the same must be concluded
against the Reformation from Popery, where the German Anabaptists sprung up;
yea, Christianity shall not escape, for did not Gnostics, and other like
Heretics, arise from among Christians, even in the Apostle's days?

Sect. 25. The Dr. (p. 31.) triumphantly appealeth to any impartial Reader, Who
most serve the Popish Designs, those who keep to the Constitution of the Church
of England, or those who fell into the course of separation. I hope the Judge
that he constituteth, having considered his Allegations, and the Answers
hitherto discoursed, will acquit us of all accession to Popish Designs; but if
we should take as much pains to retort the same blame on his party, as he has
done to accuse us, it were easy to guess where the Sentence of Condemnation
would fall; but I delight not in such unbrotherly work, and there is the less
need for it, that day unto day utters speech, to discover the sidings of that
party with the Enemies of our Religion: That the Papists designed to force all
to seek a general Toleration, is not unlikely; but that Non-conformists did
desire or seek it, is unjustly insinuated.

Sect. 26. When I consider what he writes (p. 33, 34.) I see cause to retort
his own words on him, which he uses, p. 23. If such bold and notorious
untruths are published now, what account may we expect will be given to
Posterity of the passages of these Times? He does represent the Non-conformists
very unfairly, if not very falsely; as that on the Discovery of the Popish Plot,
the Non-conformists seemed to be Like men roused out of a deep sleep, amazed,
confounded, fearful of every thing, mistrusting all that were not in such a
consternation as themselves. Were they not as vigilant and jealous over the
Papists, as other Protestants even before that time? Yea; who that will see,
does not know that they exceeded their Neighbors in this; he has forgotten
what he had before so often declaimed against them, That they pretended to be
the most zealous Protestants about their fear of Popery, their indiscreet zeal
against it, etc. with which he besprinkles most of his pages: But now, of a
sudden, they are transformed into a sort of Men asleep, having neither fear of,
nor zeal against it. How does passion blind men? Impedit ira animum, etc. Their
fear and consternation on the discovery of the Plot, is as groundlesly affirmed
as their sleep before it: No doubt, they were apprehensive of Danger, as all
the Protestant Nation were, and still are; but what Signs of such Disorder was
among them, he does not say, because he could not; therefore a general
Accusation was more apt to calumniate them by. But it may be (and it is beyond
a may be) they fasted and prayed more than some others did on this occasion,
and that some reckon a sign of Guilt and Fear, beyond what is to be found in
good men. Some (says he) in this case pressed the Dissenters to study Union
among Protestants; But were they then, or ever, backward to it on sinless
terms? or, would they have had them abandon the light of the^r Consciences for
Peace-sake in that time of danger? He again charge the Non-conformists, that
Formerly they carried smoothly toward the common and innocent Papists, as they
styled them, and thought them equally capable of Toleration with themselves. It
were well done in the Dr. if he can make this appear against any one
Nonconformist; but if it be spoken with reference to them in general, nothing
can be more calumnious. It is of the same stamp that follows, p. 34. Their
trucking underhand for Toleration with the Papists; they represent, says he,
those of the Church of England, as Papists in Masquerade. Did ever any
Nonconformist talk at this rate of Conformists in general, as he would have
his Readers believe? And if it have been said of some, and those of no mean
degree in the Church, time partly has tried, and it is like, will further try
the truth of it; I commend his Humanity, and being free of undue heat against
the Papists, on occassion of that horrid Plot. If there was due heat, we
require no more; but he does most injuriously charge us with rage and
fierceness in that case: I know not, that the wise and sober among the
Non-conformists (if he will let it be said, that there be any such among them)
did exceed due bounds of the zeal of God against such a party of his Enemies.
He next fights with the popular Censures that then passed on many of the
Clergy, which we are not concerned in. I wish him to consider, that as
sometimes vox populi is vox diaboli, so also not seldom it is vox Dei.

Sect. 27. He hops that the Nonconformist Ministers (whom he taunteth as
high pretenders to, and self-applauders in wisdom and self-denial) would in so
critical a Time have joined with them against the common Enemy, or let them
know their Sense of the present state of things. Except in their Ceremonies,
the Non-conformists were never backward to join with them, and much less at
that time; for letting the Churchmen know their sense of things, I know not
what occasion they had for that, except in their Sermons, in which they were
asplain and faithful against Popery, as their Brethren were. He next falls
heavily on the Plea for Peace, and true and only way of Concord, as most
Unseasonable and Divisive pieces. The Author of these Books is of age and
ability to answer for himself, and yet living and writing: I need say nothing
for him, only this I make bold to say, abating the vehemence of the style, and
forwardness of that learned man's genius, which sometimes run into over-lashes,
that another cannot so well defend as himself; for the substance of the Books,
let the Dr. try it when he will, he may possibly find it a hard-enough Task to
deal with them. What that Author says in the name of the whole party, (which
the Dr. takes advantage from, p. 37.) does not oblige the party further than
they see Cause to own it.

Sect. 28. The Reverend Dr. does begin, p. 39. to give account of the occasion
and Design of his Sermon, which was answered by several Hands, and in defense
of which, this Book now under our consideration was written: I shall concern my
self little about it, being ready to give all possible Charity to the design of
so worthy a person, in undertaking and managing that Affair. I shall consider
what is said on this occasion, no further than shall be needful to the defense
I now manage of our present way. It is most injur^ous that he asserteth, that
(by such Books as he had mentioned) the zeal of many was turned off from the
Papists against those of the Church. Is there any thing in these Books that
favors Papists? or any thing that makes the Church of England worse than
that of Rome? If withdrawing from the Corruptions of the Church be defended,
this has no tendency to lessen Zeal against Papists. He that complains of
hard usage, (though without cause) should not so retaliate, as to call his
Brethren, who differ from him, and give reasons for their so doing, an enraged,
but unprovoked company of Men. This, and much of that nature, we resolve
patiently to bear. He must give us leave to deny what he imputes to our way,
p. 40. That It is a great, dangerous, and unaccountable Separation: If his
Arguments against it prove as hard as his Words, it will not be easy to stand
before him; if this be to touch us with a soft and gentle hand, as, ibidem,
what will his severities prove? Sure he has forgot himself, when with the same
breath he calls us peevish and partial men, and says, he resolved to give us
no just provocation by reproachful Language, or personal Reflections.

Sect. 29. The Vnseasonableness of this makebate Sermon is objected, which he
attempteth to disprove with a Flood of Words, all built on this Foundation;
That the Church was reviled, run down by a popular Fury, etc. This is the usual
respect the learned Dr. is pleased to treat his Antagonists with. Other men
think, that a modest Dissent and withholding Communion in unlawful things,
backed with solid Reasons given for so doing, was all that the Non-conformists
were guilty of; and that, that needed not give such an Alarm as if there had
been a Design to ruin the Church, as he fansieth; and unbyassed men will think,
that such a Sermon, on purpose chosen to be preached before the Magistrate,
rather than before his Ordinary Hearers, does not savor so much of a design to
guard the Consciences of the People against Nonconformity, as of some other
Design; what that was, may be easily guessed at, for all that is said to the
contrary. I speak now of the Tendency of the thing, rather than of the
Intention of the person; but I rather choose to wave this matter than contend
about it, being more concerned about the Truth of what was said, than the
Season of Saying it. I shall be as little concerned about the sharpness and
severity of his Sermon, which is the other Objection that he answers from p.
44. though I am sure, what I have already noted in this Preface, shows, that
such a way of treating Dissenters is not ab hoc homine alienum; but I must do
him that right, as to acknowledge, that there is more mildness expressed in the
Sermon than here, he being galled by the pungent Reasons of his Answerers; yet
there wants not some Vinegar in the Ink that the Sermon was written with; but,
I confess, that is so common a fault among imperfect men, that we must say,
Veneam damus petimusque vicissim; for my part, I study to shun it, but if I be
overtaken in this fault, I am willing to be admonished and corrected. We think
Schism as great a Sin as the Dr. does; and seeing he thinks the blame of it
is on our part, I judge it but consequent to that Opinion that he exposed it,
(and us by reason of it) with all its Aggravations; and if we cannot clear our
selves in this matter, let us lie under as much blame as he can load us with.
But withal, I hope he will remember, that if the Schism be caused by the fault
of his party, all the sad imports of his excellent Discourse will return on his
own Head, and those of his way: Wherefore I wish all this had been waved, and
the merits of the Cause only minded.

Sect. 30. The Expression that his Adversaries are so offended with (to wit)
that he says (p. 49.) The most godly People among them can least endure to be
told of their faults; is, as I think, not sufficiently vindicated, by saying,
that He meant it of them who will not hear their own Teachers telling them of
the sin of Separation; as Mr. B. alleges; for they that are so unteachable,
are not the most godly of the Non-conformists: I hope there are among them who
can hear Sin of whatever sort charged on them, and soberly consider what is
said; and if on Enquiry they be convinced of a fault, will humble themselves,
and confess, if not, will soberly clear their Innocence by Reasons. Far less is
it a fit Vindication of this Assertion, to apply what he had said to Dr. O. Mr.
B. Mr. A. and the rest of the Answerers of his Sermon. I hope he does not think
that Defense of Truth, or of that which one is convinced to be such, is always
the Sin of not enduring to be told of faults: Neither do I by so saying referr
the determining of our Debates to men's Fancies, which he hinteth, p. 47. that
we call the Dictates of Conscience (I am sorry that he does either so
undervalue Conscience, or reflect on the worthy Persons that answered his
Sermon.) If we cannot show plain and evident Reasons for what we say, (as he
requires) we refuse not causa cadere.

Sect. 31. He tells a very formal Story, p. 51, 52. of the Effects of his
Sermon, of the mimick Gestures of the Non-conformists, when it was spoken of;
the Truth of which History, though I doubt, I cannot disprove. It neither was
worth his writing, nor my confuting. He thinks it lay at bottom of many men's
Stomachs, that he did not persuade the Church of England to the Dissenters. Who
did ever require that? We pretend to no Authority over Her; if she would have
condescended to us for Peace sake (which that Party talk so much of) to forbear
imposing her unnecessary things, which we judge unlawful, that should have
satisfied us. But he thinks (p. 53.) it had been unseasonable to speak of
Alteration of Laws before Magistrates, who are tied to the Laws; that such
Alteration is one of the weightiest things. Ans. Supposing (as he there says)
his private Opinion for Abatements, there was no need of proposing the
Alteration of Established Laws; but the exposing of them that were under the
lash of Inconvenient Laws, may well be forborne, before the Executors of these
Laws, by a man that thinks that Abatement should be made of the rigor of
these Laws; I do not think (as he does) that the alteration of every
Established Law is a Matter of such weight as any thing that can be taken into
consideration, provided the consideration about it be by such as have Power to
alter it: What is more common than altering of Laws when they are found
inconvenient? Our first Reformers thought not so under Edward 6. The Liturgy
(and the Law for it) was altered when excepted against by Mr. Calvin abroad,
and some Zealots (so the Historian speaks) at home, Full. Chur. Hist. 6, 7. p.
386. Why may not this be done now, when Dissatis^action is become more
universal? But it is a supposition that I can give no account of, that the Laws
against Nonconformity (for of these his Discourse must be understood, if it be
at all to the purpose) should be so looked on, as that they concern the
preservation of the Church and Religion: That Church and Religion must stand on
a tottering Foundation, that cannot be preserved, if those things be laid aside
which are acknowledged to be indifferent. But thus it is to dote on Men's
Inventions; it is ordinary to equal, if not prefer them, to Christ's
Institution, Mark 7. 13. Mat. 15. 6. Qui amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam.

Sect. 32. But the Dr. is not content, not to advise the altering of these
Laws, where it had not been very pertinent to propose it, but he brings
Reasons able (as he thinks) to preponderate all the Considerations that any
might use for changing them; these Reasons are in number Six; the 1. is, The
Impossibility of satisfying all Dissenters. Must therefore none be satisfied,
because all cannot? Some will be satisfied, if you will but forbear imposing
what God has not commanded: Others will not be satisfied, unless you forbear
also some of Christ's Institutions, such as Infant Baptism; is it reason to
neglect the doing the one of these for Peace and Unity, because you cannot do
the other? The 2. is, The Uncertainty of gaining any considerable number by
Relaxations. If any man look on this as uncertain, it must be either because he
knows not what we scruple at or because he thinks us resolved to dissent
without reason, when the reason of our Dissent is removed; but, I hope the Dr.
is neither so ignorant, nor so uncharitable: He may be well assured, that by
relaxing the Imposition of humane Ceremonies, all the Presbyterians shall be
gained to join in worshipping of God with the present Church; and I hope he
will not say, that they are no considerable number in England. His 3. Reason
is, The difficulty of keeping Factions out of the Church, considering the
ungovernableness of some men's Tempers and Principles. Answ. If the Discipline
that Christ has instituted be duly exercised in the Church, that will either
make men governable, yea, actually govern them; or it will exclude them out of
the Church, and so Factions shall cease in the Church: But it is a strange
piece of Ecclesiastical Policy, on supposition that some will prove
ungovernable, to obtain the making of Civil Laws for imposing those things on
men's Consciences, which the Imposers count need nots, and they on whom they are
imposed, know them to be unlawful. This is the way to make them ungovernable
(in reference to these particular Impositions) who would tamely submit to any
Yoke that is not contrary to that of Christ. But it seems the Dr. looks on
all that scruple at human Ceremonies as ungovernable Persons: And we rationally
think, that his Party are resolved, that we shall either be governed by their
Will, (not by the Word of God) or they will take the most effectual ways that
they can to keep us out of their Church. I confess, Conscience is an
ungovernable thing, except by the Laws of Christ; but it is much the Strain of
some of his Party, (I am confident the Reverend Dr. does not mean so ill) to
ridicule and cry down Conscience in private persons, that they may be governed
by the public Conscience, (a Soloecism in Divinity, never heard of before)
i.e. The Will of the Superiors; the thing, to wit, Blind Obedience, is an old
Popish Tool, to enslave Consciences; but such an express affronting of
Conscience, (God's Deputy in the Soul) is a new Invention that this Age is
honored with.

Sect. 33. His 4. Reason is, The danger of breaking all in pieces by a
Toleration. Ans. Toleration is both commanded in Scripture, Romans 14. 1. Ephesians. 4.
2, 3. In this last place it is joined with endeavoring after Unity, so far is
it from being the way to break all in pieces, as the Dr. thinks. It is also
condemned, Rev. 2. 2, 20. wherefore it should not have been so generally
censured, as a Church-ruining thing. Beside, Toleration is not that which we
plead for in the first place, but that the things that grieve our Consciences
may be removed, that so we may join with you in worshipping God in his own way,
that we may need no Toleration; but if that cannot be obtained, our next desire
is, that we may be suffered to worship God in that way that is acceptable to
him by our selves, when we cannot do it with you; neither is it a vast and
universal Toleration of all Blasphenius, Heresies, and Vnpeaceableness, that we
contend for, but a forbearing of such as live peaceable in their Dissent from
you in the smaller Concerns of Religion. This Toleration would break nothing in
pieces, but the denying of it tends to break all in pieces: For while Men
have the use of their Conscience, they will Dissent, and serve God in the way
that they apprehend pleases him, without men's leave, when they cannot do it
with their leave. It is a great mistake to think that Unity among Christians
lies only or mainly in Uniformity, and not rather in Consent, in the main
points of Religion, and loving forbearance in reference to the rest.

Sect. 34. The 5. is, The exposing our selves to the Papists and others, by
receding too far from the first principles and frame of our Reformation. This
is plain enough; yet without wronging the scope or sense, it might have been
thus expressed more openly, We are ashamed to mend, l^st Men should think that
we once were wrong. This Reason, if it prove any thing, will conclude against
all Reformations: Might it not have been pleaded against the abolishing the
high places in Solomon's, Azariah's, and Josiah's time; (of which before?) This
will expose us to Baal- Worshippers, as too far receding from the first
Principles of our Reformation: Might not the same have been in K. Edward 6's
time, and in Q. Elizabeth's time, in the one of which somewhat was mended that
was defective in the Reformation by Hen. 8. And in the other Praying for the
Dead, and some other things were laid aside, that had been under Edw. 6. It is
beyond my capacity to understand how this could expose you to the Papists or
any other; what could they say, but that some of their Superstitions were at
first over-lookt, which now you see the Evil of, and think fit to remove them?
What advantage could they make of all this against the Church of England? It
will be hard to convince those of mistake, who think, that cleaving to these
Ceremonies does more expose the Church to the Papists, and give them hope of
their thinking at last of returning to them, when they see how loath they are
to go too far from them. This Principle seems to make what we have done, or
the first Frame of the Reformation, the Rule of the Reformation, rather than
the Word of God: Neither can the laying aside of humane Ceremonies be
rationally esteemed a receding very far from the Frame and first Principles of
the Reformation, seeing they are of so inconsiderable moment, and next to
nothing, compared with the weighty points of Truth that we gained by the
Reformation. It is known to them, who have looked into the History of the
Council of Trent, that this very principle put an effectual Bar to all
Reformation in the Papacy, that was so much desired, and stickled for by some.
His sixth Reason is, The difficulty of keeping out priests, pretending to be
allowed Dissenters: This reason is near of Kin to that which papists use
against Peoples reading Scripture; The difficulty of keeping men from catching
Heresy by it: If the Dr. here suppose the Dissenters to be well affected to the
Priests, and willing to have their Company; or so unskilful, that they cannot
discern a Priest's Droctrine, from that of a Protestant; or to admit Ministers
among them, to the Discharge of that office, without Trial, and Testimonials:
Or, if he suppose, that when men are allowed, by Law, to Worship God without
Ceremonies; that the Law is so laid asleep, that men may do what they list: If,
I say, all these things be supposed, this Reason may seem to have some weight,
but without such a supposition, it is lighter than Chaff, and unworthy of the
Pen of the learned Dr. Stillingfleet.

Sect. 35. I perceive the Dr. cannot get that fancy out of his Head, That the
strength and union of the National Setlement depends on continuing of the
present Impositions, and that they are necessary to keep out Popery. Enough
has been already said, to lay open the fondness of this Imagination, and its
inconsistency with what Sentiments about the Ceremonies themselves do on other
occasions declare, when it serves a turn. After some indecent contempt of Mr.
A. in reference to what he had said of the Dr's Sermon, he distinguishes (p.
55.) between Lay-Communion and Ministerial Conformity, that he meddleth with
the former, not the latter, his reason is, If the People thought themselves
bound to do what is their Duty toward Communion with the Church, many
Ministers would change their Mind. I contract, but not misrepresent what he
says. To this I return two things, 1. Why Ministerial Conformity should not be
taken into consideration in such a Discourse, is not easily understood: But
that we may see the Dr. has a mind not only to make a distinction but a
difference between Nonconformist Ministers and their People, according to the
Maxim, Divide and impera. If all the People might lawfully conform, and the
Ministers also could submit to what he calls Lay-Communion, is no regard to
he had to the many Hundreds (not to say Thousands) of ministers, many of them
Eminent, and most, if not all of them, completely fitted for the Work of the
Gospel, and who have God's and His Church's Call to that Work? Is there no
Consideration to be used by the Church, how the Labors of all these may not be
lost, while the Harvest is great, and the Laborers few? (unless it be thought,
that the Case is not so now) and, Shall they all be rendered useless, rather
than the imposing of Subscription and Assent to what is confessedly not
instituted before born? Does this savor of that Regard to Souls, and of that
love of Peace and Unity that our Brethren make such a noise with, when it
suiteth their purpose? Though they think us no Ministers for want of Episcopal
Ordination, yet we cannot think so of our selves; and that one Principle
shows them the greatest Schismatics that are among Protestants; for by it
they unchurch most, if not all the Reformed Churches, and unminister all their
Pastors and nullify Baptism and all the other Ordinances that are among them.

Sect. 36. The other thing that I reply to this distinction of the Dr's is,
That we have such rational and well-grounded Scruples even against
Lay-Communion, that is, joining in their Service, and the use of the
Ceremonies, that nothing that we yet have seen, is able to remove, as I hope
the Progress of this Debate shall make appear. He alleges, (p. 6.) that The
scruple of the Surplice is worn out, kneeling at the Sacrament is generally
allowed by the more moderate Non-conformists: For the sign of the Cross, Mr.
Baxter says, The sin (if it be one) in using it, is not the Persons who bring
the Child to be baptized, but the Ministers; and that he also debateth for the
use of the Liturgy. To all this I answer, We have the same Scruple against the
Surplice we had of old, but do not for it withdraw, it being the Minister's
fault, not Ours. For Kneeling, it is our own act, and therefore we must either
be dispensed with in it (which the Church will not do) or for bear the
Sacrament in which it is; for we utterly deny, that the more Judicious of the
Non-conformists do allow it; neither do I see how they can, and disallow other
Ceremonies; for they all stand on one bottom (to wit) that they are not
instituted: but more of this in its due place. For Mr. Baxter's Authority we
lay little weight on it; he has his own Singular Opinions which neither party
do unanimously allow. His Reasons in their place we shall Consider. What he
says of the Crossing the Baptized Party, I know not that I shall hereafter be
put in mind of it, wherefore I answer, That though it be the Ministers Action,
yet it is the Parties (or his Representatives) passion; and that Personal. It
cannot be done on my Person, or my Child's without my Consent and Submission;
as if I willingly suffer Holy Water to be sprinkled on me, I am culpable in
reference to that Superstition: So it is in this case.

Sect. 37. The heavy Complaints that he makes, Page 58. of the unmanly and
barbarous usage that he met with for his Sermon, I am wholly a stranger to, and
can pass no Judgment on it; but if this be as he says, it is no way to be
justified. But he should not charge the party with this: There are some
Scurrilous and Mean wits among all Parties of men, who have no other way to
express their Zeal against what they dislike: And if we should trouble the
world with such public Resentments of the same kind of dealings, and worse,
that we and our way have met with, and Daily do meet with, not only from the
Rabble and drunken boozers of his party; but from Pulpits and the Press, not by
the baser Phamphelteers only, but famous Authors (witness Dr. Heylin's History
of Presbytery) we might write Books abundance. His citation of Bishop Whitgift
comes little short of a full proof of what I now say, in that he represents
us as Depravers, Raillers, Back-b^ters, Inventors of Lies, and spreaders of
false Rumors; and that of the best deserving men, if they but come short of
pleasing our humor.

Sect. 38. The Dr. next, p. 59. takes a view of the forces that he says were
mustered up against his Sermon, and passes a Verdict on each of his
Adversaries, which I shall not stay to Consider. Only I think he Treats Mr.
B. with too much of the same sharpness, that he complains he has received:
Though I think none who knows the writings of that learned man, will applaud
his severe strain. And for Mr. A. whether the Dr. was piqued by some home
Thursts that he had met with from him, I know not; but a man of his Worth and
Learning should not have been so despised, and his VVriting Represented so
Contemptibly as the Dr. deals with him; the facetiousness of his strain
needed to have bred no such Disgust; it is neither so. Low nor Scurrilous as
the Author would make us believe; others look on it as a condiment to prevent
Taedium and nauseousness. I know none that blames the excellent Writings of
Mr. Fuller, which have a pleasantness not unlike that of Mr. A's. The debate
that next falls in between the Dr. and Mr. A. about the true meaning of the
Text, of the Dr's. Sermon, he now waveth; as I shall also do that about the
proof of a Deity, which I think might have passed, as Foreign to this purpose.

Sect. 39. One of his Antagonists (p. 71.) charge him with changableness, in
writing here contrary to what he had written in his Irenicum, about which he
makes Diverse Apologies. A change in this Learned Man is too visible, and if
it had been to the better, it had not been Culpable; but because his Changes do
not so much concern our present debate about Conformity to the present
Church Way, I shall not meddle in that matter at this time: Especially a change
being (upon the matter) acknowledged by himself, p. 76. One thing I cannot pass
over; That he had Asserted in his Irenicum, that if others cast them wholly out
of Communion, then is their Separation necessary: which he would reconcile with
what he here writes, p. 47. by showing a difference as to this between the
Excommunication of the Church of Rome, and of the Church of England: for says
he, Our Church does not cast one wholly out of Communion for mere Scrupulous
Nonconformity, but allows to Communicate in some parts of worship. 2. Ours
is but the lesser Excommunication; which he confesses, public defamers of the
Orders of the Church to be under, ipso facto, by the Canons; but that it lays
on no Obligation till duly Executed: But the Excommunication of Rome is with
an anathema. All this is very little to the present purpose: for if we be all,
ipso facto, Excommunicated, and if this Excommunication be most frequently (as
it is) Executed against us, and capias's issued out commonly against us; and
all this for mere Scrupulous Nonconformity (as he calls it) by these means
we are de facto, put in such a Case, as we cannot enjoy all the Ordinances of
God among them; and therefore we must either live without Gods Ordinances; or
have them out of Communion with their Church. Again, he Alleges p. 75. that
he could not mean, that there was an equal reason in these cases, when he
expressly determines, That, in the case of our Church, men are bound in
conscience to submit to the orders of it: Neither does this help the Matter;
for if we think (as we do) that we are bound, in Conscience, not to submit to
all the Orders of the Church, some of them being unwarranted by the Word of
God; and if for this Opinion, and suitable Practice to it, we be so
excommunicated, as we cannot enjoy God's Ordinances with the Church; then we
are cast wholly out of the Church, and our Separation must be Lawful, on the
ground that of old he had laid down. But page 76. He would, in that case, allow
us a serupulous forbearance of Acts of Communion; but not to proceed to a
positive Separation. But if we make use of his Allowance, the Church, who is of
another mind, puts a Bar to our Enjoying all God's Ordinances: What can we
then do, but either live without them* or proceed to that, which he is pleased
to call a positive Separation? We are not convinced, that our Practice is
condemned by the wiser Protestants abroad, for all the Letters that he
mentions; of which, in their place: And it is a rash Assertion (which he
knows cannot be Tried) page 77. That if a Council were called of all the
Protestant Churches in Christendom; we should not doubt of their Determination,
of the unlawfulness of the present Separation. He, our Author, makes good the
saying, Quod misere volumus, id facile credimus; any man that has seen the
Uniformity, in almost all things, that is between our mode of Worship and
their's; and the great Deformity that is between theirs and that of the Church
of England, will find reason to expect a quite contrary Determination from such
an Assembly. We may appeal in this case even to some of the Sons of the Church
of England. The excellent and Pious, and Learned Sr. Matthew Hales, in his Book
of Schism, has this passage. In times of manifest Corruptions and
Persecutions, where Religious Assembling is dangerous, private meetings,
howsoever beside public Order, are not only Lawful, but they are of necessity
and Duty. All pious Assemblies in times of persecution and Corruption, however
practiced, are indeed, or rather alone, the Lawful congregations and public
Assemblies, though according to form of Law, are indeed nothing but Riots and
Conventicles, if they be stained with Corruption and Superstition.

Sest. 40. He answers an Objection* page 77. That the Publishing of this Book
is now unseasonable, being a hindrance to the Union of Protestants, to which
there seems now to be a general Inclination. He Alleges (p. 78.) that the
principles of Non-conformists hinder that Union, and lay a foundation for
perpetual Divisions. He knows that we will not own this, and therefore
proves it (as he thinks) On the principles laid down by some of the
Dissenting Brethren; Let the constitution be never so easy to themselves,
others may make use of their grounds, and carry on the Difference as high as
ever. I wish he had told us what these grounds are. But it is an Odd kind of
Reasoning; we will not endeavor Union with them who may be Tolerated, because
they who are not to be Tolerated, will expect the same favor. The ground on
which we plead for forbearance, is, our Scruple about what you confess to be no
Institution of Christ nor necessary duty; we in our Conscience judge it
unlawful, and can show good reason for our so judging: How this ground can be
Improved by any body to heighten Differences, unless it be by the
peremptoriness of them that will Impose such Things, I do not understand. He
professes to be for Union that will lessen differences, and not weaken, but
strengthen the Protestant Religion: Now let any judge whether the Union that is
founded on the ground proposed be not such.

Sect. 41. He says, p. 97. That Universal Liberty differs from Union, as
loosing from binding; and it is strange, if that which Papists lately thought
the best Means to bring in Popery, should now be looked on as the most effectual
way to keep it out. Ans. We do not, nor ever did plead for Universal Liberty,
which was that which no doubt Papists aimed at, ergo nihil dictum. But suppose,
says he, the Indulgence be at present strictly limited to Dissenting
Protestants, we are not sure it will always continue so; Will not the same
Reasons, as to Scruple of Conscience, suffering for Religion, etc. be extended
further when occasion serves, and Popery gets footing on the Dissenters
Grounds? Ans. Were it not as rational for us to say, Though we can now join with
the Church of England, in her present Ceremonies, what know we how soon on the
same grounds she may bring in all those of Popery? Let us forbear evil
surmising, and mind our present Duty, especially seeing the way to prevent this
feared Evil is obvious, (to wit) that no Indulgence be granted after, but what
there is as good Reason for, and as little hazard from, as is at present:
Neither do we plead for Indulgence merely on the grounds of S^ruple of
Conscience, or Suffering for Religion; but on other grounds in conjunction with
these, as has been a little above expressed. It is like our Grounds may be
comprehended in his wide-Bellied, etc. but if by it he means all grounds of
Forbearance now may be extended to plead for an undue Toleration, then all
Forbearance of Christians that dissent in any thing, must be unlawful, which is
contrary to the Scripture formerly mentioned, and to the general Sentiments of
all Christians, except Papists, whose Religion stands by Blood and Cruelty.

Sect. 42. Where (says he) has the Church of Rome more Laborers and a
greater Harvest than under the greatest Liberty of Conscience? Witness the
state of the Northern Kingdoms, compared with the number of Papists in the
united Netherlands; I can soon tell him where, (to wit) under Episcopal
Persecution of Protestants in Britain. If this be a mistake, these Nations have
been for some Years in a Dream. Again, his Instance is wide from the purpose,
for we plead not for a Toleration of all sects, and particularly not of
Papists; what Toleration is in the Netherlands, themselves can best give
account of. He asserteth it impossible to keep out Popery, where Toleration is
allowed; and I assert it as impossible to keep in Christianity in an impure
Church, where it is not allowed; and yet there is no inconsistency between the
two Assertions, if we distinguish between a Limited Toleration, which we plead
for, and one Unlimited, which he all along speaks of. To talk of Toleration
thus without distinction, is to walk in the Clouds, and not descend to the
thing in debate, which is unbeseeming a Disputant.

Sect. 43. He brings Three Arguments, p. 79, 80. to prove his Assertion; 1.
Because of the various ways of creeping in under several Disguises, which the
Priests and Jesuits have, and can never be prevented, where there is a general
Indulgence for Dissenters, and an unaccountable Church Power is allowed to
separate Congregations.

Ans. 1. This Argument Supponit falsum, which we have often disclaimed; to wit,
That we plead for a general Indulgence to Dissenters; we desire it may be
limited to men of peaceable Principles and Practices; to such as differ from
the public way in matters not Fundamental nor near to the Foundation (and for
our part, who are Presbyterians, we seek forbearance only in things that are
acknowledged to be none of Christ's Institutions,) and in things that are
neither against Godliness, nor the Peace of Church or State. Another Falsehood
that he supposes, is, That we plead for an unaccountable Church Power in
Separat^ Meetings. We plead for no Power in them, but what a good account can
be given of from Scripture; and what is allowed commonly to a Church as such.
2. I mentioned before a way of preventing the creeping in of Priests and
Jesuits, for all their Cunning, (to wit) The due Exercise of Church Discipline,
in all the ways that shall be tolerated, especially in the admission of
Ministers to their Office; and if these Foxes creep in at undiscerned cranies,
if Discipline be in vigor, they may be cast out again, before they can do any
considerable harm to the Flock.

Sect. 44. Argument 2. Because it will be great hardship, when men's heats are
over, for them (the Papists) only to be deprived of the Liberty of their
Consciences, when the wildest of Phanaticks are allowed it.

Answ. 1. Still the old Supposition must found all his Arguments. We plead for
no Toleration to any Phanaticks (properly so called) much less to the wildest
of them. 2. There are many weighty Reasons why Papists should be denied that
Liberty that is allowed to Protestant Dissenters; from the Grossness of their
Heresies, the Idolatry of their Worship, the Unpeaceableness of their
Principles, such as dethroning Kings, and cutting off all people that are
Heretics in their Sense; their Principle of bearing down all Religion but
their own. Had a Nonconformist spoke as much on the behalf of Papists, what a
noise would our Author have made about it, that we do their Work, etc. His 3.
Argument is, Because the diversity of Sects that will be kept up by this means,
will be always thought a plausible Argument to draw men to the Popish
Pretenses of Unity. Ans. By whom will this be thought? Surely, by no man that
considers, 1. That Unity in Error and Idolatry is no persuading Argument to
them who regard the Truths of God. 2. That our Differences are in things of the
smallest moment in Religion, and managed with Christian Love and Meekness, (for
who exceed these Bounds* may be punished by the Laws, notwithstanding a
Toleration granted.) 3. That the Popish Unity is but pretended, there being
more and weightier Differences among them, than among us; as the Dr. well
knows, and has, by his learned Labors, made the World know. His 4. Argument
is, Because the allowed Sects will in probability grow more insolent upon a
legal Indulgence, and bid defiance to the Settled Constitution, as we have seen
already by the yet visible Effects of the former Indulgence. Ans. 1. He has
little Charity for his Brethren, in expecting such things from them, and less
in making such an Observe on what is past, without any ground known to
unbyassed men. If he mean of any Indecency in Speech or Behavior among the
vulgar, we cannot answer for that; there is too much of it on both hands:
Neither is it fit, that on such a frivolous Ground the Sober and Conscientious
should be persecuted. 2. If Insolency shall happen (as God forbid) to be the
consequent of Liberty to Dissenters, let the Guilty be punished by the Law. We
plead for Toleration to Men's Consciences, not to their Immoralities; but, Are
we to expect, that the Laws of Men should work more upon them than the Grace of
God? Ans. Not on their Minds and Wills to change them, but on the outward Man
to restrain them. Such an Effect may be rationally expected, and is daily
observed in other Cases. It is an odious Representation, as if the Use of the
Liberty pleaded for were only to preach and pray, and write and dispute against
one another; and as absurd an Inference, that there seems to be much of Sense
and Reason in the Papal Pretense to Unity and Infallibility. Whatever our
Author, or the by-slanders that he mentions may think, they who have a just
Abhorrence of Popery, will think, that none of the Divisions that are amongst
us, are so bad as it by far, though we desire neither to excuse nor extenuate
them: Nor do we refuse to concur in our Station in any good way to heal these
Distempers.

Sect. 45. The rest of the Dr's Preface is taken up in expressing his
cond^scendency to the Dissenters, in the things that they scruple, though he
pleads for the Ceremonies as Lawful, (which is afterward to be debated) yet
he would have a Liberty allowed, that they who scruple them, may have the
Ordinances without them. If this were put in practice, it would be one step
toward healing: But it seems the Churchmen are not of his mind: However, we do
thankfully own his moderation. His other Condescendencies to such as scruple
Joining in the use of the Liturgy, are for the most part very commendable, and
might make England Happy, if they were practiced. But till some appearance of
that be, it will be needless for us to tell our Sense of them in particular:
But his kindness to his Brethren of the Ministry does not so well appear by his
Discourse from p. 88. He is willing to gain the People, but seems to look on
the Ministers as Competitors; his Reasons for dealing so with them it were not
hard to answer; but considering, that there is little hope of seeing even what
he holds to be made practicable, I think it needless to contend about it;
only I must tell him, that though we be as far as he is against Laymen, (as he
speaks) or any unordained Person, usurping the Office, or doing the Work of a
Minister, yet his Proposals are very lame, as to affording any Ministers at
all. And then what do all his commendable yieldings, as to the People,
signi^^e? Would he have them have Separate Meetings, but no Ministers in them
to Administer the Ordinances of God to them? This is a sort of Toleration that
would neither be for our Advantage, nor the Credit of the Church that allows
it: So that in a great many Pages he has said nothing.

There is nothing further to be noted in the Preface; for we wish the Proposals
that he makes, for Reforming some Abuses in the Church, p. 93. might take
effect.

Having now got through the Preface, I proceed to the Book, which the Learned
Author divides into Three Parts; the 1. is, An Histori^al Account of the Rise
and Progress of the Separation. The 2. is, Of the nature of the Separation. The
3. is, Of the Pleas f^r the Separtion. I shall accordingly divide this
Examination, and follow him, (...), so far as the clearing of our Principles
and Practice does require it. The Name of Separation is justly odious in the
Church; and it is certain, that wherever it is, some great Blame lies on the
one Party or the other, and sometimes on both; but there often is a sad and
undesirable Separation, attended with bad Consequences, where yet the one Party
is wholly innocent. I should here speak somewhat to open the nature of that
Separation that the Learned Dr. charge us with, but that were to anticipate
what is to be discoursed, animadverting on the Second part of his Book, and
therefore I now wave it.

PART I. The Dr's Historical Account of the Separation, Examined and Answered.
IN his Sect. 1. he premiseth two things, in prosecuting which, his First Part
of his Book is taken up. The first is, That although the present Reasons for
Separation would have held from the beginning of our Reformation, yet no such
thing was then practiced or allowed, by those who were then most zealous for
Reformation.

SECT. I. The Practice of the First Non-conformists considered.
BEfore we consider his 2d. Proposition, let us try how this will abide the
Test. Here are two Assertions put together, which for the greater clearness I
shall consider apart; the one is Doctrinal, the other Historical: The Doctrinal
part of his Proposition, is, That the present Reasons for Separation (I shall
not contend about calling our practice so, not being willing to contend about
words) would have held from the beginning of the Reformation.

This I deny, and shall first give the Reason of my denial, and then try the
strength of what he says for his Assertion. The Reason that I bring, is, That
our Reformation was carried on by degrees; as Rome was not built in a day, so
neither was it pulled down among us in a day. King Hen. 8. began this Work, but
did it so lamely, that Protestants were little satisfied. There wanted not
Non-conformists then, who were all the true Protestants; many of them laid down
their Lives for their Nonconformity. After him, his Son Edw. 6. a religious
and zealous Prince, reformed many things, but not all at once; for the Liturgy
was twice Reformed in his Reign, Full. Chapter Hist. book 7. p. 386. once in his
First Year, and again in a Parliament held in his 5, and 6. Years; and again,
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; there were also some Alterations made in the
Rubric, 1 Jacob. 1603. says the same Author. And it is known, that several
things unreformed in Edw. 6's Reign, were after taken away; as may be seen by
comparing his Injunctions with what afterward was practiced in them. We have
mention of Coming to Confession in Lent, Art. 9. of High Mass, Art. 21. Prayer
for the Dead is expressly injoined in the form of bidding of Common Prayers; all
which were afterward removed, name and thing; yea, these very Injunctions gave
people Hope of a further Reformation; for they were only intended till a
Parliament should be called. And Art. 27. People are injoined, not to violate
the Ceremonies not as yet abrogated; which gave the people confidence, that
such Superstitions were not to be continued as a Burden to Men's Consciences,
but were used for the present supposed necessity.

Sect. 2. The Case is far otherwise with us; we are put beyond all Hope of
Relief; a Yoke of Humane Ceremonies wreathed on our Ne^k, without any
probability of being loosed from it: For after the King's happy Restoration,
then there was the fairest opportunity that could be wished for Condescendence
and Accommodation, the Ceremonies having gone into Disuetude for 20 years, and
the Nation being more generally against them than ever before, by the Light of
the Word, that had for so many years been more freely and fully held forth than
before; and when a great number of Ministers presented a Petition for Peace, to
their Brethren then commissionate to Reform the Liturgy, and used the strongest
Reasons, the most earnest Obtestations, and the greatest Condescentions that
could be, to obtain either a taking away of what was grievous to their
Consciences, or, at least, a forbearance in them, (all which may be seen at
length in the Book it self;) yet nothing was to be obtained, but Impositions
made more strict, and our Yoke made heavier than before, rather than lighter;
so that there remained no more Hope for our selves, or our Posterity; but
either we and they must take up with a Worship, that, we are convinced, is mixed
with some things that makes it displeasing to God, or live without God's
Ordinances, or worship God apart by our selves. May not we appeal to God, and
to all the World, That whatever our Brethren talk of Peace and Unity, we were
for Peace, but when we spoke, they were for Wars? Psalm. 120. 6. while they will
not abate nor bear with us in one Ceremony, (which themselves declare
Indifferent) for that Peace and Unity that they extol so highly; yea, for the
keeping out of Popery, the re-entry of which they pretend to fear by our
Divisions.

Sect. 3. These things being considered, it is very evident, That our Case is
not parallel with that of the first Non-conformists, in reference to Communion
with the Church, and therefore the Reasons that moved them to go along with the
present way, do not conclude, that we ought to do the same; for, 1. There was
then a necessity apprehended by some of the best men for retaining some of the
Ceremonies that had been in use in Popery, lest too sudden and visible a Change
(it being the outside of Religion that the multitude does most consider)
should have scared the people from owning the Reformation; and we know,
Necessitas quicquid coegit defendit: On this Ground even the Apostles retained
for a time a little of the Jewish Observations, Act. 15. 28, 29. I do not say,
that there was a necessity for this, but it was then thought to be, and
therefore must needs influence their minds and practice, as if there really had
been such a necessity: But now it is evident to unbyassed men, that there is no
such necessity for retaining these Ceremonies. P^pists are so far from being
brought over to us by symbolizing with them, that they conceive Hope, from that
very thing, of our returning to them; as has been made appear by several
passages in their Writings and Discourses, which I now stay not to rehearse:
And in very deed, our Service, especially in Cathedrals, comes so much nearer
to their way, than it does either to the way of the Apostolic Church (so far
as it is recorded in Scripture) or to the way of most of the Reformed Churches;
that it were no hard task to bring in Popish Worship (abating the Service being
in Latin) and Discipline (for in that also we are at no great distance from
Popery) among us, without being observed by the Vulgar. And the necessity is
yet the less for retaining them among us, that our People have not been bred in
Popery, as in those Times, when the Ceremonies were retained, and therefore are
not in that hazard that they were to ^all back into Popery upon the abolishing
of them; yea, it is so far from that, that the disuse of these might make
Popery to be more forgotten among the people, these being some of the Ornaments
by which that whorish Worship was once decked.

Sect. 4. A Second Ground, why the reason of their cleaving to the Church Way
does not conclude for our doing the like, is, They had cause to look on their
Grievances but as temporary, and knew that further Reformation was designed,
and might be in a short time expected, and therefore it was Reason that they
should rather forbear, for that time* their Edification, (I mean the external
means of it) that they might have had by pure Ordinances, rather than seem to
make a Breach. This Reason does not at all touch us, who are out of all hope of
such purity of Ordinances in the Church, as is pleasing to God, or consistent
with His Acceptance; (I mean, from us, who know the right way; for I shall not
judge what acceptance an impure worship, invincibly not known to be such, may
find with God) they had not in vain essayed to make Peace with their Brethren,
and been rejected with a peremptory ^leaving to the least Indifferent Ceremony,
rather than to satisfy the Conscientious Seruples of those who doubted; which
is our Case. Therefore we are (even by them who blame us for what they force us
to) brought to a necessity of worshipping God apart from them, seeing we
neither can now do it, nor hope that afterward we may do it with them. And this
our Necessity is heightened, and our Case made yet more different from theirs at
the Reformation, when we consider, That that was a time of Reformatio, Status
convalescentiae; ours is rather status decidentiae, a time of Increasing,
rather than of Diminishing the number of Superstitions, and coming nearer the
Popish Modes, rather than going further from them. Instances of this are not a
few; take for a taste the allowing of Plays on the Lord's day; (the zealous
promoting of the Book of Sports by that party, is not yet forgotten) whereas
that day was, Art. 24. of King Edw. the 6's Injunctions, before mentioned,
appointed to be given wholly to God in hearing the Word of God read and taught
in private and public Prayters, etc. A further Conviction in this Matter may
be abundantly had from a book entitled, The Advances of England toward Popery;
which Book, though our Reverend Author labors to disparage, p. 35. of his
Preface, yet agrees so well with what men see with their Eyes, that it is not
fit to be slighted; for, Though some be mentioned, and blamed in that Book that
appeared most zealous against popery, yet it is no Rarity for Words and Deeds
to clash. Quid verba audio cum facta videam? And if it be true, that the Author
before his death was sensible of the Injury he had done to some, yet his
Evidence that he brings will still be compared with what every one saw to be
the tendency of some men's way. I might here allege the obligation of the
National Covenant that we are under, as they were not to whom the Dr. would
make our Case parallel, tho I never thought, that that Bond made any new Duties
or Sins, that were not such antecedently; yet the Oath of God makes the Tie
that we are under to Duty, and against Sin, more weighty, and aggravateth the
sin of doing what is contrary to it; but of this afterward. I conclude then,
that the present Reasons of Separation would not have held from the beginning
of the Reformation, quod erat probandum.

Sect. 5. The learned Dr. (p. 2.) after explaining the terms of his Assertion
which we have denied, proves the Identity of Reason, in their Case and ours,
by the Ceremonies, Liturgy, etc. being the same. Let all this be admitted; as
they were dissatisfied with these then, so are we now; but we join not in these
practices, as they did, and worship God without them, as they did not; because
our Case does not make these things appear so needful as theirs did, because we
have no Hope of Reformation, as they had; beside our being under an additional
Tie against such Superstitions, which they were not under. Not content with
this, the Dr. thinks to prove, that we are more obliged to join in the Church's
Worship, than those at the Reformation: 1. Because of the Number, Diligence,
and Learning of our allowed Preachers. 2. Because the Ceremonies are
retrenched. 3. Because of the Mischiefs that we have seen of Separation. To the
first I answer; As what we complain of in the present Ministry, is not the
Ground of our with drawing (though it is a sad Grievance, and tends to make
the Ordinances of the Lord to be abhorred in the Eyes of the people; as the
ways of Eli's Sons did, 1 Samuel 2. 17.) so neither can their Commendation by him
given, be a sufficient Reason for our joining in corrupted Ordinances. I
confess, the number of the present Ministers is greater than in those days, the
generality of the Clergy continuing Popish; and I am far from derogating from
some among them, who are learned and diligent (and ^ add) pious men, and sound
Protestants: But as for the far greatest part of the Parish Ministers, that the
people are most edified by, or disappointed of their Edification, they are
either Strangers to England, or strangely biased, who see not cause to
complain of their Ignorance, Idleness, and vicious Conversation, if not of all
these three. To the Second; I know not what retrenchment has been made of
Ceremonies, since the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, but I know Additions
have been made, if not as to Imposing, yet as to Use, and some Additions to the
Holidays has been imposed; but if they were fewer than they are, they are
enough to corrupt the Worship of God, and furnish as strong an Argument to
forbear such corrupted Worship, as if they were more numerous. A grain of
Arsenick may justly make one forbear a Dish in which it is, as well as if there
were two or three in it. To the Third; As he has seen Mischiefs of Separation,
and we do not extenuate them, so have we of Impositions, yea, all the Mischiefs
of that kind are justly imputable to these Impositions, they being the Cause of
the Separation; and, causa causae est causa causati. Our Ancestors had hope of
freedom from that Yoke, as has been said, which we have not; therefore no
Inconvenience (that is not our Sin) can warrant us to join with, and in the
depravations of the Worship of God, which were our Sin, as neither can such
inconvenience excuse us to live without Ordinances always, as the former
Non-conformist^ might do for a time.

Sect. 6. In his 2. Section, he comes to the proof of the other part of his
Assertion, to wit, That there was no Separation practiced or allowed by those
who were most Zealous for the Reformation. He confesses there were different
apprehensions about some few Things; but denies that they were the Things now
Scrupled at; and that any Separation was made because of them. I shall not much
dispute either of these, because the Cause that I defend is not much concerned
in them, but stands on a better foundation, than the opinions or practices of
men: And because our case and reasons differs from theirs as has been showed,
yet shall I a little examine what he alleges under both these heads. For the
former of them; he proves it only from Mr. Roger, Scrupling only the square
Cap and Tippet; and B. Hooper Scrupling only the Episcopal H^bit, to which
afterward he submitted: And Bucer and others scrupled the Liturgy till it was
reformed, but none after that scrupled any of the Things now in Controversy.
Here is Fall^cious if not false History, for with Rogers and Hooper, called
Ringleaders of the party by one who was no friend to them* are re^koned others
who had sted beyond Sea, and sucked in both the Air and Discipline of the place
where they lived, and renounced all Ceremonies practiced by Papists, conceiving
that such ought not only to be clipped with the Sheers, but to be shaved with the
Razor; yea, all the stums thereof to be plucked out. Fuller Chapter Hist. Lib. 7.
pa. 402. These fugitiv^s (if it be not too bad a name for them) I understand of
Hen. 8's. Reign of whom Fox, Act. and Mon. Book 3. p. 145. in the History of
Hooper, one of them, they being also joined with them by Fuller. Is all this no
more than two men's scrupling only some Habits? Or is not here rather a
considerable number exactly of our opinion about all humane Ceremonies in the
worship of God? 2. What he says of Mr. Rogers is a very Imperfect
Representation of him, for Fox, Act. and Monu. Vol. 3. pa. 131. (the place
which he cites) says no such thing, as that this was Mr. Rogers only scruple:
and Mr. Fuller (loco citato) says the contrary. Mr. Fox is telling a story of
his Dissent from a Determination of the Bishops and Clergy in the Reign of Edw.
6. for wearing of Priests Caps and other Attire belonging to that order: Mr.
Rogers said, He would not agree to that decree of uniformity, unless it be also
decreed, that the Papists for a difference betwixt them and others, should wear
on their sl^eves a Chalice with an Host upon it; which shows his factious and
resolute way of refusing that thing, on that occasion, rather than, that he did
not scruple any thing else; and it has no show of probability that such a wise
and holy man, would stick at that, and not at other Ceremonies, that had as
little warrant, and were more intrinsic to Religion and worship, and so less
in the power of men to be Determined.

Sect. 7. 3. We may say the same of excellent Hooper who was long at Zurick,
and very dear to Bullinger, and one of those that had sucked in the Air and
Discipline of the Places where they lived, and were for rooting out of
Ceremonies. He was a Ringleader of these, and this his scrupling the Episcopal
Habit is never mentioned as the whole of his Opnion about Ceremonies, but is
taken notice of on a particular Occasion. For his after submission; it was by
the force of Temptation, being in prison, and Deserted by his patron, the Earl
of Warwick. Fuller ubi supra, p. 404. And with what reluctance he did it, see
p. 405. 4. That on the review of the Liturgy in the Reign of King Edw. 6. there
was little or no Dissatisfaction left; at least as to the things now scrupled,
is still false History; for that review was Anno 1547. Full. Chapter Hist. Lib. 7.
p. 386. whereas 1550. he tells us pa. 402. of two parties discovered,
Conformists and Non-conformists, and the one against all the Ceremonies.

Sect. 8. That there was no separation at first he next asserteth; but people
(tho scrupling them) complied with the use of Liturgies and Ceremonies. May be
it was so at the very first, while Reformation was hopeful going on. I have
already showed why we are not bound by such Examples: I shall now Apologize for
the unimitable practice of the those holy men, to excuse them atanto, though
not atoto. The glorious Change that then was wrought in the Church, did so
affect then, and engage their zealous hearts to Gods Ordinances, that they did
not so thoroughly consider, as they ought, the sinfulness of the Ceremonies:
They had got so many things reformed, the evil of which was so incomparably
beyond that of the Ceremonies, that these seemed as nothing to them. It is
known that the limited and scant powers of our Souls, our Understandings,
Affections; yea, our Senses are by some vehement Objects so diverted, as that
meaner Objects at the same time cannot move them, nor be noticed by them. It
was much that these men discovered any evil in the Ceremonies, but that the
principles that the Reformation was built on led them to that; (to wit) That
Scripture is the Rule by which the Affairs of the House of God must be ordered;
but it is no wonder that they did not so fully discover the Evil of them, nor
were so affected with it, as we who have had longer time and less hindrance to
think on these things. I am far from thinking, that they had either less Light,
or less tenderness of Conscience than we, but that their Mind and Conscience
were exercised about higher Matters, which we have (through the Lord's
goodness) so settled to our hand, that reforming of these is not our Work. They
were employed to do the hardest part of the Work; to cast out Antichristianism;
it was left to others that succeeded them to cast out of the House a little of
Antichrist's Furniture, that had been forgotten, or by minding greater things,
over-lookt, lying in some corners of the House: So that it does no more infer
blame on us forbearing the use of the Ceremonies that they used them, while
they reformed the Church from Popery, than it was a Blame to Hezekiah, Jos^ah,
and such Reformers, who took away the High Places that other Reformers had
left, when they threw out Baal's Worship.

Sect. 9. This may satisfy an unbyassed mind, that our noncompliance with the
Liturgy and Ceremonies is consistent with all that respect that is due to those
excellent Persons, who in the beginning of the Reformation practiced otherwise;
for we owe such respect to no man, nor men, as to reckon them infallible in
Opinion or Practice. Also what has been said may take off the edge of the Dr's
jeering Insinuations, That these things are now such Bug-bears to scare People
from our Communion, and make them cry out in such dreadful manner, of the
mischief of Impositions, as though the Church must unav^idably be broken in
pieces by the weight and burden of two or three unsupportable Ceremonies. We
have little Answer to this sort of Argumentation, only we say, It is not
Childish Fear, but Conscience guided by Scripture, that scareth us; neither do
we count these Ceremonies such as will break (though they defile) the Church, but
they are too heavy for our Consciences to bear, and the example of men using
them, can yield us no ease of this Burden. When the Dr. does thus ridicule the
Scruples of Conscience, that his opposites pretend to have, either he thinks,
that an Erring Conscience is to be cured by contempt and scorn, or that we do
only pretend to Conscience in our Dissent: The former is no sign of a good
Casuist, nor the latter of a good Christian; for such will not judge, lest they
be judged. He stormeth much at two Expressions of one of his Antagonists; one
is, That it is unreasonable, that Men should create a necessity of Separation,
and then complain of the Impossibility of Union: Has our Church (says he)
made new Terms of Communion, or altered the old ones? Ans. Though the Terms of
Communion be not new, as to the matter of them, they are perpetuated on new
grounds, which make them now harder to be submitted to than before, for they
were brought in at first on a present Necessity, as then was thought, the
Nation being Popish, and ready to abandon the Reformation, if that was
offended. Now it is not so; they were continued in a Reforming time, and now
fixed in a time when no such thing is to be expected, but rather the contrary:
They were retained in the Morning twilight of the Reformation, but now in the
Noonday of Gospel Light long shining among us, fixed in perpetuity, so that
the present Prelates give a new Being to these Stumbling Blocks; especially,
they are new grounds of Separation, because now they are scrupled at more than
at first; and though the things were before, yet they did not such Mischief
then as now; and therefore, they who continued them when thus hurtful, (though
it were granted, that the hurt of them arose from the mistake of the Scruplers)
do create a necessity of Separation, while they may remove these scandals, and
will not. But they that scruple, cannot remove their Scruples. The other
Expression is, That continuing of the Ceremonies, is, venturing our Peace in an
old Worm-eaten Bottom; which the Dr. against all Reason, understands of the
Reformation, but is indeed to be understood of the Ceremonies. The Reformation
is founded on Scripture, a sure and sound Foundation. The Ceremonies on Men's
Will and Authority, and therefore justly termed a Worm-eaten Bottom. That he
says, There was no Non-conformists in K. Edw. 6. days, is before disproved;
and if there had not, while we can give Scripture-ground for our
Nonconformity, we need not be ashamed, though Martyrs and other Reformers acted
otherwise.

Sect. 10. That Dr. Ames can bring no other Instances but Rogers and Hooper, is
nothing against us, who have before showed that a Party they had, of whom they
were the Ringleaders. He seems, p. 5. to lay some weight on P. Martyr and
Bucer, persuading Hooper to submit to the Episcopal Habit; I deny not but they
di^ so, and he at last yielded to their Advice; but P. Martyr, in the Epistle
cited by the Dr. (to wit) Ep. Theolog. Hoopero, p. mihi, 1085. does there fully
declare his dislike of these things, and of all Humane Inventions in God's
Worship, only that for the necessity that then was, advises the Use of them;
as the Apostles on the like ground (as he there mentions) forbad eating of
things strangled, etc. He highly commends Hooper's Zeal in endeavoring, Vt
ad castam simplicemque puritatem christiana religio denuo aspir^t; and
desires, Vt omnia paulatim resecentur -- quae parum aut nihil habent, quae ad
solidam aedificationem referri p^ssint, and redundare potius and superflua
quodammodo piis animis judicantur. And he commends the practice at Strasburg,
(where he lived) Vbi vestrum discrimina quoad sacra sunt sublata, as being
Morem candidiorem and apprime resipientem Apostolicam ecclesiam: And after he
says, Accendit hoc meum desiderium, partim quod in ritibus, quamproxime vellem
ad sacras literas accedere, atque meliorum temporum ecclesiae imitatione
persequi, partim quod animadverto, papae sectatores adhuc his reliquiis conari
speciem saltem missae instaurare: And afterward, Si pateremur prius evangelium
and propagari and altas radices agere, melius fortasse and facilius
persuaderentur homines ut hos externos apparatus removerent. And he adds a
Similitude of one that was sick, and recovered by degrees, who cannot forbear
the use of some unfit things, that in health he will willingly put away. Does
not all this fully express what I have already said, That all the Ceremonies
ought to have been cast out at first? That the Reformers, partly by the
Church's, and their want of due light (like one in a state of Convalescency)
and partly out of a design to gain, and not offend the Papists, did for a time
retain these Ceremonies, with a design to have them afterward removed? And is
it not plain, that P. Martyr, under our circumstances, would be a Non
conformist as well as we? The opinion of this good man is yet more clear, and
against the Dr. out of another Epistle, Amico cuidam in Anglia, who none that
reads the Letter, and knows the History, can doubt to be Hooper, p. (mihi)
1126, 1127. where he says, De pil^^ vero rotundo vel habitu, extra sacra
gestando, non arbitramur esse plus quam opor^eat rixandum, at de vestibus ut
Sacris in ministerio ipso adhibendis cum sp^ciem Missae referant, and sunt
merae papatus reliquiae, Dominus Bullingerus cens^t non esse illis utendum; ego
vero et si usui ejusmodi ornamentorum semper sum adversatus -- idcirco tardior
eram ad suadendum, ut potius episcopatum abdicares, quam u^ illarum vestium
usum reciperes; attamen quia scandala ejus generis vidi prorsus evitanda,
propterea in ejus sententiam fucile cessi. He after advises, that he may not
act against his Conscience, and shows, that he himself, when at Oxford,
though he were Canonicus, yet would never wear the Surplice in the Quire. I say
nothing of Bucer, not having his Book, Script. Anglican. but it is reasonable
to think that he was of the samemind.

Sect. 11. That Mr. Bradford was a Nonconformist he cannot deny, but says, A
good man had an unreasonable Scruple. Might not we answer the same way to all
his Allegations of the Martyrs and first Reformers compliance with the
Ceremonies; (to wit) That good men did not scruple where it was reasonable that
they should. The words that he cited out of the Act. and Monument. Vol. 3. P.
319. where Mr. Bradford calls Martyrdom the Lord's Cognizance, and not
Tippets, etc. do rather make against than for his Design; for it is plain, that
he puts Tippets, etc. in the same Rank with Shaven Crowns, and calls them
Antichristian Baggage; and no reason can be given why these should be so
called, except that they are brought into Religion by Man, not by God; which
agrees to all the Ceremonies. Who they were that kept secret Meetings under B.
Ridley, it is needless to enquire. The Dr. guesseth, that they were furious
Anabaptists or secret Papists. I know no reason for this guess; but because he
is resolved* that there shall be no No^-conformists then, such as are now; but
that there then were some excellent men, who disliked the Ceremonies, I have
showed; that some of them did use them notwithstanding, I acknowledge. That any
did separate, I do not undertake to prove; nor can he prove the contrary, so
much as probably. I am sure, there were Principles then maintained by a Party
of men, which would have made them do as we do, if their Practice had been
sufficiently adapted to the Sentiments that they had about the Ceremonies,
which makes it not unprobable that some of them did withdraw; though it may be
the men of more note among them, who considered the necessity of their Case, as
warranting that Practice, might do otherwise; but it is no way likely, that the
Church did so furiously impose these things on the Consciences of Scruplers, as
we are now imposed on.

Sect. 12. The Dr's long Harrangue, p. 6, 7. to condemn our practice by the
contrary practice of the first Reformers, does either prove nothing, or it
concludes, that it is possible that such holy Men could mistake: Which before
he himself had imputed to holy Mr. Bradford, one of them here mentioned by him.
Their Holiness, Learning, Integrity, Industry, profound Judgment,
Mortification, did not entitle them to Infallibility. Were it not easy to name
many more men of all these excellent qualities, who have had their Navi? The
laying such weight on men, has been an useful tool to build up Antichristian
Babel, b^ taking People off from eyeing Scripture Authority in the matters of
Christ, and putting that of Men in its room. Does the Dr. thing it strange,
that a dissenting Artifi^er (a term suited to that Contempt of Non-conformists
that his Book is full of) should be in the right, when one more Holy and
Learned than he is in the wrong; especially in things of that moment that the
Ceremonies are of? For, I look on it as taunting, not disputing, to talk of the
mighty importance of the Ceremonies to the Souls of Men; the Beams of
Unlawfulness in them, of which a Mote could not be seen by the Reformers; we
count them of such Importance, as a tender Conscience ought to refuse them, and
yet not of such mighty Importance as many other things are. We see a M^te, not
Beams, of unlawfulness in them, whatever our Ancestors thought of them: Neither
is this because of a dark and Jewish Dispensation that they were under, while
all the clear Gospel Light of Division and Separation is reserved for our
Times, as the Author pleasantly dreams that we think; they were not so favored
with a general Sunshine of Light as we are, Popish Darkness being then but
going away: But for the Light of Division and Separation, we look on it as
gross Darkness, and leave it to our imposing Brethren, who cause the Division.
Neither was it the Reformer's want of Zeal for Religion, but want of Light and
Zeal against Ceremonies, that caused their different Practice from ^urs; they
Burnt for the former, not for the latter* Neither is it strange, that they
should have no suspicion of the unlawfulness of these things, when they went to
suffer, seeing these things never were controverted between them and their
Persecutors. Was it never heard of, that true Martyrs had Mistakes that were
extrinsick to that on which their Sufferings were st^ted? What he cites out of
Jacob, the Nonconformist against Johnson the Separatist, p. 7. does not touch
our Case, for the Separatist^ that then were, went on other Grounds than we do;
of which after; and if Mr. Jacob used some Arguments that were ill grounded,
let him answer for it.

Sect. 13. As to the Historical Account that he gives, Sect. 3. of the English
Exiles in Queen Mary's Reign at Frankford, and elsewhere, I shall not
controvert it, only I shall make a few Animadversions on it, having first in
general noted, That it is no wonder (nor is it argumentative against us, who
take Scripture, not Men's Opinions for our Rule) that they who in England were
inured to that less-pure way of Worship, did cleave to it abroad, till by
seeing and learning away more consonant to Scripture, they fell in with that:
And it is as little to be wondered at, that some gave more pliable Ears to the
right way that they were instructed in, in strange places; and others clave
more obstinately to that they had been bred with; (we know what a prejudice
Education causes) and he^c^ arose those Contests that he mentions. If he
could prove (as he cannot) that all the Nonconformity that is in England, was
brought from beyond Sea, he says nothing, unless he also prove, that it was
not brought out of the Scripture. We must not reject every thing in Religion
that is not of English Original, lest we by so doing throw off both
Christianity and Protestantism.

S^ct. 10. In particular, I first take notice of what he says, p. 8. These
(English Exiles) with the People in all other places, Geneva excepted, kept to
the Orders established in our Church. Here is a notable Falsehood, (to wit) That
all the Exiles kept to the Orders of the Church of England; himself excepteth
those at Frankford; and Mr. Fuller, above cited, tells us of a Party of
Non-conformists, before that time in England, headed by Rogers and Hooper; no
doubt some of them fled from the Marian Persecution, and it is not probable
they would use the Ceremonies that here grieved them, when they were under no
Law to ^ompel them. Another thing that I take notice of, is, He challenges Mr.
Baxter for saying, That at Frankford the Contest was between them who were for
the English Liturgy, and them who were for a more free way of Praying; but I
see not how this is disproved by him; the Confirmation of it may be rather
gathered from the Account he gives of these Debates, p. 9. (to wit) that when
the Magistrates first required them not to dissent from the French in Doctrine
or Ceremonies, and then took off that restraint: Yet they altered the English
order, and brought it nearer to the French Model; which we know does not impose
a Liturgy, nor restrain free Prayer; but at most proposes a Directory, wherein
are some set Forms, as helps to them that need them. To say, that those who
laid aside the Responses, Litany, and Surplice, ^^d many other things, were
still for the English Liturgy, is to speak at random. But he omitteth a
material passage, (because it makes against him) with which Fuller, Chapter Hist.
lib. 8. p. 27. supplieth us, out of the same History that the Dr. cites, (to
wit) The Troubles at Frankford: That they laid aside the Liturgy, Surplice and
other Ceremonies in Service and Sacraments, both as superfluous, and
superstitious: wherein then did they differ from Non-conformists?

Sect. 14. He says, p. 9. That the Question among them was not, Whether a
Liturgy, or not; but whether the Order of Divine Service, was not to be
accommodated, as much as might be, to the French. This is to confess, that they
did not contend for the English Liturgy, as he tells us some others did, who
were dissatisfied with their deserting of it. But I further Assert, That the
Controversy was between a Liturgy and Directory, to wit, between the way of
England, and that of the French Protestants, who have no Liturgy, but as other
Protestant Churches had; an order of public worship, for directing unqualified
Ministers; such many behoved to be in the beginning of Reformation from Popery,
to the set Forms, in which they were not tied, whom the Lord had competently
gifted for the Work of the Ministry: So as in the best Reformed Churches; these
Directories were by Degrees disused, as Crutches are by a Lame Man, as he
recovereth the use of his Limbs. p. 10. He tells us of some resolute
Conformists at Zurick and Strasburg, who were earnest with the Non-conformists
at Frankford. We deny not that there were such among them, who suffered for
Protestantism. What those of Frankford say p. 10. of not defacing King Edward
's Laws, must be understood of Laws for the Protestant Religion, not of those
for Ceremonies; otherwise it had been protestatio contraria facto; and p. 11.
Their not dissenting from their Brethren wholly at the ransom of their Lives
for this Doctrine, must needs have the same interpretion, if we will reconcile
them to themselves. And their extenuating, as much as might be the Alterations
they had made, shows them to be peaceable Men, that shun Offense, if
possible; but does not prove them to be for the English Liturgy; yea, or for
any Liturgy.

Sect. 15. He speaks (p. 11.) of Knox and Whittingham, finding their (the
Exiles at Frankfora's) Zeal for the English Liturgy, desired Calvin's judgment
of it. I find no such Zeal at Frankford, for the English Liturgy: but the Dr.
will have it so in despite of History, that tells us of their laying aside
its Ceremonies as Superfluous, and Superstitious: of which before. It was not
those of Frankford, but of S^rasburg, whose Zeal for the Liturgy (if it may be
so called, for they desire but the Substance of it to be retained; quitti^g the
Ceremonies, and things which the Country could bear) occasioned the calling for
Calvin's Judgment. Fuller, Chapter Hist. lib. 8. s. 3. p. 29, 30. out of Troubles
of Frankford, p. 24. In giving Account of Calvin's Answer to their Desire, he
represents Calvin as biased and selfish; being thoroughly heated in a cause,
that so nearly concerned him: It had been fairer to have refuted his opinion,
than to judge his Thoughts and Motives. He says also, that what Calvin thought
most unfit, yet he thought tolerable. Calvin says not so, pace tua dixerim, he
says, There were in it, multae tolerabiles ineptiae; not that all things in it
were such: Any that know Calvin's Principles will say, that he thought some
things in it no ineptiae, and other things not tolerabiles. And what he says
of the Tolerableness of these fooleries is no more, but that they might be born
with for a time; because they could not be corrected primo statim die. He does
then not count them tolerable; for he approves them that appeared against them
(tho he Condemns the most unseasonable contest, that was in that Church)
neque tamen (says he) eorum Constantiam repr^hendo, qui, ut pro justa causa
depugnent, in vilem contentionem trahuntur. He speaks of these things, as not
to have been tolerated, even in England, after the Progress of the Reformation.
Si hactenus in Anglia viguisset sincera religio, aliquod in melius correctum
multaque detracta esse oportuit. Much more to this purpose is in that Epist.
which is (mihi) 200, cited by the Dr. for 164. It is true, he speaks of his
easiness, to yield in indifferent things, such as are External Rites. This must
be understood of Rites common to Religion: and others, not of sacred
Ceremonies; or if of those, it is for a Time of urgent necessity, not always,
that they may be Tolerated. That Calvin gave no encouragement to Separation, if
the Ceremonies were continued, is said gratis; and in defiance of his own
Words, while he commends them, who stood up against them; and the Sequel
proved, that Calvin was so understood by them who regarded his judgment; for
Fuller, p. 31, 32. gives us the Story of their hard usage by the other party;
and of their departure from them, being Headed by Whittingham, after Knox's
removal, and sets down the Names of them, who separated themselves from the
Congregation of Frankford.

Sect. 16. He denies (p. 12.) That Calvin was in his Judgment for free Prayer,
because in his Ep. 55. (mihi 87.) to the Protector of England; he approves a
certain form, and gives Reasons for it. It is evident, that Calvin gives this
Advice for the necessity of the Church* that then was, Popery being then scarce
well removed, and there being few Pastors tolerably gifted for their work, and
some who Labored to sow the Seeds of Errors in Christ's newly dressed Fields,
whom he calls cerebrosos homines; I suppose he means the Anabaptists. That
Calvin designed no more, by this is manifest, both because at Geneva, and other
Churches that owned Calvin's Doctrine, Prayer was not restrained by an imposed
Liturgy; but men's infirmity relieved by some forms also; because Calvin, in the
same Letter to the Protector, advises, that all the abuses brought into
Popery, should be removed; and that by bringing back things to Christ's
Institution, as the Apost. does, 1 Cor. 11. 23. Inde (says he) colligend^
generalis Doctrina, tum de legitima reformatione and quae Deo accepta sit;
igitur ad ipsum purum dei verbum redeundum nobis esse, etenim supererunt
mixturae ex hominum ingenio prolatae, totidem extabunt polutiones quae homines
distrahant a recto eorum usu quae Dominus in ipsorum salutem instituerat, and
much more to that purpose: No Non-conformists will desire a further
Reformation, than Calvin there advises to; however he was forbearing with some
things for the present necessity, as good men then generally were. He tells
us that the Ceremonies (making no exception of the few that were retained) were
lenocinia quae miseras animas ad malum perducerent: That no Admonition against
the abuse of them, will hinder men to be hardened by them. He confesses that
Ceremonies should be Accommodated to the Peoples Capacity, but we must beware,
least under that pretext, any thing be left that proceeds from Satan or
Antichirst; and compares such a way of reforming to leaving of the High Places
untaken away. He blames leaving of some things unreformed, to (...) the
D^ss^tisfaction of some; and says, that in our own Matters, such yielding is
allowable, not in Gods matters; and that God will be with us, if we keep his
way, whatever Men think or act against us. Who ever, without prejudice, reads
that excellent Ep. will not look on Calvin, as a Favourer of either the English
Liturgy, or Humane Ceremonies.

Sect. 17. He does very unduly represent Calvin's Judgment expressed in his Ep.
to Cox and his Brethren, 165 (mihi 206.) He there mentions nothing
misrepresented to him, save that Cox and his Party had precisely urged the
English Ceremonies, and that they would remit nothing of them: But now by their
Letter he perceived, that they had showed themselves magis humanos and
tractabiles: Here indeed are different Representations; but not of the State of
the Controversy, or things controverted: Which of them was truest, we shall
see a little after. It is false to say, That he expresses himself satisfied,
that the matter was so composed among them; his Words are, Totum negotium
placide fuisse compositum gaudeo; he was pleased with their peace, not with
their decision. And that this was falsely by Cox, and the rest, represented to
Calvin, will appear, when I shall show that their Debate made a very
unpeaceable end. Calvin does not mention Lights to be an Excuse for his Letter;
but Them and Crosses, he mentions as superstitious usages to be abolished:
Neither needed he a miserable shift to excuse any thing that he had written:
His first Letter on Knox and Whittingham's Information, advising the abolishing
of the Ceremonies; his second on Cox's Information, applauding their supposed
peaceableness, which he rejoiced in, tho he could not obtain his first desire.

Sect. 18. That they at Frankford did compromise the matter, as he alleges,
p. 13. I do not find. Fuller says, p. 30. That Calvin's Letter struck such a
stroke, especially in the Congregation at Frankford, that some therein, who
formerly partly approved, did afterward wholly dislike; and more who formerly
disliked, did now detest the English Liturgy. Our Author tells us of Dr.
Cox's setting up the Litany, which put Knox in a rage, so as he declaimed
against the English Church, as far as his Wit and Ill Will could carry him. Woe
to the World, if such partial and false History carry the Day! But we see what
we are to think of the most ancient and remote History, when, so near our own
time, matters of Fact are so unjustly represented. Fuller, u^i supra, tells
us, That Dr. Cox, a Man of high Spirit, with some of his Friends, arrived
there, and, March 13. discompose the Model of their Service; first answering
aloud after the Minister, and on the Sunday following, one of his Company,
without the Consent and Knowledge of the Congregation, got up into the Pulpit,
and there read all the Litany; and Cites for this, Troubles of Frankford, p.
38. whereat Knox highly offended, Preaching from his Ordinary Text, showed the
English Book to be Superstitious, Vnpure and Imperfect. Is here any thing of
Rage, or what did not become sober Zeal for God, and his Ordinances, which were
interrupted in their peaceable Administration by a proud-Stranger, intruding
into the Pulpit without a call from the Minister or the Church?

Sect. 19. We are told by the Dr. ibid. from a Letter of Grindal to Ridley,
that the Church at Frankford was well quieted by the Prudence of Mr. Cox and
others, which met there, for that purpose: But a more Impartial Historian (out
of the Book that the Dr. pretends to follow), tho he be no Nonconformist,
tells us what a peaceable end this Debate came to; even such an end, as a
blo^dy Victory uses to bring to an unhappy War: And such a Peace as the
Non-conformists in England at this day have under Prelatists of the same temper
with Dr. Cox; and such as the poor Jews had in Shushan, when the King and Haman
sat down to eat and drink, Esth. 3. 15. The forecited Author, p. 30, 31.
tells how Cox prevailed by new Recruits out of England: And Knox 's Party
again by the Favor of the Magistrate, and the French Minister: And that Cox 's
Party being depressed, embraced a strange way to raise themselves, and accuse
Knox to the State, of Treason against the Emperor; and that in Eight places of
a Book of his. The seven last the Historian says, may be well Omitted. The
first is, That he called the Emperor no less an Enemy to Christ, than was
Nero. This the Impartial Historian cries out on; the Words being spoken some
Years before in England, by one that owned no Natural Allegiance to the
Emperor; that they should be charged on him, by Men of his own Religion, in
Exile with him, to the endangering of his Life: And of this, he says, alluding
to Rachel's Words, With great rather than good Wrestling, have I wrestled, and
prevailed. So was Mr. Knox advised by the Magistrate to depart; not forbidden
by the Congregation (as the Dr. says) to Preach: And those that clave to him,
were scattered. Here is Episcopal Peace, and here is a taste of the Spirit and
Methods, by which they carry on their Cause. But further, the some Author
tells us, how harshly the Coxioens (it is his own word) used the other party,
ejecting their Church Officers, without taking any notice of them, or asking
their consent. Also how they refused to let the matter come to Hearing or
Arbitration, by which he says, Cox's party lost much Reputation. How they
reproached the other as Schismatics, when they had made the Shism in a
peaceable Church. And after he tells us, how Cox's party brake among
themselves about other things, oftener than once, and that to a scandalous
height. Which may be seen at length in the Author. If this be convenient in a
Congregation, let any judge; it is strange that the Dr. and Mr. Fuller both,
should Read these Historical passages, with so different Spectacles.

Sect. 20. The Dr. tells us, Sect. 4. P. 13, 14. That the Controversy was not
carried out of England with them, but as Hooper in Switzerland, so they in
Geneva, and elsewhere, got a better likeing of their Church Way, than of Ours;
that being such as the Country would bear: And it is hard to remove Prejudic^s,
especially when they have such Abetters, whose Authority goes beyond any Reason
with them. And that is the true Foundation of our unhappy Differences, that yet
continue. I have abridged his Words; but given the full sense of them. And now
I shall Note a few things on this Discourse. 1. He will not allow it, it seems,
that Non-conformists of old, or late, have ever made the Bible the Rule of
their worshipping God: No, they are mere Consuetudinary Men, and soon taken
with any new Fashion, and so Obstinate, that they will not part with any
Custom, when once taken up. Thus he is pleased to picture those that dissent
from him: We expected more Charity from him. 2. If Non-conformists cannot prove
what they hold, by Scripture, and sound Reason; let them lie under as much of
his Reproach, as he shall please to cast upon them. But if they can, I hope he
will retract this rash Censure. 3. If Custom did so far Influence these men,
methinks the Customs that they had first received in their native Country,
should have been a sufficient Antidote against all Foreign Infection to the
contrary. But their being taken with the way in other Countries, rather
shows, that their former way was built on Custom and Education; and that the
Change was from Scripture Light, that they had met with abroad, which they
could not resist. 4. I have showed before, that they had these principles
before they went abroad; even in King Edward 6's. Time, there were not a few of
that way. 5. It is strange that all Countries beside England, are so Clownish,
that they cannot bear the Pomp and Ceremonies of Divine Worship here used: How
then does Popery get any Entertainment beyond Sea, even among the Sw^ssers;
which Religion will vie with Ours in outward Splendour? If the Genius of a
Nation did determine men in Religion (as the Dr. insinuates in this cas^) how
is it that the Ceremonies are not used among the Protestants in France, which
is the pattern for Modishness and Gaiety to England, and other parts of the
World? but this is so indigested a Notion, that it does not well become the
Learning of Dr. Stilling fleet; tho it be good enough for some to rant with
over a Pot of Ale. 6. Whether our party or his, be more guilty of Obstinate
insisting on men's Authority, in defiance of Reason, let the World judge. We are
content to set aside all the Authority of men, Ancient and Modern; and to
referr our debate simply to the Determination of Scripture: But men's Authority
is the Argument that the Dr. in this Book does most insist upon. I hope the
Reader may by this time perceive, whether the Dr. does truly or faIsly Assign
the Foundation of our Differences, which I, with him, acknowledge to be unhappy.

Sect. 21. He says, p. 14. That in the English Reformation, they proceeded
more out of reverence to the Ancient Church, than mere opposition to Popery
(which some other Reformers made their Rule.) Here are two mistakes not to be
passed in silence* 1. The Ancientest Church had none of the Ceremonies; they
were neither in the Apostolic Church, nor in that which was near it. How
ancient they were, he will after give occasion to enquire. So that England took
for their pattern, the Church that was much declined both in Antiquity and
Purety. 2. What can be more grossly false, than to say, that other Reformers
made mere opposition to Popery with their rules. Two things make the contrary
evident. 1. They did not reject all that Papists held, as, That there is one
God, etc. 2. They rejected nothing of Popery, but what they gave other reasons
for, than that the Papists held it: (to wit) That it was contrary to Scripture,
or not instituted by Christ; and so condemned in Scripture, as vain Worship,
being a Teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of men. We make Symbolizing
with Papists, or other Idolaters, an Argument against the Ceremonies; but we
reject them not on that account only; and so mere opposition to Popery, is not
the rule of our Reformation.

Sect. 22. He complains that Calvin and others, did insinuate, that the
English Reformation was Imperfect. Nay, they openly main^ained it; and so do
we. He does twice mis-represent Calvin's Words, p. 14, 15. That he had avowed
in the Letter before-cited to the Protector, That the best Rule of Reformation,
is, to go as far from Popery as they could. No such Words are to be found in
that Letter; nor any thing that will import so much. He does indeed press the
removing of all Popish Ceremonies, as having been abused to Idolatry; and
cites, Psalm. 16. 4. Where David says, That he will not take up the names of
idols in his mouth^, but he neither makes this the Rule, nor the best Rule of
Reformation. He knew that Scripture and Institution (which he had a little
beforementioned) was the Rule, and a far better Rule than that: Though even that
has its use to direct us in Reformation of the Church. Again, he says, That
Calvin yields to this Moderation, that such Ceremonies might be retained, as
were easy, and fitted to the Capacity of the People; provided they were not
such as had their beginning from the Devil, or Antichrist. His words are,
Adeoque Ceremonias ipsas ad usum and captum esse accommodandas; sed non minus
constanter affirmo, Videndum esse ne sub illo praetextu toleratur quicquam quod
a Satana vel Antichristo profectum sit. Here is no advice to retain any Humane
Ceremonies, but all of that sort fall under that Censure, they being not from
God, and being Parts of Worship, they are from Satan, or Antichrist; but he
would have all the Externals of Worship, so fitted to peoples capacity, as that
they do not hinder, but rather help in the inward exercise of it. And if Calvin
did yield in that Infancy of the Reformation (which I think he did not,
otherwise he could not blame the Imperfection of it) That the Ceremonies might
be retained, it makes nothing for perpetuating of them. The Dr. says, They
proceeded by this Rule of Moderation, taking away all the Ceremonies that were
of late Invention: And he says, p. 14. That the Ceremonies retained, were more
ancient than the great Apostasy of the Roman Church. It had been fit to have
removed all that were of Humane Invention, for Antiquity can neither prejudice
Christ's Institu^ions; nor warrant Men's. But it is not true, that all the
Ceremonies retained were so ancient, as shall be made appear in due time,
(...), of Kneelling in the Act of receiving the Lord's Supper. Neither will it
free our Ceremonies from being Popish, that they were before the great
Apostasy, if it be made appear, that they were with a considerable degree of
the Apostasy; yea, and a part of it.

Sect. 23. He endeavors to free our Ceremonies from Popery, because the
Cross is used by Papists in the Scrutinies before Baptism; we use it after
Baptism; and Kneeling is not strictly required by the Roman Church, in the act
of Receiving; as appears by the Pope's sitting, or a little leaning. For the
first, What great difference does it make, whether Crossing be used before or
after Baptism, seeing it is not to be omitted, but belongs to that Sacrament,
as one of its Adjuncts? Our quarrel with it is not that it is used after
Baptism, but that it is used, being none of Christ's Institutions, but of Man's
Invention, and abused in the Popish Administration of Baptism. For the Second,
I hope he will not deny, that Kneeling in the act of Receiving is the constant
Practice, and required among the Papists; and, That the Pope, who to them is
above the Laws of God, should be exempted from the Laws of their Church, is so
insignificant an Argument against Kneeling, being required by them, that I
wonder to see it used by so Learned a man. For his Plain Linen Garment, only
used instead of many of the Popish V^stments, which was used in the time of
Jerome and Austin; I deny that it is the only Vestment that they use as
appropriated to Religion and religious Persons; any who read^th the Book of
Canons, made Anno 1603. Can. 74. may see the contrary, the Reverend Clergy
there busying themselves to order the fashion of Clothes, that all of them
should use. But, that the Surplice is as ancient as Hierom and Augustine, I
shall not now examine, seeing it is too well known, that many Abuses were crept
into the Church sooner than their days; the one flourishing in the end of the
Fourth Century, the other in the Fifth. I see no cause why any man should stand
amazed at the noise that is made against the mischief of these Impositions, as
he says, p. 16. seeing all that he has said, does not clear them from being
Men's Devices in God's Worship, and consequently vain Worship, which is a
burden to any Conscience that regards Christ's Authority more than that of
Men.

Sect. 24. He pretends, Sect. 5. to give Reasons why the Ceremonies were
retained by our Reformers, though they were distasteful to some Protestants, and
like to prove the Occasions of future Contentions. These Reasons are three, 1.
Out of a due reverence to Antiquity. 2. To justify the Reformation before
Enemies, in that we would not break with them for mere indifferent things. 3.
To show our consent with the Protestant Churches. To these I return a word or
two in general, and then shall answer them particularly. ^. Why was not
Scripture consulted in this weighty matter, which wise men think is a safer and
better Rule of Reformation than any of the Three here mentioned? Shall we
slight or cross Christ's Institution in the Worship of God, for the sake of
Antiquity, or Papists, or Protestants either? I am far from thinking, that our
Reformers had so little regard to Scripture; nay, that was the Weapon they
always used against the Papists, though in reference to the Ceremonies, they did
not so well consider it, as they should have done. But the Dr. and his Party
seem to lay little weight on it in this Controversy, for he makes little or
no use of it through this large Book, which is somewhat strange in a
Controversy of Divinity. It is (...), to use weapons so far different from
those of the Apostles; and therefore I hope they will not prove mighty through
Christ, as his were, 2 Cor. 10. 4. None of these Reasons, nor all of them in
conjunction, is sufficient to establish any point of Truth, or to warrant any
part of Divine Worship: Wherefore they should first have proved the Ceremonies
to be lawful, and then these three Reasons might well have come in as
Auxiliaries to confirm the use of them; but to manage the Worship of God by
such Considerations, without any other Reason was too slender a Ground to
proceed upon.

Sect. 25. Let us now consider his three Reasons in particular. For the First,
Due reverence to Antiquity. Ans. 1. We reverence Antiquity as much as our
Brethren do, but with these two Cautions; 1. That we prefer the first
Antiquity to that which was later; the Apostolic Church, to the Ages of the
Church that succeeded. If they can show us any footsteps of the Ceremonies in
that Church, we shall embrace them, if not, give us leave to reject them, even
out of Reverence to Antiquity. 2. We do not own Antiquity, (where there was no
Infallibility, as was in the Apostles) for the Rule of our Faith or Worship. We
know, the Church may err, and did very soon begin to decline; of which
somewhat before, and more afterward. We reverence Antiquity so far, as not to
recede from it without sufficient warrant from Scripture or clear Reason; and
to reverence it further, is to idolize it, and put it in the place of Divine
Authority. Ans. 2. Why are not our Brethren uniform in their Reverence to
Antiquity? Do not they desert Antiquity in more things, and those of more
moment than the controverted Ceremonies are? Will they deny the naevi patrum
that Divines, both Papists and Protestants, have observed? They have laid aside
the osculum, that then was called pacis, sanctum, vel fraternitatatis, used
presently after Prayer, which Tertullian calls Signacul^m orationis; the
Agapae, that, notwithstanding of the Apostles check, 1 Cor. 11. 21, 22. were
used in Tertullian's time, sometimes before the Lord's Supper, sometimes after;
also the Baptizing (if not only, yet more ordinarily) the day before Easter and
Pentecost; the Trina immersio; the Communio Infantum; the Gustatio mellis and
lactis, all used in Baptism in Tertullian's time. Of the same sort are the
diluting of the Wine with Water, in the Lord's Supper; the sign of the Cross
used in Omni conversatione, as Tertullian has it; The carrying the Eulogias,
or consecrated Symbols, to the Sick and others; all these in the Second
Century. In the Third Century were brought in Offerings and Prayers for the
Dead, and Exorcism in Baptism. What a world of Ceremonies were added in the
Fourth Century, is too well known. Now, all these were as ancient as the Times
of the first Christian Emperors, to which the Dr. says, p. 17. that Our
Reformers endeavored to reduce the state of the Church; if it was thought fit,
and no disrespect to the Fathers, to reject their practices in some things as
innocent as our Ceremonies, why not in them also, there being no more warant in
the Word for the one sort of things than the other? This is to make Respect to
Antiquity to ^erve a turn, or men's own designs; which I hope our worthy
Reformers were far from, whatever may be said of their Successors.

Sect. 26. Ans. 3. If the Dr. had pleased to tell us how ancient the Ceremonies
that he contendeth for are, we should have considered his Allegations; I am
sure he cannot equal them in Antiquity, with the Rites abovementioned, which
yet his Church rejects. We affirm them to be Novel Inventions, brought in
under a considerable, though not the highest, Degeneracy of the Church; when we
meet with his proofs to the contrary, they shall be answered. I wonder to hear
from such an Antiquary as Dr. St^llingfleet, That purging out of these
Ceremonies is a Reforming 1600 years backward; as if all the controverted
Ceremonies, or any of them, had been in the first Century, in the very days of
the Apostles; I suppose he will find it a hard Task to prove this. By what has
been said, it is easy to discover the weakness of what he alleges about
giving unspeakable Advantage to the Papists, by reforming 1600 years backward;
for neither do we own the Ceremonies to be so old; nor could Papists have any
advantage, if we reject what is unwarranted by the Word, however ancient it be.
Indeed, if we should part with Scripture, and referr the decision of our
Controversies with the Papists only to ^hurch-History, it were to give them
advantage, if we should disown any thing so ancient, but I hope the Dr. will
not advise us to that course, and therefore there is no hazard. It adds to
this unspeakable advantage in the Dr's Opinion, That when they (the
Non-conformists) are pinched with a Testimony of Antiquity, presently cry out
of the Mystery of Iniquity already working in the Apostle's Times, as though
every thing that they disliked were a part of it. Ans. Though we have hitherto
met with none of his pinching Arguments from Antiquity, yet we think that
Allegation no such ridiculous Evasion as he would make it, seeing the Spirit of
God was pleased to give us this warning; and after-Ages gave a clear proof of
the fulfilling of this Scripture, by the ripening of those Inclinations that
were among some in the Apostles days, of falling back to beggarly Elements;
Gal. 4. 9. and subjecting themselves to men's Ordinances: touch not, taste not,
handle not, Col. 2. 20, 21. into the highest of Superstition and Depravation of
the Worship of God, as Antichristianism came to a height. If the load of humane
Traditions were a part of that Mystery of Iniquity that was adult under
Antichrist, why should we not think that these Beginnings were a part of these
first workings of it, that the Apostle complains of? If we make any thing
that disliketh us, a part of that working Mystery of Iniquity, that we cannot
prove to be evil, and to have had its Rise in the decay of the Church, let us
bear the blame. He says, the rejecting of the Ceremonies gave a great check to
the Reformation in France, and cites for it Thuanus and Balduinus, both
Papists, without pointing to their words, or places where they may be found;
wherefore I look on what he says as gratis dictum: And if it were true, it
says no more, but that there were two in France, that were fond of humane
Ceremonies, as there are many in England. We have cause to bless the Lord,
that the Reformation in France was not checked, but made very glorious
Progress, was owned by many, great and small, was sealed with the Blood of many
Martyrs. And that it was not universally received, we may rationally impute to
the supreme Power being against it, which uses to have the Command of the
Consciences of the greatest and carnal part of the world: But what the Dr.
says in prosecuting this reason, I wish he would reconcile with his Third
Reason, That England retained the Ceremonies, to show their consent with other
Protestant Churches.

Sect. 27. His Second Reason is, to manifest the Justice of the Reformation, by
letting Enemies see, that we did not break Communion with them for mere
indifferent things. Ans. 1. Papists might have seen that, if they would have
opened their Eyes, without our retaining any of their Ceremonies; (to wit) That
we brake with them on weighty points of Heresy and Idolatry, and not for
Ceremonies alone. Ans. 2. When we had separated from their Church, on such
weighty Accounts, we were not to retain any thing that they had corrupted the
Worship of God by, to please them; neither could we retain those to shun
breaking with them, having already broken with them on other accounts. Ans. 3.
The Dr. takes it for granted, which is the (...), the Question between him and
us, (to wit) That the Ceremonies are mere indifferent things. If he prove this,
he must carry the day. What Advantage the Popish Bishops (for all their
Subtilty and Learning that he talks of) could have made of rejecting of these
as well as the rest of humane Ceremonies, I know not; they had a large Field to
expatiate in with the People, by holding forth to them: How many Usages of the
ancient Church the Reformers had rejected, that were (in the Dr's sense) mere
indifferent things, as Holy Water, Cream, Salt, Spittle, etc. How little
addition could the rejecting the Cross, Surplice, etc. with the rest, have made
to their strength? What he cites out of P. Martyr, is abundantly answered
Sect. 10. for he speaks not of Vestments used in, but out of Worship, about
which, he would not have such Contentions made at such a time, but have them
removed afterward. The Dr. cites his words Indefinitely, Other Reformed
Churches; but the Author's words are, Per multas Ecclesias n^n ab evangelio
alienas. I suppose he means the Lutheran, or rathe Greek Churches; for P.
Martyr well knew; That in the rest of the Reformed Churches no such Vestments
were used.

Sect. 28. Let us now hear his Third Reason, to show their consent with other
Protestant Churches; and he instanceth in the Lutheran Church. Ans. 1. This
Reason could not be used by the English Reformers, because they would surely
rather have imitated the Calvinist Churches, with whom they agreed in Doctrine,
than the Lutheran Churches, from whom they differed in considerable points of
Doctrine; if they had designed to symbolize with other Churches; and had been
influenced in their determination of this matter by that design, sure they
would have symbolized with the soundest Churches. Ans. 2. Neither could this
Reason have had any weight if they had used it, seeing there were m^re
Protestant Churches of a contrary Practice; and therefore the Protestant
Churches would have carried the rejection of the Ceremonies; whether the notes
had been ponderanda or numeranda. Ans. 3. If our Reformers had designed a
Consent in Ceremonies with the Lutheran Churches, why did they retain these,
and not the rest used among them, which are (most of them) as little liable to
Exception, as those retained, and are not by their multitude such a burden as
those of the Papists? I hope the Dr. when he considers better, will retract
this Argument; for there is no Reformed Church on earth, that the Church of
England shows any Consent with in her Ceremonies. Ans. 4. I have elsewhere
showed, from good Authority, That the Lutheran Churches at first had no humane
Ceremonies, but what they now have, crept into those Churches afterward, as
other Evils did, which Luther did not authorize.

Sect. 29. He will not only have Lutherans, but the chief among the Calvinists,
to be of his Opinion. He cites, Calv. Ep. ad Sadol. That he was for restoring
the Ancient Face of the Church: His words (which I found not easily in that
long Ep.) are, Vt instauretur vetusta illa ecclesiae facies quae primo ab
hominibus indoctis and non optimis deformata and foedata, postea a pontifice
Romano, and ejus factione, flagitio se lacerata and prope deleta est. It is
evident, that he is not speaking of Ceremonies only, but mainly of the Doctrine
of the Church, that was in Controversy between him and the Cardinal: Also,
that it is the Apostolic Church that he speaks of, whose Face he
acknowledges to have been deformed before Antichrist came to an height. He
cites also Calvin de vera Eccles. Reformatione, chapter 16. which Book I find not
in the Catalogue of Calvin's Works; only among his Tractatus Theolog. I find a
Supplex exhortatio to the Emperor and Diet at Spire, De necessitate
reformandae Ecclesiae; which I have diligently looked into, and find no such
Passage in it, but much contending against Humane Ceremonies: And he
apologizeth for their casting them out, by showing, Quod nihil vel primo digito
attigimus, nisiquod christus pro nihilo ducit, cum frustra coli Deum humanis
traditionibus pronunciat. Wherefore, if Calvin own Symbolical Ceremonies (as
the Dr. alleges) we must understand him of those of Divine Institution, or
charge him with Inconsistency with himself. Oecolampadius (says he) looked on
the Gesture in the Sacrament as indifferent; so do we; therefore we think
Kneeling ought not to be imposed: And when it is so imposed, it loses its
Indifferency, having a show of Adoration of the Bread. I have not Bucer's Book,
and therefore say nothing to the citation out of him, but that his Authority
will not prove the Opinion of the Calvinist Churches that we debate about.

Sect. 31. Our Author, after this Digression returns to the Historical part
of his discourse, Sect. 6. He tells us, that in the beginning of Que^n Eliz.
Reign, the Exiles returned from abroad, with secret dislike of the Ceremonies,
but the Act of Conformity being passed, and the Use of the Liturgy strictly
enjoined, there was no Separation; some of them accepted of Preferment in the
Church: The Bishops showed kindness unto them for their Zealous Preaching. A
few remarks on this, will serve to clear our way. 1. It seems the Episcopal
Party had not such respect, as was fit to the Consciences of their dissenting
Brethren, in that they were getting Laws made, to force them to that, which
they could not persuade them to by the Gospel: but this is the Old Spirit of
that party, which still creates trouble to the Church. 2. That some of them
accepted of Preferment (and these he names; Gilby, Whittingham, are among
them, whom Fuller places in the Rank of fierce Non-conformists,) shows how
loath they were to divide from their Brethren, as long as they were suffered to
keep their Consciences undefiled. 3. He omitteth to tell us, that these men
would never subscribe to the Liturgy, nor use the Ceremonies; which Mr. Fuller,
Lib. 9. p. 76. informs us of, that not only these fiery men (as he calls
them) but even the moderate Non-conformists, as Mr. Fox, Mr. Lawrence Humfrey,
refused to subscribe. 4. It was a commendable piece of Moderation in the then
Bishops, that they suffered these Men to Preach; notwithstanding of their
Nonconformity. Indeed there was cause for it; they were able and useful men,
and the Church had much need of their Labors: Fuller says, p. 65.
Tolerability was Eminency in that Age. A Rush Candle seemed a Torch, where no
brighter Light was seen before; where he tells us of a Sheriff's Preaching
for want of other to do that work, and how sorrily he performed it. If the
present Bishops would exercise the same moderation, they needed not to be
afraid of Separation.

Sect. 31. He proceeds to tell us, that these Nonconformist Preachers first
let fall their dislike of Ceremonies, and gaining Ground, they called them the
Livery of Antichrist, and enflamed the People, and this was the first Occasion
of pressing Uniformity with Rigor: Some were silenced; as kindness had made
them Presumptuous, this made them Clamorous. Mr. Fuller gives another account
of this matter, p. 76. The English Bishops conceiving themselves Empowered, by
their Canons, began to show their Authority, in urging the Clergy of their
Diocese, to subscribe to the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Discipline of the Church;
and such as refused the same, were Branded with the Odious Name of Puritans;
and p. 81. He shows how Ministers were contented, before B. Grindal (one of
the most moderate, but pressed to Rigor by the rest) who asked them, have we
not a Godly Princess, speak, is she Evil? A Question fitter for the Inquisitors
in Spain, than a Protestant Bishop. That the Non-conformists preached against
the Ceremonies, is neither to be doubted nor wondered at; so did our Lord and
Master, and his Apostle Paul: It was their duty to teach people to observe all
that Christ has Commanded, that being their Commission; if they spoke
Falsehood, or Truth in an undue manner, they were liable to Correction. What our
Author calls inflaming the People, others will call faithful warning of them,
against what might displease God, and defile their Consciences. Any who
enflameth them to unsober, or unpeaceable principles or practices, let them
bear their blame. I see nothing in their Carriage, under the Bishops forbearing
of them, that deser^eth the Name of presumption, nor under their Sufferings,
that should be called Clamorousness, as the Dr. calls their informing their
Friends at Geneva, how they were used. But it is the Spirit of that party to
use cruel Severity against them, that differ from them, and reproach them, if
they say they feel it: Patience and Stoical Apathy are not the same thing.
There is nothing yet said by the Dr. that can cast the Blame of Separation on
the Non-conformists, or free the Bishops of it.

Sect. 32. He says further, p. 19. at the end; About this time the dissenting
Party being exasperated, by silencing some of their most Zealous Preachers,
began to have separate Meetings, where they Preached and Prayed, and had the
Sacraments. Here we have out of the Mouth of an Adversary, the true Cause and
Original of the Separation, though somewhat unfavourably represented; the cause
of it was, they could not have Gods Ordinances, without Man's Inventions, their
Ministers being silenced, who administered them purely; and though, but some of
them at first were silenced, yet the rest were under the same Condemnation by
the Law, and daily expected the Execution of the Law on them; and all the
People could neither have the ordinances by those that were as yet unsilenced,
nor could they live without them: So that it was not Exasperation, but desire
to wait on God in his own Ordinances, that made them take that course. This
account of it themselves give (as the Dr. has it, p. 20. before the Bishop of
London, whose Discourse to them the Dr. relates, unbecoming the Moderation of
B. Grindal, charging them with lying pretenses, without any Ground mentioned,
and unbecoming the Learning of a Bishop, charging them with Condemning the
Reformation.

Sect. 33. The next thing he insisteth on, is, Beza's advice to the Ministers
and people; who, though he shows his dislike of the Ceremonies, and advises
the Ministers not to subscribe; yet presses the silenced Ministers not to
Exercise their Function against the will of the Queen, and the Bishops: And the
People to wait on the Word and Sacraments; notwithstanding of the Ceremonies;
that they might by these means obtain a through Reformation: And to Ministers,
he says, that they should not leave their Functions for the Sake of the
Ceremonies. In which Advice the Dr. does much insult. How impartially Beza's
opinion in this case is represented by the Dr. I know not, not being able at
present to get a sight of the Book; but some other Citations already examined,
make me jealous; especially, seeing the Dr. makes Beza contradict himself; for
p. 21. he makes him advise the silenced Ministers to live privately, and not
exercise their Functions against the Will of the Q. and the Bishops. But p. 22.
he makes Beza say to them, that the Ceremonies are not of that moment, that
they should leave their Functions for the sake of them. But whatever were
Beza's opinion, Non-conformists of old and late, took the Word of God, and not
the Authority of Men, for the Rule of their Faith and Practice: They honor
such as Beza, and are ready to receive Instruction from them; but must have
leave to examine all by Scripture, as the Beraeans did the Doctrine even of
Paul. Again, Beza is far from advising Ministers to forbear Preaching a
together, because restrained by the Magistrate: That principle never obtained
among Protestant Divines; and is to be examined afterward; but he disliked
their public appearance in that case, which may be constructed a Defiance and
Contempt of the Magistrate. For they had hired a Hall in London (as public as
any Church) for their Meetings. Christ's Apostles were private, with the Doors
shut, when they might not be public, and so should we; and yet not give over
Preaching and Hearing when Men forbid us: We should do it peaceably and
inoffensively; but do it notwithstanding. For his Advice to the People, I
cannot approve it; yet does it not reach our Case; for he advises to
Conformity for the present, with express mention of their Hope of a further
Reformation; which we are out of all hope, that ever our Clergy will yield to.
In Beza's Resolution of a Case mentioned by the Dr. p. 23. I desiderate one
cause of Separation from a Church, (to wit) Imposing unlawful Terms of
Communion, unless either this be comprehended under the right use of the
Sacraments, that he mentions; or such withdrawing be not properly a
Separation, but a being driven away.

Sect. 34. He says, this Advice of Beza's put an effectual stop to the
Separation. I find no such thing in History, but rather the contrary. The same
opinion he cites of Gaulter ep. dedicat. in homil. ad 1. Ep. ad Corinth. and
Zanchie ep. lib. 2. p. 391. where Gualter complains of the Lies and Prejudices
against the Church of England. I wish it have not been Lies written by that
party, that made him write so, and Zanchie is even for Ministerial Conformity.
It is an easy thing to gather Scraps and Sentences out of men's. Writings, that
represent them as speaking what they never thought; and nothing is more
ordinary with this Author, than to persuade himself. (at least to endeavor to
persuade his Reader) that all the World are of his opinion. It is enough to us
in this matter, that the Reformed Divines beyond Seas, did not use the
Ceremonies, but have condemned them, and that on such Grounds, as make them
unlawful to be used, (to wit) that they are Vain Worship, Additions to the Word
of God, the Symbols of Popish Idolatry, etc. and if notwithstanding of all
this, any of them would persuade us to use them; their Doctrine does hinder us
to obey their advice, which we look on as an overlash of Charity to the then
good Bishops of England, who were Laboring to Reform the Church from Popery.

Sect. 35. He tells us next, Sect. 7. of a New Generation of fiercer
Non-conformists, the peaceable ones being worn out. It is not unusual for
Adversaries to represent true Zeal as fierceness; but if there was undue
forwardness among them, we defend not the Faults of Men; but the Truth of God,
which they owned. There was a sinful fierceness among some of Christ's
Disciples, when they called for Fire from Heaven, Luke 9. 54, 55. but this was
no Argument against their cause. We, with sad Hearts behold the scandalous
Fierceness, that is among some Antiprela^ists at this day, but must not change
our Principles for that And was there then, and is there now no fierceness on
the otherside? If we may judge of former days by the present, we may rationally
ascribe the fierceness of some of the Suffering Party, to that of the
persecuting Party, as the Exciting cause, for oppression makes a Wise Man mad,
Eccles. 7. 7. for the Complaint that Mr. Fox makes of them, which he Cites
out of Fuller, Chapter Hist. lib. 9. p. 106. If the Circumstances be considered, it
will be found not to prove what the Dr. brings it for. We must know then out
of the same Author, that the Complaint in this Letter was against some
particular men in Magdalen College, who were no Representatives of the
Non-conformists, that it was not occasioned by any of their Principles, or
Religious Practices, but by a particular injury done by these men to Mr. Fox,
as he thought: And Mr. Fox was as likely to be biased in the matter, in
Controversy between him and these men he complained of, as they were: The
Matter was, his Son Samuel had left the College, and gone beyond Sea, without
leave either of his Father, or the College; and at his return was suspected of
Popery; and for this, he was by that party, that Mr. Fox is so angry with,
expelled the College. Beside all this, any who reads that Letter of Mr.
Fox's, may see a Strain, and meet with Expressions very unbecoming Old,
Reverend and Good Mr. Fox, who had always professed himself a Nonconformist;
tho he had more Latitude about the use of the Ceremonies, than some others had:
Factiosa ista puritanuorm capita; isti ter puri puritani, and some other foul
Reflections, with the odious name that Enemies gave to that Party, are very
unsavory from such a Pen: But Age and supposed Injury, must bear the blame of
the peevish strain, that is too manifest throughout that whole Letter. It were
a hard case, if the faults either real or supposed of some, were always to be
charged on all the Party: The Dr's own Party would be black enough, if they
were thus dealt with; and even the Historian, no Friend to the Non-conformists,
calls this Letter such a Strain of Rhetoric, as once Tully used, pro Domo sua;
and imputes the too much passion in it to the unjust Affront offered to him.

Sect. 36. Next the Dr. does highly resent the Admonitions, First and Second,
presented in the Name of the Non-conformists to the Parliament, by Mr. Thomas
Cartwright: But I see not by what he cites out of these Admonitions, wherein
the bitter Zeal of that Party appeared: Neither that they despised the old
Trifling Controversy about Garments and Ceremonies; for these were still the
Grounds of their Nonconformity; tho they complained also of other Grievances.
Neither do I find that they said all was out of Course in the Church; they
owned the Protestant Religion; but desired, that the Reformation might be more
through, by laying aside some of the Remainders of Popish Superstitions,
formerly overlookt. I wonder why the Dr. should startle so much at their
complaining of the Liturgy, Bishops, and Archbishops, the Way of c^lling their
Clergy, the Ceremonies annexed to the Sacraments; which are the Grievances by
these Admonitions laid before the Parliament, with an humble Petition for
redressing of them. Seeing he knows, that these are the very things that our
Controversy is Conversant about; and, though all these be not the Grounds of our
withdrawing from their Worship, yet all of them are such things as we are
grieved with, and desire a Reformation of. That he calls them bold and
groundless Assertions, is a more bold and groundless Assertion than any of
them; for, he knows, Grounds have been given; which it were better to refute,
than rail at. It is also strange, that he says, That these Admonitions gave
the true occasion to the following Practice of Separation; when himself
assigns another Cause of it before this, p. 18, 19. and yet another that he
dateth it from, long after, (to wit) the Indulgence, Praef. p. 23. Sometimes he
lays it on the Jesuits, Praef. p. 11. and indeed, he knows not where to lay
it, missing the true Cause, which is Episcopal Rigor in their unscriptural
Impositions, on the one hand; and Conscientious Obedience to the Word of God on
the other. That this Cause was maintained with greater Heat than Learning, is
the Dr's Dialect, not seldom occurring. That they courted the Vulgar most, is
like some others of his Representations; if they did, they acted not wisely:
But if the Vulgar embraced Truth, while it was rejected by the great ones, it
is no new thing, such Ratiocinations did better become the Pharis^es, Jo. 7.
48, 49. than this Reverend Author. That they pleaded the Peoples Right of
Election of their Pastors, we own our selves their Successors in that. Speaking
(railing we approve not) against the Greatness and Pomp of the Clergy, is no
popular Theme, but has been insisted on by sober and learned men of all
Persuasions. But, that does not much move us; we are content that they enjoy
their Pomp and Greatness, if they will let us enjoy the Worship of God in
purity and peace. That this will infer a Principle of Levelling in Men's
Temporal Estates, is an insinuation unworthy of this Reverned Author.

Sect. 37. He still exposes the People, p. 26. as pleased, to think what a
share they should have in the new Seigniory, to wit, Presbytery in every
Parish. If any had such Designs in being for that way, we blame their Intent,
not their Work or Opinion. But might not we (if we were so disposed) harangue
of the pleasure the Clergy takes in their way, in contemplation of the fat
Rectories, Prebendaries, Deaneries, and Bishoprics that they daily have in
view? but such ways of Reasoning, I reckon fitter for the vulgar, whom he so
much despises, than for Scholars. He tells of a mighty Interest they got
among the people, and compares this prevalency with that of the Anabaptists in
Germany. What if we should compare the prevalescency of Episcopacy among the
Clergy and others, with that of Popery in Rome, and elsewhere, Arguments one as
strong as another? That others would refine on us, as we refine on the Church,
is a Plea against us, that would well suit, and has been often used by
Papists, against our deserting them. If others do that which is wrong, because
we do what is right, we are not accountable for that. If he can make it appear,
that our Principles lead to other men's evil practices, we shall disown such
Principles. I know not what Name to give his Assertion, that the consequence
(to wit, the Brownist Separation) seemed so unnatural from their own (the
Presbyterian's) Principles; for nothing can be more rashly or falsely spoken. It
behoved the Dr. to attempt the proof of this, not barely to assert what is so
injurious to his Brethren, and that he might well know that they would be far
from owning. All that we have from him as a Color of Proof, is a most unfair
representation of what the Non-conformists had said, That the Church had
neither right Ministry, nor right Government, nor right Sacraments, nor right
Discipline. One would think that they had asserted the Nullity of all these;
whereas they had never d^sowned the Ministry nor Sacraments, but found some
faults adhering to them, as the Office of Bishops, and way of calling all the
Clergy; and as to the Ceremonies that were annexed to the Sacraments, which
faults do not infer a necessity of Separation, further than the owning of them
is made the Terms of Communion with the Church: And it is known that
Separatists went on other Principles, even such as will divide any Church, the
most moderate and indulgent, that is not of their way* Of which after.

SECT. II. Of the First Separations that were in the Church of England after
the Reformation.
HAving followed the Reverend and Learned Dr. through his Historical Labyrinth,
about the Nonentity of Separation from the Church by the first
Non-conformists, and found how little Truth or Candor there is in his Account
of these Matters, and how little that little Truth, that is in his Histories,
does make against our Cause; I shall now attend him in his Historical
Collections, to prove, That when Separation began, it was vehemently opposed by
the Non-conformists, who were dissatisfied with many Corruptions in the Church.
By the Non-conformists, who opposed the Separation, he cannot mean all the
Non-conformists, the Separatists themselves being also such; but that among the
Non-conformists some were for Separation from the Church, and others opposed
it. And so it is at this day; some are dissatisfied with humane Inventions in
the Worship of God, and yet have more Freedom than some others of their
Brethren have to use them.

Sect. 2. But before I come to a particular examination of his Discourse, I
shall premise some things, that partly might excuse my whole Labor in this
matter, and partly may render it more easy, and expedite. The first thing that
I premise, is, That if I should grant all that the Dr. discourses, from p. 27.
to 29. the end of his First Part, it would conclude nothing against our Cause,
for it amounts only to this; That some good men were not of our Opinion, nor
practiced as we do, but used the Ceremonies, though they were dissatisfied with
them. If Arguments from the Authority of Men could satisfy our Consciences, we
should not be Non-conformists; for the Hinge of the Debate between us and our
conforming Brethren, is, Whether God ought to be worshipped according to the
Prescript of His own Word, and that in all the parts of His Worship, greater
and lesser; or, may in some of them be worshipped by the Traditions of Men. We
expect Divine Authority for every thing whereby we worship God, and cannot rest
on that of Men. And therefore, if the Dr. could prove, That all men that ever
were (who were not infallibly guided) did worship God by Humane Traditions,
this cannot warrant us to do so. And yet this does not infer Self-will, or
pretending to be wiser, or more conscientious than all men; yea, or any men;
(an Objection frequent in our Brethrens Mouths, and more frequent with Papists
against Protestants) for it is not Will, but Conscience, guided by
Scripture Light, that we are determined by: And we are always ready to receive
Light from the Word, if our Antagonists can hold it forth to us, though it were
to the changing both of our Opinion and Practice: And we judge no Man's Light
nor Practice; they stand and fall to their own Master; let every one be fully
persuaded in his own Mind: But we dare not be so far the servants of Men, as to
subject our Light and Conscience to them. If we may retort without offense, It
seems to us a less fault (if it be any) to seem wiser than those that have
gone before us, (if differing from them import so much) than it is in our
Brethren to seem wiser than Christ and his Apostles; from them they do
manifestly and confessedly differ, in the things we now controvert about.

Sect. 3. Another general Consideration that I premise, is, That there are such
considerable Differences between the old Church of England, in which these
Non-conformists lived, and this new Edition of it, who now require Conformity
from us, that their Example cannot, in reason, be judged sufficient to oblige
us; even Apostolic Example, in some cases, is not declarative of what is our
duty, as it is in other cases: Beside that, the Clergy of England then were
sound and orthodox, and the Doctrine of the Pulpi^s and Press was fully
consonant to the Doctrine of the Church, contained in their confession of
Faith, the 39 Articles. Now, it is far otherwise with the greatest part, (I am
far from charging all with this blame); who knows not how frequent (yea,
almost universal) Arminian Doctrine is? How some of them preach and print
Socinianism, and without a check from the Church? and, How many Popish
Doctrines are either maintained or extenuated by some, is too well known by
them who converse in England. In the Old Church of England, pious men were
cherished: In This, we know how not only Dissenters, though never so sober and
religious, are persecuted to their utter undoing: But men of their own way, who
are sober and serious, are by the High-Church-men discountenanced and slighted,
under the nickname of Whigs or Trimmers. So that, if we judge of the Church of
England by her Confession of Faith, and the Temper of her ancient Clergy; the
Presbyterians, with a few of the Conformists, do best deserve that Name. But
this, though it be our great grievance and discouragement from Communion with the
Church, is none of our Grounds for withdrawing from her public Administrations.

Sect. 4. I say then further, as I did of the Church in King Edward 6's time,
That Church was a reforming Church; even in the beginning of Queen Eliz. Reign,
they were about purging out of the old Leaven; and therefore many good men, who
were dissatisfied with Humane Trash in the Church, yet cleaved to public
Ordinances notwithstanding, till a better Season should appear for purging it
out (though I think they did better who stood at a greater distance from these
Relics of Superstition.) But we are out of expectation of Reforming of these
things: What Attempts have been made by Archbishop Laud, Bishop Cozens, and
others, to re-introduce some of the ejected Ceremonies, is not unknown; and
what superstitious Gestures and Practices are used by many without Approbation
of Superiors, which yet are not imposed, but are at present a sort of
candidate Ceremonies, and stand in the place of the Competentes or Catechumeni,
waiting for a fit Season to be brought into necessary and universal
observation, none is ignorant, who know any thing of English Affairs. The
Advances that the present Church of England has made toward Popery, not in
these things only, but in greater matters, cannot be obscured by any thing that
the Dr. has said against the Book written to that purpose; of which before. If
our Ancestors bare with these Fopperies when they had Hope to get them removed,
as other things of the same kind had been a little before, it does not follow,
that we should comply with them, when we see them like to grow upon us; yea,
when we see them made use of, as an Engine to drive away the best Protestants,
that Popery may the more easily re-enter.

Sect. 5. Another Difference between our Case and that of Non-conformists, in
former times, is, We have been in full and quiet possession of the pure
Ordinances of God, without the mixture of men's Inventions, as they never were:
Therefore their using of Ceremonies was only not going forward, but our doing
so were going backward. Sure it was not so great a Fault in the People of
Israel, to be slow to entertain Moses, proposing a Deliverance to them out of
Egypt, as to talk of returning back thither: Nor in Lot, to linger in Sodom,
as in his Wife to lo^k back toward it. I hope these Comparisons may be
pardoned, not being intended to equal the Evils to be shunned, but to
illustrate the greater Evil of Backsliding, than that of Continuing in a thing
that is amiss; Licet magna componere parvi^. If any Objection be made against
the way that we came into that Possession, I shall not dispute the Truth of
that Allegation; but the thing being our due, by Gospel-Right, we were to stand
fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ had made us free, Gal. 5. 1. I do not
know, that their freedom from Ceremonies could be defended at Man's Bar,
though, I am sure, it could at GOD's Bar, and so can ours.

Sect. 6. A Third Difference is; At this time, Ministers of ancient standing,
and approved usefulness in the Work of the Gospel, who had received Ordination
in the way mentioned in Scripture, by the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery; which is also the way of Ordination used in most Protestant
Churches; must be re-ordained, otherwise they cannot be Ministers of the Church
of England, nor the People enjoy the benefit of their Labors: Which Imposition
was never heard of in the old Church of England, nor the Need of it ever
asserted: P. Martyr, Bucer, and others that came from beyond Sea, had the Right
Hand of Fellowship given them in England, as Ministers of Christ, without that.
Neither was it ever heard of. that I have met with, in any of the Churches of
the Reformation. Therefore People then might hope to enjoy God^s Ordinances
from those that dispensed them purely; which we cannot in your Church; and
consequently, we have more cause to seek them where they may be had, than our
Ancestors had. Fourthly, There never was in the Protestant Church of England,
before our days, such a number of the Lord's Harvest-men thrust out of his
Work, for their not complying with Humane Ceremonies in God's Worship, Two
Thousand (some say more) in one day, before they were silenced, one, or two, or
three, and that for some real or pretended personal Misdemeanour: For, though
there was an Act of Uniformity in the beginning of Queen Eliz. Reign, yet
Non-conformists preached, and People heard them: But here such a number laid
aside, and that mee^ly for Nonconformity, and the People out of all Capacity
to enjoy pure Ordinances in the Church. Here was some more Reason for having
the Ordinances by themselves, than was before. And, to make this difference
between our Case and that of our Ancestors, more considerable, these Ministers
were silenced by the Church, (though clave errante) ours only by the Magistrate,
who never pretended a Power to give or take away Ministerial Authority.
Fifthly, We are under the solemn Oath of God against Superstition, (under which
Head we reckon the Ceremonies) which our Ancestors were not: And we cannot see
how our using of them consists with our keeping of that Oath.

Sect. 7. A Third general Consideration to blunt the edge of all this
Historical Discourse of the Dr's, is, That the S^paration that the old
Non-conformists did so much oppose, was quite another thing than that which he
can charge upon us. It is of two sorts, that of the Brownists, or rigid
Separatists, who denied the Church of England to be a True Church, but held it
for an Antichristian Soci^ty, and therefore not to be communicated with. And
that of the Independents, who owned the Congregations in England to be True
Churches, but thought it unlawful to join with them, because of the mixture of
scandalous Sinners with visible Saints, that was among them. Separation on the
first Ground is well refuted by the old Non-conformists; and that of the
second, by the Assembly of Divines, and other Presbyteri^ns: Both these were
active separation, chosen by the separating Parties, and that on grounds of
Dislike with the Church, that a^e indefensible. But our Separation (if it may
be so called) is pass^ve; we are driven away; we seek the Communion of our
Brethren; we are willing to bear wi^h many things that are a Burden to us, and
which we wish to be reformed, rather than have Separate Meetings. We own the
Parishes of England as the Church of Christ; the Petition for Peace is a
public and authentic witness of all this; but our Brethren will have no
Communion with us, unless we will own the Ceremonies that they, without any
warrant from Scripture, impose on us, which we cannot do without sinning
against God, and wounding our Consciences; and we can and do give good Reason,
and Scripture-warrant, for this our Scruple. Let then any Indifferent Person
judge, Whether it be fair dealing to condemn our not joining in the public
Worship of the Church, by the Authority of them who condemned these
forementioned Separations. But occa^^on will be given to discourse this Matter
further; wherefore I now forb^ar.

Sect. 8. I hope what has been said will evince, That the Dr's following
Historical Discourse has the fault called Ignoratio elenchi, running through
the whole Texture of it, and that it does not t^uch the Question in hand; but I
shall take a more particular, yet transient, view of it. He says, Sect. 8. at
the beginning, The Separation being now b^g^n, the Non-conformists set
themselves with the greatest vehemen^y against it. If the Dr. would prove any
thing against us, he must show, That there was no forbearing of public
Ordinances, on account of scrupling the Ceremonies by the Non-conformists,
before this, the contrary of which I have showed: Also, That it was Separation
on that account, and no other, that they wrote against, the contrary of which
is most evident. He may know, that the Presbyterians now do differ nothing from
the old Non-conformists in this; for they have as much set themselves against
the same sort of Separation, and can make it appear, that this is no way
unsuitable to their own Principles or Practice. It seems, by what the Dr.
cites out of Mr. Parker, that the Separation was charged on him, as laying a
Foundation for it by his Principles; just as it is now with us. If the Dr. can
charge any of us with bitterness and pride, the two Characters given by Parker,
to the Separatists; let the Guilty bear their blame: But I am sure our
Principles that he is angry with, import no such thing; and therefore such an
oblique Reflection on us in general, is not Brotherly dealing. We love not to
recriminate.

Sect. 9. He alleges, p. 28. that of the Four Reasons published by Barrow and
Greenwood, against the Separation, Three of them were taken out of the
Admonition, given in by the Non-conformists, to the Parliament. He here
exposes these Non-conformists that then were, as very ridiculous men, who laid
down Reasons for Separation, and yet were so much against other men's practicing
what they gave Reason for. If he think them such men, why would he bind us to
their Authority, which is the tendency of this long Discourse? But the Dr. does
both mistake and misrepresent this matter: His Mistake is, In the Admonition
these things were presented as Grievances, to be redressed, not as Grounds of
Separation. His Misrepresentation is, These Monitors did not speak of the
Ministry, Government, and Worship, as wholly unlawful, antichristian, and
false; for they owned the Ministry and Worship (whatever thoughts they had of
the Government) as right for the substance, though vitiated by some Modes
adhering to them, which they desired to be removed. It is true, Gilford says,
they make a vile Schism; rending themselves from the Church of England; but
does he not add, And condemning by their Assertio^s the whole visible Church in
the World, even as the Donatists did of old time? Which shows, that it was
not scrupling of Humane Ceremonies that they are charged with, but nullifying
of Churches, because of some Corruptions in them* Gilford's words that follow,
p. 29. we are not concerned in: We know, that many were the sad effects of that
Separation, diverting People from the serious Exercises of Religion, to
Janglings. And it is not without this effect on some, where the oppressed Party
is Innocent, as to the main; but that proves not, that we should comply with
unscriptural Ceremonies, to shun this Evil, but that they should not be imposed
on us. As to Gilford's blaming them, for not coming to the Book-Prayers, this
he spoke without Book, either in the heat of Disputation, in which many do
overreach; or, it was his Opinion, but is not ours. I agree with Gilford, That
the Corruptions of the Church of England did not make her Antichristian; and
therefore the Brownists were to be blamed in separating from her as
Antichristian; not we, who are ready to join with her as a Church of Christ,
but cannot digest her Humane Ceremonies in Divine Worship. That Gilford was a
Nonconformist, the Dr. needed not to be at so much pains to prove. That all
Non-conformists are fallible men, and some of them mistaken in some things* we
willingly grant. We also close with what his next Author says, p. 30. That he
is a Member of that Church, where he is by Providence placed, and that he ought
not to separate from it while it is a true Church, only with this Exception,
Unless that Church require me to sin; and if I will not do so, exclude me:
Which Exception it could not be expected that he should mention, that not
belonging to the thing then controver^ed. It is hard for a Controversal Writer
to guard his words against all Exceptions that contingent Cases, not yet
thought on, may afford. The same is to be answered to his Citations out of Mr.
Bernard, and the Confutation of the Errors of the Separatists, d^ne in name of
the Non-conformists; so that this whole Discourse of the Doctor's is, -- (...).

Sect. 10. He thinks, Sect. 9. to parallel our withdrawing from the
Ceremonies, with the Separation of the Brownists, (for if that be not desig^ed,
I know not what his Discourse tend^th to) by setting down the concessions of
these Separatists, (to wit) That the Doctrine of the Church of England, is
sound and saving; that they will not separate for every blemish in the Church.
So far we agree. But they pleaded (says he) that the Corruptions of the Church
of England were such, as overthrew the very Constitution of a Church; in which
we differ from them, as he says p. 33. the old Non-conformists did, of whom he
says that they held, That nothing could justify Separation from the Church,
but such corruptions which overthrow the Being of it. And he says, The force
of all their Reasonings against the Separation, lay in this, and the denying of
such corruptions to be in the Church. For proving of this, he shows, That the
Separatists thought nothing could justify their Separation, but that which
nullified the Church; and it is no wonder, for they minded nothing but an
active Separation, and not that of being driven away by sinful Terms of
Communion imposed. It is true, they mention the Service, as one of their Pleas
for Separation, but not barely as unlawful to be used, but as nullifying the
Church which we never pleaded: For, what he adds, p. 35, etc. that the
Non-conformists, when they would disprove the Separation, only proved the
Church of England to be a True Church: It is no wonder that they minded no
more, seeing that was to overturn the very Foundation of the adverse Cause.
But, Did they ever teach, that we ought to communicate with a true Church in
those parts of her Worship that are sinful? which is the one half of the
Controversy that we now manage. He insulteth much in an Assertion of the
Non-conformists, p. 36. at the end, That the Church of England is a true Church
of Christ, and such a one, as from which whosoever wittingly and continually
separateth himself, cutteth himself off from Christ. I might say as much as all
this, without giving the least advantage against our Cause; for we do not
separate our selves, but the Door is shut against us, by as many Bars as they
have imposed Ceremonies, which we cannot use without Sin, and they will not
suffer us to worship God with them without these. Again, We do not continually
separate from the Church, but are ready and waiting to return to Communion with
her in all Ordinances, whenever these sinful Bars shall be removed that keep us
out; the Separatists could say neither of these. That the old Non-conformists
did not understand their Assertion of such a Case as ours is, is evident; for
they were men of so much Sense and Reason, as that they could not imagine it
impossible, that any should lawfully withdraw from joining with a Church,
because of sinful Terms of Communion required: They could not blame any Member
of the Church of Pergamus, to refrain from the Communion of that Church, if
that Communion were denied to that Member, unless he would either approve of
the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, or at least consent to the tolerating of it.
Such is our Case; we are denied Christ's Ordinances in the Church, unless we
will approve, by our practice, the Ceremonies which we judge sinful; with what
Face can they blame us, for doing that which themselves put us into so great a
Necessity to do? Have we not rather cause to take up David's complaint against
them, 1 Samuel 26. 19. They have thrust us out from the Inheritance of the Lord,
saying, go serve other Gods. Had it been fair dealing to call David a
Separatist in his Exile, because he waited not on the Temple Service? And yet
the Necessity that he was under, of abstaining from it, was not so great as
ours: That was Bodily Hazard, ours is Soul Hazard by sinning against God.

Sect. 11. The Non-conformists Reasons that he brings for their Assertion, p.
36. prove no more than what is already granted, as any that reads and
understands them, may perceive. What he brings out of Jacob against
Johnson, and Ball against Can, is nothing against us; to wit, That the Church
of England is a true Church. From p. 39. He shows that Non-conformists held,
That the Corruptions of the Church of England, were not such as did overthrow
the Being, and Constitution of it, which we willingly yield to. What he Cites
out of other Non-conformists, p. 40, 41. about Forms of Prayer, and the English
Liturgy, shall be examined in its due place; if the Lord permit. I know some
Non-conformists have had, and some now have a greater freedom to use it than
others have: But as now there are, so of old there were, others that could not
comply with it. What ever was Giffard's opinion about the Ceremonies being
Antichristian; if he thought them Lawful to be used (which is our Question) I
know not why he should be reckoned a Nonconformist: But indeed there is
nothing of that, in what the Dr. Cites, p. 41, 42. What he brings, p. 42,
43, 44, 45, 46, 47. out of several Non-conformists, to show that the Ministry,
Discipline, and Hierarchy of the Church of England, is not Antichristian, nor
the Church-Antichrist; we are not concerned to disprove, and the Dr. might have
spared all this Transcribing, it being wholly beside the question. Some things
he makes them say, that deserve a little Animadversion; but I will not now
Digress to take notice of them.

Sect. 12. He proceeds, Sect. 12. To give Account of the Independent
Separation, and how it was opposed by the Assembly of Divines, by such reasons
as will hold against the present Separation. I confess there is a present
Separation, that these Reasons do hold against; for that same Separation does
still continue: But he does not prove his point, unless he make it appear that
these Reasons conclude, that we should use the Ceremonies, rather than forbear
Church Communion with the Prelatists. But his Reasons for what he says, we
shall attend in their course. What reflection the Dr. thinks to cast on the
Non-conformists, by the breaking of Brown's Church in Midleborough; and his
juggling in the Matters of God, I know not. This long Story has either no
design, which I cannot impute to a Man of his Parts; or an ill design, which I
am loath to impute to one of his Worth. However it be, we disclaim all concern
in it. There have been Breaches and Apostasies among others, as well as among
Non-conformists. That a nameless Author calls Brown's Preaching privately in
time of the Public Assemblies* a Cursed Conven^ic^e; it may be there was
cause, if Brown was such a bad Man, as the Dr. makes him: But I know some of
these Meetings that the Dr. is so displeased with, are blessed of the Lord. He
imputes these and the other Dissentions that followed, to the Judgment of God
on them; this we are no way concerned to Apologize for: Their way was Evil, and
it did not prosper: If the Doctor can prove our way to be Evil, let him pass
what Judgment he will on what befalls us, but till then, Sobriety in judging
is becoming. No doubt the Papists thought they had as good cause to construe
Providence to favor them, because of the Confusions, and Ruin that followed in
Germany, on the Reformation. We have Sins enough to provoke the Lord against
us; but we are not convinced, that the Things in Controversy are to be reckoned
among them. Let the Dr. impute this to our Obstinacy, at his pleasure, we can
bear it: In this we are Murus Aheneus -- in the Poets Sense.

Sect. 13. He tells us, p. 53. of the present Separatists going beyond Mr.
Robinson, the Fo^nder, (as he makes him) of the Independent way, who was for
Communicating with the Church in the Word and Prayer: He should have told us
who these are* It is true, they thrust us out from Word and Prayer too, by
denying us all Church Privileges, for not submitting to the Impositions; and
force us to seek all Gods Ordinances, where we can have them in his way; but we
are far from withdrawing from the Word and Prayer in the Church of our own
choice. This Discourse against the Independent Separation, I meddle not with,
and therefore pass over all that he says, from p. 53. to 59. only touching Two
or Three Passages. What Mr. C^n says. p. 54 of the principles of the Puritans
inserting Separation, is so far True, that their holding the unwarrantableness
of Bishops and Ceremonies, does infer on them who act conscientiously, that
they should rather refrain from joining with any Church, than own the one, or
use the other: And if these be made the necessary Terms of Communion with a
Church, we must suffer our selves to be separated from such Imposers. p. 59.
Some complaining of the Mischief of Impositions (a Word the Dr. is very angry
with) because unordained men were not suffered to Preach, when and where they
listed, is no fit Parallel to the complaint that others make of the Mischief of
Impositions, when they are Excluded the Church, for not using Humane
Ceremonies: In the one case there is restraint of what is contrary to
Scripture; no imposing in the other. That is imposed to be done, which is
without warrant; yea, condemned in Scripture. Such mean ^rtifices the Dr.
reaches at, that he may ridicule our unwillingness to be Imposed on by Man's
Will, in the Worship of God. p. 58* he says, Presbyterians would not have
all left to Conscience: Who ever said otherwise; or can say otherwise, unless
they would first burn their Bibles? We never made Conscience the Rule; it must
be guided and ruled by Scripture. What he says of Popular Government, let them
answer it who are concerned. He says, Humorous and Factious People, will
always be complaining of the Mischief of Impositions. (This Title of Mr. A's
Book, is a great Eyesore to him) but he should consider that on the other
hand, an Imperious, Superstitious Clergy, that will be Lords over Gods
Inheritance, in dispite of the Apostles Words, will always be Imposing, and
take it ill that any should think their Impositions a Burden; as wise and sober
Men may do without being either Humorous or Factious. He says, the Principles
of Liberty of Conscience, will unavoidably lead men into Confusion. Many think
that such indistinct and rash Assertions, are more like to lead Divines into
Confusion, in managing their polemick Discourses. Must Conscience then be bound
Hand and Foot, and carried whither the Prelate pleases? Will even Dr.
Stillingfleet own Mr. Parker's Notion of the Public Conscience? Has
Conscience no use, but to discern what is my Lord Bishop's Will, or what the
Act of Parliament says? We are as far from owning an unbounded Liberty of
Conscience, as the Dr. is; but the absolute denying of all Liberty of
Conscience, is liker to lead Men into Atheism, than giving them some Liberty to
lead them into Confusion. Let Conscience then have Liberty, where it has
Scripture warrant for what it holds (which is the Liberty we plead for to our
selves) and let it not be rigorously dealt with in things that are of lesser
Moment in Religion, where they that profess Conscience, are otherwise sober and
peaceable; and there is no hazard of confusion from Conscience. It is a more
innocent thing, where it is rightly dealt with, than the Dr. takes it to be,
and we think it is more to be regarded, than the Rules of Order and Government
in a Church, which the Dr. seems to bring in Competition with it. I mean such
Rules as are but of man's devising. It is false, that the Presbyterians cannot
Answer Independants, as to the pretense of Conscience; nor they the
Anabaptists. For the one can refute the other wherein they mistake, and tell
them that Conscience cannot make their Error to be a Truth: And yet they can
bear with Godly and Peaceable Men in these mistakes, because of their
Conscience.

Sect. 14. He tells us, Sect. 14. That the Presbyterians charged the
Dissenting Brethren; with being the occasion of an inundation of Error, by
their going upon the principle of Liberty of Conscience. I am far from
justifying that Toleration, which the Independants pleaded for, and which (by
their means, some say) was used in our late times of Distraction: Then there
was no King in our Israel. All Error should be opposed: Gross Error punished
and restrained by force: But will it hence follow, that we must not have leave
to Dissent, even from those things that the Church imposes, without Warrant
from the Lord? All the Citations that the Dr. brings, p. 59, 60, 61. are
evidently against a vast Toleration. The Uniformity in Religion, that the
Scotch-Commissioners speak of, is not to be understood of Words in Prayers, and
Humane Ceremonies (for would they not then have first settled that way at home?)
but of Doctrine, and Discipline, and Worship so far as commanded by Christ.

Sect. 15. The Dr. is pleased to give himself the Trouble, from p. 61. to 73.
to transcribe the Substance of the many and large debates, that were between
the Assembly of Divines, and the Dissenting Brethren: But he will find it hard
to apply the condemning of their Separation to our Case: For they refused
Communion with the Presbyterians, whom they could not charge with requiring
them to use any mode of Worship, but what was commanded: They left the Church
for supposed Corruptions, which were none of their personal fault, nor were
they put under a necessity of approving them. We are willing to have Communion
with the Church, if we may be suffered but to forbear these personal
Accusations that were our Sin, if we should do them. But let us hear what
conclusions the Dr. draws from these Debates, p. 73, 74. The 1st. is, That
the Old Non-conformists thought themselves bound in Conscience to Communicate
with the Church of England, and did look on Separation from it as Sin,
notwithstanding its Corruptions. This he thinks he has so proved, that the
shining of the Sun may as easily be denied: Whether it has been disproved in
what is above discoursed, and with what measure of clearness, let others judge;
also how inconcludent men's Authority is in Gods matters, has been showed. The
2d. Conclusion is, That all Men were bound in Conscience toward preserving the
Unity of the Church, to go so far as they were able: So that the lawfulness of
Separation, where Communion is lawful, is one of the newest Inventions of this
Age. This conclusion I easily yield to: and who are the Inventers and
Maintainers of the Contrary, I know not. I hope he will not blame us, when we
are thrust out of the Church, that we do not lie about the Church-walls; rather
than go to another place, to Worship God by our selves. If we do any thing but
what we can show Christ's command for, let him blame us. 3d. Conclusion. Bare
Scruple of Conscience does not justify Separation, although it may excuse
Communion in the particulars scrupled; provided they have used the best means
for a right Information. I do so fully Assent to this Conclusion, that I shall
say more than the Dr. does; to wit, that bare scruple of Conscience, cannot
excuse even Communion in the particulars scrupled, whatever means have been
used for Information: For Scruples that have no Scripture Ground (and what else
can be meant by bare Scruples, I know not) make an Erring Conscience; which
however it may excuse ae toto, can excuse from nothing, in totum. But if our
Scruples, such as they are, (and we may say, we have used the best means that
we could for Information) do excuse us from Communion in the particulars
Scrupled, and if by the force of rigid Men, we be deprived of Gods Ordinances,
unless we will communicate in these scrupled particulars; I hope the Duty that
lies on us to worship God, and not live like Atheists, will so far warrant
that which the Dr. will call Separation; that it will be hard for him to
disprove it, unless he retract this conclusion; by which he has given a sore
Blow to his cause. I oppose to this regardlesness of Men's Consciences, that the
Dr. seems to allow himself in, the Judgment of the Excellent Judge Hales in
his piece of Schism, who says, That nothing absolveth from the Guilt of
Schism, but true and unpretended Conscience: Also, that requiring the doing of
an unlawfu^ or suspected Act, is a just cause of refusing Communion.

Sect. 16. Conclusion 4. Where Occasional Communion is lawful, constant
Communion is a Duty. I suppose he means of that particular Church, in which a
Man is a Member, and has his constant Residence; otherwise it is manifestly
false; for it is lawful for me to have Occasional Communion with the Protestant
Church of France; but that I am not constantly bound to Communicate in England,
if my Occasions call me often abroad. But take it in the most favorable Sense,
the Assertion is not true: It is lawful to have Occasional Communion with a
Church that has one Ordinance pure, Exemp. Gr. Preaching: I may as occasion
serves join in that Ordinance, but if there be nothing else pure, or that I
can partake of without Sin, in that Church, I am obliged to look after another
Occasion, where I may enjoy all Gods Ordinances without sinful additions; and
having got that opportunity, I do not see what Obligation lies on me
constantly to hear in that Corrupted Church, rather than where I enjoy all the
Ordinances in Purity. What he alleges out of the Assemblies Reasons, against
the Dissenting Brethren, does not all quadrate with our case; for the
Congregational Men could not allege, that any unlawful Terms of Communion were
imposed on them by the Presbyterians, in one Ordinance more than another; and
therefore if they might join in one Ordinance, they might in all; and so had no
excuse from constant Communion, if occasional Communion was lawful. But this
question about occasional and constant Communion the Dr. brings in afterward;
therefore enough of it at present.

Sect. 17. Conclusion 5th. That withdrawing from the Communion of a true
Church, and setting up Congregations for purer Worship, or under another Rule,
is plain and downright Separation, as is most evident from the Answer of the
Assembly of Divines, to the dissenting Brethren. It is strange that this
Learned Author, should Cite these Men for condemning our Practice, who were of
the same Principles and Practice that we own, and he is pleading against,
particularly Dr. Burgess, Mr. Case, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Newcomen, etc. whom he
names. They were neither such Fools as to condemn themselves: Nor such Knaves
as to blame others for that, wherein they allowed themselves. Where^ore it is
evident, that it was not every Separation from a true Church that they
condemned (for such is both innocent, and necessary, when a true Church will
impose sinful Terms of Communion on her Members) but a Separation for pretended
Corruptions in a true Church, which Corruptions were not imposed on the
Separaters, either to be practiced or approved of by them, and so could not
become their personal Sin. This Separation they condemned; and that with good
reason; for where the Church is a true Church, and no Sin committed by them
that join with it in their joining, Separating can have no show of Reason.

Sect. 18. He infers, Sect. 16. From what he had said, That the present
Practice of Separation, cannot be justified by the Principles of the Old
Non-conformists: Nor by the Doctrine of the Assembly of Divines. The former I
have disproved, though he says, ^t's clear by undeniable Evidence: The latter,
he says, is, in effect, confessed by all his Adversaries; to make out which he
cites in the Margin, Mr. Baxter, and Dr. Owen: For the latter, no wonder he
confess it, seeing he was for that very Separation, which the Assembly opposed.
And the former is yet alive to speak for himself: And it is as little wonder
that he should say so; for he denies that any of Assembly were Presbyterians.
I have already showed that the the Assembly might well Assert, That Separation
from a true Church was Schismatical; the men that they debated against,
separating or such Grounds, as either proved the Church false; or gave them no
colorable ground for that Schism: But they could not understand it without
Exception. He takes a great deal of pains, p. 75. to prove that any difference
that is between our Separation, and that which the Assembly condemned, is but
in some Circumstances, that do not make the one unlawful, and the other not:
But that it is otherwise is clear, if we consider (as has been said) that they
had no thing Imposed on them as Duty, and as Terms of Communion, which had been
their Personal Sin to do, as we have. If this make not a material, and
pertinent Difference, I know not what can do it. But, says he, the Assembly
used general Reasons, that have equal force at all times. Ans. These general
reasons may suffer an Exception; which they did not, nor needed not mention,
because it was not the case in hand: Nor do we make the Difference to lie
between that and this time; but between their and our Grounds of Non-communion.

Sect. 19. He says, it comes to the same point, whether the Scruples (on
which men separate) relate to some Ceremonies required, or to other
Impositions, as to Order and Discipline; if they be such as they pretend to a
necessity of Separation. Ans. 1. The Dr. then makes no difference between a
Scruple that has ground for it; and one that has none. If he can make our
Scruple appear to be groundless, as he confesses theirs to be, he has
advantage against us. Ans. 2. Is there no difference between having probable
grounds for a Scruple, and having no such grounds? Is there any comparison
between scrupling at using Religious Ceremonies, that have no warrant in the
word, but are in general, at least, condemned in it, and scrupling at some
pretended Corruptions, that no Scripture Condemns? Ans. 3. If the Dr's
reasoning be good, either we must bear with none that scruple, unless we
scruple the same thing: Or we must bear with all that Scruple. The first of
these excludes all Christian forbearance; the last he will not allege. Ans.
4. He mentions Impositions as to Order and Discipline, only that we may seem
Imposers as well as his party is; that is unreasonable, not only because we can
show Christ's Laws for our Order and Discipline, which he will not pretend to
show for the Ceremonies: But also because we can bear with sober and faithful
Brethren, that cannot approve of all that we do; which his Party will not.

Sect. 20. He mistaketh the Case when he insinuates, That we have no more but
scruple of Conscience to plead. The Dr. should not have alleged this, till he,
or some of his party had answered all our Reasons of Scrupling, in many Books,
neither touched by him, or any other: But now he will Knock down our cause with
one blow. He says, he put the Case as clear as possible, to prevent all
Subterfuges, and slight Evasions. He supposes five scrupling Parties, one at
the Liturgy, a Second at the Cross and Kneelling, a Third at wrong gathered
Churches, a Fourth at Infant Baptism, a Fifth at Preaching by set Forms, and
being stinted by an Hourglass: And he says, the Nature of the Case does not
vary according to these. If this be the Dr's Herculean Argument, we shall not
need to fear his Strength so much as before. Surely the Learned Dr's parts
could let him see more Reason to bear with sober and intelligent men, who dare
not join with a Church in worshipping God, by Religious Ceremonies not
instituted by Christ, than with Fantastic Quakers, who cast off God's
Ordinances, because of an Hourglass; but that his prejudice does, in this,
darken his understanding. But the Tendency of his Discourse seems to be;
either Church Authority must lead us Blindfold, so as we must scruple nothing
imposed; or neither Scripture, nor Reason shall limit our Fancy; but we may
scruple what we will. He says well, p. 76. (and the Non-conformists before him
had said it) If they allege Grounds to justify themselves, they must do it ex
natura rei, and not from the mere error or mistake of Conscience. We will most
willingly join issue with him on this Condition, provided the natura rei may be
judged by Scripture, as all the Worship of God should be. If he can prove the
Ceremonies that we scruple, to be such as we may use without Sin; or, if we
prove not the contrary, let him call us as vile Separatists as he pleases. If
the Dr. had pleased at first to hang the matter on this Pin, and not to have
filled his Book with so many Citations, to strengthen his Cause with Humane
Authority; he might have saved both himself and me all this labor, that
hitherto we have been at. It is no great commendation either of the wisdom or
of the sobriety of his Church, that he says, She has as much occasion (cause
he should have said) to judge their (the Presbyterians) scruples unreasonable,
as they do those of the Quakers. What follows about occasional communion, is
answered above. That which he cites out of Mr. A. of the Assemby's being
transported in the heat of Dispute, is not so derogatory from that venerable
Meeting, as he would make it: It is rare to find it otherwise with sinful men.
How many things did thus slip from the Pens of several of the Fathers, that the
Dr. will not approve? But we do not hereby give up the Cause to the dissenting
Brethren, nor forsake the Assemblies Principles; it is one thing, not to
approve all that men say, and another thing to condemn the Cause that they
plead for.

Sect. 21. Our Author does next undertake Sect. 17. to show how we have
deserted the Principles of the old Non-conformists, as to private Persons
reforming Church Discipline, setting up new Churches, and the preaching of
Ministers, when silenced by the Laws. For the setting up of Churches and
Discipline, he cites several Non-conformists against it, without the
Magistrate, p. 78, 79, 80, 81, 82. To all which, I answer, That two things are
expressly in these Citations, that make what they condemned not, to reach our
Case: For, 1. They condemn private men's endeavoring a public Reformation,
that belonging to the Magistrate; so it is thrice expressed, p. 81. out of
Confut. of the Brownists. Now we meddle not with a public Reformation,
otherwise than by our Prayers and Advice, as we have occasion, (which is there
also expressly allowed by them) but content our selves to serve God privately,
when we cannot do it publicly without Sin. To this same purpose is that which
is cited out of Giffard, p. 79. That though every one ought to keep a good
Conscience, yet no private Persons are to take on them public Authority to
reform. If we do so, blame us for it. 2. These Non-conformists all along speak
of private Persons reforming the Discipline of the Church. Now, what is done
among us of that kind, is done by Ministers, who, though in the State they are
private persons, and therefore are not to meddle with matters of that concern:
Yet in the Church they are public persons, and have Authority from God, to
dispense his Ordinances. But I do not, by what I have said, intend to
homologate all that the Dr. cites out of these Non-conformists; several things
they assert, that cannot well be defended; but I shall not digress so far, as
to particularize them.

Sect. 22. I shall only say, That had this Principle of not reforming the
Ordinances of Christ by People, among themselves, till the Magistrate gave
countenance, taken always place in the World, not only Christianity had not
come in the place of Jud^ism, but Arrianism had extinguished the Orthodox
Profession. Have we not Examples of People who were under Arian Bishops,
setting up new Bishops over themselves, in Epiphan. Haeres. 73? Does not Hilary
exhort the People to separate from Auxentius, their Arian Bishop, adversus
Arianos, when yet there was no Orthodox Magistrate to countenance these things?
Yea; had this Principle obtained, there had been no Reformation from Popery, in
most places, where now, through the Lord's mercy, it is. Say not, that our
reforming of Worship and Discipline is not in things of that moment; for though
that be true, yet it is not of no moment; without it we should either join with
men in Sin, or live without the Ordinances of God. Let me here make use of the
Testimony of a worthy Person, one whom the Dr. afterward brings against us;
and therefore, in reason, cannot refuse his Suffrage, (though we are far from
hanging our Cause on men's Opinions, as the Dr. does) that is, the learned
Monsieur Claude, in his excellent Book called, the Historical Defense of the
Reformation; the design of which, is, to show, that every man has a right to
believe the truth, and to dissent from Error, and to profefs this, and to
reform Religion, by setting up Religious Assembles, for the true Worship of
God; when they cannot have Truth, nor right Worship in that which goes under
the name of the Church. He says, (Part 2. p. 169.) As it is ridiculous to
demand of a man, in a civil Society, what personal Call he had to live, to
labor, to avoid that which would be hurtful to his Life, and to have a care of
his own Preservation; so it is also an Absurdity to demand of our Fathers, what
Call they had to believe aright in God, and to worship him purely, and to
remove far from them all that which they believed to be contrary to a spiritual
life, and their own Salvation. And much more to this purpose. He objecteth, p.
170. Is not this to rend the Church by Divisions? and answers, No; for the
Unity of the Church lies not in Error, or false Worship; it is love to the
Church, to endeavor her cure, by showing a good example. And, Part 4. p. 14,
15. When it is objected, That the Protestants could not separate, because their
Pastors were against it; he answers, That many Pastors went along with them;
and if that had not been, they might have chosen Pastors; all which he
discourses at length. We have an Example of setting up God's Ordinances
without, yea, against the Laws of men, in the Word. It is clear from Ezr. 5.
with chapter 4. 21. that the Temple was built against Law: And it is clear from
Hog. 1. 2. that it was the Peoples Sin, that they neglected it so long, even
when Law was against them; and that they ought to have done it before Haggai
and Zechariah put them on it.

Sect. 23. Next the Dr. (p. 82.) brings in some Non-conformists condemning
Ministers Preaching, after they were silenced. It is evident to any that
reads, p. 82, and 83. that it is silencing by the Church that is there spoken
of; but our restraint is by the Magistrate only, who does not pretend to give
nor to take away Pastoral power. Page 86. he brings Mr. Bradshaw reasoning
against Ministers preaching against the will of the Magistrate; but in the
First part of Mr. Bradshaw's Discourse, it is evident, that he speaks only
against public Preaching in such a place, in defiance of the Magistrate, and
running on the Sword's point, or opposing Sword to Sword; which we are far from
either practicing or approving. I confess, p. 87. he is for the Ministers
living privately; yet says expressly, that he is to labor mean while
privately, upon particular occasions offered, (why they may not be also sought,
I know not) to strengthen and confirm in the ways of God those people that are
deprived of his public Labor. If this be not an allowance of his private
preaching, I understand it not: But. Mr. Bradshaw will have the People to
submit to the Ministry of another in public, with the liking of the
Magistrate, though he would have them to affect and love the former as their
Pastor. How congruous this Advice is, I shall not enquire, not laying so much
stress on men's thoughts of things, as to be turned out of our way by them. But
Mr. Bradshaw seems to speak of a Case wherein the Magistrate is offended with
a Minister on some personal account, and another is set over the People, with
whom they may as lawfully join, as with the former; but that does not come near
to our Case, in which Ministers are restrained, because of a Scruple common to
them and the People that join with them; to wit, using the Ceremonies. Would he
have the People, over the belly of Scripture Light, to join with the new
Incumbent in Ceremonies, and not rather enjoy the Ordinances in purity, though in
private, from their own faithful Pastor? I cannot see how that can be gathered
from his words; but if it was his Opinion, we crave leave to differ from him.
Beside, Mr. Bradshaw did never advise, that some Thousands of Ministers being
all laid aside at once, should deprive the Church of their more private
Labors, when they were forcibly restrained in public: The Non-conformists, in
former times, were not in our Circumstances.

Sect. 24. The Dr. is now come to his Triarij, his last Argument to prove what
was the general Sense of the Non-conformists in this. It is Mr. Sprint's
Argument for Conformity, rather than to be deprived; to wit, That a lesser Duty
should cede to a greater: He supposes Conformity and Preaching to be a greater
Duty than abstaining from the Ceremonies: And he confirms this (it seems)
by the Apostles, who, he says, submitted to the Jewish Ceremonies, rather than
lose the Liberty of the Ministry. The Dr. I see, has not kept his best Wine
till the end of the Feast; this is one of the meanest of his Allegations; for
the Non-conformists had an easy Answer to this Argument, that here a Sin, and
forbearing a Duty, are brought in competition; which makes an easy choice, to
wit, using unlawful Ceremonies, with not preaching in public. What he says of
the Apostles using the Jewish Ceremonies, is quite out of our way, for these
Ceremonies for a time were indifferent, as all acknowledge; bu^, that ever any
of the Apostles used them, after the full promulgating of the Gospel, and the
Destruction of the Temple, when they became not only mortuae, but mortiferae,
(as the Schools speak) we utterly deny. But even what he makes the
Non-conformists answer, concerning the greater usefulness and necessity of the
preaching of the Apostles, than of their preaching, makes nothing for his
Design: Nor does it prove, that they did not think that the Apostle's, Woe be
unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, did reach to their Case; for it can import
no more, but that if such a great necessity might warrant some things otherwise
not warrantable, (as the abstaining from things strangled, and Blood, was
warranted; yea, made necessary by a present necessity) their public Preaching
was not of that moment; and it was only their public Preaching that was
hindered by their Nonconformity.

And thus I have got through the Thicket of his Historical Coll^ctions, and
proceed to the Rational Part of his Discourse, which, I hope, shall prove less
tedious.

PART II.
IN the Second Part of his Book, the Learned Dr. enquireth into the nature of
the Separation. (I wish he had taken as much pains to find out the true Cause
of it, and to get that removed); where he considers the several Principles,
on which he alleges, That the several sorts of Dissenters do proceed in their
separating from the Church. I am not obliged, nor shall I endeavor to defend
all these; the owners of them not agreeing among themselves, let every one
stand up for his own Principle. But there is one general Principle that I think
Non-conformists agree in, That the Church of England imposes some unlawful
Terms of Communion, and because of not submitting to these, she excludes the
Dissenters from her Communion; and being thus excluded, they think it their
duty to worship God apart by themselves, when they are not suffered to do it
with the Church without Sin. If any do add to this other Principles, I leave
the defense of them to their Authors. This is to be further opened in the Third
Part; where the Dr. examineth the several Pleas for Separation. He is pleased
to take a great deal of pains to refute some things, as insufficient Grounds
for Separation; which some Dissenters have mentioned in their Books, as
additional motives; there being other sufficient Reasons for Non-communion
which never any of them owned, as the sole ground of their practice, or a
sufficient Reason for not joining with the Church by it self. This is to set up
a man of Straw, that he may get a Victory by bearing him down. Instances enough
of this kind will occurr in our progress. I shall consider what is
argumentative against the Principle already mentioned, that I hold.

SECT. I. Some Opinions about Separation from the Church of England Examined.
THE Dissenters, with reference to the Principles of their withdrawing from the
Church, he divides into two sorts: 1. Such as hold partial and occasional
Communion with the Church, lawful; but not total and constant Communion; and
that they may choose Communion where there is greater purity and edification. 2.
Such as hold any Communion with the Church to be unlawful, because they believe
the Terms of its Communion to be unlawful; such as the Liturgy, Cross, etc.
This distinction is unhappily stated; for, 1. Non exhaurit divisum. There is a
third sort, who hold partial and occasional Communion lawful, but not total and
constant, and yet believe the Churches terms of Communion unlawful; and because
of that Belief, cannot communicate totally and constantly with Her. We can hear
a Sermon, join in Prayer, without partaking in any of the unlawful Terms of
Communion, to wit, Ceremonies and Liturgy; but we cannot enjoy other
Ordinances; and often we are even excluded from these by their
Excommunications, and therefore must seek the Ordinances elsewhere. 2. Partial
and Occasional Communion are not the same thing; nor total and constant, as to
the lawfulness of them. One may have communion with you, and that not only
occasionally, but constantly, in God's Ordinances that are kept pure; and yet
refuse communion with you in your own devices, and in those Ordinances of God,
that ye have so annexed those devices to, that the one cannot be had without
the other. And there are some that practice accordingly; they wait on your
Sermons and Pulpit-prayers constantly, but refuse the rest of your Worship. 3.
I think there are few, if any Non-conformists, that think the Terms of
Communion with your Church lawful, and can keep occasional communion with Her,
and yet separate for greater purity and edification. If any such be, they make
a causeless Separation indeed.

Sect. 2. He will now proceed with all clearness, (which he has not done in
the forementioned distinction) and consider three things; 1. What things are
to be taken for granted by the several Parties. 2. Wherein they differ among
themselves about the nature and degrees of Separation. 3. What the true state
of the present Controversy about Separation is. For the first, he says, There
are three things that we cannot deny. And I say, There is not one of the three,
but they are to be denied, or at least distinguished, and not admitted, as he
sets them down: The first of them is, That there is no reason of Separation,
because of the Doctrine of our Church. I do cordially agree with the learned
Authors, whom he cites in the proof of this, p. 95. That there is no cause of
separating from the Church of England, or refusing communion with all Her
Congregations, on account of that which is the Doctrine of the Church,
contained in the 39 Articles; for we assent to them all as true, except those
about Bishops and Ceremonies; and we would not separate from the Church,
because of Doctrinal mistakes in these things, if the owning of them were not
imposed as Terms of our communion with Her. But it is not so easy to persuade
us, that there is no just cause to withdraw from the Communion of some
particular Parishes in England, where Arminianism or Socinianism is commonly
taught; where the practice of Godliness is ridiculed, and Principles striking
at the root of it, are instilled into the Hearers; such as, That all the aids
of the spirit that men pretend to look after, that are above that Exercise of
their own Faculties, that is in their own power, is but fancy; that the Person
of Christ is not to be minded by Christians, but only obedience to his Laws;
that, Resting on Christ, Rolling the soul on him, are no fit expressions of
Faith. What would the Dr. have serious Christians, who are concerned about the
Salvation of their Souls, do, when such a Minister is set over them? Shall they
hear him? That were to sit down to a Table, where Poison is strewed over all
the Meat, and it is hard, if not impossible, at the best dangerous, to pick out
a wholesome bit. And it is contrary to Solomon's Advice, Prove. 19. 27. Cease, my
son, to hear the Instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge.
They who would have such Doctrine heard, but not received, may as well advise
to go to the Stews, but not commit Fornication. Should they complain to
Superiors, against the erroneous Preacher? But what if they get no redress, and
the Heretic be countenanced and dignified, notwithstanding that all this is
known to the World, by the Press, as well as the Pulpit? What if such a Case as
this, or little less evil, be not rare? Ought not people to seek their Souls
Food in corners, when they cannot have it in the public Assembly, being mean
while ready again to join with the Assembly, when the Lord shall remove this
stumbling block?

Sect. 3. The Second Concession of his Adversaries, that the Dr. sets down,
is, That there is no other Reason of Separation, because of the Terms of
Communion, that what was from the beginning of the Reformation. A sufficient
refutation of this may be seen, Par. 1. Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. If he can tell of
some Alterations that have been made to the better, we can tell, and have told
of others made to the worse. It may be, Mr. Baxter thinks Lay-communion
easier than before; he thinks it so easy, that he practices more of it than
his Brethren can do. But that is no proof. What he objecteth from the practice
of the Martyrs is above answered. The Third Concession; That Communion with the
Church of England has been still owned by the Reformed Churches abroad. I have
before answered this also, showing, That though some of the Divines, (for no
Churches ever gave any hint to that purpose) in their condescendency, have
showed aversion from our withdrawing, yet they have laid down Doctrinal
Principles, that necessitate what they are so averse from. Their receiving the
Apology and Articles of our Church into the harmony of Confessions, the Dr.
brings as an Argument against Separation from Her: But it is a frivolous
Argument, both because the Collection of these Confessions is not the work of
the Churches, but of a private Writer; as also, because the Author of that Book
reckoning England, among the Protestant Churches, does not by so doing oblige
all to submit to her unlawful Impositions. What Durel has said, or he or
others can say of the good opinion of Reformed Divines of the Constitution, and
Orders of the Church of Engl^nd, may soon be Balanced by Testimonies, out of
the same Reverend Divines, Condemning her Ceremonies as relicts of Popery.

Sect. 4. The Second thing that he insisteth on, he begins, Sect. 2. to
examine the several Hypotheses and principles of Separation that are at this
day talked of among Dissenters: He says, some seem to allow Separate
Congregations only in such places, where the Churches are not capable to
receive the Inhabitants. And this he groundeth on some passages, wherein some
had defended their Meeting Houses by this Consideration, that all the
Inhabitants in London could not hear in the Churches. But did ever any of them
say, that this was either the only, or main reason of their Meetings? or was it
not rather brought as an Additional Consideration, to blunt the Edge of that
Clamor, that was raised against Non-conformists Preaching, by them, who
neither could benefit the People themselves, nor would suffer others to do it;
whereas the Non-conformists had other reasons for not joining with the Church,
but worshipping God without Humane Mixtures, in other Assemblies? But even that
reason might have some weight, ad hominem, against the Silencers of
Nonconformist Ministers: I hope to give better reasons in due time and place,
for the Nonconformist Ministers Preaching: But I am very free to declare, that
in a Church where there is no cause of withdrawing from her Ordinances, this
alleged is not sufficient.

Sect. 5. Some, says he, Sect. 3. do allow Communion with some Parochial
Churches in some Duties, and at some Seasons; but not with all. Churches, in
all Duties, and at all times. And from this he charge the Separation as a
Mystery, as if we dealt not openly and ingeniously in setting down our opinion.
But I ask the Dr. who of the Non-conformists did ever thus express their
opinions without further Explication? And if none have, it is not Candor so to
represent us: We desire not to walk in the Dark, nor are we ashamed of our
Principles. We profess then, That in Parishes, where Truth is Preached, and not
dangerous Error, and in those Ordinances, to which no Humane Ceremonies are
annexed, as Preaching and Prayer; and when we are not obliged to wait on the
Ordinances in those Assemblies, where we have all the Ordinances in purity, as
we cannot even in the Parish mentioned, because of unlawful Impositions made
the Terms of our Communion with them: I say thus, we can join with them; but
not otherwise. I hope there is no Labyrinth in this Declaration of our opinion.

Sect. 6. He is at much pains to prove, that we go upon the same principles
with the Old Separatists; which he prove^h of some of the People, out of Mr.
Baxter's reproof of them for their unsoberness: I know the Reproofs of that
Learned Author, were sometimes dealt at Random: But if any of the People have
undue apprehensions of things, and understand not so well as need were, what
they profess, will that ruin our cause? Is there no such blame among his Party?
Do they all speak Judiciously, and Soberly, and with no Tincture of Popish
Principles in managing their Conformity. But he will (p. 103.) have even our
Teachers to come near to the principles of the Old Separatists; for what matter
is it, says he, as to the Nature of the Separation, whether the Terms of our
Communion be called Idolatrous or unlawful? whether our Ministry be called a
false or insufficient Ministry? scandalous Usurpers and Persecutors? Whether
our Hierarchy be called Antichristian, or Repugnant to the Institutions of
Christ? Ans. 1. A difference sufficient to make our Separation lawful, and
theirs unlawful, is, that we withdraw, being put away by the Church, for not
submitting to unlawful Terms of Communion: These left the Church, and would not
join with her, even though these Terms had not been imposed; looking on the
Church as no true Church. Answ. 2. Whatever fault we find with the Ministers of
the Church and the Hierarchy, we do not separate because of these; we would
join with you for all these Grievances, if you would but suffer us to do it,
without sinning against God in that, which is our personal Action. I hope he
will not allege, that the Old Separatists were of that principle.

Sect. 7. But this, to wit, that we are of the same principles with the Old
Separatists, the Dr. will make manifest: And that, 1. As to the People. 2. As
to the Ministers of the Church. As to the People, Sect. 4. he says, We disown
the Old Separation; and yet make the Terms of Lay-communion for Persons, as
Members of the Church unlawful. This I own, save that I am not willing to
contend with him about the Term, Members of the Church; let the thing be
understood, to wit, that we think it unlawful to join in the Liturgy and
Ceremonies; and seeing we cannot have Gods Ordinances without these, with the
Church; we think it our duty to serve God without these apart among our selves:
Yet are ready to worship God with the Church, when they shall please to suffer
us to do it, without these Impositions: This, I say, being understood; we
matter not much, whether he call this a casting off of Membership with the
Church or not. Mr. Baxter, he says, calls it Schismatical in the Church, to
deny Baptism without the sign of the Cross, and Godfathers; and the Communion
without Kneeling; and that People, in this case, may join with other Pastors,
that will otherwise Baptize, and give the Communion. And I say the same: What
is this, says the Dr. but formal Separation. Ans. It is nothing else. And what
has he gained by that Concession? For who ever questioned but there is a
Separation in the Church of England, between the rigid Imposers and the
Dissenters: But the Question is, Who is the culpable cause of the formal
Separation; and consequently who are the Schismatics? whether the Imposers or
the Scruplers? I know no way to determine this question, but by falling upon
the Merits of the Cause, and deciding whether the things scrupled be lawful to
be used, and fit to be imposed on them, who conscienciously scruple them, so as
no forbearance should be used in them, what ever may follow. If both these can
be proved (as I am sure neither of them can) we were the Schismatics: If not,
unbyassed men will adjudge that Epithete to the Dr. and his Party. If he had
pleased to put the Matter to this Issue, the far greatest part of his Book
might have been spared.

Sect. 8. Neither has the Dr. any advantage, by what he next brings out of
Mr. Baxter; to wit, It may be Schism to separate from a Church, that has some
Schismatical Principles, Practices, and Persons. If these be not such, and so
great, as to necessitate our departure from them, for there is such a Case
supposeable; yet we affirm, That the Schismatical Principles, and Practices,
and Persons in the Church of England, to wit, the Clergy imposing the
Ceremonies, as Terms of our Communion with them, are such as Necessitate our
departure: Or rather, they do by these drive us away. The Old Separatists,
says he, did not renounce total Communion with our Church; but held Communion
in Faith with us Lawful (so do we with all the sound Christians in the World,
though we hold no Church Communion with them for want of opportunity) and private
Christian Communion (neither is this in the Question) and in some Acts of
Worship, as hearing and joining in Prayer, and yet were charged with Separation
by the Old Non-conformists. Ans. They were justly charged with Separation,
because their Principles would separate them from a Church, that gave no just
cause by unlawful Impositions; which ours do not. The Separation Materially is
the same; that is, here are two Parties gone asunder, as were there: But not
Formally; for their principle was, The Church was no true Church, and Ministry
and Ordinances were Nullities. Ours is, Unlawful Terms of Communion are
required; and for our Non-submission to these, we are expelled by force. He
says, We must hold a Necessity of Separation. Ans. So we do, as things now
stand* But this Necessity is not of our making, but of our Brethrens making,
and therefore they must bear the blame of it. It no way follows, which he
infers, that we must be Separatists: For it is an uncontroverted Truth, That
they only are Separatists, who separate without just cause, which we deny to be
imputable to us. The medium that he insisteth so much on, p. 104. is but a
Quibble; to wit, either we are Members of the Church of England, or of no
Church, or of another Church: If the first we must Communicate as Members: If
the Second, we are no good Christians: If the Third, we own as formal a
Separation, as ever any did. All this has been before answered, but the Dr's
repeated Importunity forces Repetitions from us. I say then, there is here
(...). If we own our selves as Members of the Church of England, it will not
follow that we are obliged to partake with her in corrupted Ordinances, that
is, her Sin to impose, and were our Sin to yield to. There were Members of the
Jewish Church in her degenerate times, who sinned not in abstaining from Baal's
worship, and the Groves, and High Places. If we should say the 2d. That we are
at present Members of no Church, that understood sano^sensu, might be our
Affliction, and not our Sin, for if a Man be cast into a place where there are
no Christians to join with, or none that will let him join with them, without
he sin against God, he is not to be blamed if he Worship God by himself: Every
good Christian is a Member of the Universal Church; and ought to join himself
to some particular Church if he can: But it does not always derogate from a
Man's Christianity, that his Circumstances are such, that he is not Actually in
Communion with any particular Church. If we should say the 3d. it is true, we
own a Formal Separation; but the Culpable Cause of it is not in us.

Sect. 9. If any ask, which of these three we do indeed own? I might answer as
above, Section 7. that the Question is not very material, and but about words.
Yet seeing the Dr. seems to lay such weight on the Word, Members of the
Church, I shall open this a little further. And 1st. I say ad hominem by the
Dr's Doctrine we are not, nor never were (most of us) Members of the Church of
England; and therefore not capable of Culpable Separation from her; on what
ever account we separate: For he asserteth, part 3. p. 350, 351* that the
Minister in using the Sign of the Cross after Baptism, and saying, we receive
him into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign him with the Sign of
the Cross, etc. does speak in the name of the Church; and so as Baptism is a
rite of Admission into the Catholic Church: So the Sign of the Cross is into
our Church of England. I leave the Examination of the Truth of what he here
asserteth to its due place. I only now consider, seeing this Learned Author
takes this crossing to be the admitting rite into the Church of England, how
he can look on us as Members of that Church, who were never so admitted into
it: And if we never were Members in it, how can we be blamed for separating
from it? But I am not so fond of this notion of the Dr's coining as to excuse
our Separation by it; I make no other use of it but ad hominem: And I think it
will be hard for him to Answer it. But I come ad rem: The Term Churchmember is
a relative Term; it imports a Relation between a Person and a Church. Now in
all Relatives, there are the two termini, the Things or Persons related, and
the Fundamentum Relationis: That which makes them so to be related one to
another; which must be something so particular to them, that it is not common
to them with all other persons or things. And this is that we here enquire
after. That which makes our relation to the Universal Church is Baptism, and
our visible owning of our Baptismal Covenant. That which foundeth ones relation
to a particular Church, is the Obligation that he has to join with that
Church; and the right he has to be reeeived into its Fellowsh^p, or admitted
to the Ordinances in it. This Right and Obligation is either remote, or
proximate: A Remote right and obligation to Communicate with every particular
Church as occasion serves, every visible Believer has; this is a part of the
Communion of Saints, that they should join with one another, and receive one
another as providence gives opportunity; and thus every visible Believer is
Aptitudinally, a Member of all the Churches of Christ. But the Proximate Right
that one has, and the Proximate Obligation that he is under hic and nunc to
join with, and be admitted to the Ordinances in a particular Church, is that
which does actually make him a Member of it. And the Foundation of this is not
the rite of Admission, whether it be the Dr's Crossing, or the Independents
declaring their Assent to the Church Covenant, or whatever other outward
Expression men do pitch on for that end; for these are but the external
declarative Signs, not the effecting cause of such Right or Obligation: and
therefore these are but the Tokens, not the Foundation of Actual Membership.
But the true Foundation of the Obligation mentioned, is ones being so
Circumstantiated, that he may conveniently wait on the Ordinances here rather
than elsewhere; which is determined by his place of residence (not that I think
the Division of Parishes a Divine, but a Civil Constitution; yet it has its
use for shunning confusion.) And the true Foundation of his right to be
admitted, is his being a Visible Believer.

Sect. 10. This Obligation to join with a particular Church, may be suspended
by that Church's refusing the Ordinances to the Man, unless he will submit to
their unlawful Impositions; and his right may also be superseded, and the
Church not obliged to admit him to Ordinances, by his contradicting his
profession by Heresy or Scandal. Wherefore as every one that lives within the
Precinct of a Parish, is not to be owned as a Member of that Church as Papists,
willful Deserters of the Church, Atheists, etc. So every one that lives in a
Parish, is not to act as a Member of that Church in all things: As they who
cannot with a good Conscience submit to these Terms of Communion, which that
Church does sinfully require: To clear this a little further, consider; that to
make Actually and Completely a Member of a particular Church; beside his
residence, there is required a mutual consent of the Church and Person; and
that either Explicit, or Implicit: The Implicit consent of the Church lies
in ordinary giving the Ordinances to such a Person, Word, Sacraments,
Discipline: The Implicit consent of the Person lies, in ordinary using of, or
submission to these. Now where the Church is willing, and the Person is not,
and his unwillingness is from no allowable cause, the Person may be charged
with sinful Separation, where the Person is willing, but the Church is not. And
this unwillingness may be expressed either by absolute refusal, or by refusal,
unless the Person will submit to sinful Conditions, the Person is no
Separatist; but the Church does sinfully cause a Separation. In this last case
(which is our case) the Person is a Member affectu, but not effectu. This is
(to apply this whole discourse to the case in hand) we are Members of the
Church of England affectu, i. e. Being by providence fixed in England, where
Christ's Truth is professed, and his Ordinances administered; we are willing to
join with his people in the ordinary Assemblies of that Church in the waiting
upon all his Ordinances; yet we are not Members of that Church Effectu; because
the Church will not suffer us to Answer that Obligation that we are under, to
join in the Ordinances, without submitting to sinful Terms: And therefore
because we cannot please God by living without his Ordinan^es, we meet
privately in little occasional Assemblies, for the present distress, where we
have Christ's Ordinances purely Administered; and there we are effectu Members,
where we thus ordinarily meet. And for all this we are still Members of the
Church of England affectu; for we declare a readi^ess whenever these unlawful
bars from Communion with her shall be removed, that we dissolve these separate
private Assemblies, and join in Christ's pure Ordinances in the Parishes where
our Lot shall be cast. If after all this, the Dr. or his Party, will charge us,
as he does, with Obscurity and Tergiversation in declaring our principles; and
Prevarication in manageing of them we must bear that injustice.

Sect. 10. He deals, p. 105, 106, 107. with some of his Adversaries about
their opinion, how far they reckon Communion with the Church of England lawful.
I have ^o fully set down my opinion in this (and I hope Presbyterians will
generally say the same things, though many of them may word them better) that I
think it not needful to interpose in that debate; especially some positions of
Nonconformists whom he cites, I will not defend. He takes up part of p. 107,
108, 109. in proving that Occasional Communion with the Church of England does
not make them who ordinarily join in other Assemblies, to be Members of the
Church, nor excuse them from Separation. I have nothing to say either against
his Assertion or Proofs: For it is not Occasional Communion alone, but that
with a readiness for constant Communion with her, when her unlawful Bars from
it shall be removed, that both does answer that Obligation that is on us to
join with her, and so makes us Members so far as we can; and does also excuse
us from a Culpable Separation.

Sect. 11. Some of his Answerers had yielded to Occasional Communion with the
Church of England, and that notwithstanding of some defective modes of Worship,
because holding Communion with one Church exclusively of others is contrary to
Catholic principles. This he highly derideth, and laboriously refuses, p.
110, 111, 112, 113. What is Argumentative I shall touch. It is not their (says
he) Obligation to Peace and Unity with the Church, as Members of it, that
moves, but a certain Romantic fancy of Catholic Unity. Ans. That respect to
Peace and Unity inclines us to constant Communion with the Church; but
unlawful Impositions hinder the effect of these Inclinations: And therefore by
the fault of the Imposers, we have no other way to show our owning the Church*
as a true Church, but this Occasional Communion: Let him call it a Romantic
Fancy, or what he will; we separate from no true Church, and much less from
that where we live, but so far as we needs must to shun sinning against God.
Again, he argues from a supposition, That if we were at Jerusalem, where there
is occasion of Communion with all sorts of the Eastern Churches; and one should
ask us what Church we were Members of. If we should Answer, we are fixed
Members of no Church, but can have Communion occasionally with all tolerable
Churches. Would they take such a Man for a Christian? Ans. We are under no
Obligation to make such an Answer, as he feigneth for us, for his own
advantage. I should in that case join my self to the purest Church that I could
there meet with (being at Liberty to choose, and not prelimitted by my
habitation) if I could do it without sinful Terms of Communion: And then should
Answer to the Question, I am here free to join with you, or any tolerable
Church, but do Actually join with you as the purest, during my abode here. When
I am at home I would join with the Public Assembly, in the True Protestant
Church of England; but that her Rulers impose unlawful Terms of Communion,
which forces me and others to join together in Worshipping God apart, and in
that Assembly I am a Member, till I can find a sinless access to the Public
Assembly; where I desire to be a Member. I suppose the Eastern Christians, such
as are sober and serious of them, and are duly informed of the State of our
Debates, would not think me no Christian for this Answer, nor deny me
Occasional Communion for it. I am sure if they did, they should not then walk
by the Rules of the Gospel.

Sect. 12. Another argumentative Consideration is, p. 111. We were baptized in
the Church of England, and received as Members of it: If then we communicate
with it only occasionally, we renounce our membership. Ans. Wherever one be
baptized, that Baptism makes him only a Member of the Catholic Church. If an
Inhabitant of England be occasionally in France, and have his Child there
baptized in the English way, or in the French way, Does that make it a Member
of the Church of France, though the Child in Infancy be brought to England, and
there have Education, and continue? The Dr. had not, it seems, when his Book
had come this length, hatched his fine Notion of the Sign of the Cross being
the Rite of Admission, as a Member of the Church of England. Ans. 2. We are
obliged to fixed and constant communion, though not by our being baptized in
this Church, yet by our residence in it, and owning the same ^aith with it, and
are willing to own that Membership and Obligation: But the Church's sinful
Impositions do take off this Obligation; for we cannot by any means or case be
obliged to sin* and therefore we do not renounce our Membership; but the Church
hinders our answering that Obligation that our Membership lays on us. The
Dr. despises this our yielding to occasional communion, and it is no wonder,
for his Party (forasmuch as they talk against us for withdrawing) desire none
of our communion, as appears in excluding us, by imposing such terms as they
themselves count needless, and we judge unlawful. But whatever he think of it,
it is all that we can do: We would bid more frankly in bargaining about our own
matters, but in God's matters dare not go one Ace beyond his Warrant.

Sect. 13. The next thing he brings against this Occasional Communion, p.
111, 112. is pure Trifling, unworthy of so learned an Author; That this
Occasional Communion cannot be lawful above once or twice in a Man's Life: That
there will arise a difficult case of Conscience, concerning the lawfulness of
not constant cleaving to the purer Occasions, and leaving purer Administrations
to join with a defective Church. For a man may occasionally have Communion in
public, when he cannot have it in private, and that often: And these Occasions
we may embrace in a true Church, which we would not do in a false Church, but
rather be without the Ordinances for that time. Again, We do not speak of
Occasional Communion with the Church, in any of Her corruptions; we should
always abstain from and reprove those, as he speaks. These things being
considered, the difficult Case of Conscience, that he fancies, has an easy
resolution, That when we can enjoy God's Ordinances in the Society to which we
are joined, to shun the sinful Impositions that are in public, we should wait
on them there, rather than elsewhere; but when that occasion is not offered, we
may join with a Church in some things corrupted, in such Ordinances that are
not corrupted in it.

Sect. 14. His next Argument is, That here are no Bounds to the peoples Fancies
of purer Administrations, and less defective ways of Worship, so that there can
be no stop to separation in this way. This Argument the Dr. prosecuteth with
facetious Scoffs, more than with solid Reasons, which he (but undeservedly)
most severely had taxed Mr. A. for; he tells us of Deserting our Meetings
when the first relish is over; and going to Anabaptists, and thence to the
Quakers; and that they are bound to forsake us on the same Reasons that we left
the Church, unless they be secure, that the perfection of our way is so
glaringly visible to all Mankind, that it is impossible for them either to find
or fansy any defect in it. Nothing here that has a shadow of Argument, but it
is already objected and answered; but the Dr. falls into frequent
repetitions. I answer; It is not only for purer Administrations, that we
withdraw, but to shun sinful Impositions, which, I am sure, neither Anabaptists
nor Quakers can justly allege. Neither is it the glaring visibility, but the
real Scripture-warrant for our way, that condemns them for departing from us:
Nor will Fansied Defects in our way excuse them, but real sinful Terms in our
Communion. But that some will without cause separate from us, is no reason why
we should not on just cause withdraw from you. Such a way of reasoning, from
the ill use that some will make of our doing our Duty, is too vulgar to come
from so Learned a Pen. The Dr. when he wrote this, had forgotten, it seems,
what he had said Iren. p. 109. where he says, A Christian is bound to adhere
to that Church which appears most to retain the Evangelical Purity. Which
Assertion I no further improve than ad hominem, counting it the opposite
Extreme to what he here pleads for: It is incident even to wise men, Dum
vitant vitia; that, in contraria currunt, it is downright for us, and against
himself. What he has Iren. p. 116. A Christian is bound to break off from that
Society that injoineth some corruptions, as to practice. What he cites out of
Mr. Baxter, is a good and sound Reproof to them that causelessly divide the
Church, if he intended it against any others, let him answer it. The sad
effects of R. William's Separation in New England, do not concern us further,
than to lament them, unless the Dr. can prove, that we have no better Reason
for what we do than he had.

Sect. 15. His Refutation of Mr. B's Answer to this Objection, that he had
made, I insist not on, save that I observe his usual way here also, his
representing his Adversaries, as if they held, That Peoples apprehension of a
less defective way of Worship, is sufficient ground for them to break the
Church in pieces. We think, the less defective that Worship be, it is the
better; but it may be the Dr. as well as Mr. B. writes sometimes in haste:
Neither do we think Defectiveness but real Sinfulness, and that imposed on us
as the Terms of our Communion, a sufficient ground of Separation: Far less do
we think, that the Peoples apprehension of Defectiveness in Worship is a
sufficient ground, unless that apprehension be founded on Scripture, or found
Reason: And least of all do we think that such apprehension can warrant us to
break the Church in pieces. The best grounded Scruples can only warrant our
peaceable withdrawing and worshipping God apart, which may consist with the
Church's being whole and sound. He does exceedingly wrong Mr. B. and others, in
that he imputes to them an opinion, That better means of Edification is, by it
self, a sufficient ground of separating from a Church. If any have ever
asserted that, let them bear their blame. It may be some might mention this as
a cumulative inducement to join with other Societies; but none of us ever held,
that this alone could warrant a Separation. And yet the Dr. is at a great deal
of pains to prove, that neither the old Separatists, nor the New-England-men
ever held such an Opinion, which he might have got us to yield to him without
his spending five Pages in the proof of it; but some men labor most in that
which is least necessary. I know not what name to give to the Dr's Assertion,
p. 117. That this (greater means of Edification) is now the main support of the
present Separation. Nothing can be spoken with less semblance of Truth.

SECT. II. Of the Ministry of the Church of England.
FRom Sect. 7. and forward, the Dr. debateth against Separation that is
grounded on the Church's want of true or rightly qualified Ministers. Here I
shall have but little Debate with him; I shall, to cut off Debates, as much as
may be, lay down mine own thoughts (which, I think, are not different from
those of most sober Non-conformists, especially Presbyterians) in a few
particulars.

1. We look on some of the Conforming Ministers as Persons of great worth, and
excellent Ministerial Qualifications, and could live with great satisfaction
under their Ministry, if it were permitted to us, without our Sin. 2. Others of
them we know to be very bad men, and ill qualified for the Work that they
undertake; they are Strangers in England, who have not seen this. 3. We are
dissatisfied with some things in the Calling and Practice of all the present
Clergy; we think the very Office of some of them unlawful, as Bishops, Deans,
A^ch-Deacons, etc. and their Ordination by a Bishop alone not warrantable;
their Call by Patrons, we judge such also; and their using the Liturgy and
Ceremonies we look on as sinful. These things I now only assert, and shall
debate them with the Dr. as they fall in. 4. Yet we deny not any of them, on
any or all of these accounts, to be true Ministers, nor to have the substance
of a lawful Calling: Let this be understood of Bishops and De^ns, etc. as
Ministers, not as in these superior offices. 5. Though we think a better and
more edifying Ministry than that which most of the People of E^gland live
under, very desirable, yet we do not think, that any defect that is in their
Ministerial Call, or in the Truth of their Ministry is a sufficient ground for
separating from the Church.

Sect. 2. These things being premised, I am resolved not to take the defense of
all that some have written of the defects of the Ministry, as a ground of
Separation, though I find many things cited by the Dr. that at first view may
seem to have that tendency, (and he improveth them with all the advantage that
he can) and yet were not so meant. In the very entrance of this discourse, I
meet with a most unjust Imputation laid on us by the Dr. In general (says he)
they declare, that they only look on those as true Churches, which have such
Pastors as they approve; and for this, cites not o^e Author, but Mr. Baxter.
Is this fair dealing? Did ever the Non-conformists make Mr. Baxter their
general Representative? or, Has he so much as pretended to write in the Name
of them all? Were it candid in us, if we should pick out some passages out of
Dr. Sherlock's Book of The Knowledge of Christ, and impute those opinions to
the Conformists, as their Doctrine in general? Beside, Mr. Baxter, nor no
Nonconformist never made their Approbation the Rule, by which Ministers are to
be judged, the having of whom makes a true Church: But the Dr. looks on us
as a Company of silly Rediculous Men, and is pleased often so to expose us. Mr.
Baxter's Notion about true Pastors, and true Churches, I know he himself can
best defend: And therefore I leave him and the Dr. to debate that Case.

Sect. 3. He says, Sect. 8. If the People judge their Ministers to be
unworthy, or incompetent; they allow them Liberty to withdraw, and to separate
from them; and promises to prove it from many passages, in several Books of
Mr. Baxter's and others Still he represents us as making the Peoples Judgment
the Rule; and that this Judgment is sufficient ground of Separation, not
considering whether their Judgment be right or wrong; or that there is a
Superior Rule, by which all Judgment, whether of people or others, is to be
governed. All this we disown; neither can the Dr. prove that any of us ever
owned it Yea, we further deny, that we own a Power in the People to withdraw
and separate from every Pastor, who is really unworthy and incompetent. But
what he asserteth, he endeavors to prove by three Arguments. 1. Says he, p.
122. They leave it to the Peoples Power, notwithstanding all Legal
Establishments, to own, or disown whom they judge fit. This we deny. And the
Proof he brings of it, is, Mr. B. speaks against the right of Patronage,
and the Power of Magistrates in these cases, for the unalterable right of the
People. Mr. A. says every particular Church has power to choose its own
Pastors. Dr. Owen makes the depriving the people of this Right, a Ground of
Separation. If Dr. Owen has done so, let it pass for a part of the Independent
Judgment, which was the mistake of that Eminent Servant of God; others are not
of that mind. For Mr. B. and Mr. A's words no such consequence can be drawn
from them. The People (and neither Patron nor any other) by the Laws of the
Gospel, have the right of Election of their Pastors; but it does not follow,
that they ought not to bear with being hindered the Exercise of this right, for
the sake of Peace and Unity.

Sect. 4. The 2d. Argument is, The People are made Judges of the Worthyness and
Competency of their Ministers. This, says he, follows from the former. Ans.
I have disowned the former; and therefore this falls with it. Yet I here
distinguish: The the people have a discretive power of judging the fitness of
the Man that is to be set over them with respect to their Souls; so as he ought
not to be obtruded on them, without their being satisfied with him. But the
Peoples power of judging is not Authoritative, nor Supreme, much less absolute,
in this matter; but Subordinate to the Pastors of the Church, who have power of
trying the Person Elected by the People, and rejecting him if unqualified: For
the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets; not to the People. As
for Pastors not now to be Elected, but obtruded on the people, and s^tled among
them, though in an undue way, I shall not say, that it is the Peoples part to
separate merely for the Insufficiency of the Minister, if the Ordinances be
Administered, so as they can partake of them without Sin. That which can warrant
withdrawing, must be a Depravation of the Ordinances; and that such as
imports my personal Action, in partaking of that depravation of the
Ordinance, and not every defect or fault, either of the Minister or the
Ordinance. What Mr. B. says of peoples Duty to get the best supply they can,
which the Dr. taxes him for, is not meant of d^ferting, or separating from a
Parish, merely on Account of the defective Quali^^cations of the Minister; but
either, of Occasional Communion with a better supplied Society; which if the
Dr. do altogether condemn, he should Preach against the Throngs that resort to
him, and leave others under whose particular charge they are. Or, when
withdrawing is founded on other good Grounds, that people should choose better
qualified Pastors, than those they leave: What he says, himself must Explain
and Defend. What Mr. B. further says, of the warrantable Preaching of Silenced
Ministers; and of the Magistrates imposing Pastors, obliging people to adhere
to and own these; and forsake their own Pastors, settled among them in the way
of the Gospel, come afterward to be debated; and has in part been spoken to
above.

Sect. 5. Argument 3d. They give directions to the People, what sort of
Ministers they should own, and what not. And does not the Scripture so too? We
Affirm people to have a Judgment of Discretion, both of their Pastors to be
Elected; and also of the Doctrine and Administrations of their Pastors already
in possession of the change of their Souls: And yet that they are not to
separate from the latter for any defect, save that which does so vitiate the
Ordinances, as that it is their Sin to join in them. And if the Dr. will not
allow them this Judgment (as he seems to deny it, by his Sarcasm, of which,
says he, (to wit, utter Insufficiency, and Heresy) the People are admirable
Judges) he must introduce implicit Faith and Obedience: And by this Doctrine,
it had been a Sin in the People even to have left Rome it self; for were not
they admirable Judges of the Heresy and Idolatry of that Church? He that
charge other men's way so fiercely, with a Tendency to Popery, should take
heed of giving ground for such a Reflection to be made on himself. Our Lord
does not speak with such Contempt of the People, as this Learned Dr. does. He
says, My Sheep hear my Voice; and they know not the Voice of strangers, Joh.
10. 27. and 5. to deny this Spirit of discerning to the People of God, is to
make them Sheep in a literal Sense; that men may Rule over them as Beasts. I
see not such Inconsistency in Mr. B's Words, as the Dr. would make us believe;
while he speaks, p. 123. of withdrawing from the utterly Insufficient and
Heretical; and p. 124. that people are not warranted to withdraw for a
Ministers personal Faults, nor for his ministerial Faults, while his
ministration is not utterly untolerable; if the Dr. can show either the
Falsehood, or Inconsistency of these Assertions, we shall own it. He also
wrongeth Mr. B. and the Non-conformists, while p. 124. he tells us of Mr. B's
outcries against the People, as Heady, Rash, C^nsorious, Proud, Ignorant, such
as are ready to Scorn and Vill fie the Gravest and Wisest Preachers: And hence
He (the Dr.) infers, that such are unfit to discern the Qualifications of
Ministers. I ask the Dr. if ever Mr. B. said that the People were all, or
generally such: We deny not there are too many that de^erve severe Reproofs for
such things (and Mr. B. has not been too sparing in his Censures of them) but
is there any shadow of reason for in^erring thence, That all the People should
be deprived of the Right, that Christ by his Testament has bequeathed to them?
It were as reasonable to say, that because many men Misguide, or Debauch away
their Estates; therefore no man should have the Power of managing his Estate.
Christ has provided Discipline and Authority in his House to Curb the
Extrav^gancy of such persons, and to restrain the Power of Election, when it is
mis-managed, as is abovesaid: And he needed not the Dr's, and the ^^elates
device to prevent this mischief, by putting the power of Election into the
Hands of a Patron; who (may be) a Papist, Atheist, or Enemy to Godliness, and
so less fit to choose one to take the charge of men's Souls, than any of the
Persons described.

Sect. 6. And if Mr. B. say, That the heady Persons mentioned, are comm^nly the
most violent, and will judge in spite of the rest: Yet the Remedy that I have
mentioned, is for restraining of them, and is like to do it bet^e^ than what
the Dr. is for, can do. Neither does Mr. B. nor any of us, allow these heady
persons to be the decisive Judges either of who of his side, or who of our side
are true and sufficient Ministers: Which the Dr. might have known, and so
spa^ed much of his discourse; which I shall not Transcribe. That which Mr. B.
tells of many young, rare, injudicious Preachers in England, was never looked
on as sufficient ground of Separation by it self; as the Dr. insinuates. But
it is a sad grievance, and these men withal imposing sinful Terms of Communion
on the people (for who greater Zealots for Liturgy and Ceremonies than they)
and there being many faithful and qualified Ministers laid aside from their
public work; is it any wonder that people leave the one, and cleave to the
other? The Ground that I have already laid down, will justify our withdrawing
from the Ministers even in London, however Grave and Learned they be, and
however Capacious their Churches be: For even their sinful Terms of Communion
are imposed.

Sect. 7. He alleges, Sect. 9. That by this means Separation cann^t be kept
out of any Church whatsoever. This is true if the Dr. have liberty to make our
opinion to be what he pleases to have it, that he may the better refute it.
But if our opinion be rightly understood, and if we be heard speak for our
selves; it is most false. I hope there are Churches where the Ministers
generally are sound in Doctrine, and mix nothing with God's Ordinances as Terms
of ^ommunion with them, that is unlawful: In a Word, There are Church^s where,
though Ministers be not faultless, yet the ordinances are pure; or if there be
any thing amiss in the Ordinances, people are not required to own it
pe^sonally: From such we will not withdraw. He brings Four Qualities that Mr.
B. required in Ministers; the want of which may warrant to withdraw from them:
Tolerable Knowledge: That they be not Heretical: That they be not opposers of
serious Godliness: That they be not so vicious in their Lives as to do more
hurt than good. If these qualities were to be considered by a People about to
Elect a Minister, it is not difficult to determine what Obligation lies on
people to shun the man that wants them: But it is another case, when the
Qualities of a Minister under whom we are, come to be considered in order to
warrant casting off his ministry. A general Determination of this I have
already given; to wit, that no other qualities of the Minister does warrant
withdrawing, but such as so vitiate the Ordinances, as my personal Concurrence
with them is Sin.

Sect. 8. But to consider these Four Ministerial Qualities in reference to this
Case: Two things I shall say of them in general. 1. It is either supposed, that
all the Ministers of a Nation are so ill qualified; or that some one, or a few,
or most of them: In the first case there is more need of separate Meetings: In
the last some less need; in the Third yet less; and in the Fourth least of all;
because peoples wants are more easily supplied by Neighbor Ministers in the
one case, than in the other: tho the need to the Soul under that one bad
Minister to shun him, is as great as that of others to shun many. 2. These bad
ministerial qualities may no doubt arrive at that height, and have those
Aggravations and Circumstances, that they may warrant withdrawing from such
Ministers; and when people cannot otherwise have God's Ordinances, may warrant
separate Meetings. The reason of this, a priori, is, because they may so
pervert the Ordinances of God, as to make them unlawful to be used: This may
without difficulty be supposed to be possible: Ignorance may be such as neither
Word nor Sacraments are so much as right for the Substance. It is so clear in
Heresy, that none can doubt it, as in Papists, Socinians, etc. opposing
serious Religion may be the all of some men's Preaching. And even personal
wickedness of Ministers (which seems to be more remote from this Hazard than
the rest) may affect the Ordinances, as is exemplified in Eli's Son, the Priest
of the Lord; their intemperance and covetousness made Non-conformists in
Israel, that were not chargeable for their withdrawing: For their taking the
Flesh by violence from the People, before the Fat was burnt, was contrary to
the Institution of that Ordinance; in which first the Blood was to be
sprinkled, then after the slaying and opening, the Fat was to be burnt: And
after that the Priest was to have his part; as may be seen, Levit. 7. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. And before the burning of the Fat to the Lord, the Flesh was not Holy,
and so not the Priests Portion, says J. Martyr, in locum. This was so observed
among the very Heathens (who imitated in many things the Jewish Sacrafices;
That haud immolata sacra devorare, was proverbial, to express a Belly-god; such
as Eli's Sons were. This was their Sin, whereby they did pervert Divine
Ordinances from the Institution, 1 Samuel 2. 14, 15, 16; and it is said ver. 17.
That Men abhorred the Offerring of the Lord. Some Translate it, Retrah^bant
homines a Sacrificiis Domini, they shunned offerring Sacrifices (says
Vatablus) beholding the Avarice of the Priests, and when they saw that the
wonted rites of Sacrificing were not observed, says Menochius: And it yet
further appears from ver. 24. that this their Fact did affect the Ordinances,
and made people withdraw from them; You make the People of the Lord Transgress,
says Eli. There is no reason to restrict this to their uncleanness mentioned,
ver. 22. For Eli heard beside that, of all that they did to Israel; and no
doubt his Reproof had respect to all. Some Translate ver. 24. Abigitis populum
Domini, i. e. efficitis ne huc veniat populus ad Sacrificandum. So vatablus.
All this considered, we must not think it absurd, to say that people may see
such things in their Ministers, as may warrant deserting of them.

Sect. 9. If this should be denied, the Clergy should be Lords over God's
Heritage, to all ends and purposes, and might teach what they would, and do
what they would, and bring into the Church what they would, instead of Christ's
Ordinances; and the People be still obliged to hear them, and join with them in
all these abominations; they might lead the People in the way to Hell, who were
still obliged to follow them. 3. The People have a Right of discerning and
judging, in reference to their own practice, whether their Ministers be so
qualified, as that they may safely live under their Ministry: This does neither
import, that they may determine in this what they will; nor that they are not
to blame, if they judge amiss; nor that they have Authority to pass a Sentence
on their Ministers (that belongs to the Pastors); nor that all of them are so
qualified for this Judging, as were to be wished; yet, that they have such a
Right, cannot be denied, without obliging them to blind obedience, and
regardlesness of their own Souls; and Scripture allows it, when it allows
People to admonish Ministe^s in reference to their work, Col. 4. 17. This
Command the Colossians could not obey, if they had no power of discretive
judging, whether Archippus fulfilled his Ministry, or not. Without this, people
were obliged to cast themselves into Temptation and hazard of Soul-ruine by a
Deceiver or Soul-murderer. This was both the Principle of the Primitive Church,
Cyprian, Ep. 68. Plebs obsequens praeceptis Domini a peccatore praeposito
separare se debet. And it was their common practice, (though I confes^ sometimes
on no sufficient grounds) they separated every where from the Arian Bishops and
Pastors. The Magdeburgenses, Cent. 4. 1, 10. p. 746. tell us out of Ruffinus,
Theodoret, Sozomen, that when Foelix B. of Rome had communicated with the
Arians, the People of Rome separated themselves from him; and that when he
taught, none of them came to Church: Also, ibid. p. 772. That Moses refused to
be ordained by Lucius B. of Alexandria, because he was an Arian, and a
Persecutor, but went to the Exiled Orthodox Bishops to receive Ordination. I
may here put the Dr. in mind (using it only as Argumentum ad hominem) that an
eminent light of their own Church, Bishop Jewel, giving reasons why the English
Bishops went not to the Council of Trent (a formal Separation) was, because of
Pope Pius's Simony in getting the Chair, and manageing it with Murders and
Cruelty. Full. Chapter Hist. lib. 9. p. 70.

Sect. 10. 4. Breaking the Peace and Unity of the Church, is a matter of so
much weight and consequence: And the Sin of it (on whatever side it lies) of
so deep a Die, and so great Aggravation; that the greatest caution is to be
used, that we do not separate for imagined, but real; for small, but very
great; for uncertain, but very Evident want; not of every ministerial quality
that is ^^sirable, but of such as is necessary for the Ordinances being so
Administered, as we may partake of them without Sin. If People do mistake in any
of these, and run into Separation without sufficient grounds, thinking that
fault of a Minister true, or great, or evident, or intolerable, which is not
so; we do not plead for this practice: But we must not, to shun that
inconvenience, say, that it is in no case lawful. I know no Truth but it may be
abused by men of Corrupt minds, as well as this. I know there are faults in
Ministers, which render them in the secret Judgment of God, and to the
Jealousy of good Men, no Ministers of Christ, but of Satan; which yet will not
warrant Separation from them, while they have Ordination unrepealed by a Church
Sentence of Deprivation, and Administer God's Ordinances, so as the partaker of
them is not involved in Sin. Gildas said of some Pastors in his time; Apparet
cum quem vos sacerdotes -- sciens ex cord dicit, non esse eximium Christianum:
And O inimici Dei, and non Sacerdotes: O li^^atores malorum, and non pontifices
traditores, and non sanctorum Apostolorum successores; Impugnatores and non
Christi Ministri. When we can apply all this to a Minister, the Church ought to
cast him out, as unsavory Salt: But till that be done, private Persons ought
to withdraw from his evil Deeds; but not from the Ordinances while they are
pure. I know this has been, and is, a Controversy in our Neighbor Church of
Scotland, and has given rise to much disquiet, much Confusion, and many
Persecutions there: I shall not much dip in it; our Case being more clearly
Stated: and our withdrawing from the public Assemblies, being founded not on
personal faults of Ministers, but on sinful Impositions in Worship. I have not
met with one judicious Writer of that Nation; nor one Minister that I remember
of in private discourse, who denies, in thesi, that it is lawful to partake of
the Ordinances from a Minister, merely on Account of his personal faults, where
the Ordinances that we are to partake of are incorrupted; but they state the
Controversy upon some Specialities in their Case. One or Two little
Manuscr^pts I have seen, that in Thesi and with as much Confidence, as little
Reason, deny the lawfulness of hearing a scandalous Minister. To these, I only
oppose this one Argument; Our Lord Commanded the Jews to receive the Ordinances
from the Priests of that time, who were most of them very bad men, Matthew. 8. 4.
Luke 17. 14. and what Christ bid them do, we may lawfully do in the like case.
The Exceptions made against this Argument (that I have met with) are very
Light, as that the Priests were not so bad as ours. 1. This is said without all
Color of Reason. 2. Let them show what degree of Scandal in a Minister will
warrant such withdrawing, and what not. Again, they object, That the Ordinances
could not be had, but from these Priests. Ans. If it had been unlawful to
partake with them, Christ would rather have had no Sacrifice offered, than that
People should sin in going about it. He that prefers Mercy to Sacrifice,
would never prefer Sacrifice to shunning of Sin. And, beside this, if the
hazard of want of Ordinances could infer the necessity of joining with these
Priests, so may the hazard of a sinful rending of the Church, persuade to join
in the Case in hand. And further, where the Ordinances can, without any sinful
circumstance, be had from better hands, I am far from advising any to attend
the Administrations of bad men: But in that Nation they had better grounds of
their practice, to wit, Subjection to Prelacy, required of them; and that their
faithful Pastors were turned out, and others put in their Place. But I leave
this Debate, as not being my present Work.

Sect. 11. I now come to say a word of each of Mr. Baxter's four Ministerial
Qualities; in particular, 1. Knowledge and Utterance: The Ordainers are the
Authoritative Judges of these; and the People are not without very great and
manifest cause to question what is in this done, by the Guides of the Church;
yet must they see with their own Eyes, and lament the defects of this kind,
that they evidently see, but not separate, while the Ordinances are not
intolerably depraved, though there be considerable defects. The Dr. never heard,
that the Apostle bid People turn away from their Minister for want of
Utterance; neither was such a Command needful, Nature and Reason injoining,
That if a man cannot speak audibly and intelligible, People should not come to
hear a noise, so that they cannot tell what is uttered. His declamation against
Peoples judging of a Minister's Knowledge, is out of the way; we do not make
them Triers, as he supposes, neither give them Authority; and we think, (for
all his scorn) that though many cannot well discern a Minister's Knowledge in
Controverise, yet most can tell whether he understands the plain Truths of
the Gospel, when they hear him discourse of them. If men, by prejudices, or
want of due application of their minds, (as the Dr. speaks) mistake about
these, I shall hardly call them very good men; as he supposes they may be. The
Second Quality is, That a Minister be not Heretical. Except Taunts and personal
Reflections on Mr. B. I see not what the Dr. answers to this. We do not say,
That Peoples thinking a man Heretical, when he crosses their humors, is a
good ground to separate on, as the Dr. would have it thought; neither is it
needful for discerning this, that all the People be Learned Divines, or have
read Epiphanius and Binnius, as he talks; but we think, they that diligently
read the Scripture, and pray for spiritual Understanding, may discern when
manifest Error against the Foundation of Christian Doctrine is taught; and
where they find this to be the way of a Minister, may withdraw from him. I wish
the Dr. would speak more plain, that we might see his mind more clearly than we
can do by these jeers: Does he think there are none Learned among the People?
or, Does he think that none of them that want Literature can discern Truth from
Error, in any Case? or, Does he think, dangerous Error being discerned to be
ordinarily preached, People should attend on that Preaching, instead of the
wholesome Food of their Souls, and not seek better means, unless the Bishops
will give leave? If he be not positive in all these, he says nothing against
Mr. B. nor Us, in this matter.

Sect. 12. The Third Quality is, That Ministers be not Opposers of Godliness.
That is not to be understood of what people will call so without cause; nor of
suspected malignity; nor of open opposing of it in the man's private actings, by
word or deed; nor of close hints in Sermons against it; nor breaking out
sometimes into more open maligning of it: But when this is manifestly the
ordinary strain of his preaching; we say, in that Case people may withdraw from
a man; for here the Ordinance of Preaching is wholly inverted and turned
against that which it was appointed to promote. There is as good ground in this
case to desert a Minister, as there is in a besieged Garrison, for the
Soldiers to desert their Commander, when he turns the Guns that are on the
Walls, from the Enemy, upon the Town. The Dr. rejects this, as before, by
tart Reflection on Mr. B. which whatever it may be, ad hominem, is nothing ad
rem. If Mr B. has sharply reproved some for Censoriousness, Pride, Divisions,
etc. and these will count this opposing of Godliness, Does this peevish mistake
of theirs prove, that there can be no such thing really committed by a
Minister; or if it be, that it should not be resented by the Hearers? Or, if
Mr. B. sometimes speak at this rate, is this his ordinary Doctrine? or, when
men make Railing their ordinary Doctrine, Should people sit and hear that, as
God's Ordinance for their Souls edification? The Fourth Quality; That Ministers
be not of a scandalous Life. Of this the Dr. says nothing, and I shall say
little more than is already said. We do not hold, That personal faults in a
Minister, where the Ordinances are incorrupted, is a sufficient ground of
Separation from him. But it cannot but be a sad Grievance, and make people wait
on the Ministry of such a person with less comfort and satisfaction, and may
warrant people that regard the advantage of their Souls, to lay hold on the
first opportunity that they can get, to live under a Ministry that is more like
to be blessed.

Sect. 13. He charge the Non-conformists (without exception) Sect. 10. with
insinuating, that the whole body of the conforming Clergy is guilty of such
faults as the people may lawfully separate: A most false Assertion, and unjust
Charge. Not one Nonconformist that ever I read or met with, has said or
written this, or words to this effect, but they do generally disclaim it: But
the Dr. undertaketh to prove it by some particulars. 1. They make Conformity it
self to be a very scandalous thing, and then tell the people over and over
again, That it is no sin to separate from scandalous Priests, especially where
the Scandal is so notorious. I am astonished to read this, from the Pen of one
whom I am loath to have an harsh thought against. We do indeed think Conformity
a Sin, and being open, it cannot but be a Scandal; and we think, that in some
it arising from a regardlesness of knowing what is right, becomes yet more
scandalous; but none of us ever thought, that a mistake of this nature in men,
otherwise sober and conscientious, was a very scandalous thing; or, that it was
such a scandal, as by it self could warrant Separation. But let the Dr. tell us
of any one of our way, that ever held this general Thesis, That it is no Sin to
separate from scandalous Priests, when the Scandal is notorious. I am sure Mr.
B. (whom he only cites on this occasion) teaches the contrary oftener than
once, particularly Christ. Direct. p. 718. and his looking on Conformity as
Sin, and an aggravated Sin, and the pressing of it as that Sin which they
charge us with, to wit, Schismaticalness, do no way prove what the Dr.
asserteth. When Mr. B. says, p. 133. Can you wonder if the people choose more
faithful Pastors? It does not make the Clergy's Conformity the true Reason (nor
the main Reason neither) of Separation; yea, nor does it import an Approbation
of Separation, (though he does elsewhere show his Approbation of it) but only
shows how you tempt the people to it.

Sect. 14. Another Argument to prove his charge, is Sect. 11. That we count
most of the present Ministers of the Church of England Usurpers, and that from
such we may lawfully separate. Ans. We deny both parts of his Assertion,
whatever Usurpation some of them may be guilty of. We know most of them have
the (tacit at least) consent of the people, a post facto; and therefore,
however they might be guilty of intrusion in their entry, in their continuing
in their places they are no Usurpers. Neither do we own it to be lawful to
separate from every Minister that is an Usurper, merely on the account of his
Usurpation. To clear this, I shall lay down our opinion about this, in these
few Assertions. 1. The regular way of entering into the Ministry, is by the
Election or Call of the People over whom he is to have charge, and the
potestative Mission or Ordination of the Pastors of the Church: This will fall
in afterward to be debated. 2. It is consequential to this, That whoever do not
enter this way into the Ministry, are in some degree or other Intruders into
that Work. 3. Though the express Call of the people, and their free consent, be
needful to the more orderly Entrance of a Minister among them; yet if they
implicitly show their consent, and they being prelimitted by the Presentation
of a Patron, or Commands of the Magistrate, if they consent, that is enough to
the substance of a Call, and makes the Minister that so enters no Usurper.
The reason is, because he is only to consider the Will and Consent sufficiently
declared, not the motives nor considerations that influence their will. Indeed,
if the man had any hand by undue means, to influence them to consent against
their Duty and right Reason, he is, in so far, guilty before God: But this does
not nullify his Call, which consists in the peoples consent. 4. There are
three sorts of Usurpers of the Ministerial Office or Work. 1. Such as fall upon
that Work, without a Call from a people, or Ordination by Ministers. 2. Such as
do it upon a peoples Call, but have no Ordination or potestative Mission by
those in Authority, the Church for that end. 3. Such as have Ordination, but
take the Charge of a particular Flock, wholly without consent, or against their
will. The two former sorts usurp the Office; the third usurpeth that particular
Charge that he has no right to. 5. The Presentation of a Patron to the Living;
the Civil Laws of men, injoining or owning a man's entrance into a place; due
Ordination, Institution, and Induction, and what else men please to devise, can
never make him the Pastor of such a particular people, without their consent
some way had; but without it he is still an Usurper. This does follow, from the
peoples right of choosing their Pastors, which is to be afterward discoursed. 6.
It is lawful to Separate from usurping Ministers of the first and second sort,
because they are no Ministers; they have only the name of Ministers, like those
that called themselves Apostles, and were not, Rev. 2. 2. I hope the Dr. will
not deny this. 7. When a Minister is obtruded on a People against their will;
and so is an Usurper of the 3d. Sort; if there be no other cause of separating
from him but that, I think (under correction of the more Wise and Learned) that
they should rather cede of their right (with a Salvo) than break the Peace and
Unity of the Church, or disoblige the Magistrate; and therefore they ought to
give their consent. By this means, their right that Christ has given them is
not alienated; it being by them on that occasion Asserted; and the Rending of
the Church is prevented.

Sect. 15. Let us now hear what the Dr. will say, to make good against us his
charge of our separating on this Head. He says, They have a Legal
Establishment, and Law and Usurpation are contraries. Ans. Establishment by a
Civil Law, and Usurpation of a Civil Office are contrary. Also Establishment by
the Gospel, and Usurpation of a Church-Office are inconsistent; but
Establishment by a Civil Law, and Usurpation of an Office in the Church, are
very consistent one with another: Because the Office of the Ministry is no
institution of Man, but of Christ; and he gives Laws to regulate that, and
other affairs in his House; and has not left these to be ordered by the Laws
of men. I thought the Dr. had been for Episcopal Government in the Church, not
for Erastianism. Mr. B. is cited, p. 134. asserting, That all that come into
the places of Ejected Ministers, the people not consenting, are Usurpers; that
the Magistrate's Imposition makes not such true Pastors of that Church,
without or before the Peoples consent; nor will it always oblige the People to
consent, and forsake their former Pastors; nor prove them Schismatical, because
they do it not: For disproving of this, the Dr. first leaves it to others, to
judge of the dangerous Consequences of this; an Act being passed by King and
Parliament for removing of some Pastors, and putting in others. And I desire
that these others, who judge of this matter, may consider, that the ordering of
the Ministerial Call, and the fixing a Religion between Pastor and People, do
fall directly under the Cognizance, and Laws of him who is the Head and
Lawgiver in his Church, even Jesus Christ, and under the Laws of men only, as
the Civil Peace may be concerned therein; and let them also consider, that we
by owning or disowning a Pastoral Relation, which the Magistrate has passed an
Act for or against, do manage our principle, and order our practice with that
peaceableness and caution, that the Magistrate may as little as possible either
know it, or be offended at it; and if we be Convicted of a Transgression of the
Magistrate's Law, we patiently suffer the Penalties: Let them, I say, Consider
these things; and withal Consider, that to differ from the Magistrate in
Principle and Practice of Religion, was the Lot of the Primitive Christians;
and then let them judge (if they be Impartial Men) whether any such dismal
consequences as the Dr. insinuates, are like to follow.

Sect. 16. He objecteth next, On those Grounds when Solomon deprived Abiathar,
and put Zadock is his room; any part of the People might have pleaded they
never consented to Zadock's coming in -- The Question is, whether it belonged
to the King or the People. Ans. There is so little shadow of Reason, or
affinity to the question in Hand in this Argument, that it is no small
Derogation from the understanding of so Learned a Man, once to mention it; for
the choosing of a High Priest belonged neither to King nor People; but the
Succession was fixed in one Family by the Lord; and it was neither in the Power
of the King nor People to choose any, but the nearest Heir of that Lin^.
Wherefore what Solomon did in this Case, was no more but to inflict a Civil
Punishment on Abiathar, to wit, Exile from Jerusalem (where only the Office of
High Priest could be Exercised) and Confinement to Anathoth: And this was done
for his Accession to Treason against Solomon: And Solomon's putting Zadock in
his place, was no more but obeying the Commandment of God, who had promised the
Priesthood to Phinehas; whose nearest Heir Zadock was: And it is the opinion
of many Divines, that Abiathar's right to the Priesthood was not so good as
Zadock's. Another Argument like the rest he has, p. 135. is, That it follows
that a smaller part of the People may disown the Public Acts of Parliament,
and choose other Governors in opposition to those Established by Law, and they
may do it in one case as well as in another. Which makes me wonder (says he)
at those who dare call them Usurpers, who enjoy their places by the same Laws,
that any men do enjoy their Estates. This is a Confounding of things most
disparate one from another, a taking away all distinction of Civil and Church
power. We utterly deny his consequence, That because people, notwithstanding of
an Act of Parliament, may adhere to their Pastors; therefore they may choose
other civil Governors (for of these he must speak, or speak nothing to the
purpose.) They may not do it in the one case as in the other; because the one
case is regulated by Christ's Law, the other by Men's Law. But I now smell out a
mistake in the Dr. that makes such Choler and Zeal against us, That we count
them Usurpers of their places, that is their Benefices: Let him no more fear
that; we own their Title to these, to be as good as Men have to their Estates,
both being disposable by the same Law: But all that we have said, is about
their Usurping the Charge of Souls: Of which we Assert two things, 1. That
there is no necessary Connection de facto between a good Title to the one, and
to the other, though de jure (I mean, divino) beneficium sequitur officium. 2.
That the same Law may give a Title to an Ecclesiastic Estate, which gives
Title to other Estates; but another Law and not that, must give a Title to
having the charge of Souls, and must make a Relation between Pastor and People:
And the reason of this Difference I bring from that famous saying of
Constantine the Great, to the Churchmen, that they were (...), but the (...).

Sect. 17. He has yet another Argument; to wit, That this overthrows the
Reformation, for the Papists had the very same Plea, that these Men have now,
to wit, that the Magistrate had no Power to dissolve the Relation between them,
and their former Church-guides. Ans. If the Dr. will say, that the Popish
Clergy had no otherwise forfeited their Title to the charge of Souls, than by
the Magistrates Law, then their Plea, and ours were the same. But I suppose he,
as well as we, will fix that forfeiture on another Foundation; to wit, their
Heresy and Idolatry, that they led the People into, warranted the People to
withdraw from them, as none of Christ's Ministers, and disobliged the People
from owning any further Relation to them, as their Pastors: And this not only
warranted the Magistrate to protect those that did break off from them; but to
suppress them, who should have done so, and would not, If he will not own this,
he does more to overthrow the Reformation, than all that he can charge
Non-conformists with can amount to. We are far from questioning the Magistrates
Power over Ministers, to inflict civil Punishments on them; if he do it on good
Grounds, he is approved of God; if otherwise he must answer to him for it: But
our Magistrates do not own any power of inflicting Church Censures by
themselves; whatever some Flatters do on their behalf. The Objection from the
Old Non-conformists, I have answered above. By what has been said it will
appear, whether he says truly, p. 137. That not one word of our Plea, but
might equally serve the Papists.

Sect. 18. What follows, p. 137, 138, and 139* of the Peoples Power of
choosing their Pastors, and the Nullity of their Title to that Charge without
the Peoples Consentt, he Dr. it seems thinks that Recitasse is Refutasse, for
he says no more to disprove it, but Asserteth, That it lays a Foundation for
all imaginable Disorders, and Separations; which we deny: And enough I have
said above to evince the contrary. He makes another of our Grounds of
Separation to be, the Persecution of the Prelatists, and their having a Hand in
silencing of Ministers: This we disown. Indeed their Persecution for our not
submitting to their Impositions, is a Bar by which we are forcibly kept out of
the Church; but it is not the motive that determines us to leave the Church;
we are willing to wait on Gods Ordinances even Administered by them that
persecute us, if they will suffer us to do it on sinless Terms. And if Mr. B.
(whom he only cites in this matter) mean any thing else, I cannot answer for
him.

SECT. III. Of the Terms of Communion imposed by the Church.
AFter Examination of other Pleas for Nonconformity, the Dr. comes Sect. 13.
to examine that which he confesses to be the most colorable Plea that has
yet been used; to wit, their imposing of unlawful Terms of Communion with them.
And this I look on as not only the most colorable Plea; but is the causa sine
quo non, that without which no Separation can be made from a True Church, which
is sound in the Faith, without Sin; and as the very Foundation of that Cause
that I now plead: and if the Dr. can beat us out of this Hold, we shall become
his willing Proselites. Let us hear then how he takes this Plea from us.

Sect. 2. His first assault is by a distinction, which is really true, but very
ill managed, though by amost Learned hand; but the Dr. being Master of so much
Learning, as few men are, does, I suppose, sometimes make him consider less
what he writes, than they find need to do, who move in an inferior Orb. His
distinction is, between terms of Communion plainly and in themselves sinful;
and such as are only fansied to be so through Prejudice and wilful Ignorance,
or Error of Conscience. That there are some Terms of Communion with a Church
really sinful, and others that are not so, though they be fansied by some to be
so, I think none ever doubted; and therefore the Dr. might have better employed
his pains (to say nothing of his Ink and Paper) that he has taken to prove
this by a multitude of instances. And I grant, that when the sinfulness of the
Terms is only fansied, the Sin of Schism, that follows on that apprehension,
lies not on the Imposers, but on those that separate: Only I must add an
Exception of a Case in which it may lie on both; that is, when the thing
imposed is unnecessary, and is made a ground of Separation by the mistake of
persons otherwise orthodox and sober, and who pretend to no other cause of
Separation: If the Imposers will not yield in that case, (that is the wiser to
the more wilful) they show not that moderation, nor love to Peace that they
should. If the Quakers could be gained by forbearing preaching by an
Hourglass, (the Dr's. instance) I would think it hard to lose them for that,
for whom Christ lost his Life.

Sect. 3. As the Dr. manageth this distinction, it is hard to tell what to make
of it; for he confounds two things that are most distinct, yea, different; to
wit, Terms of Communion plainly sinful, and Terms of Communion in themselves
sinful: And in the other Lemma of the distinct on, he has set nothing in
opposition to plainly; for fansied to be sinful through Prejudice, wilful
Ignorance, Error of Conscience, are all opposite to those that are sinful in
themselves. He should then have told us, if Terms of Communion imposed be
sinful in themselves, but not plainly, but only obscurely so; what censure he
would pass on them that could not comply with them; also what degree of
plainness he would require about the sinfulness of imposed Terms of Communion,
that it might be lawful to Separate, rather than yield to them. My opinion is,
that if Terms of Communion be imposed, that are in themselves, and really
sinful, and if the sinfulness of them can be known by diligent searching of the
Scripture, and depending upon God for Light and Guidance, though there be not
such plainness as the Dr. had above called glaring Evidence, that all the world
may see, they that are conscientious ought to withdraw from any Church
whatsoever, rather than submit to those Terms. There is an Ambiguity in the
Term that he uses, In themselves sinful; for I know, that it is their usual
Plea for the Ceremonies, (the imposed Terms of Communion now under debate) that
they are things in themselves indifferent. This may either be understood, that
they are in their general nature such; which we grant; Habits, and Postures,
and Gestures importing neither good nor evil, as such: Or as considered under
the circumstances that they are clothed with, as they fall under our debate;
and so we think them sinful. Now, the Dr. should have told us whether he
means of Terms of Communion, that are things imposed, which are really evil,
under the circumstances with which they are imposed; or Terms of Communion,
which are things in their general nature evil: We think the sinfulness of Terms
of Communion, even in the former, and not only in the latter sense, may warrant
our withdrawing.

Sect. 4. He tells us, That the Magistrate of Church may lawfully determine
and impose Time and Place, and suchlike circumstances of Worship; which we
grant, (though we think it inconvenient to be rigorous in these Impositions, or
too frequent and universal in them; but about these, our Question is not
conversant:) Therefore, if any Separate from these Impositions, he says, the
Sin of Separation is on their part: This we do not deny. We also grant his
Hypothetick Proposition that follows; to wit, If other things be as much in
the Magistrate or Church's Power, they sin who separate, because of imposing of
them. His reason of this is not so clear; to wit, Where there is no plain
prohibition, men may with ordinary Care and Judgment satisfy themselves of the
lawfulness of the things required: And there is no plain prohibition, he says,
of the Liturgy and Ceremonies. We deny the imposing the Liturgy and Ceremonies
to be as much in men's power as is the determining of Circumstances of Time and
Place, and suchlike. We deny also, that men, with the best Care and Judgment,
can see the lawfulness of every thing imposed in the Worship of God, (for of
such things we now discourse) that is not plainly prohibited: For, What if they
be prohibited, though not plainly? It is too great peremptoriness, to take upon
us to teach the Spirit of God how to speak in Scripture; if He expects
Obedience from us (the Dr. was in this strain also in his Ir^nicum;) if we have
any hint of His Will, though never so obscurely, so as we can understand that it
is the Mind of God, we are obliged to obey it. Again, we deny, that want of
either obscure or plain Prohibition is good ground to satisfy us about
Religious Ceremonies, that they are lawful, though imposed by men: It is
enough, that they are not commanded nor instituted. Will Worship is condemned
in Scripture; and, Can it be denied, that what is not commanded, though it be not
plainly forbidd^n, is Will Worship? And, What Argument will the Dr. bring
against most of the Popish Ceremonies, but that they are not commanded? Where
is the plain Prohibition of them?

Sect. 5. Further, we say, That the Liturgy and Ceremonies are plainly enough
forbidden, tho not in particular, yet in general terms. The Traditions of men
in Gods Worship, are plainly forbidden, Mat. 15. 7, 8, 9. Mark 7. 6, 7, 8. Gal.
4. 9, 10, 11. Col. 2. 20. -- which Scriptures, and other Arguments proving them
to be forbidden by God, have been so fully managed against his Party, without
any Answer, as may let the world see, that neither Ordinary Care nor Judgment
has been wanting to find* out the lawfulness of such Impositions; and yet we
cannot find it. I shall not now repeat what I have elsewhere said to this
purpose, but intend to answer what the Dr. will please to say in defense of
these his Lawful Impositions.

Sect. 6. The Dr. is at some pains to prove, that the prohibition of these is
not in the Second Commandment: But if he would have convinced us of our Error,
he should have proved, that they are neither forbidden there, nor elsewhere, by
giving satisfying Answers to all our other Arguments; but he is pleased to
insist only on our Argument from the Second Commandment, and to that as he is
pleased to frame it, he gives an Answer, such as it is. I observe some
mistakes in his treating of this Argument; 1. That he expects that the
Liturgy and Ceremonies should have been forbidden in words, if they be
forbidden; that is, that they should have been expressly named. Will he forbear
no Sin, but what is named in one of the Ten Commandments? What will he say of
Fornication, Incest, Rebellion against Kings, etc. May be he will say these are
forbidden expressly in other parts of Scripture. Ans. So are humane Inventions
in God's Worship; as has been showed: And beside, it were impertinent to deny
Fornication to be forbidden in the Seventh Commandment, because it is not named
there, though it be in other Scriptures: Even so it is here; yea, I suppose the
Dr. will not think, that whatever is not named in Scripture as a Sin, is no
Sin; mispending the Sabbath day in sleep, idleness, play, etc. advising or
commanding one man to murder another, and many things of that nature, are not
named in Scripture, and yet comprehended under general prohibitions.

Sect. 7. 2. His Question is very absurd, How shall we come by the sense, but
by the words? He must mean the words of the second Commandment. And then I
answer, That we could never by this way know the sense of the seventh
Commandment, Fornication is a Sin: Nor by the words of the sixth Commandment
could we know it is a Sin, to say to our Brother, Thou fool. Wherefore has the
Spirit of God written so much more Scripture holding forth Sins and Duties, if
we are only to look to the bare words of the Ten Commandments, for learning the
preceptive or directive part of His revealed Will? His Commands are exceeding
broad, Ps. 119. 96. and therefore we are to look for more understanding from
them, than the words by themselves can afford us. Ezra and the Levites read the
words to the People, and gave the Sense, Neh* 8. 8. It is our Duty also to read
it, and enquire into the sense of it. One useful means of coming by the sense
of the Commandments, is, to consider how they were expounded by Christ,
enlarged on by the Prophets and Apostles injoining and forbidding things of the
same nature, with what the words of the Commands do express; and in general, we
must compare Scripture with Scripture, if we would understand the meaning of
the several parts of it. It is strange, that the Dr. and his Pa^ty should deal
so unequally; they take a great deal of Liberty to impose things on the Church
of God, from a very general Command, Let all things be done decently and in
order: Which words they practice upon at their pleasure, devising Rites for the
Worship of God, and bringing This to warrant them, though they can bring no such
sense out of the words, as that Crossing, Kneeling, etc. are lawful: But if we
scruple any of their Inventions, we must be obliged to give words of Scripture,
where they are expressly forbidden.

Sect. 8. In the Third place; When his opposites allege certain Rules for
interpreting the Commandments, he asks, Whether they be divine or humane? I
again ask him, Whether does he own them as sound, or reject them as fallacious?
But to his question I answer; They are by men collected out of the Scripture,
and therefore have Divine Authority, though the frame of them be Humane; as the
Dr's Sermons (I do not mean that at Guild Hall) are divine. Truths, and of
divine Authority, though of humane frame and composure. 4. One of these Rules is,
That where any thing is forbidden, something is commanded. We choose, after the
generality of Divines, rather to express it thus; That in every Negative
Precept the contrary Duty is commanded: And in the Affirmative Precept, the
c^ntrary Sin is forbidden. His Answer is, There is here a Command to worship
God without an Image. A Logician would say, this is still a Negative Command,
for here the matter of this Precept is expressed Negative. All Protestant
Divines agree, that the matter of the Second Command is the m^dus of Divine
Worship, Divine Worship it self being commanded, and what is contrary to it
forbidden in the First Commandment. Now, though this preceptive proposition of
the Dr's, Worship God, be set down affirmative, yet the manner how God is to be
worshipped, is set down negative; and therefore he has yet given us no Duty
commanded in the second Commandment, but only the way of worshipping God by an
Image forbidden, (which he shunneth to say) or we must seek for some other way
to express the affirmative part of this Commandment.

Sect. 9. We may then conclude, that it is injoined in this Command, That we
should worship God in the way that He has prescribed to us in His Word. This
is elsewhere commanded, Exodus 25. 9, 40. and the contrary is severely reproved,
Isa. 66. 3. Ier. 7. 31. From all these places it is evident, that God is to be
worshipped according to his own Institution, and no otherwise: And I hope the
Dr. will not dissent from the generality of Divines, who hold, that all Sins
and Duties held forth in other places of Scripture, are reducible to one of the
Commandments. And to which of them can this duty of worshipping God by the
prescript of His Word, be reduced, if not to the second? Hence we conclude,
that the affirmative part of the second Commandment is, that we ought to
worship God in the way that He himself has prescribed in the Word. And if the
Dr. can make it appear, that the Liturgy and Ceremonies are prescribed there,
whether plainly or obscurely, directly or by consequence, we shall own them. 5.
Whereas we say, that it is a prohibition comprehended in the second
Commandment, That we must worship God by our own Inventions. He says, No
Inventions are condemned in the Worship of God, but such as God Himself has
somewhere forbidden; but He has no where forbidden the Liturgy and Ceremonies.
The meaning of this must be, a general prohibition of humane Inven^ions is not
sufficient; but notwithstanding, that they are generally forbidden, Men may
devise, and bring into God's worship, and impose on others what they please, if
that in particular be not forbidden by a particular precept wherein it is
named, or otherwise particularized. What a mad exposition of the second
Commandment is this? He might as well say, when it is said, Thou shall not
kill, I may, for all that, kill any man I please, if there be not a particular
command not to kill such a man. Are there particular prohibitions of the
several Ceremonies that were used in Popery? or, Must the Bible have been made
so voluminous, as to mention every circumstantiate Case, otherwise we will take
no notice of its general Precepts? Is not this stretching and forcing of
Scripture to defend a bad Cause, which he below charge us with?

Sect. 10. The Dr. (as conscious to the insufficiency of this shift) comes in
the Fifth place to excuse the Ceremonies from falling under the second Command,
by telling us of two sorts of humane Inventions forbidden in it, and no other.
1. Such as go about to represent God, and so to disparage Him: For, he says,
the reason of the law, to wit, the spiritual and invisible nature of God,
extends only to these. Ans. 1. It seems then, worshipping God by or before a
Crucifix, is not here forbidden, for that does not go about to represent or
disparage God, but only to represent CHRIST as Man. The same may be said of all
the use of the Images of Saints in the worship of God that is among the
Papists; that is, they are all innocent by this Doctrine: For, if these be not
forbidden in the second Commandment, the Dr. will find it hard to refute these
practices from Scripture. If such a passage had dropped from the Pen of a
Nonconformist, how would the Dr. have improved it against the whole Party, as
doing the Papists work for them; as he has charged them on far less grounds
than this is? Ans. 2. Seeing other ways of uncommanded Worship are condemned
in Scripture, as has been showed, what reason is there to say, that this way
of it alone is here meant? This is to expound Scripture ad libitum, and
amplify or restrain it as our fancy or interest leads us. Ans. 3. I deny not
the spiritual and invi^^ble nature of God to be a good Reason of this Law; but
I deny it to be either the sole reason of it, or the reason of it that is
expressed in the Law it self; which is, that He is a jealous God, and will punish
the corrupters of His Worship. Now this Reason of the Law does evidently extend
to all ways of worshipping Him that He has not injoined, making bold to
worship Him in any of these ways, being a derogation from that sovereignty that
He has over Men, especially in His own Worship, which has a nearer
dependence on His Institution than other things have.

Sect. 11. The other sort of humane Inventions that he will exempt from the
scope and sense of this Commandment, is, Such as relate to the manner and form
of Worship, supposing the Worship it self to be performed in a way agreeable to
the Divine Nature and Law. Ans. 1. I desire to know of the Dr. what difference
he makes between the manner or form of Worship, and the way of Worship; when
he supposes the way of it to be agreeable to the Divine Nature and Law; while
yet the Controversy is, whether the manner and form of it be so. This is a
subtilty that I cannot reach; but Words must serve to palliate a bad Cause when
Reason cannot defend it. Will then the Dr. say, that the way of Divine Worship
is injoined in this Command, but not the manner and form of it? I hope he will
not deny; that the object of worship is fixed in the first Commandment, and
also the way of it, so far as by that word is expressed, the duties of natural
worship, the inward affections and actings of the Soul on God, that are
requisite in His Worship. Wherefore, if he will (with all Divines, except
Papists and some Lutherans) allow this to be another Precept, and not a part or
explication of the first; he must say, that here is appointed all instituted
worship; that is, all the means, manner, external forms and ways, by which the
Lord will have us to worship him; to wit, that we should make nor devise none
of them to our selves: And this he was pleased to express by the most absurd
and most common way that Men had devised to themselves to worship God by, to
wit, Images; as, in the rest of the Negative Precepts, he uses to express all
the sins included in it, by one that is more notable than the rest. Ans. 2. I
hope the Dr. will not deny, that most of the Popish Ceremonies, as Oil, Salt,
Spittle, etc. are forbidden in this Commandment, (or, if he do deny it, let him
tell us where they are forbidden, or whether they be forbidden any where, or
not) but they perta^n to the manner and form of worshipping God, as well as our
Ceremonies do. Further, let him tell us whether it is possible there should be
any Superstition in the manner and form of worship; and if there be, where is
it forbidden, but in this Commandment? Or, let him give us any reason why
Humane Inventions, relating to the manner and form of worship, are not
forbidden, as well as these that relate to the way of it. A Reason indeed he
pretends to give, Otherwise (says he) all Use of Men's inventions, as to
preaching, reading, interpreting Scripture, would be forbidden; and then this
interpretation of the second Command would be unlawful, because it is a mere
invention of Man, as much as Liturgies and Ceremonies. If this be to reason
like a Divine, or to quibble like a Sophister, let the Reader judge; for the
Invention that men make use of in preaching, etc. is the act or exercise of
their faculties, whereby they find out the mind of God: The inventions in God's
worship, that we ^ow debate about, are Objects found out by Men, not commanded
by God. If Men devise unrevealed Objects in Reading, Preaching, etc. we condemn
them in that, as well as in devising ways of worshipping God: And if the Dr.
mean, that this exposition of the second Commandment is an invention of Man,
that is, the exercise of his inventive Faculty, whereby he finds out the Mind
of God; he speaks wide from the purpose, when he compares that with things
that men devise to worship God by: If he mean, That the Interpretation is only
devised, not warranted; let him prove that, and we shall reject it.

Sect. 12. I hope, by this time, the impartial Reader may judge whether we
stretch and force Scripture to condemn Liturgies and Ceremonies, as the Dr.
says; or he does so to defend them. That he imputes to us, blinding and
fettering our minds by Education, and reading but one sort of Books, and taking
things for granted, which we ought not, we resolve to bear patiently, and must
accept of these, instead of better Arguments, to refute our Principle. His
instance of the deniers of Infant Baptism, proves fully, that the Schism does
not always lie on the Imposer's side, (though they separate from us, because of
our using it, without considering imposing it on them. Who of them have been
excommunicated for not using it, as we are for forbearing the Ceremonies?) If
men will separate, because the Ordinances of God are imposed on them, let them
answer it; we scruple only the Ordinances of Man: Neither did we ever say, that
the blame of separation does in all c^ses lie on the Imposers. And we confess,
that where impos^d Terms of Communion are scrupled through mistake, they that
separate on that scruple do sin. And we yield also to him, that not the
pretense of Conscience, but sufficient proof of the unlawfulness of the Terms
of Communion, is a good ground of Separation; and we still desire that the
matter may be put to that issue.

Sect. 13. He proceeds next to set ^orth the principles of them who hold all
Acts of Communion with the Church of England unlawful; of them he has little
to say, their mind (as he says) being easily discovered; and we are not
concerned in that opinion, and therefore shall not insist on it. Only I see not
on what grounds the Dr. names the Author of the Book called Jerubbaal, as one
that is against the lawfulness of hearing the conforming Ministers preach; for
that Author (...), p. 12. of himself and others, whom Mr. C. had charged with
Schism, because they could not communicate with Her in the Liturgy, that they
joined with Her in the instituted Worship and substantial Ordinances of
Christ, as Prayer, Hearing of the Word preached, singing of Psalms, etc.

SECT. IV. The Dr's stating of the Question Examined, and the Question truly
Stated.
THE several Principles of the Dissenters having been examined^ the Dr. now
proceeds to state the Question about Separation. Some think this should have
been done before examining of the Principles on which men separate; but the Dr.
must use his own method, and we must follow him, in examining what he says. He
gives us, Sect. 15. his Concessions, which I shall say little of, save to make
a Remark on one or two of them. And, 1. His third Concession is, He can allow
different modes of Worship in Cathedral and Parochial Churches, in public and
private Administrations (these being allowed by the Church in whose Communion
we live:) but, What is this, says he, to the denying of constant Communion
with our Churches, to the choosing of new Pastors? It is true, these are two
different things; the difference is, the one is allowed by the Church, the
other not so. But consider the things in themselves, and abstracted from the
Churches pleasure, and there will appear to be as little Uniformity between
Cathedral and Parochial Worship, as between their Parochial Worship, and that
used in the Meetings of the Dissenters. Now we gladly would know of the Dr. or
any of his Party, seeing the Church can yield so far to Parochial Assemblies,
as not to tie them to the same Modes with Cathedral Assemblies, because they
cannot go to the expense of it: And seeing the Church dispenses with crossing
in pr^vate Baptism, why may She not condescend so far to the Dissenters, who
cannot for their Consciences use these things, and so shun this Breach in the
Church, this denying of Communion with their Churches, and choosing of new
Pastors? Are the Consciences of men so little to be regarded? or, Is it fit the
Church should be so imperious over her Members, as that She will indulge Men's
Purses, but not their Consciences; She will dispense with the sign of the Cross
for Her pleasure, but not for peoples consciences, when they can show good
reason for what they think and make conscience of? This is wholly
unaccountable, and very inconsistent with those high pretentions, that our
Brethren make of regard to Peace and Unity.

Sect. 2. Another remark I make of his 4th. Concession, That the Church
allows a different mode of Worship to Foreign Churches set up in England,
because they break not off Communion with the Church of England, as they do who
were Baptized in it. But why may not the Church be as kind to her own Members
as to Strangers; if the Ceremonies be necessary, why should the neglect of them
be permitted to any? If unnecessary; why should they be forced on men's
Consciences, to the Rending of the Church? The breaking off of Communion that
he talks of, may be prevented by this Condescendency; and therefore it is
most unreasonable to charge us with that as a Sin, which we are under a
Necessity to do for shunning the wounding of our Consciences, and sinning
against God; and which they might as easily prevent by showing us that Favor
that they show to others. I take notice also of his 6th. Concession, That it
was no sinful Separation to keep up the Exercise of True Religion under Arians,
against the will of the Magistrate: But what is this to our Case, where true
Doctrine is taught? It is very much to our Case; for the reason why the
Orthodox might Worship God apart from the Arians -- was because it had been
their sin to join in corrupted Worship; though we do not equal the owning of
the Arian Doctrine, and using the Ceremonies; yet we reckon the one to be Sin,
as really as the other; and we may not commit a smaller Sin to enjoy Communion
with a Church, more than we may commit a greater Sin for that end. And we are
not obliged to live without the Ordinances of God, when we cannot have them
with the Church without Sin, more than the Oxthodox were, who lived under the
Arians.

Sect. 3. Though the Dr. it seems had designed this Section for stating of the
Question, upon which his whole Book is founded: I see no formal Stating of it
(Concessions are but preparatory to the Stating of a Controversy) except that,
he says, he had told Mr. B. that all our dispute was, whether the upholding
separate Meetings for Divine Worship, where the Doctrine Established, and the
substantial parts of Worship are acknowledged to be agreeable to the Word of
God, be a sinful Separation or not? This is no sufficient stating of the
Controversy between the Prelatists and Dissenters about Separation. Two things
in it are not sufficiently clear; and some things needful to be minded in our
present Controversy are left out. The First thing that is not clear, is, That
he will not allow any fault in Doctrine to justify Separation, but what is in
the Established Doctrine; that is, either that which is contained in the
Churches confession of Faith, or is settled by Law. But it is evident there may
be such faults in Doctrine, as may make them that regard their Souls Health,
withdraw from a Church which are not here comprehended; that is, when gross
Errors are commonly taught, contrary to the Doctrine contained in the Public
Confession of Faith, and which is Established by Law: That this is a Case
supposeable; yea, that it ought to have been supposed with reference to our
Controversy, appears in that it is most common in England, for Ministers who
have subscribed the 39. Articles, to teach Doctrines quite contrary to them; as
I observed above: It is no rarity for unconscientious men, to subscribe to
whatever is imposed, rather than lose a Benefice; and mean while to Hold and
Teach what they please notwithstanding of such Subscription. Now if a Church
should become so corrupt, that Heresy is commonly taught, though the Orthodox
Faith be Established; ought not People to withdraw from that Church? Or if many
teach dangerous Doctrine contrary to established Truth; ought not People
withdraw from such Teachers? Especially when there is no way to get this
unsound teaching removed, or restrained.

Sect. 4. Another thing in the Dr's State of the Question is unclear; to wit,
That where the substantial parts of Worship are acknowledged to be right, there
should be no Separation. What he means by these is a Controversy it self; and
he is at a great deal of Pains to clear what he means by this Term, Part. 3.
p. 334. whither I referr the Debate with him about it. But, what if any part of
Worship be unlawful; call it Substantial, or Circumstantial, or what he will?
Or what if something be Annexed to the True Worship of God; which is sinful;
but yet so peremptorily imposed, as none shall worship God without it? I ask
the Dr. whether in this case we may separate, though we scruple not any part of
that worship that he is pleased to call Substantial Worship?

Sect. 5. Some things are also left out by the Dr. in his Stating of the
Controversy, which were needful to have been minded. As, 1st. To clear what he
means by Separation. I have above showed, that sometimes they that are
charged with Separation, are merely Passive in it; sometimes they are Active:
The First is when the Church casts them out, because they cannot submit to
her Impositions. The Second, when they take offense at something in the Church,
and therefore leave her; but are not cast out by her, but have free and
peaceable Access to all her Ordinances: In the first Case (which is ours) if
they causlesly scruple at the Impositions, they may be charged with Ignorance,
or Error of Conscience, or Peevishness, and Willfulness; but how they can be
charged with Separation, I know not, more than a Banished Man can be blamed as
a Fugitive from his Country. And if they have good cause to scruple the
Impositions; I see not how any blame can be fixed on them at all. 2. He should
have showed whether by Separation he means casting off all ties to have
Communion with that Church, more than with another Church that professes the
true Faith; as a Man, or Company that live in Holland, have no more Tie to
Communicate in England than in France, etc. or a present forbearing of
Communion, because of sinful Terms, with owning an Obligation to communicate
with this Church, when these Bars shall be removed. In the one case all
relation to that Church in particular is cast off; in the other not so: It is
but a suspending the Exercise of Communion as a Churchmember; not a disowning
it, or casting it off.

Sect. 6. He is defective in mentioning no other alleged grounds of
Separation, but false Doctrine Established, or wrong substantial parts (as he
calls them) of Worship. He knows little of the Controversy that he
manageth, if he knew not that other grounds are alleged; and therefore it had
been fair to have fixed the Question on them; whether it be lawful to separate
on such and such grounds. It is true, his question may include all the grounds
that can be alleged, beside the two mentioned; but that which is the main
Hinge of our Controversy, should have been mentioned, in stating of the
Question. 4. It being confessed on both Hands, that there is a sinful
Separation; it should have been one part of his question, where the Sin of this
Separation is chargeable; whether on the Imposers, or the Scruplers of those
things that cause the Separation? But he is willing to set his Church beyond
all imaginable blame, and to put the Question only, whether the Dissenters have
any blame, or not? 5. It should not have been omitted; to enquire whether the
Grounds alleged for Separation lie in things really Evil, or only fan^ied to
be such? And again, whether the Evil of them be such as will bear the weight of
Separation.

Sect. 7. I shall then endeavor to state the Question more fully and clearly
than the Dr. has done. There are indeed diverse questions, on which this
question about Separation does depend; and therefore our Controversy cannot be
represented in one single question, to which an Affirmative or Negative Answer
will suffice. It is then, 1. A great part of our Controversy, seeing the
Liturgy as to the Frame of it, and Ceremonies are by the Clergy thought
indifferent, and so unnecessary, That God may be acceptably Worshipped without
them, and the Dissenters think them unlawful to be used, and are able to make
it appear by good reason, that it is not Humor but Conscience that moves them
so to think; whether they should impose these on the Dissenters, and so force
them either to separate or sin against their Consciences. 2. It is a part of
our Controversy, and that indeed on which it mainly hangs; whether to
worship God by the Liturgy, and with the Seremonies, be a Worship acceptable to
him; or such as he will reject. If he will approve them to be acceptable
Worship; yea, lawful to be used; all our other questions will cease. 3.
Supposing them to be unacceptable worship, as the Non-conformists believe; and
supposing them to be so imposed by the Church, as we cannot enjoy God's
Ordinances without them with the Church: The question is, whether we should
choose to use them, or forbear the Ordinances with the Church? 4. It is yet
another question; supposing the unlawfulness of using them, and impossibility
of joining with the Church without them; whether we ought to live without the
Ordinances of God; or keep separate Meetings, where we may enjoy God's
Ordinances without sinful mixtures of Man's inventions? I deny not but several
other questions may fall in, while we are debating these; but these are the
main points in difference between our Brethren and Us. Some have not unfitly,
though not so fully, comprised all the Controversy in this question; whether
we ought to worship God, only according to the Prescript of his Word, or may do
it by the Traditions of Men?

SECT. V The Dr's Arguments examined for Occasional Communion.
HAving Stated the Question, he is resolved to make the charge of Separation
against all the Dissenters: And 1st. against those that deny constant Communion
to be a Duty, wherever Occasional Communion is lawful. 2. Against them that
hold all Communion with the Church of England unlawful. He insisteth on the
1st. Sect. 16. etc. There was here also need of clear stating of this question;
which I have done above; and here resume it briefly: Occasion^l Communion is
either in some Duties, or in all Duties; and so is constant Communion. I hope
he does not mean, that they who think it lawful to communicate with the Church
in some Ordinances, as Preaching, Prayer, etc. are consequently to that obliged
to think it lawful to Communicate with them in all Ordinances; because they
have annexed unlawful Terms of Communion to some Ordinances, and not to others.
The Question then is, whether they who because they cannot enjoy all the
Ordinances without Sin in the Public Assembly, and yet think they may enjoy
some of them without Sin; and have for enjoying all God's Ordinances without
Sin, set up a Meeting apart from the Church for that end: whether I say such
are obliged constantly to attend these Ordinances in the Public Assembly,
where there is no Sin in their joining in. To make the thing plainer by
Instances; we may lawfully hear Sermons by the Conformists; and do not shun to
do it occasionally; but they have annexed such unlawful Terms of Communion to
the Sacraments; and sometimes even to their Preaching, by their second Service
at the end, as well as the first at the beginning, that we cannot at all enjoy
the Sacraments; and but seldom other Ordinances, in purity; and therefore are
forced to have Meetings where we may enjoy all the Ordinances in purity. Now
the Question is, whether in that case we are obliged constantly to wait on
Preaching in the Public Assembly, rather than in our private Meetings. The Dr.
is for the Affirmative; we are for the Negative.

Sect. 2. Before I examine what the Dr. says for his opinion; I shall in a few
words lay down the Grounds on which we deny any such obligation to lie on us.
1. We are cast out of their Church by Excommunication; all of us being
Excommunicated ipso facto, on our Nonconformity by the Canon as the Dr.
confesses; though he labor to palliate the Matter, Praef. P. 74. and Part. 3.
P. 367. And many of us; yea, most of us in many places Excommunicated by Name;
and Prosecuted with such Severities, that we may not be seen in Public: It is
strange that they should cast us out of their Communion, and at the same time
blame us for forbearing their Communion. 2. This partial Communion that the Dr.
would have us constantly use, can neither satisfy the Laws of the State (which
he lays so much stress on in Church Matters) nor of the Church: There is no
Law for hearing of Sermons; but only for waiting on the Service and Sacraments;
from which they have excluded us by their Impositions. Why then should they
blame us for forbearing that Communion with them, which themselves lay so
little weight on, while they have excluded us from that which they count
Church Communion, so as the Dr. himself reckons hearing a Sermon not to be?
3. Being by their unlawful Impositions necessitated to have Meetings and
Pastors for Administration of all God's Ordinances; we think our selves more
obliged to wait constantly on hearing of the Word in those Meetings, and from
those Pastors; than in the Assembles, which we are so necessitated to leave, or
rather are driven from, for a time.

Sect. 3. In order to proving his opinion about Occasional Communion, the Dr.
undertaketh to make out. 1. That bare Occasional Communion does not excuse from
the Guilt of Separation. 2. That as far as Occasional Communion with our Church
is allowed to be lawful, constant Communion is a Duty. The First of these we
are little concerned to dispute with him; we bring other Grounds to clear our
selves of the Guilt of Separation, that he lays on us: Neither do I see how
that by it self could do it. If we have no cause to forbear constant Communion,
we cannot satisfy the Obligation that lies on us to the Unity of the Church,
by Communion with her now and then. It is no wonder that the Presbyterians (as
he says) were not satisfied with Occasional Communion granted to them by the
Dissenting Brethren, because they saw no just cause of their denying constant.
Communion; which if we cannot show in our case, we are indeed faulty. I have
above showed how we are Members of the Church, and how not: And do not plead
that Occasional Communion makes one a Member, but I hope it will not be
denied, but that, with protestation of the Grounds on which we own it, will
show that we do not cast off all sort of Membership with the Church; and it may
excuse from the tantum, though not from the totum of Separation, as I believe
it did in the Independants, compared with the Brownists, in reference to the
Presbyterians, which the Dr. instanceth. For his discourse against Mr. B. for
being Eighteen years without Administering or receiving the Sacrament, and yet
Preaching, What Evil is in it, or in other instances of this nature, will be
charged on his Party, who deprive us of the Ordinances of the Lord with them,
by their sinful Impositions; and do what they can to hinder us from having them
otherwise, by their Persecutions; many things of that nature are our
Affliction, and their Sin; but all this cannot oblige us to Communicate with
them in their Corruptions of God's Worship.

Sect. 4. I leave our Author to make the best he can of his first undertaking,
and come to attend him in his second; to wit, That constant Communion is a
Duty, where Occasional Communion is lawful. This he manageth, Sect. 17. Mr. B.
and Mr. A. had given good instances to disprove this, as it is here set down;
to wit, joining with other Parishes in a Journey, at a Lecture, etc. but I am
willing to understand it, with the Dr. of Communion with a Church, whereof we
have been or should be Members; and of withdrawing from a Church for some
Corruptions; where yet I may Occasionally join in some duties; for his opinion
in this, he brings two Arguments; the first he takes from the general
Obligation upon Christians to use all lawful means for preserving the Peace and
Unity of the Church. This he inforceth, by proving this Obligation; which none
of us ever denied; but do with more reason retort all that can be said, on that
he^d, on themselves, who will not do what they can for this Peace and Unity;
they will not quit so much as one of their needless Ceremonies: ^or our part we
are ready to do what we can without Sin for Peace and Unity; but the Dr. should
have proved, 1. That our coming to their Sermons, as often as there was no Let
by the Liturgy joined with it, and when they pleased to suffer us without
Excommunication, and C^pi^ndo's, would preserve that which he calls Peace and
Unity. 2. That we being necessitated to have other Meetings for the pure
Ordinances of God; it was a lawful means for Peace and Unity with that Church
that had driven us away, to desert these Meetings, and wait on so much of their
Administrations, as they should be pleas^d to allow us. Our Hearts do not
reproach us, as this Learned Author does, That it is one of the provoking Sins
of the Non-conformists, that they have been so backward in doing what they were
convinced they might have done, with a good Conscience: He means toward
Communion with the Church.

Sect. 5. But I perceive all the Strength of his Argument, and the Zeal with
which he prosecuteth it, is built on a mistake; to wit, That we hold it lawful
to Communicate with the Church in the Liturgy and Sacraments. If Mr. B. or any
other, are of that opinion, I know not why they should be Non-conformists: If I
were convinced of it, I should not deny constant Communion with the Church,
whatever I might do Occasionally elsewhere; only I think our Author need not
talk so highly against his Opposites as he does, p. 159. when they speak of
some cases, where joining with the Church, would do more harm than good. Was
ever Schism, says he, made so light of? And the Peace and Unity of
Christianity valued at so low a rate? Ans. Yes, to wit, by them who will not
part with a Trifling Ceremony, for the Peace that they so much talk of; but
will impose these on scrupling Consciences by force, to the dividing of the
Church, the laying aside of thousands of well qualified Ministers, and the
Hazard and Ruin of many Souls. Did ever men in the World make lighter of the
Peace of Christians, than these men do, if you believe their deeds, and yet
value it more highly, if ye regard their words? He asks, p. 161. Which of
them reads what they think lawful in their own Assemblies? Ans. We read part
of that Service Book daily in our Assemblies; to wit, the Scriptures therein
contained, we read them out of the Bible; but for using the Book, or any part
of it, as in that composure, we find no obligation on us to that; both because
that would be very insignificant toward Unity with the Church, more than
Preaching of the same Doctrine, and praying for the same things, is counted by
them; also, we look on the whole Frame and Model of that Service, as a humane
device, that we ought to give no Countenance to in God's Worship. And lastly,
because having once par^ed with them, in the matter of worship; we think we
should take our Rule for manageing our Worship, from the Scripture, rather than
from their Ecclesiastical Constitutions.

Sect. 6. All his Arguments, Sect. 18. do proceed on the forementioned mistake;
to wit, that we count Communion with them in all their Ordinances lawful: If
that were true, Communion with them sometimes for peace, might well infer
constant Communion, for the same good design. Neither do I say, that better
means of Edification will warrant constant separate Assemblies; however it may
warrant Occasional Communion elsewhere, then where we are Members of a Church.
I look not on our Lords Communion with the Jewish Church, as only Occasional,
but Constant, so far as the Wo^k that he was sent into the World for, did
permit; but I am far from thinking that ever he did communicate with the Jews
in any part of their uninstituted worship, as the Dr. alleges, p. 162. His
presence at the Feast of Dedication, as other Jews were, is asserted by the Dr.
without all Ground; and he knows our Writers do constantly deny it; and
therefore his bare asserting it, should not have been thought enough to set it
off. All that the Scripture says of this, is, That he walked in Solomon's
Porch, Joh. 10. 22, 23. Did none of the Jews more than this, at that Feast? Is
it not to be thought, that he who did so sharply reprove their uninstituted
Washings, and other religious Observations, on account of the want of
Institution; and defended the Nonconformity of his Disciples to these
Observations; would himself observe a Religious Solemnity, that had no other
warrant nor foundation, but what those other things had, which he condemns?
It is then rational to think, that he walked there to get opportunity to speak
to the People at that concourse; as the Apostles after did, when they knew
these Jewish Feasts to be abrogated, and not fit to be observed.

Sect. 7. He brings a Second Argument, Sect. 19. from Phil. 3. 16. As far as
we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule; let us mind the same
things: To prove that where Occasional Communion with a Church is lawful,
constant Communion is a Duty; for, says he, from hence appears evident, that
Men ought to go as far as they can toward Uniformity, and not to forbear doing
any thing which they lawfully may do toward Peace and Unity. This Argument is
but lamely proposed, and this Scripture but weakly improved (by what the Dr.
says) to prove his design. Two things, it seems, he would infer from it; to
wit, Uniformity, and Study of Peace. I first ask him, whether he thinks these
two to be necessarily conjoined; so as to study the one, is to study the other
also; and neglecting the one, is, to neglect the other? If he say they are not,
why does he here conjoin them? Will not the study of Peace answer this
injunction of the Apostle, without Uniformity? If he say they are, it is easy
to prove the contrary; for not only we have Peace and Unity with other
Churches, though not Uniformity; but the Church of England allows a
Difformity within her self; to wit, between Cathedral and Parochial Service;
and yet I hope she allows no Schism, nor breach of Unity; or, will the Dr.
say, that the Apostle here injoineth Uniformity among all particular Assemblies
in a Church, except in Cathedrals? I confess it is like he did not mind their
Uniformity, for he knew no such distinction of Churches, or Officers, on whom
it depends, under the New Testament.

Sect. 8. I ask, Secondly, what sort of Uniformity does he think the Apostle
does here injoin; if in Doctrine, instituted Worship, Holy Conversation, and
such like: I grant it to be our Duty to study it; But if in the same Forms and
Words of Prayer, in the same religious instituted Ceremonies; yea, or in all
the same Circumstances, let him prove that the Apostle meant any such thing;
for we deny it: And it is generally held, that the Ancient Church (which the
Dr. thinks could not possibly so soon degenerate from Apostolic practice) was
very various, and not Uniform in her Rites and Customs; as may be seen in
Daillie's right use of the Fathers, Lib. 2. p. 148. -- but much more fully in
the Dr's own Irenicum, p. 65, 66. He must be a great Stranger to the Primitive
Church, that takes not notice of the great Diversity of Rites and Customs used
in particular Churches, without any censuring of those that differed from them,
or if any, by inconsiderate Zeal did proceed so far (as the Dr. and others now
does) how ill it was resented by other Christians. A great deal more to that
purpose is excellently there said: But, O quantum mutatus ab illo -- We deny
that Uniformity (such as that our Breth^en use to plead so hotly for) was any
part of the Apostles meaning; and therefore it ought to be no part of the Dr's
Argument from this Text.

Sect. 9. I do, in the Third place, readily acknowledge, that the Apostle here
designeth to engage Christians, as far as they can attain, by their
understanding of what is their Duty; and as far as they can lawfully do, to
study Peace and Unity, as with all men; so with the Church of which they are
Members. But how does this prove constant Communion with the Church to be our
duty; for if he mean constant Communion in the Liturgy and Ceremonies, we have
not attained so far: We see not the lawfulness of the use of these, much less
of the constant use of them; and therefore the Apostle does not enjoin us to
study Peace and Unity that way. I should rather think that a concludent
Argument might be brought from this Text, to persuade our Brethren to study the
Peace and Unity of the Church, by not pressing us with these things, nor
forcing us to withdraw from the Church, because of them; for they have attained
so far, they know them to be indifferent, and so unnecessary: They and we agree
in this Attaintment; why then do we not walk by the same Rule, in laying them
aside, and minding the same things; to wit, the Unity of the Church, and not
our own Enriching, Grandeur, and Dominion over our Brethren? But if he mean
constant Communion with the Church in the Orninance of Preaching, 1. That
themselves hinder, by their Excommunication. 2. That is not Duty in the
Circumstances, that their Violence has placed us in, as has been showed. 3.
That could not conduce to Peace and Unity, while we are necessitated to keep
separate Meetings on other accounts. So that the Apostle's command in this
Text, does not at all reach our case, and how far it reaches the Imposers, let
them look to it.

Sect. 10. Having thus defended our cause from his Argument built on this Text,
even supposing his own Exposition of the Text, I shall not need to be concerned
in what Exposition others give of it; nor in his Refutations of them; yet I
shall take notice of a few things in his discourse on this Text, which may seem
to make against our cause. And, 1. this Refutation of Dr. O. who says, That
the Apostle understands the different Seize of Christians in knowledge;
supposing which, they should jointly practice what they know; and bear with one
another in what they differed about. To confirm this, (if i^ be not a Crime to
make use of Mr. Pool's Critics, which the Dr. objecteth to Mr. A. the poor
Non-conformists not having Dean^ies to furnish them with vast Libraries) this
seems to be the general opinion of Interpreters, gradum illum cognitionis
rerum divinarum and perfectioris vitae, say Menochius, Estius and Tirinus. In
eo quod revelavit Deus; says Zanchius: Who, though he apply it by way of
Consequence against Dissentions in the Church, as the Dr. a^le^geth, p. 176.
yet does downright make the Apostle to mean of Degrees of Knowledge; and his
applying it against Dissentions does not say, that he presses Unity in Men's
Devices; but in God's Truth, and Institutions, which no doubt the Apostle does
also recommend. Also Bullinger in loc. (not cited by Mr. Pool) Idem sentientes,
and concordibus votis, calculis, and studiis progrediamur, agnitaque veritate
provehamur. Let the Dr. show us one Interpreter, that expounds this passage
of Studying the Churches Peace by Uniformity in Ceremonies and Liturgy: I think
himself is the first that hatched that Opinion.

Sect. 11. The Dr. here, against Dr. O. discusseth three Points; the first is,
Whether the Apostle speaks here of different Opinions, or of different
Practices. He endeavors to prove the latter, because the Apostle begins
with a Caution against them that were for Circumcision, and makes a digression
concerning himself; he advises People to agree in pursuing their main end; and
then brings in the Case of them that were not satisfied about the Law, that
People should not listen to them, because they made Divisions among them, and
divided them by different Observations. This is to expound Scripture by our
fancy. It is evident, that the Apostle is speaking of Justification, which the
Concision Thought must be, by the Works of the Law: And this he refuteth from
his own practice of looking after another Righteousness; but he would have them
to deal tenderly with those that had not yet learned the Truth, even in that
great point, waiting till God should instruct them. I see nothing that he says
to prove, that it was meant of different Practices, but rather of different
Opinions, that divided the Church: But whether the one or the other, it proves
not, that we should go over the Belly of our Light to keep Peace, but rather
bear with one another for that end.

Sect. 12. Next he enquireth, Whether the Rule here mentioned was the Rule of
mutual Forbearance. I think the Question should rather be, Whether it was a
Rule of God's making, or of Man's making? Whatever the Rule were in particular.
Tirinus says, Regulam hic intelligit a Christo and Apostolis ejus
praescriptam. Zanchius, Doctrinam quam modo tradidit, summam doctrinae
Chr^stianae, tum de d^gmatibus, tum de moribus. Doctrinam fidei, say Estius and
Menochius. Grotius says, Etiam qui de ri^ibus and circumcisione aliter
sentiunt, interim s^iant, evangelij praecepta, quae divina esse per suas sunt
sibi esse sequenda. If the Dr. can prove this Rule to be a humane Rule, he will
gain much by this Scripture, otherwise nothing at all. We are content to follow
a Divine Rule, for attaining Peace in the Church; it does indeed forbid peevish
dividing of the Church, by injoining to hold to the same Rule; but the Dividers
are not they that are content to follow all Christ's Rules, but they that make
Rules of their own, and will tear the Church in pieces, rather than these
should not be observed. The Third thing he enquireth into is, What influence
this Rule has on our Case. He says, It obliges to go as far as we can: This
is confessed. But then we say, It is a Divine, and not Humane Rule that must
show how far we can, (i. e.) ought to go. He says, When we can go no further,
we must sit down quietly, and wait for further Instruction, and not divide the
Church. Ans. When the Apostle speaks, ver. 15. of God's further instructing
them that mistake, I suppose it expresses rather the hope that the sound part
should have of them that are short in Knowledge, which should make them not
over-drive them, (as our Brethren would do with us) than what is their Duty. I
am far from saying, that it is men's Duty to break the Peace of the Church, but
I am sure, two things are far from being the Apostle's Scope, to injoin such
doubting Christians; 1. That they should go over the belly of their Light, to
join with them that they differ from, either in the Principles or the Practices
that they scruple. 2. That if they cannot have Communion in Ordinances with
them, unless they thus sin against Light, that they should live without the
Ordinances. None of these we have any Rule for in the Gospel; and therefore
doing of these were not walking by any Rule that the Apostle here means. The
Dr. says, p. 171. This Rule, in order to Peace, requires the observing of
such things, which although they be not particularly appointed by God, yet are
injoined by lawful Authority, and not repugnant to the Word. I wish the Dr. had
proved, that the Apostle gives any warrant to observe such things in the
Worship of God; we deny it. It is fallacious to propose his distinction of
things not particularly appointed by God, but appointed by Lawful Authority;
but let us see a general Rule from the Word, for what we scruple, and that will
satisfy us: Or, let us see what Authority Men have to appoint any thing that
is in statu cultus, or religioso, that God has not appointed. It is most
falsely asserted, p. 172. that Because the Apostles decreed against a plausible
pretense of Conscience, about abstaining from Blood, etc. the Governors of the
Church, (he has now changed the style; it used to be, the Magistrate) by
parity of Reason, may determine those things which they think conduce most to
the peace and welfare of the Church which they are bound to preserve: For to
give any color of Truth to this Assertion, he must prove, 1. That ordinary
Church Governors have as much Power as the Apostles in such Cases. 2. That
there is a parity of Reason for the things determined by our Church-Guides, and
those by the Apostles; these were necessary, and the Apostles Decree found them
so, and had its Rise from this necessity. The Ceremonies are confessed to be
indifferent, and to have no necessity, but what it pleases the Church or
Magistrate to give them.

Sect. 13. He says, p. 173, in answer to another of his Opposers, That the
Apostle gave binding Rules to particular Churches, which are not extant in
Scripture, as appears by 1 Cor. 7. 17. Ans. 1. This Rule is expressly said to be
given in all Churches, not to any Church in particular. 2. That this Rule is
not extant in Scripture, is false; for it is extant in this place. 3. This Rule
that a man should keep within his station, is no prudential Rule of Order and
Government, as the Dr. hinteth, but a Principle of the Moral Law. 4. We are
content to submit to all Rules that can be justly proved out of, or inferred
from Scripture, though they be not, in terminis, extant there. But the Rules for
Liturgy and Ceremonies are none of these.

SECT. VI. The Dr's Arguments against Independent Separation considered, in so
far as they may be thought to reach Presbyterians.
FRom Sect. 21. and forward, the Reverend Author insisteth on the Charge of
Schism, against those that deny any Communion with the Church of England to be
lawful; to wit, in partaking of the Ordinances with them; who deny them (though
true Churches in some sense) to be such Churches as they can abide in the
Communion of, and therefore must keep separate Meetings, which they own as
other Churches distinct from the Patrochial Churches. He aims I suppose,
especially at the Independents; I am not of that Persuasion, and therefore
leave the Patrociny of it to them that are. Yet because many of the Dr's
Arguments against their Separation may be thought by the unwary Reader to
militate also against the Meetings of the Presbyterians, I must not wholly pass
over this part of his Book; but I shall answer his Arguments so far only, as
they may be thought to condemn our Principle and Practice.

Sect. 2. Before I examine his Arguments, I shall show two considerable
Differences between our withdrawing from the Church, and that of the
Independents. 1. They have more grounds on which they separate than we; and
consequently, more is required to bring them back to Communion with the Church,
than is to bring us to it; for we withdraw, as they also do, because of the
Liturgy, Crossing in Baptism, Kneeling in the Act of receiving the Lord's
Supper, observing of Holidaies: If the Church will either remove these, or bear
with us in them, we are ready to join with Her in Acts of Communion. But
besides these, they s^parate, because of the wrong Constitution of the Church
in her Members, want of a right Discipline, faults in the election and
ordination of Ministers: Though the Liturgy and Ceremonies were not, they would
still separate, as they do from the Presbyterian Churches, where these are not.
2. They separate, because these are used; We only because they are imposed as
necessary terms of our being admitted to Communion. They separate, because the
Church is polluted with these; We only because we dare not pollute our own
Consciences with them. If we may have leave but to forbear personal concurrence
in these, we think the fault of other men (I mean in things of that nature) no
ground for us to withdraw from the Ordinances in and with the Church; so that,
in effect, they go away from the Church, We are driven away by the Church.

Sect. 3. The first Argument that the Dr. brings against denying Communion to
the Church, is, It weak^neth the C^use of the Reformation. This he undertaketh
to prove by the testimony of some French Divines, and he begins with Calvin,
whose words (too long here to be transcribed) do prove indeed Separation from a
Church to be unlawful, because of lesser Impurities or great Faults, while the
Doctrine and Worship are not greatly corrupted. But he speaks not one word of
the Case of them who are driven away from a Church, because they cannot submit
to sinful Terms of Communion with Her: yea; he speaks more in favor of such
a Case than against it; for he makes Corruption in Christ's Institutions (even
in the words cited by the Dr. p. 181, 182.) and being anathematized, for not
complying with these Corruptions, a ground of Separation from the Church of
Rome, which is parallel to our case. But (says the Dr.) he does not mean
indifferent Rites. Ans. Neither do we scruple indifferent Rites, but sinful
Ceremonies. And though I am far from comparing the Church of En^land with that of
Rome, as ^o causes of Separation, yet here there is a likeness; the one
rejects some of her Members, because they will not sin with her, and will
force her Impositions on their Consciences; and so does the other. Another
Author he cites is Daillie, giving most substantial Reasons for Separation
from Rome; and he does not mention our Ceremonies among them. And, what need
was there to mention them, when there were such weighty Reasons beside to be
insisted on? But Monsieur Daillie says expressly, if the differences had been
such, as we might safely have yielded to, then Separation had been rash and
unjust. So say we, for we cannot yield to the lesser sinfulness of
superstitious Worship, as we cannot to that which is greater, to wit,
idolatrous Worship.

Sect. 4. Next he cites Amyraldus, who says, If there had been no other
faults in the Roman Church, beside their unprofitable Ceremonies in Baptism,
and other things beyond the measure and genius of Christian Religion, they had
still continued in Her Communion. Ans. Neither should we refuse Communion with
the Church of England, for these and suchlike faults: We refuse the use of
these, and because of that, the Church casts us out of Her Communion. And if
Amyrald us say, That he would have used these rather than have fallen under
Rome's anathema, we leave him to his own Sentiments in that, but are of another
opinion. It is no wonder these men think little or next to nothing of the Evil
of our Ceremonies, when they are compared with these Romish Abominations; but
when we consider them by themselves, and compare them with Scripture, we cannot
think so of them. The Dr. further urges us, with the Answers given by Claude,
Paion, and Turretine, to the Book entitled, Prejudes legitimes contre les
Calvinustes: That they do not defend the Reformation by the unlawfulness of the
Ceremonies; this is both false and inconcludent: It is false; for Monsieur
Claude spends a good part of the Third Chapter of his First Part in defending
the ground and right that the Reformers had, to depart from the Communion of
the Romish Church, because of their Ceremonies. One of the chief Objects (says
he) that presented it self to our Fathers, was that of the great number of the
Ceremonies; which he sets forth as defacing God's Worship, making it look
partly like Judaism, and partly like Heathenism: He says, It was, without
doubt, a character very opposite to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and much more
to that purpose. What the other two Answerers of that Book say on this Head, I
know not, for I have not seen them. This Argument is also inconcludent, because
the Reformation is abundantly defended by weightier Objections against Popery.

Sect. 5. One passage he cites, p. 184. out of Mr. Turretine, that no
tolerable superstitious Rites, that do not infect the Conscience, are
sufficient grounds of Separation. And the Dr. adds is parenthesi, (as they
cannot be where they are not forced on it by f^lse Doctrine.) To Mr.
Turretine's Assertion I assent; for nothing that is tolerable can warrant
Separation: And I deny not, that some Superstitious Rites may be tolerable; to
wit, where men will use them, and do not impose them on others: They that are
left to their liberty, may well tolerate others in the use of them; but I do
not so well see, that any Superstition imposed is tolerable to a tender
Conscience; for Superstition is Sin, and no Sin is tolerable in that case. To
the Dr's Parenthesis I answer, That it is absolutely false; and I wonder that
he should assert it so confidently without proof; for, (that I may not deny, as
he asserteth, without reason) 1. A Superstitious Ri^e is one of the Traditions
of Men, in the Worship of God, and that the Scripture does simply condemn,
without all noticing of any false Doctrine to enforce the Tradition. I know not
what false Doctrine the Pharis^ical Washings were enforced with, but I am sure
Christ condemns them without mention of any such false Doctrine distinct from
the asserting of their lawfulness, Mat. 15. 6, 9. but of this afterward. 2. May
not enforcing a Superstitious Ri^e on the Conscience of one that scruples it by
Command and Will, make it to defile the Conscience, as well as enforcing it by
false Doctrine? If this Doctrine were true, men might impose what they will in
the Worship of God; they might impose all the Rites that ever Jews or Heathens
used, or Papists either, if they keep but orthodox mind, and give no reason
that is heterodox for these Rites, but only sic volo, sic j^beo. To what
purpose he cites le Blanch, showing the impossibility of reunion with the
Papists, I see not, but that many Names of Authors make a show, and it argue^h
great reading; for he says not one word of the ^eremonies; and we all know,
that if we would swallow down not only the Ceremonies of England, but those of
Rome it self, yet Reunion with them is impossible on other grounds.

Sect. 6. It was needful, that the Dr. should bring all this Discourse and
these long Citations, home to his purpose, which every Reader could hitherto
hardly ^iscern how it should be done: Wherefore, p. 185. he telle^h us what
Triumphs the Church of Rome would make over us, if we had nothing else to
justify our Separation from them by, but the things that we now scruple. And
he tells us, how we would be laughed at, all over the Christian world, and
how the Papists are hardened, seeing no end of Schism. To all this I answer, 1.
I know Rome, and some others too, will triumph when there is no cause for their
so doing; but as long as we can show Scripture-warrant for what we hold and do,
we are unconcerned in their censures. 2. That there is no cause, for their
triumphing, appears, because the Dr. and his Party, (who have the same cause
of Triumph that the Papists could have on this occasion) have as yet had no
such victory in their Debates with us, as to make them triumph. 3. If by the
Christian World, he mean the Protestant part of Christianity, (for the rest, we
are less m^ved by their Judgments) I hope they will not laugh at us, who
scruple nothing, but what most of them have condemned, as Additions to the Word
of God, and Corruptions of His Worship; for so all the Calvinist-Churches and
Divines have done. 4. If the Papists be hardened, as seeing no end of Schism,
they are to be blamed; for we can show them, and others, a good end of it; to
wit, ordering the worship of God by his Institution; or, at least, imposing
nothing uninstituted as Terms of Communion with the Church.

Sect. 7. His Second Argument is, Sect. 24. That this Separation makes Union
among the Protestant Churches impossible, supposing them to remain as they are.
This he proves, because the Lutheran Churches have these and more Ceremonies,
yet these Churches are thought true, and fit to be united with, by a Synod of
the Reformed at Charenton, 1631. The Helvetian Churches declare against
separating for different Rites and Ceremonies. So does the Confession of
Poland, and that of Ausburg, and Strasburg; also Crecius, and the Transilvanian
Divines. Nothing of all this comes up the point as above stated. We allow no
Separation for these Rites; and none of the Divines or Confessions mentioned,
disalloweth forbearing of them in our own persons, nor injoineth using of them.
We do not separate because the Church uses them; but She drives us away
because we cannot use them. What he cites out of Amyraldus, p. 189. that the
nature of Ceremonies is to be taken from the Doctrine that goes along with
them, I have said somewhat to above. I deny not, but a bad Doctrine may infect
an indifferent Ceremo^y, that is built on it; but I cannot assent, That the
best Doctrine can justify an uninstituted Ceremony in God's Worship. He cites
Davenant, giving three Reasons that may hinder Union; and the first is, Tyranny
over Men's Faith and Conscience; let but this be removed, and our Separation is
at an end; for I think the Dr. will hardly clear imposing of needless
Ceremonies on them that are convinced of, and can prove their sinfulness of
this blame. That Protestant Churches abroad have harder Terms of Communion than
we, he supposes, p. 198. but does not prove; the Calvinist Churches have not;
and if the Lutheran Churches have, that is, impose them with such rigor, we
cannot but, eatenus, condemn them: Yet we shut not out the Lutheran Churches
from all possibility of Union with them, as he insinuates; we can have Union
with them as Sister Churches, but we cannot partake in their instituted parts
of Worship.

Sect. 8. His third Argument is, that this will justify the ancient Schisms
that have always been condemned in the Christian Church; and he instanceth in
the Schism of the Novatians and others: But the Dr. has done us Presbyterians
the favor, to free us of the trouble of this Debate with him, by setting aside
(from their Pleas for Separation) Ceremonies, Liturgy, and Holidays, which are
the things we insist upon. I say no more on this Argument, but take notice of
the Dr's wonderful but most groundless confidence in a Parenthesis, asserting,
That these are common to our Church, with all other Christian Churches, for
many hundred years before the great degeneracy of the Roman Church, and are
continued by an universal consent in all parts of the Christian World. The
first part of his Assertion is absolutely false, for all the cunning used in
inserting the Epithete, great degeneracy of the Roman Church; I know not where
he will fix this great degeneracy, whether in Boniface's usurping the Title of
Universal Bishop, or, may be, in the Council of Trent: But he shall never
prove, that these were used in the Church before a notable degeneracy of the
Church; nor that they were used by all Christians, even before the greatest
deg^neracy. For the Second Part of his Assertion, it is beyond comprehension
what he can mean by it; for he cannot be ignorant, that these are not continued
in all, nor most of the Reformed Churches, but disowned in their Confessions,
and by their Practice. But some men's confidence, or pretense to it, runs
highest, when Truth and Reason is with them at the lowest ebb.

Sect. 9. I come now to his Fourth Argument, Sect. 26. That these grounds will
make separation endless. He prosecuteth this Argument in 12 pages, by showing
the evil of Schism, p. 197. reprov^ng Mr. A. for making too light of it, p.
198. and exposing him in a mimick long Oration, in the excuse of it, p. 199,
200, 201, 202, 203. and citing Mr. B. setting forth the evil of Schism, p. 204,
205, 206. and reproving Mr. A. for not setting Bounds to Separation. All which
I shall pass by, as not against the cause that I maintain, and only briefly
answer his Argument, (if either his Party, or any pretended to be on our side,
will not keep within that Boundary, let them answer it) That Separation will
soon be at an end, if the Church impose nothing but what is warranted by
Scripture, and if People refuse nothing, so as to separate for it, but what
they can show Scripture-ground, that it were their Sin to own it or do it.

Sect. 10. His Fifth Argument is taken from the Obligation that lies on all
Christians to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church. To enforce this
Argument, the Dr. does well prove several sound truths, but such as none of
them, nor all of them, conclude against withdrawing from the Church, when
sinful Terms of Communion are imposed; as, 1. That the Study of Unity is a
Duty. 2. That this Unity does not lie in bare Communion in Faith and Love. 3.
Nothing can discharge us from this Obligation to study Unity, but what is
allowed by Christ or his Apostles, as a sufficient reason for it. What is all
this, to make up an Obligation to sin against God, rather than separate from
the Church? But a fourth thing he insisteth on, may be, will help him better.
He tells us of three cases, wherein Scripture allows of Separation; to wit,
Idolatrous Worship, False Doctrine, men's making indifferent things necessary to
Salvation. That this is not a sufficient enumeration, I prove; 1. Because there
may be sinful Terms of Communion imposed where none of these are. May not men
make owning Traditions of Men necessary to their Communion, though they make it
not necessary to Salvation? and wherever we must sin or separate, Separation
is allowed by the Scripture, which tieth us to live peaceably with all men, if
possible, and so far as in us lies: It is not in our power to sin, for Illud
tantum possumus quod jure possumus. 2. The Apostle speaks of using Ceremonies
that the Dr. calls indifferent, as so dangerous to the Soul, that Separation
is, no doubt, rather to be chosen than the use of them; and yet he does not
take notice of their being looked on as necessary to Salvation: Therefore I
conclude, against the Dr's Conclusion of this Second Part of his Book, that we
are not obliged to prove against his Party, either Idolatry or false Worship,
or making the Ceremonies necessary to Salvation. It is enough, if we prove,
that ye make them necessary to our communicating with you, and that it is
unlawful for us to use them; for hence it plainly follows, that we must
either live without the Ordinances, which were our Sin; or meet apart, for
worshipping God, which is our Duty, as your Impositions and Severities have
stated us.

PART III.
IN this Third Part of his Book, the Learned Author undertaketh to refute
several Pleas that the Dissenters use for their not communicating with the
Church of England, and for keeping Meetings separate from the Church. The
Dissenters, as they are of different p^rswasions, so they use different Pleas
in defense of their ways. I shall not take the defense of them all; but before
I come to examine this part of the Dr's Book, I shall give my opinion of the
several Pleas that he refuteth, and fix upon what I shall own.

SECT. I. The several Pleas used by Dissenters, considered.
I Behold the Pleas used for the present separating from the public
Assemblies, as divided into three sorts. 1. Some that I do not think to be any
just cause of complaint against the Church of England; 2. Some that are
Grievances to us, that we dare not own nor approve, but desire a Reformation of
them; yet I do not think that they by themselves make Communion with the
public Assemblies unlawful, nor can justify Separation: 3. Some that not only
are Grievances, but do justify; yea, make necessary some sort of separation;
and these I shall afterward further subdistinguish. Of the first sort, I reckon
the Constitution of the Church in its Members at first; want of governing Power
in the People; and the Constitution of a National Church, as it is scrupled at
by some.

Sect. 2. For the second sort, they are not a few, neither can I promise to
name them all. 1. We are gri^ved with Prelatical Government, and taking away of
that pari^y of Power that Christ has given to the ordinary Ministers of his
Church. This we cannot approve, and therefore Ministers ought rather to suffer
deprivation of the public Exercise of their Ministry, than own it. And people
also ought not to own that their lordly Authority that they exercise; yet,
because this is not required to be acknowledged as a lawful Power in the
Church, by the people, I see not that we should withdraw from the public
Assemblies, merely because there are Diocesan Bishops set over the Church;
except our owning them, by submitting to their Jurisdiction, is required as one
of the Terms of Communion with the Church. 2. Depriving people of their Right
of choosing their own Church Officers, is also matter of complaint; but we must
bear it, rather than separate for that, from a Church. 3. The gross Abuses that
are in the Discipline of the Church, or rather the want of any thing that
looks like Gospel Discipline, we lament; but it not being peoples work to
mend it, nor the Abuses their personal action, it is no just ground of
Separation. 4. Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism are an abuse; but being
extrinsick to the Ordinance, we should not separate for that neither. 5. The
defects and faults that are in the Call of the Ministers, and in their personal
Conversation, their Pluralities and Non-residences, and several things of that
nature we complain of, and the insufficiency of many of them, but do not
separate for these, while the Ordinances are not corrupted that we partake of.
6. The Surplice, and other superstitious Habits, worshipping toward the East,
bowing to the Altar, and suchlike, we dare not approve nor practice; yet these
not being imposed as Terms of our Communion with the Church, we do not separate
on account of them. The lawfulness of these I do not now debate; nor is it
needful at all to do it, in reference to the point of Separation, that the Dr.
charge us with; yet they being things wherein we dissent from our Brethren, I
shall not shun to dispute such of them with the Dr. as his following Discourse
shall give occasion for.

Sect. 3. There are a third sort of things that we dislike in the Episcopal
Church of England, which not only are matter of Grievance, but do necessitate
us (and justify us in it) to depart from her Communion till these Letts be
removed; and they are of two sorts: 1. The unlawful Terms of Communion with
Her, tha^ She requires of us; without which she will not suffer us to partake
with Her in the Ordinances of God; as that we must worship God by the Liturgy,
that our Children, when baptized, must be signed with the Cross; that we must
Kne^l in the Act of receiving the Lord's Supper; that we must observe the
Holidays that She has appointed, out Christ never instituted. These things we
think unlawful to be done; and the Church, though She thinks them indifferent
and unnecessary in themselves, yet have made them necessary by Her imposing
them, and excommunicateth and persecuteth us, if we will not use them; and
therefore a parting from Her on these accounts, does necessarily follow; not
only because we ought not to live without God's Ordinances, which we cannot
have with our Brethren, but because, if we would do so, they would still
persecute us, if we come not to the Liturgy; if we have not our Children
baptized; if we do not receive the Lord's Supper thrice a Year, and especially
at Easter; if we do not observe the Holidays. A second thing that lays a
necessity on us, to have Meetings apart from them, is, their restraining of a
considerable part of the Ministers, whom Christ had sent to his Church, and
fitted by his Gifts for Gospel-Administrations (upward of Two Thousand of them
being put out in one day.) We think it is the Duty of these men to preach the
Gospel, and administer the Ordinances of God, and the Duty of the People to
wait on their Administrations, and to own their relation to them. It is true,
this by it self considered, need not hinder our Communion, and that ordinarily
with the public Assemblies, for things might be so managed, as no clashing
needed be; but this puts us under a necessity of meeting by our selves, and
the sinful Terms of Communion imposed, puts us out of capacity to assemble
with our Brethren in public. These I now but propose, but intend to dispute
them as they fall in, in the Doctor's Discourse.

SECT. II. Of Parochial Churches.
IN the beginning of this third Part, the Reverend Author reduces the Pleas
for Separation, to Four Heads, 1. Such as relate to the constitution of our
Church. 2. To the Terms of Communion with it. 3. To the Consciences of
Dissenters. 4. To the parity of Reason, as to our Separation from Rome: Under
the First he ranketh, 1. That the Parish Churches are not of Christ's
Institution. 2. That Diocesan Churches are unlawful. 3. That the National
Church has no Foundation. 4. That the People are deprived of their Rights in
the choice of their Pastors. About these Four last mentioned, he spends the
far greatest part of this third part of his Book; and a very small part of it
upon the Second Head; which is that which he knows his Antagonists do most
generally insist on, and lay most weight on; but it is easiest going over the
Hedge, where it is lowest.

Sect. 2. He begins with Parochial Churches, because it is Separation from
those, that is most Conspicuous. He says, the Non-conformists at first kept
Communion with them. I have before disproved the Truth of this, and also given
reasons, why the practice of them who did so, is not binding to us. He says,
Since the Congregational way prevailed in England, the present Dissenters are
generally fallen into it; at least so far as concerns Communion with our
Parochial Churches. Ans. There was a withdrawing from the Parochial Churches,
because of unlawful Terms of Communion, before the present Congregational way
was either known, or prevailed; and to say that Dissenters are generally fallen
into the Congregational way (I suppose that he means by it) is a mistake; it
is true, indeed, the restraint (he will be angry if I say Persecution) that
they are under, makes Presbyterian Meetings de facto in many places
Independent; because they cannot associate for Discipline; but we have not
quitted our principles for that.

Sect. 3. I do not Interpose in his Contests with Dr. O. about the Parochial
Churches in England being true Churches; or about Dr. O's reasons for
separating from them. But I cannot pass our Reverend Authors Ingenuity, in
acknowledging p. 221. That Tyranny over Men's Consciences is a good Ground of
Separation; which is our great Plea for withdrawing from their Assemblies: They
impose on us Terms of Communion, that they can pretend to no other warrant for,
but their own Fancy and Will; and they exclude us, because we cannot yield to
them: If this be not Tyranny over the Consciences of Men, let any unbyassed
Person judge; and if it be so judged to be, we have good Ground for Separation
by the Dr's own confession.

Sect. 4. Our Author, Sect. 2. maintains a long debate with Dr. O. about this
Question: whether one Church is that which ordinarily assembleth in one place;
or diverse assemblies, that meet ordinarily in diverse places for worship, be to
be recko^ed diverse Churches. This Question is stiffly debated on both sides,
between the Congregational and Episcopal Brethren; the reason of their so much
concern in it, is, the one ascribes all Church Power to every Congregation
that ordinarily meets for worship; and so makes that the highest ruling
Church: The other places ruling Church Power only in the Bishop; and so makes
a Diocesan Church, to be the lowest ruling Church. The Presbyterians go a
middle way; they stand not on the (...), whether a Congregation should be
called a Church, or only the Combination of more Congregations, for the
Exercise of Discipline; they find the word used both ways in Scripture (and the
Word it self, (...), signifies any Convention, Civil or Religious) as, 1 Cor.
1. 2. all the Christians in Corinth, with their Officers, are called the
Church; and yet 1 Cor. 14. 34. it is supposed that there were several Meetings
among them ordinarily, that might bear each of them that name, of Church. When
the Apostle forbids, that their Women should speak in the Churches, (...),
he must mean the Churches in Corinth; for it is not to be thought, that he
would particularly have mentioned their Women, (...), if he had not meant the
Churches of Corinth, where they were likest to usurp that Authority. The Dr.
says, p. 235. That it does not once fail, that where Churches are spoken of in
the Plural Number, they are the Churches of a Province: Here it fails.

Sect. 5. But leaving the Word, let us understand the thing; which I shall set
down in a few Assertions, 1. All visible Christians are Members of one Great
Body; whereof Christ is the head; to wit, his Universal Church; which if it
could so meet together as to be taught, and ruled, ordinarily, by the same
Officers, there needed be no distinction of Churches in the World. And it is
probable it was so in the beginning of the Gospel; till the increase of
Believers made it needful to divide into several Compani^s, that might be
ordinarily taught and ruled by their several Officers. 2. The several Companies
of Believers, with their several Officers (each of which in Scripture-sence,
may be called a Church) are to be such as may commonly meet together in one
place, for partaking of God's Ordinances. We read of the Apostles ordaining
Elders in every City, (...) sure then they had respect to the conveniences of
Peoples living together, that so they might usually meet together. 3. These
single Congregations being furnished with one or more Pastors, and Elders have
ruling Power within themselves; for Christ has given ruling power to all the
Pastors and Elders, and not placed it single in a Diocesan Bishop; for at
Philippi, Phil. 2. 1. all Church Officers are divided into Bishops and Deacons;
a plurality of which were in that Church, though in one City; where our Brethren
acknowledge, that more Diocesans than one could not be. 4. The Church power in
single Congregations, is not Independent, but is to be subordinate to the power
of them, associate together. This may be gathered from the Churches in Corinth,
being there also called a Church: If there were not diverse religious
Assemblies, ordinarily they could not be called Churches; if they were not
Associate, they could not be called a Church; and wherein they could be
Ass^ciate, except in the Exercise of Government, is not easy to guess. 5. The
Association of Churches for Government may be diverse, as their Convenience of
meeting together for that end, gives them opportunity: Hence particular
Assemblies, lesser and greater Associations, have their Congregational,
Classical, Provincial, and National Presbyteries, or Assemblies, for the
Government of the Church; the Lesser in Subordination to the Greater And if
Ecumenical Synods could as conveniently, and duly assemble, all the rest
should be subordinate to them, seeing every one of them should make a part of
these.

Sect. 6. But because the diversity of Civil Powers, and frequent clashings of
them, in diverse Nations makes this hardly practicable; therefore the highest
Church Power is usually in National Assemblies. And though I am far from the
opinion of them, who think that Church Government should be modelled according
to the civil government of the Nation; the contrary of which I have asserted
elsewhere against the Learned Author (whom I now dispute with) yet in this
particular, it not only may, but must be suited to the extent of the Civil
Government: This being no essential part of Church Government, nor instituted;
but a Circumstance of it, determinable by necessity and convenience. On the
same Score, where a Congregation could have no other to Associate with, it
might act Independently, and be blameless. 6. Though Christians should so divide
themselves into particular Churches, as they may attend the Ordinances together
ordinarily; yet is not this meeting together, but their being under the
particular Inspection of the same Officers, that makes one particular Church:
For, 1. One Congregation may increase to that number, that one place cannot
contain them; and yet continue one Congregation, till they be regularly
divided: Thus it was in some of the Ancient Churches. 2. Where Parochial Bounds
are so large, as all the People cannot always travel to one place; the Pastor
or Pastors of the Church, may well have places more convenient for some of
them, where he or they may Administer the Ordinances to them, sometimes; as in
Chapels of Ease; and yet they all continue one particular Church. 3. It is a
frequent case with Families, that but a part of them at one time, can leave the
House, to wait on public Ordinances; and the rest at another time; yet are
they one Congregation. 4. In a time of Persecution, where the Flock is but
small, and might easily be contained in one House, the Danger of numerous
Meetings may be such, as it may be needful, that but a part of them should come
together at once, and that by turns; as we are necessitated at this time to do:
This does not make diverse Congregations. All this considered we are little
concerned; whether in the Primitive Times there were but one Church in a City,
or more? Whether those called Churches did meet in one place, or not; as long
as the one Party cannot prove, that each Meeting was ruled Independantly by it
self; nor the other, that a Diocesan Bishop ruled over more Churches than one,
and over their Presbyters.

Sect. 7. Before I part with this d^scourse of the Dr's about the Unity of
Churches, I take notice of his confident Asserting, p. 226. the impossibility
of the change of Church Government, so suddenly from its first institution;
even though the Church fell into Heresies very soon, yet this change could not
be. The same thing he had asserted before, and I have answered it, Praef. S^ct.
9. His further considerations to enforce what he had said, are not weighty; to
wit, That Government is so nice and tender a Point, that they cut of whose
Hands it was taken by those who usurped it, would certainly have complained.
This he enlarge^h upon: But I answer, 1. It may be they did; that they did not,
is not proved by the silen^e of History: A Negative Argument here is not
concludent; especially considering the Lame^ess of the History of the first
Centuries; and what we have of it, is by those who had a Hand in the
Usurpation. 2. He does not consider, that Men might Sleep, while others were
robbing them; as Christ foretold, Matthew. 13. 25. 3. We may rationally think
that Government in the Church (which then was no Lordly Dominion, but a painful
Ministry, or Servi^e; and made unpleasant by the cross Humors of them that
needed it most) was not then so ^ice and tender a Point, to honest and
well-meaning Presbyters, as it is now to our aspiring Churchmen; they were Men
of another stamp; they were willing to lie by, if the work were done; and they
might think, that others might do it better than they (this is not to justify
them, but to take off men's wonder at this) and Men of higher parts and Spirits
might easily, by degrees, wrest Power out of the Hands of as good men as
themselves, who were not so foreseeing as they should have been; nor so
tinctured with Ambition as they; though other ways good, and eminent Men. And
we need the less wonder at this, when we consider, that this thing was not done
suddenly; but by insensible steps, in the space of three or four Hundred Years.
Cyprian (whom the Dr. lays most weight on in this matter) lived in the third
Century, and even then we deny that Diocesan Episcopacy was settled. What the
Dr. says under this Head of the Plurality of Congregations in the several
Cities, that seems to prove Episcopal Power over Presbyters, shall be
answered (...), in the next Section; where it is more proper: Also what he here
says against popular Election, is to be considered in its place; because I
would not confound Subjects so diverse.

SECT. III. Whether Diocesan Episcopacy be lawful.
THE Second Plea for Separation, that the Learned Dr. considers, is, the
Unlawfulness of Diocesan Episcopacy; which he takes a great deal of pains to
prove to be, 1. Primitive; 2. Not repugnant to any Institution of Christ; 3.
That its Discipline, as exercised in England, does not overthrow the Being of
Parochial Churches. All this he manageth, Sect. 8, etc. I might shun this whole
Debate, having above disowned this as a Plea for Separation, except in so far
as we are required to own it. But because we look on this Episcopacy, as
unlawful to be used or owned, I shall examine what the Dr. says in defense of
it: This is done already to much more advantage than can be expected from me by
the learned Auther of, No Evidence for Diocesan Churches or Bishops, etc. and
the defense of that Piece, under the Title of, Diocesan Churches not yet
discovered in the Primitive Times; which might supersede all that I have to
say, and shall make me say the less, referring the Reader to these two most
Learned Books; yet, lest there should be an hiatus in this Dis^ourse, I shall
not wholly decline this debate with the Docto^.

S^ct. 2. Mr. b's Frame of Church Government, (which the Dr. disproveth, p.
242, 243.) being singular, himself can best defend it; wherefore I leave it,
and shall attend the Dr's proof of the three particulars above mentioned, first
asserting a few things that may clear our way. 1. That it is not the Name of
Bishop that we quarrel, it being applied in Scripture to all the ordinary
ruling Officers in the Church, as distinguished from her Servants, the Deacons,
Phil. 1. 1. and the Exercise of it called a good Work, 1 Timothy 3. 1. and applied
to all the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20. 28. 2. We meddle not with their Titles
and Revenues; those are the Magistrates Gifts, and do not cross Christ's
Institution, whatever inconvenience may be in them. 3. Nor do we deny the
Lawfulness of a Presidency among Presbyters in the Person of one of them.
Nature makes it necessary, that one should preside in a Meeting to shun
Confusion; and Christ has not instituted the duration of one man's Presidency,
whether for one meeting, for a Month, or Year, or during his life, and
therefore the Church may determine in that: Yet we must add, That the
perpetuating of a (...), or making a moderator constant, having been, of old
and late, the means of bringing in a Lordly Prelacy, and corruption of
ambitious men being so apt to improve it that way; so that the Papal Chair has
arisen from this low and blameless Foundation, we think it highly inconvenient.
4. Neither do we deny, that among Ministers, the wiser, graver, and men of more
Holiness and Experience, should by their reason prevail over those that are not
so well qualified: It is Superiority of Power that is in question between us
and our Brethren; yea, we deny not, but some of Opinion for parity of Power,
have overborn their Brethren, through their loftiness of Spirit; an Episcopal
Temper may be in a Presbyterian; it is not men's Corruptions, but their
Principles that our debate is about. 5. We deny not, but the Name, Bishop, that
in the Apostles times was common to all Elde^s of the Church, began very early
to be appropriated to the Moderator, who also was called Primus Presbyter* and
that this priority, for as small as it was, was too much affected and taken
notice of, even in the Apostles times. Diotrephes (who is said, (...), Jo. 3.
9. i. e. affected to be Primus Presbyter) had a great mind to that dignity; but
this was, when ^ew of the Apostles were now alive. It is neither the Presidency
nor the Precedence that we debate about, but the Imparity of Church Power or
Authority. 6. We deny not that prelatical Usurpation obtained in some places,
and was s^atched at in other places; while yet the ancient Order of Parity,
among the Pastors of the Church, was in most places retained. 7. Though we
deny, that Diocesan Episcopacy prevailed in the Church, for the first Three
Hundred Years, or that it was general in the fourth Century, and are willing to
enter the Lists with our Brethren in this debate about the first and purest
Antiquity of Church Government; yet it is not men's Authority, but divine
Institution, that we are determiend by, and lay the stress of our Cause upon;
and will admit of no absolute Rule of judging in this Controversy, but the
Scripture.

Sect. 3. It might have been expected, that the Dr. when he would charge us
with so great blame, as he does, in not submitting to the Authority of
Prelates, should have proved the Divine Institution, or at least, the
lawfulness of that Office, and answered the Arguments that our Writers bring
against it. This were the way to satisfy Men's Consciences; but the Dr. is
pleased to take an easier, though not so persuasive a way, to wit; to refute
Mr. B's. Assertions about Episcopacy, and to prove some things that are short
of the main thing that is in question; as I hope shall appear in our Progress.
And I have often observed, that the confidence of our Brethrens Assertions in
this Controversy is too big for the strength and concludency of their
Arguments.

Sect. 4. It will contribute to our clear, and sure procedure in this
Controversy, if we consider the difference and inconsistency that is among our
Prelatical Brethren about the Episcopacy that they assert; and the Foundation
on which they build it, as to the thing; some of them do so restrain the Power
of Bishops, denying both sole Ordination and sole Jurisdiction to them, that
they make it little or no more, but a Presidency: So the learned and Pious
Usher, who is followed by many of the more sober and learned of that party.
Grotius also goes this way, de Imper. sum. potest. circa sacra, p. 337. others
allow them Jurisdiction over other Pastors of the Church, and exempt them from
being liable to the Censures of their Brethren; yet so as they ought not to
rule by themselves, but with the consent of the Pastors of the Church, who are
to be their Counsel. Our Author, Iren. p. 309. says, that both Jerome, and
Ignatius agree, that the Counsel of Presbyters was of Divine Institution.
Others are for their Monarchial power in their several Diocesses; neither being
obliged to take the Counsel of the Presbyters; nor being liable to their
censures: So the generality of our High Churchmen. Some make the Bishop the
sole Pastor of the Diocese; and all the Parochial Clergy to be but his Curates;
others think the Parochial Pastors to be substitute, or delegate to none but
Christ; some think the Bishop's work is to preach the Gospel, and administer
Sacraments in his own Person, and that this, he should be constantly exercised
in: Others, that his Work is to rule, and that he need not trouble himself with
other Work, unless he please. Some allow the Bishop a Power of delegating his
Authority; not of dispensing the Word and Sacraments only, but of Government
and Discipline, to others; yea, to Laymen; that by them he may Excommunicate,
and judge Ministers and People: Others think that he has no power to do so; so
me think that it is inconsistent with the Office of a Bishop to be employed in
Civil Government, others allow it. Some think a Bishop should be chosen by the
Church, and that really, and not seemingly only, as when the Magistrate
nominateth the Person to the Chapter (who yet are not the Church) of whom they
must proceed to a Mock election; others think those that come in this way, to
be none of Christ's Bishops. Some own Diocesan Bishops, who yet see no warrant
for the Hierarchy, as it is stated among us, in Metropolitans, Primates,
Archbishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chancellors, etc. Some hold the Office of
Bishop to be distinct from that of Presbyter; others deny this; many School men
are on both sides; it was debated at the Council of Trent. In all these things,
I observe very much Confusion, and want of a distinct Idea of that Office, that
is debated about in the Writings of our Prelatical Brethren.

Sect. 5. There is as little agreement, or distinctness among them about the
Foundation, on which the Office of a Diocesan Bishop stands: Some of them are
for i^s divine Right, as being instituted by Christ: But this Plea they find so
hard to be managed, and to have so ill success, and to be so little the way to
preferment, (as derogating from the Supremacy of the Magistrate) that most have
laid it aside; others, that it is of Apostolic institution; being not
commanded by Christ, but prudently settled by the Apostles. Others, that it is
juris ecclesiastici brought in by the Primitive Church, after the decease of
all the Apostles. Others, that it is wholly indifferent, and may be received,
or not, as is thought most expedient in several times and places; and some of
these say, this is to be determined by the Church: Others, by the Magistrate.
This Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Irenicum asserteth; but is very uncertain,
whether the Church or Magistrate is to determine in this matter. One of the
most Learned of our Adversaries, Dr. Hammond, holds the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, but goes away different from all the rest in managing of that
Opinion; to wit, that all the ordinary Pastors of the Church, appointed by
Christ, or ordained by the Apostles, were Diocesan Bishops, and that Presbyters
are a sort of Men unheard of in the New Testament, and their Office but a
device of Men, or a constitution of the Church. This fancy is solidly refuted
by learned Mr. Durham, on Rev. 3. p. 230. Where the Reader may see abundant
ground of Satisfaction about the absurdity and inconsistency of this Notion,
from Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity.

Sect. 6. The question between us and our brethren, being about the lawfulness
of the prelacy now exercised in England, the owning of which is required of us;
that we may judge aright of it, we must have a true Idea of it, and then
consider whether such an Episcopacy was instituted by Christ, practiced in the
primitive Church with general approbation; or whether it has any rational
Foundation to stand upon. The true Idea of our English Episcopacy is visible in
these Lineaments of it; First, The Bishop is one of a Superior Order to, and
distinct Office from, other Presbyters, as appears not only from the power he
has, and they have not, and acts of Church Power reserved only to him; but
also because he is put into that Office by an ordination distinct from that by
which he is made a Presbyter. And yet further, because the Presbyters are owned
but as his Delegates, or Curates, and he is owned as the sole Pastor of all the
Presbyters, People and Flocks in the Diocese. Secondly, The Bishops have
jurisdiction over other Presbyters. Thirdly, He has the sole Power of
Ordination of Presbyters. Fourthly, He may delegate this Power to whom he will,
whether Men Ordained to the Ministry, or any of the people; so that by this
Delegation, a Man that is no Church Officer may exercise Church Power over both
Ministers and People. Fifthly, This power is exercised in the name of the
Magistrate; the Courts in which it is exercised being owned as the Kings
Ecclesiastical Court. Sixthly, They are not chosen to this Office by the
Church, but by the Magistrate; and they are not Preaching but Ruling Bishops.
Now if our Brethren cannot show us such a Bishop as this in Scripture, or
Antiquity, all that they say from either for an Episcopacy, is short of the
thing in question, and our scruple cannot be taken away by their proofs for
Episcopacy, unless they prove this Episcopacy.

Sect. 7. Though our Writers have brought Arguments against the lawfulness of
this Office in the Church that have never yet been answered, and I think never
shall; and though I can promise no new nor better Arguments than have been
already adduced by others; yet that the Reader may see that our Scruples
against Episcopacy are not without good ground, I shall briefly set down some
Arguments against it. The first shall be, ad hominem, against our learned
Author: By this Author's Doctrine, there is no ground to believe that such an
Episcopacy as consists in a Superiority of Power above Presbyters, was
Instituted, Allowed, or Exercised in the Church; Ergo, according to him, it
has no Foundation at all that can satisfy ones Conscience about the
lawfulness of it. The Antithesis I prove, If such a ground there be, it must
lie in one of these three (if any asserters of it can add a fourth, we shall
quit this Argument) either Christ's appointing it in Scripture, or his allowing
Men to appoint such an Office, or the practice of the Church, showing us what
was Christ's allowance. But none of these yield us a Warrant for Episcopacy, all
the three being denied by this Author to be able to satisfy the Conscience in
this matter. For the first, he denies such an Institution, asserting expressly
that Christ gave equal power to all the Ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; this
is the basis of his Irenicum. The second, he never had the confidence to
assert, neither is the least hint in all the Scripture, that Christ has
allowed Men to take away that power from his Servants that He has given them,
and to put it into the hand of others to whom He never gave such eminency of
power. For the third, he proves at length that the primitive form of
Church Government is uncertain, from the Defectiveness, Ambiguity, Partiality,
and Repugnancy of the Records of the Ages that succeeded the Apostles times,
Iren. c. 6. p. 294. Let him tell us then what ground we have to belive that
Episcopacy was Instituted by Christ, practiced by the Church in Her uncorrupted
times, or any way allowed.

Sect. 8. Our second Argument is, There is no foot-step of any inequality of
power among these Ordinary Pastors of the Church, that are mentioned in the
Bible, neither in their Name, nor Office, nor Power, nor Work, nor
Qualifications, nor Respect or Obedience due to them, nor any thing else from
which any distinction can be rationally gathered; whence I thus Argue: If the
Lord had allowed a distinction between Bishops and Presbyters in his Church, he
would have hinted some thing about this distinction; but this he has not done,
Ergo, etc. The first proposition I prove, first, Because this was needful for
these distinct Officers, that each might know his work: And for the
Church-Guides that they might know how to choose and ordain qualified Men for so
different Employments: And for the people that they might know how to carry
toward these Officers respect according to the difference of their Stations,
that they might obey the Bishop rather than the Presbyter, -- and submit to the
Teaching of the Presbyter and ruling of the Bishop; that they might not come to
a Presbyter for Confirmation, nor call Presbyters to ordain a Minister for
them, nor delegate a person that deserves Excommunication to the Presbyters,
all these belonging to the Bishop. 2. Our Lord has made a clear distinction in
Scripture, among the other Ordinary Officers in the Church, in their Names,
Qualifications, Work, and Office, as between Elders or Bishops and Deacons,
Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 9. Also between Preaching Elders, and those that are
only Ruling Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 17. If our Brethren can show us as much for a
distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, let them do it: I hope none of them
will say, that by Ruleing Elders is here meant the Bishop, least it follow that
the Preaching Presbyter should rather be honored than he, either by affording
him more respect or maintenance: I suppose our Bishops will rather part with
the Patrimony of this Text, then with their Titles, Grandeur, and Revenues.

Sect. 9. The second Proposition is evident in the several Branches mentioned
before, for our Adversaries can produce no hint of any such distinction in
Scripture, and we can show an identity in them; And first, for the name it is
clear from Act. 20. 28. where the Apostle calls all the Elders of Ephesus,
Bishops. It is a groundless fancy of some, that these Elders were the Diocesan
Bishops of Asia; for this is said without any show of proof, to serve a turn.
Besides that, they are called the Elders of the Church, not Churches, as (even
in the prelatical Style) Diocesan districts should be called. And it is called
the Flock, not Flocks, and the Church of God, not the Churches of God, that
they were to take heed to; and the haste that the Apostle then was in,
considering the short time, and long journey that he had before him, was
inconsistent with his expecting such an Assembly from so remote parts. This
identity of name is also clear from Phil. 1. 1. for no reason can be assigned
why Deacons should be mentioned, as concerned in what was written in that
Epistle and not Presbyters. Also it is most clear, Tit. 1. 5. with 7. where
showing how Elders must be qualified, a reason is given why they must have such
Qualifications, for a Bishop must be Blameless; if they were not one, this
reason should have neither force nor sense, which were Blasphemy to averr, it
being the Holy Ghosts reasoning.

Sect. 10. In the next place, Scripture makes no distinction between the
Office of Bishop and Presbyter, many of our brethren deny a distinction of
Office betwixt them (how consistently with their other principles I enquire
not) and they that assert such a distinction cannot show the least foot-step of
it from Scripture. Thirdly, for their power, if Bishops ordained, so did
Presbyters, 1 Timothy 4. 14. If any allege that the ordainers of Timothy were
Diocesan Bishops, they must prove it: If Bishops had rule over the people, were
over them, so were Presbyters, 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. For none question
but Presbyters are they who mainly labor among the people, admonish them, and
watch for their Souls; (I am sure this is not the work that our Bishops are
exercised in) and the same persons in both places are the peoples Rulers, and
are over them. Fourthly, Their Work is the same, as is clear both from the
places last cited, and Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. Where taking heed to,
feeding, and over-seeing, in the Greek, acting the part of Bishops, (...), are
made the work of all the Pastors of the Church. 5. The same qualifications are
required in all the guides of the Church without any distinction, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Tit. 1. 5. And the qualification of Deacons, they being a distinct sort of
Officers in the Church, are set down by themselves, 1 Timothy 3. 8. Sixthly, for
Obedience, Reverence, Maintenance, or any thing else, that concerns a Bishop
as distinct from a Presbyter, there is not the least hint in Scripture from
which any such thing can be gathered; a Man must then put force upon his
reason* or be strangely swa^ed by prejudice, who can persuade himself that
there is an ordinary Officer mentioned or allowed in the New Testament, that is
above the Presbyters of the Church, or has jurisdiction over them.

Sect. 11. Argument third. The Apostle does thrice set down a list of the
several Officers of the Gospel Church, without mentioning a Diocesan Bishop, or
any Officer to which this Office can be rationally reduced; Ergo, no such
Officer ought to be allowed in the Church. The consequence I prove, first,
Because this should have been a defect not imputable to the Apostle, infallibly
guided by the Spirit, to teach us designedly the several Church Officers
appointed by Christ, and not tell us of them all: Let our brethren, if they
can, give us an instance of a defectiveness in any Scriptureinstruction of this
moment that can be parallelled with this. Secondly, The consequence can yet
less be questioned, if we consid^r that not only an Officer is left out, and
the Church left without a hint concerning him; but the chief ordinary Officer
in the Church, that should make the greatest Figure in the Church to the end of
the World, and on whose management the weightiest affairs of the Church should
depend: He who can believe this, his Judgment must be under the power of so
strong a Bias, that I know not what will be too hard for him to Swallow; the
Antithesis I prove out of 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Not any
of these Offices agrees to the Diocesan Bishop; some say, they are reducible
to Apostles. With what face can wise men allege this? Was not the Office of an
Apostle extraordinary, and temporary, appointed for the first dispersing the
Gospel, and planting Churches; and besides every Apostle was an Universal
Officer: Diocesans have their limited charges: Some allege they are reducible
to Apostles, not as being absolutely such, but because they have power over
inferior Ministers as the Apostles had. But these men should prove that Christ
instituted such an Office, or that the Apostle meant not only extraordinary
Apostl^s, but these Semi-Apostles as ordinary Officers to continue in the
Church. Secondly, They should prove that Christ's instituting Apostles, did
warrant the Church to set up an Office made up of as much of the Apostles
Office, as should be afterward thought convenient. What may not men devise in
the Church, that take on them thus to add to, or diminish from Christ's
Institutions, and thus to wrest Scripture to make it comply with their fancies
and interests?

Sect. 12. Others make the Doctors or Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. to be the Bishops,
and this with as little ground as the former, though some learned Men have so
dreamed, as Estius, and Doctor Hammon. Grotius thinks Metropolitans also are
here meant, but the absurdity of this fancy will appear, First, If we consider
that they are named after the Pastors or Presbyters, which is an indecency
un^uitable to the Apostles Exactness, if my Lord Bishop we^e here meant. I find
many Interpreters argue that Prophets are the next in Dignity to Apostles, and
are extraordinary Officers, because they are named always next after the
Apostles, which Argument will as well hold here. Secondly, The work of the
Bishop that we speak of, which discriminateth him from the Presbyter, is not to
Teach but to Rule: Therefore others, as Calvin, by Teacher understands him
that educateth Ministers, and instructs them and others in the truth, and
defends it against Heresies; such as are Divinity Professors in Universities;
others understand Catechists: But it is evident that it cannot, with any kind
of Congruity be applied to the Diocesan Bishop, who is least employed in
Teaching of any part of Church-Work; some find the Diocesan Bishop under the
name of Helps, 1 Cor. 12. 28. As Grotius and Hammond; both of them also make
him to be meant by Government; and the same two Authors, in the same verse by
Teachers understand the same Officer. They would be sure to find him somewhere,
but this very uncertainty where to fix him is a token that he is no where to be
found. Is it imaginable that the Apostle in a list of Church Officers set down
in so few words, would use such repetition? When so Learned Men are put to such
shifts, it is a sign the cause is so weak, that it affords no better reason
to defend it by. That they are not meant by Teachers, I have already showed;
neither are they meant by Helps. (...) says Grotius, significat, curam rei
alicujus gerere: This is said without Book (be it spoken with due respect to
that great Critic.) I find Authors cited for its signifying, to take hold,
undertake, uphold, help, correct; but none for its signifying, to take charge
of a thing. The place he refers to, Luke 1. 54. can bear no signification of
the word so well as that of helping; and among all Critics and other
Interpreters, he cannot produce one that so expounds the word, either here or
in that place: but Men will say any thing to serve a turn. Neither can the
Diocesan be meant by Government, not only because they are among the last, and
so the most inferior of Church Officers; but also because our Brethren will not
say that the Bishop should only Rule, and not Teach (though it is too much
their practice, yet they will not averr this to be according to Institution) as
this Officer must do, he being a distinct Officer from the Teacher. I conclude,
If the Apostle had intended to set forth to us such an Eminent Officer of the
Church, we might have expected he should have, if not clearly, yet to the
Satisfaction of an inquisitive mind, set him down in some of these Cat^logues,
which is not done.

Sect. 13. Argument fourth. The power that we read of in the New Testament, was
never exercised by any ordinary Officers alone, but by the Church-Guides in
Common; Ergo, there was no Diocesan Bishop in the New Testament, and if we have
no warrant there, our scrupling to own such a one is not unreasonable. That
Church Power was so exercised I prove by Instances, leaving to our Brethren, if
they can, to bring Instances to the contrary. First, Ordination was performed
by Presbyters in Common, 1 Timothy 4. 14. It is a groundless Notion that some Men
of great Name and Worth have on this place, that Presbytery is meant of the
Office, for both it is a harsh phrase, the hands of the Office; and further the
word (...) is often used in the New Testament, yet is never used for the
Office, but for the College of Presbyters; the Office is called (...) says
Camerarius; others say, That by the Presbytery here is meant the Company of the
Apostles, who are called Presbyters: This cannot be, for the Apostle ascribes
to himself a special concern above others in the Ordination of Timothy, 2 Timothy
1. 6. Which he would not have done if the rest of the Apostles, equal in
Authority with himself, had concurred, but might well do it, when, he as chief,
and the ordinary Pastors as sub^rdinate, did join in this Action, for (it is
the observation of Camerarius on this Text) the Apostles did not use their
extraordinary power often, but when the Church was constitut^d, acted in
Conjunction with the ordinary Pastors; and there was good reason for this, to
wit, both that the Church-Guides might know that Apostolic power was not
always to continue among them, and that they might learn the way of
Church-Administrations, which they behoved to exercise by themselves when the
Apostles were gone.

Sect. 14. Another Instance is in Excommunication, which the Apostle injoineth
the ordinary Eld^rs of the Church of Corinth to exercise against the incestuous
Man; he directs his Injunctions not to a single Bishop, but to a Company of
Men, 1 Cor. 5. That they being gathered together should deliver him to Satan,
verse. 4, 5. That they should purge out that old leaven, verse. 7. That it was
their part (not a single persons part) to Judge the Members of the Church,
verse. 12. That they should put away the wicked person, verse. 13. and sp^aking
of this Sentence, 2 Cor. 2. 6. He expressly says it was done by many, and
ascribes the power of forgiving (i. e. absolving from the sentence of
Excommunication) to them, not to one Man. What ever different thoughts men may
have about this delivering to Satan, or about the Apostles Interest in this
Action, it is evident that here is Church Power adjudging (which implies
Authority) exercised by a Community. A Third, Instance of this is, 2 These. 3.
14. Where a Community not a single person is commanded to Note them that were
Disobedient to Paul's Admonition in his Epistle. This is not to be understood
as some take it, of Noteing the Disobedient Person in an Epistle, that they
should write to Paul; For First, The emphatick particle (...) put before (...)
denotes that Epistle, to wit, that the Apostle now wrote not an Epistle that
they should write. Secondly, The Greek word will not bear that signification
(...) here used, is Note, or set a mark on him; to Signify, or give Notice, is
(...) which word had surely been used if the Apostle had intended that they
should give Notice to him by an Epistle of the Disobedient. Thirdly, He tells
them what should follow on this Note* set on the Man, and how they should carry
toward him when thus Noted; to wit, that they should have no company with him;
this would not follow on their Writing about him to the Apostle, while no
Sentence was as yet passed against him, but might rationally follow upon their
setting the ignominious mark of Excommunication upon him. If then
Church Discipline, in the Apostolic and best times of the Church, and
especially while the Apostles being yet alive, might have exercised it by
themselves or their Delegates, the Evangelists, was yet exercised usually in
Common, and not by a single Bishop; we have cause to scruple the owning of such
an Officer in the Church.

Sect. 15. Other Arguments from Scripture may be brought, but I shall not now
insist on them, having maintained some of them against this learned Author, in
my Animadversions on his Irenicum. Wherefore I shall only add a fifth Argument,
as a ground of our scruple from some Testimonies of the Judgment and Practice
of the Primitive Church, that succeeded to the Apostles. This may the more
heighten our scruple, that our brethren lay the stress of their cause on the
Ancient Church; if we cannot find there sufficient ground for a Diocesan
Bishop, but much to the contrary, they ought not to blame us if we cannot with
them own such an Office in the Church. The first Testimony that I bring, is
that of Jerome, who gives his Judgment of this matter, not Obi^er, but of set
purpose, as that which was his settled Opinion, and that oftener than ^nce. In
his Epistle to Euagrius, where he sharply reproves some as Impudent, that
preferred Deacons to Presbyters, i. e. says he, to Bish^ps, but shows at
length that Bishops and Prebyters are the same, for which he cites, Phil. 1.
1. Act. 20. 28. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. and if any
should think little of these Testimonies he adds; clanget tuba Evang^l^j,
filius toni^ru, etc. and so cites, 2 John ver. 1. and 3. Joh. v. 1. and after
he has showed the occasion of preferring one Presbyter to the rest, he
tells, that notwithstanding of their Riches or Poverty, Greatness or
Meanness; the difference of Cities where they are, sive Romae, sive E^g^bij,
sive Constantinopoli, etc. they are ejusdem meriti and Sacerdotii; and shows
that the Apostle giving direction to Timothy and Titus, about Ordination of
Bishops and Deacons, says nothing of Presbyters; because the Presbyter is
contained in the Bishop; that is, they are the same. What may seem to make
against our cause, in this Epistle, is, that he says, quod autem unus electus
quem caeteris praeponeretur id in Schismatis remedium factum, which he says
was, ne unusquisque Ecclesiam ad se trahens, Christi ecclesiam rumperet; which
was done, says he, in Alexandria, a Marci Temporibus. This may well be
unde^stood of a Moderator of their Meetings, who had power of Convening the
Presbyters, least every one might call a Meeting of them at his pleasure; and
so breed confusion; and it must be so understood; not of a Bishop with sole
jurisdiction; unless we will make Jerome to contradict the whole strain and
design of this Epistle. Another passage is, quid enim facit Episcopus prae^er,
Ordinationem, quod non facit Presbyter: Which cannot be understood of
Ordination, or s^le Ordination of Presbyters; for that were to make a material
difference between Bishop and Presbyter; which is directly contrary to his
whole Discourse; but Ordination here, must be, ordering of their Meetings;
which is the part of the (...) or Moderat^r. One might also allege, that in
the Writings of this learned Father, a passage, Obiter set down, is not to be
taken notice of, in prejudice of the Scope and Strain of h^s Discourse, though
they be ^n^^nsistent and might ground this allegation on the account that he
gives of his own Writings, and cited also by Dr. Stillingfl^et, Ireniou^^, p.
278. Itaq^e ut simpliciter fatear, legi haec omnia, and in me^^e mea plurima
conservans, accito notario, vel mea, vel aliena dictavi, nec ordinis, nec
verborum, interdum nec sensuum meinor.

Sect. 16. Another Testimony is also out of Jerome, c^mment. in Tit. 1. where he
insisteth at length on the same subject, and asserte^h the same opinion as
before, Idem ergo (says he) Presbyter qui Episcopus, and antequam diaboli
instinctu studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli,
ego Appollo, ego Cephae (alluding to the Schism mentioned, 1 Cor. 3. not
meaning it in particular, as some fansy) Communi Presbyterorum concilio
ecclesia gubernabatur; postquam vero unusquisque eos quos Baptizaverat suos
putabat esse, non Christi, toto orb decretum est, Vt unus de Presbyteris
electis superponeretur reliquis, ad quem omnis ecclesiae cura pertineret, ut
Schismatum semina tolerentur; and for proof of the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, he cites many Scriptures, as above; and shows, that Bishop
denotes the Office, Presbyter the Age. He cites also, Heb. 13. 17. Ibi (says
he) equaliter inter plures ecclesiae cura dividitur. And after he shows the
difference between Bishop and Presbyter, to be magis consuetudine quam
dispositionis dominicae veritate. And in conclusion of that discourse, making a
Transition to the qualities that the Text mentions; says, videamus igitur
qualis Presbyter, sive Episcopus, ordinandus sit. What Jerome says, toto orb
decretum est, is not to be understood of the Decree of an Oecumenick Council,
for no such Decree can be produced; but that this Remedy of Schism in many
places, began then to be thought on; and it was no wonder that this Corruption
began then to creep in; it being then about the end of the Fourth Century, when
Jerome wrote. And this remedy Jerome declares was not of God's, but of Man's
inventing; and accordingly it succeeded; for it proved worse than the Disease,
bringing in Tyranny, and overturning Christ's Institution; and at last setting
up the Man of Sin. Satan gave the occasion to it, as Jerome says; Man gave a
Being to it, and Satan improved it to carry on his designs. The omnis eccle^iae
cura, that he mentions is inconsistent with the cura inter plures aequaliter
divisa, which, he says, was the way of the Gospel; and therefore either we
must make Jerome say, That the practice in his days was a direct overturning of
Christ's Institution, and contrary to Apostolic practice, which will make the
way of the Primitive Church, and Writings of the Fathers to be no good
Commentary upon the institution and way of the Apostles times; and so destroy
the Argument that our Brethren insist most upon for Episcopacy; or we must
expound this omnis cura of the extent of it to the whole Church, not of the
solitude of it in one Man, excluding the rest of the Presbyters, that he had a
special inspection, though he might not exercise Discipline by himself.

Sect. 17. A third Testimony out of Jerome, is Ep. ad Heliodorum, Fol. (mihi)
283. speaking of the Dignity of a Presbyter, and showing that they have power
to consecrate the Eucharist; they have claves Regni Coelorum and quodammodo
diem judicij indicant, and then adds, Illi (Presbytero) si peccavero, licet
tradere me Satanae. Sure then he is not for sole jurisdiction of a Bishop. And
this he speaks of the principle and practice of his time; which confirms
what I said before of the meaning of Omnis cura ecclesiae. There is yet another
place in Jerome that is plain to this purpose, Ep. ad Demet. Sunt quos ecclesia
reprehendit; quos interdum abjicit; in quos nonnunquam Episcoporum and
Clericorum censura desaevit; which clearly puts the Censures of the Church
in his days, into the Hands of Presbyters, and not into the Hands of Bishops
only, whatever Priority they had above the other. It is worth our Observation,
that several Popish Writers (as zealous for Prelacy as ours are) confess such
light in the Writings of Jerome to this purpose, that they find no way to
Answer, but to Condemn him of Error in this matter. And Bellarm. de clericis,
lib. 1. c. 15. confesses that Sedulius and Anselmus ad verbum retulerunt
Hieronymi sententiam, In Comment. in Tit. 1. If any reject the Testimony of
Jerome, because he was a Presbyter, and no Bishop, I hope they will allow us the
like liberty, to reject the Testimonies that they bring of them, who themselves
were Bishops; and then let them reckon their Gain, when the Suffrages of the
Ancients are brought to the Poll.

Sect. 18. Other Testimonies I shall mention more briefly. Tertul. Apolog. c.
34. speaking of Excommunications, and other Censures, says, they are done in
the Assemblies, and that praesident probati quique seniores. Clem. Alexandr.
Stromat. lib. 7. poenes Presbyteros est disciplinae quae homines facit
meliores: Both these wrote in the beginning of the Third Century. Wherefore
Discipline in that Age was exercised in common, and every Assembly had its
president, with power of Discipline. Ambrosius who wrote in the end of the
Fourth Century, when no little Deviation had been made from the right way; yet
shows the Church could not then bear sole jurisdiction; for a Sentence passed
by Syagrius was disliked, quia sine alicujus fratris consilio. But Ambrose
passing Sentence in the same cause, was approved, quia cum fratribus, and
consacerdotibus participatum processit, Ambros. Ep. ad Syagrium: And even
Cyprian, as great an Asserter of Episcopal Primacy, as that age could bear, Ep.
12. 46. joineth the Clergy with the Bishop in receiving the Lapsed on their
Repentance. I next adduce the learned and excellent Augustine, as a Witness of
this Truth, Ep. 19. ad Hieron. Quamquam enim honorum vocabula quae jam
ecclesiae usu obtinuit Episcopus, Presbytero major sit: He makes the Bishop
Major, not Lord over the Presbyter; and even that Majority, was but by the
Custom of the Church, not divine Ordinance, and a custom that had now obtained,
was not always. Also, lib. quaest. com. he proves from, 1 Timothy 3. Bishop and
Presbyter to be one; and says, qu^d est enim Episcopus nisi Presbyter, and
this O^eness he further shows, because Bishops (such as then were; to wit, in
the beginning of the Fifth Century, when the Order of the Church was much
changed) called the Presbyters, Compresbyteri, but never called the Deacons,
Condiaconi, Presbyter and Bishop being the same Office, but Deacons being
distinct from them both. The last Testimony shall be that of Chrysostom, in 1 Timothy 3. homil. 11. Inter Episco um atque Presbyterum interest fere nihil;
quippe and Presbyteris ecclesiae cura permissa est; and quae de Episcopis
dicuntur, eae etiam Presbyteris congruunt; sola quippe ordinatione superiores
ill^ sunt. Bellarm. says that Primasius, Theophilactus, and Oecumenius on that
Text, teach the same things, and almost in the same words: And the Second of
these lived in the end of the Ninth Century; the last in the Tenth or Eleventh.
The Answer that Bellarm. gives to this, is not worth taking notice of; to wit,
Chrysostom. means, that Presbyters have jurisdiction, as Bishops have, but only
by Commission from the Bishop: This is directly contrary to the Scope of his
Discourse, which is to show an Identity of them, as they are in themselves.
What he alleges out of this Citation; that a Bishop may ordain, not a
Presbyter, the learned Father's expression will not bear; for Ordination must
signify either the Ordination the Bishop and Presbyter have, whereby they are
put in their Office, to be different; which he does not allege; or that the
difference between them was only in order, or precedence, not in Power or any
Authority; or that it was by the Ordination, or appointment of the Church not
Christ's Institution; but it can never signify the power of ordaining; for
then Christ (who was sufficiently a Master of words) would have said, potestate
ordinandi, not Ordinatione.

Sect. 19. I conclude this one ground of scruple at the present Episcopacy with
3 Considerations; which tho they be not ^oncludent in themselves, being but
humane Testimonies; yet may abate a little of our brethrens confidence in
asserting their Opinion about Bishops, to have always been the sentiments of
the Catholic Church. The, 1 is, That Lombard and most of the Schoolmen deny
the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters, lib. 4. did. 24. liter. I. He
tells us that the Canons do only mention the orders of Presbyters and
Deacons; because the primitive Church had only these; and of these only we have
the Apostles Commandment; the rest were after appointed by the Church. And
ibid. litera M. he shows that the orders of Bishop, Archbishop, etc. the
Church borrowed from the distinction of the Heathen Flamins, Horum autem
disoretio (says he) a gentilibus introducta videtur. Both Cajetan on Tit. 1.
and Estius on the place of Lombard now cited, deny the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. The 2 Consideration, is, That the Waldenses, Albigenses, Wickliff
and his Followers, and all they that under the darkness of Popery maintained
the same Doctrin^s that the Protestants now profess, were of a Parity among
Presbyters, and disallowed of Diocesan Bishops. This is confessed by Medina,
and is not denied by Bellarm. and any that read what is written of their
Opinions will acknowledge this; it is among Wickliff's Errors imputed to him by
Tho. Waldensis, that in the Apostles times there were only 2 Orders, Priests
and Deacons, and that a Bishop does not differ from a Priest, Fuller Chapter Hist.
lib. 4. cent. 14. p. 132. Let not any impute this to their persecuted State;
for we know Papists have always had their Titular Bishops, where their Religion
was suppressed. The third thing that I offer to be considered, is, The
observation of Spanhemius, a most diligent searcher into the History of the
Ancient Church, in his Epitom. Isag^g. ad Hist. N. T. saeculo 2. V. 5. Where he
moves a doubt, whether then there was Episcopus Praeses only in the greater
Churches; whether it was only Praesidentia Ministerii non imperii, as Tertul.
de pudicitia, c. 25. or only a reverence to their age, and their conversing
with the Apostles, and whether it did not with the defection of after ages
receive addition.

SECT. IV. The Dr's Arguments for Episcopacy Answered.
I Return now to the reverend Dr. to hear what he will say for this Episcopacy
that we scruple, on the forementioned grounds. I begin with his first
undertaking above mentioned; to wit, to show That our Diocesan Episcopacy is
the same in substance which was in the Primitive Church. And this he labors
to prove concerning the African Churches, in the times of Cyprian and
Augustine, and the Church of Alexandria in the time of Athanasius and of the
Church of Cyprus in the days of Theodoret. Concerning all this in general; I
make two observations before I come to examine his particular Allegations, 1.
That his phrase is ambiguous, that their Episcopacy was the same in Substance
with ours: I wish he had showed what is that Substance of Diocesan Episcopacy
that he finds in both. I think the Substance of our English Episcopacy is,
that one Man has sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction over all the
Church Officers and Members in many Congregations; if he will show us that in
the Primitive Times, let him rejoice in his Argument from Antiquity. 2. The
Antiquity that the Dr. here pretends to, is far short of that which himself
and others do boast of with a great deal of Confidence; some of them tell us of
a clear Deduction that they can make of it down from the Apostles in all ages
without Interruption, some make it of more than 1500 years standing; but the
Dr. here is not pleased to pretend to that. Cyprian lived in the Third Century,
Athanasius in the Fourth, Augustine and Theodoret in the Fifth, and it may
easily be granted that there was a great degeneracy in Church Discipline and
Government by that time; yet that Episcopacy was arrived at that height that
is now in England, even at that time, we deny.

Sect. 2. To prove what he had undertaken, he lays down two Observations. 1.
That it was an inviolable rule among them, that but one Bishop was to be in one
Church. I am little concerned in this, though I see no rule for it, except a
Canon of Council. Cabilonens. which was but Provincial, and very late, under
Pope Eugenius, about Ann. 654, yet I think it was generally and rationally
practiced for taking a Bishop for the (...) among the Presbyters, (which I
affirm to have been the Dialect of those times.) What needed more Bishops than
one, seeing all the Presbyters of one City might conveniently meet ordinarily
for the Exercise of Discipline. When Mr. B. proves the contrary, he takes
Bishop in the Apostles sense, and then I affirm with him that there were more
Bishops in one City, that every Assembly for worship had one, if not more. The
Dr's. Argument that he seems to glory in, p. 246. is of no value; it is, That
if more Bishops than one could be in a City, the Schism of the Donatists and
Novatians might have been prevented; this is either a great mistake, or
somewhat else; for taking Bishops for Moderators of Presbytery, the bare
setting up of two Presbyteries, and two Moderators could not have prevented
these Schisms; and if the Church had found it convenient to divide them,
retaining the same Principles of Faith, and about Church Order and Discipline,
there had been no Schism: It is most false that these Schisms were merely about
the plurality of Bishops in a City. The Schism of the Donatists had its rise at
Carthage from the Ambition of Donatus, who opposed the election of Cecilianus;
the pretense was, that he had been ordained by a Proditor, and that he had
admitted another Proditor to Ecclesiastical Office; Cecilianus being Tried, and
Acquitted, both by the Emperor and the Church in several Councils, Donatus and
his party set up another Church, an Eldership, and People, in opposition to
Cecilianus, disclaiming the discipline of Cecilianus, and his Party, in
admiting the lapsed upon repentance, and admitting the wicked as they alleged
to the Sacraments. So that it is plain, that the Schism lay in this, That they
set up another Church Way and Order, and consequentially to that, set up
another Bishop and Presbytery, not beside, but in opposition to that which was
before, and that without sufficient reason; upon the very like occasion did
Novatus separate from Cornelius Bishop at Rome, and set up a new Church on the
foresaid grounds. Cyprian indeed condemns Novatus, and nullifieth his
Church Power, because post primum secundus esse non potest; but this is still
to be understood of setting up another Bishop, or meeting of Presbyters under a
President without the Authority of the Church, or good cause for so doing. It
is evident then, that these Schisms were built on another Foundation than what
the Dr. supposes, and that they could not have been prevented if forty Bishops
had been allowed in a City; as long as Donatus and Novatus retained their
Principles, they would have separated from all Bishops and Churches that were
not of their way; all that follows in this his first Observation is easily
Answered in one Word, to wit, that all these Citations prove no more than this,
that where a Church was settled, and sufficiently furnished (whether you take it
for a single Congregation, or more Congregations associate for Discipline with
a President) it was not fit for any to disturb that Unity by setting up another
Church, whether of the one, or the other sort mentioned.

Sect. 3. His second Observation is, That in Cities and Diocesses which were
under the care of one Bishop, there were several Congregations and Altars, and
distant places. I contend not about the word Diocese, supposing that one
President of an Assembly of Presbyters, with these Presbyters might have ruling
power over many particular Churches; call that District by what name he will,
the matter is not great: Our question is not about the Name, but the Power by
which that District was ruled, whether it were in one Man or in the body of
Presbyters. But it is well known that Diocese, which now signifies a Church
Division, did in those days signify a Civil Division of the Roman Empire made
by Constantine the Great, who divided the hundred Provinces of the Empire into
14* Diocesses, where all Africa was but one; see for this Heylin, Cosmogr. lib.
1 p. 54. And it is as well known that Diocese did often Signify a Parish or
people of a Parish; neither do I contend about the word Altar, supposing the
Dr. means, places where the Lords Supper was Celebrated. Both Origin and
Arnobius affirm that 200 years after Christ, the Christians were blamed by the
Heathens, because they had no Altars; the name of Altar was not used in the
Church till the Third Century, and not then neither, but figuratively: But the
Dr. loves to speak of Ancient things in his Modern Dialect, borrowed from the
more corrupted times of the Church.

Sect. 4. For his Observation it self, I shall not contend about it, though I
think he will hardly answer what is said against it, No Evid. for Diocese, p.
15. For it makes nothing against what I hold, unless he prove that the Bishop
had the sole Power, or had jurisdiction over the Presbyters in that District
which he calls a Diocese. What he says that seems to be Argumentative to
this purpose, I shall mind, and no more: The multitude and distance of places
that he instanceth (though all were true, the contrary of which the forecited
Author makes appear) will not prove Superiority of power in one Man; neither
Augustine's care for Neighboring Places that wanted Ministers, either to
provide Ministers for them, or to Baptize them, or do other Church Acts for
them in their need. This proves neither Extension, nor Solitude of Power; far
less does Cyprian's nameing Provincia nostra, in which were many Bishops, prove
him to have been a Metropolitan; the Empire was divided into Provinces. If a
Minister in England should say there are many Ministers in our Country, it will
not prove that they were under his Charge. Vuler mentions Cresceus who had
120 Bishops under him; the Dr. should have proved that he had sole jurisdiction
over them, and all their Churches, or that he could act any thing in Church
matters without them; and so that he was more than president in their meeting,
when they came together about the Affairs of the Church. These are the Goodly
Arguments from Antiquity, by which Men think to wreath on our Necks the Yoke of
Domination.

Sect. 5. He brings another proof for his Diocesan Bishop, Sect. 20. from
Athanasius his having charge over the Church of Alexandira; and these of
Maraeotis. And 1. Epiphamus says, that Athanasius did often visit Neighbor
Churches, especially those of Maraeotis. Ans. So have many Presbyterian
Ministers done to Neighboring Parishes that were destitute, and yet never
pretended to Episcopal Power over them; That this was an Act of Charity, not of
Episcopal Authority appears, because Epiphamus calls them Neighbor
Churches, not a part of Athanasiu's Church, and that he mentions other
Neighbor Churches besides these of Maraeotis, which Athanasius says were
subject to him. Next, Athanasius says Maraeotis is a region belonging to
Alexandria, which never had neither Bishop nor Suffragan in it, but all the
Churches there are immediately subject to the Bishop of Alexandria; but every
Presbyter is fixed in his particular Village. Ans. Maraeotis or M^ria, as
Ptolomy calls it, is a Lake not far from Alexandria now called Lago (...); I
suppose Athanasius means the Country about that Lake, which it seems had then
few Churches, and Christians, and therefore it was very fit they should
Associate for Discipline, with these of Alexandria, being very near to it;
their Subjection to the Bishop of Alexandria does not prove his sole
jurisdiction over them, but only that they were so by the Association of
Presbyters, of which the Bishop of Alexandria was Moderator. Subj^cton to a
Bishop in our days signifies to be under his Jurisdiction by himself, because
men have set up such Bishops; but it cannot be made to signify the same in the
Dialect of these times, unless it were Aliunde proved that they were such
Bishops, which is not done by such an Argument as this; wherefore I deny the
Drs, third Consequence that he draws from this passage, p. 254. to wit, That
these were under the mediate inspection of the Bishop of Alexandria, so that
the whole Government belongs to him. There is not the lest shadow of reason
for such an inference; his disputation that follows about the Christians of
Alexandria meet^ng in Diverse Assemblies, I meddle not with, it is nothing
against us, whether it we^e so or otherwise.

Sect. 6. The last proof that he brings, is out of Theodoret, which he says,
is plain enough of it self to show the great extent of Diocesan Power; he
says, he had the p^storal charge of 800. (he should have said 80) Churches,
and that so many Parishes were in his Diocese. The Dr. insulteth much on this
Testimony, but without cause; for 1. Theodoret lived in the fifth century, and
we deny not but by that time Episcopal Ambition had in some places encroached
on the Government instituted by Christ, and which had been kept more entire in
former Ages. 2. It is much suspected by learned Men, that Theodorets Epistles
are not genuine, and the Dr. does not deny that Heretics had feigned Epistles
in Theodorets name, as Leontius says, which does darogate much from the credit
of these that cannot be well proved to be true. 3. Theodoret does not say that
he had the Pastoral charge of these Churches, but that he had been Pastor in
them; the former Expression looks like a sole power in him, and therefore the
Dr. thought fit so to vary the phrase; the other hinteth no more power then is
consistant with a party, every Minister being a Pastor in the Churches to whose
Association he belongs. 4. But whatever be in that, this shows the extent
of Theodorets Power, as to place or bounds, but does not prove that he alone
exercised that power, and therefore is no proof of a Diocesan Bishop.

Sect. 7. Before I proceed, I shall return to examine the Doctor's Allegations
for Diocesan Power, p. 230. which I above referred to this place. He asserteth,
That the Presbyters and whole Church were under the particular Care and
Government of Cyprian: This Assertion is too big for the Proofs that he
brings for it; to wit, That Cyprian reproves some of the Presbyters for
receiving Penitents without consulting him, and complains of the Affront done
to his Place, as Bishop, and discharges the like to be done for the future.
Lucian says, that the Martyrs had agreed that the Lapsed should be received on
Repentance; but their Cause was to be heard before the Bishop, and several
Passages to this purpose. To all which, I. A. by denying the Consequence;
Cyprian as I cited above, did not take on him to receive the Lapsed without the
Presbyters: Will it thence follow that he had no Power at all? But it was
solely in them; even so, that the Presbyters (especially that some of them, as
the Dr. himself states the Case) might not do it without Cyprian, does not
prove that the Presbyters, and whole Church, were under his Government. It
amounts to no more but this, that in a Presbytery regularly constituted,
especially, where they have devolved the Power of calling, and presiding in
their Meetings on a fixed, and constant Moderator, it is very irregular that a
part should meet about Discipline, without the rest, and particularly, without
Consulting him whom they have so chosen. Beside, I will not deny but Cyprian
shows too much Zeal in this Cause, and might possibly attempt to stretch his
Power a little too far, as afterward many did: He was a holy and meek Man, but
such may be a little too high. To this same purpose are his other Citations of
Moses and Maximus, commending Cyprian for not being wanting to his Office.
Cyprian's Epistle to the Clergy of Carthage, that the Dr. cites, shows there
were Disorders committed in the Matter of receiving the Lapsed; in that not
only some Presbyters took it on them, without a regular Meeting of the whole,
but even Deacons meddled with it, which was out of their way. His Citation of
the Roman Clergy commending the Martyrs for not taking on them the Discipline
of the Church, is wholly out of the way; for none ever supposed that every
Martyr had Church Power. That they delayed some parts of Discipline till they
had a new Bishop, proves as little as the rest; for it is fit one should
moderate in their Meetings, and Custom had obtained that he should be fixed in
that Office, which was not from the beginning. Cyprians appointing some to
visit, when he could not do it by reason of Persecution, neither is a precedent
for our Bishops doing their Work by Delegates when they are at ease; nor does
it prove that these did any thing without the Presbyters; that Cyprian cites
tu es Petrus; and whatsoever you shall bind, etc. was to very good purpose,
when some Martyrs invaded the Discipline of the Church; and i proves, that as
Christ gave the power of the Keys to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, not
to the People; so he had given it to Cyprian and the rest of the Presbyters,
not to the Martyrs. It had been well if tu es Petrus had never been more
abused. He says indeed, that the Church has ever been governed by Bishops,
but the Dr. must prove that he means, by Bishops alone, as they are distinct
and separate from the other Presbyters: The rest that follows, that the
Bishop is to govern, and give Account to God, that he is in the place of
Christ; that a Church is a People united to a Bishop, do all agree very well,
either with a Congregational Bishop, or Minister; or a Presbyterian Moderator,
acting in parity with other Presbyters; and yet these are the Herculean
Arguments from Antiquity, that men make such a noise with.

Sect. 8. I now proceed with the Dr. to the third Thing, that he had
undertaken; to wit, to prove, That such an Episcopacy as is practiced here, and
was so in the Primitive Church, (this Last he supposes that he has proved) is
no devisi^g a new species of Churches, nor repugnant to any Institution of
Christ. To prove which, Sect. 11. he brings some of Mr. B's Concessions,
which I neither yield, nor will vindicate. He brings also some Arguments of
Mr. B's to prove that the ordinary governing part of the Apostolic Office was
settled in all Ages: Wherefore, I must, for a little, leave the Dr. and Answer
these Arguments of Mr. B's: But first, I take notice, that it is a Mistake in
the Dr. and Mr. B. too, to call the governing part of the Apostle's Office
ordinary: For 1. That is, to suppose the Thing in question; to wit, that it was
continued in the Church; that they governed, and preached, is true; but that
Officers that after were employed in governing, or preaching, can claim that
power as succeeding to the Apostles in any part of their Office; and without
other warrant we deny. The Apostles governed, and preached by another
Commission from Christ, than men now do; and that both, as to the manner of it,
the one being immediate, the other mediate; and as to the matter of it, their
Commission warranted them to do many Acts in governing, and preaching, that
others have no power to do, as giving Authoritative rules to all Churches where
they came; ordaining, and censureing every where, going up and down to Preach
every where, without a call from any Church, without being fixed any where;
this power no Man can now pretend to: Wherefore I say, that Min^sters Te^ch and
Rule the Church not by virtue of Apostolic Office, or any part of it committed
to them, but by virtue of another Office, distinct from that of the Apostles
which they receive by their Ordination. 2. It is evident that the Apostles
governing Power was not ordinary, because there was an ordinary governing Power
in the Church even in the Apostles times, distinct from that of the Apostles,
and exercised by other Men; though in subordination to the Apostles governing
Power. The Presbytery did then Ordain, they did also Excommunicate, as was
above showed, and the Apostles directed them so to do; and sometimes concurred
with them, and sometimes they acted without them.

Sect. 9. Let us now hear Mr. B s. Arguments, 1. We read (says he, Christ
direct. pt. 3. Question, 56. p. 831.) Of the s^^l^ng of that form (viz. general
Officers as well as particular) but we never read of any Absolution, Discharge,
or Cessation of the Institution. Ans. 1. If this Argument have any force, it
will pr^ve the continuance of all the extraordinary Offices that ever were in
the Church, Prophets, Evangelists, Workers of Miracles, etc. For we read not
that ever they were discharged. Ans. 2. It is enough to Abolish and Discharge
that Institution, that this Office was settled in the persons of some Men,
immediately by Jesus Christ himself; and after their decease, He neither put
others in their room immediately by himself, nor gave the Church any hint that
such a thing should be done; but instead of that, he has given sufficient
direction for propogating other Officers in the Church in all Ages. Argument 2.
If we affirm a Cessation without proof, we seem to accuse God of Mutabillity,
as settling one form of Government for one Age only, and no longer. Ans. I hope
Mr. B. will not say that a change in Gods Works, yea, or Institutions, does
argue mutability in God, are not all the Old Testament Institutions now
changed? Were not Prophets, Evangelists, Men gifted with diverse tongues, etc.
His Institutions, and yet now ceased, and no other proof can be given for their
Cessation then what we give for the ceasing of Apostles. Neither do we say they
are ceased without proof, that they were by immediate Commission from God; that
that now cannot be pretended to, and that the Lord has hinted no other way of
continuing such an Office in his House, nor that it should be continued, is
abundant proof of this Cessation. Argument 3. We leave room for audacious Wits,
accordingly to question other Gospel Institutions, as Pastors, Sacraments, etc.
and to say that they were but for an Age. Ans. There is not the least show of
reason for this: for their Gospel Institutions have more abiding Warrant then
Immediate Commission given by Christ to some to Administer them. Argument. 4.
It was General Officers that Christ promised to be with to the end of the
World, Ma^h. 28. 20. Ans. 1. If this Argument prove any thing, it proves too
much; to wit, that only General Officers have that promise which I hope Mr. B.
will not say. Ans. 2. It was spoken to General Officers, but the promise is not
made to them alone, but to all that should be Employed in the work of Teaching,
and Baptizing. And these being particularly here mentioned, will prove that
there shall be Teachers and Baptizers to the end of the World; but not that
there shall be General Officers, as the Metropolitans, etc. that Mr. B.
dreameth of to the end of the World.

Sect. 10. The Dr. to improve these Arguments of Mr. B^. to his purpose,
joineth with him the consent of the Ages, succeeding the Apostles that the
Apostles did leave successors in the care of Government of the Churches. Aus.
Who doubts of that; but the question is, to whom did the Apostles commit this
care? we say to the Pastors in Common, he says to Diocesan Bishops, this we
deny that it can be proved, either from any Writing or Deed of the Apostles, or
from the consent of the Ages next after them; that the Bishops were looked on
as succeeding to the Appostles in the Government of Churches; we deny not (though
we deny that they had that Office, or any part of it) but then the question is,
whether they alone who in the 2. or 3. Century began to get the name of Bishops
appropriate to them, had that Government by themselves, or in Common with the
rest of the Presbyters, unless the Dr. prove the former, he speaks not to the
point. None has better proved the contrary of what is here held by the Dr.
then he himself, Iren. p. 308. to wit, That not Bishops alone, but all
Presbyters succeeded to the Apostles, and that by Testimonies out of Cyprian,
Ierom, and Ignatius.

Sect. 11. He undertaketh to prove that the English Episcopacy does not take
away the whole Power of Presbyters, as some allege: And that therefore it
makes no new Species of Government from what Christ Instituted, or was read in
the Ancient Church. We do not allege that it takes away the whole power of
Presbyters, for that were to reduce them into the same order with the rest of
the people; but we say it usurpeth an undue power over them, that neither
Christ nor the Primitive Church ever allowed, in taking out of their hand that
power of Governing the Church that they have equal with the Bishop; and in
other things to be observed in our progess. In order to making out what he
alleges, he proposes two things to be enquired into, Sect. 12. First, What
power is left to Presbyters in our Church. 2. What Authority the Bishops have
^ver them. For the first, he asserteth their power in reference to the whole
body of the Church, and that because they have a place in the convocation,
where rules of Discipline, Articles of Doctrine, and forms of Service are
determined. How small a matter this is (though the Dr. aggravateth it) I do with
him appeal to any Man of understanding who is unbyassed, and who knows the
constitution of an English Convocation; it consists of two Houses, in the
upper House are only Bishops, and let the lower House never so unanimously vote
for a thing, they can reject it; that is, 25 Men who by the Laws of the Gospel,
have no more power then any other 25 of near 9000 (so many Churchs are reckoned
in England) take to themselves as much power as all these. Then for the lower
House of the Convocation, it is made up of Presbyters indeed, as the Dr. says;
but many, if not most of them, such as by no Law of Christ have more power to
sit there than any others have, as Deans, Archdeacons, and other Cathedral
Officers; here also the Presbyters are bereaved of that party of power that is
their due; besides that few of the inferior Presbyters are admitted, often not
above two or four in a Diocese. If then their power be not swallowed up by the
Bishops, and their Creatures in the Convocation, let any judge: He next proves
the power by the hand that they have in Ordination, or giving Orders, as he
calls it, to wit, That by the Rules of this Church; four Presbyters are to
asist the Bishop, and are to examine the persons to be ordained (or the Bishop
in their presence) and to join the Imposition of hands. Here also their power
is swallowed up, for all the rest have equal power with these four, yea, with
the Bishop himself, which is wholly taken out of their hands, and managed at
the Bishops pleasure, who chooses these four, beside, that this is really, if
ever practiced, the person is usually examined, or said to be so by the Bishops
Chaplain, and the Bishop lays his hands on him.

Sect. 12. Next he tells us what power Presbyters have in their particular
Charges, p. 267. which he leaves us to gather from 3 topics. The Epistle that
is read at the Ordination of a Presbyter, to wit, Act. 20. or 1 Timothy 3. What an
impertinency (says the Dr.) had both these been, if the Presbyters power had
been swallowed up by the Bishop. A goodly Argument, some think it a great
Impertinency, and Boldness too, in the face of these Scriptures to make a
distinction, as to any part of Church Power, between a Presbyter and a Bishop.
His next topic is, the Bishops Exhortation at the Ordination, where he tells
them of the dignity of the Office, and greatness of the Charge, calls them
Pastors, that they are to Teach, Premonish and Feed, and provide for the Lords
Family, etc. This indeed implies their Preaching Power, but there is not a
word of Ruling Power, which the Lord joined with it, but the Bishops do
separate them; and for all this saying over their cold ^esson at the Solemnity,
the Bishops will not suffer the Presbyter to Preach by virtue of this
Ordination without License; so that their Ruleing Power is taken away, and
their Preaching Power restraine^ at the Bishops pleasure. This is a crossing of
Christ's Institution, who made them equal; neither is it any more wonder that
the Bishops practice should cross his own Exhortation, then that he should
cross the Scripture, read on that occasion. His third Topic, is the ordained
Persons Oath, to mi^ister Word and Sacraments, and Discipline, as this Realm
has received the same. Here Discipline is pro forma mentioned; but the
following words show the meaning, for this Realm has not received Christ's
Discipline to be exercised by the Officers, into whose hands he put it, but the
Dr. acknowledges little less then I say, when he says, That the general care
of Government and Discipline is committed to the Bishop; I hope the Reader will
by this time see, that the Presbyters in the Church of England, have not all
that power left to them that Christ gave to his Ministers; and therefore the
English Episcopacy is another kind of Church Government, than that which Christ
Instituted, or the purer primitive times knew.

Sect. 13. The other thing he proposes, is, Sect. 13. to show what Authority
the Bishop has by his Consecration, which he places in Government,
Ordination, and Censures; and he says, the Church of England did believe that
Bishops did succeed the Apostles in these parts of their Office. This I deny
not, but the Dr. should have proved that the Church of England had ground to
believe so. Mr. Bs. concession will not oblige us to be of the same mind; that
she did believe so, I am not convinced from what he brings in proof of it,
but the contrary I have proved above, wherefore I shall take no further notice
of this Section except to examine his notion, p. 269. on which he seems to
value himself very highly; it is that in the Apostles times they managed the
Government of the Church themselves, and therefore there was no Bishop, but
Bish^ps, and Presbyters were one; but as the Apostles went off, Bishops came to
be settled in the several Churchs, whom the Apostles settled some sooner, some
later; if which (says he) we have an incontrouleable evidence in Timothy and
Titus. And by this he would reconcile the different Testimonies of Antiquity,
the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles time being hereby secured, for
which Irenaeus, Tertullian and Cyprian stand, and with this consists all that
Jerome, and Epiphemus say of the different settlement of Churches at first; to
all this I repone these few things. 1. Is is most false that the Apostles
managed Church Government by themselves while they lived; the contrary I have
proved, as to Ordination, and Excommunication in Corint^, and Th^ssal^ni^a,
that these were in the Hands of ordinary Officers, tho superintended by the
Apostles. 2. That they settled Bishops any where, either in their own time, or
left order for it to be done after their decease, is also false. The
incontroullable evidence of it that the Dr. talks of is asserted duro ore;
for he knows it is controulled beyond what he or any man can refute, to wit,
that Tim. and Tit. were no Diocesan Bishops is proved by our Writers; and all
the Arguments that are brought for their being such, fully answered. This
confidence without Argument is unbecoming so learned a Man, he hinteth an
Argument for his Assertion, to wit, that the care of Government was a distinct
thing from the Office of an Evangelist. This we deny, the Office of an
Evangelist was to Teach, or Govern by a deputation from the Apostles; he says,
Their removes do not invalidate this, because while the Apostles lived there
were no fixed Bishops, or but few: I wish he had instanced in one, He
confesses by this Tim. and Tit. were not such, and for unfixed Bishops, we
read of none such either in Scripture, or Antiquity, 3. Neither can this
reconcile the Testimonies of Antiquity as he would have it; for it does not
answer what Jerome, Augustine, Chrisostom, and others say of the Divine
institution of parity; neither is it true that Irenaeus, Tertulian, and Cyprian
are for Diocesan Bishops.

Sect. 14. The Dr. proceeds now, Sect. 14. to the third thing that he had
undertaken to prove, p. 244, to wit, that the restraint of Discipline in our
Parochial Churchs does not overthrow their Constitution. In this I shall not
oppose him, and therefore I shall only consider this matter as a grievance, and
consider what he says in Justification of it, and not as a ground of
Separation, and shall pass over what he says, that is of that tendency. He
says Presbyters have power in admission to the Lords Supper, because none are
to be admitted, but such as are confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be
confi^med, and Presbyters are judges in that, because they are to send a list
of the Names of the persons to be Confirmed to the Bishop, who is to confirm
them; and this, he says, would (if rightly observed) keep as much purity in
that Ordinance as is pretended to in the separate Congregations. Ans. This is a
poor fence for the Table of the Lord, for if one be ready to be confirmed, the
Presbyter cannot keep him back, though he was not listed by the Presbyter, nor
Confirmed by the Bistop; and we know many of the worst of men are ready for it:
Again, when one is Confirmed by the Presbyters consent, if he prove never so
profane or careless, the Presbyter cannot debar him; the Bishops Confirmation
admiteth him, let him do what he will. I hope Separate Meetings will not admit
every one to the Lords Table that is a Church Member, when they fall into gross
Sins. 2. It is no good way of defending the Presbyters Power in manageing of
Christ's Ordinances, to say that his Testimony is to be taken about admitting
persons to an Ordinance that Christ never instituted; to wit, Confirmation. 3.
This is no great evidence of Church Authority in the Presbyter that his
Testimony is taken by the Bishop in order to Admission; it is the Bishop not
the Presbyter that Authoritatively admits. 4. It is an odd way of Admission
to Gods Ordinances, not precedented in Scripture, nor purer Antiquity, that one
man should judge of the fitness of a person to be admitted, and another should
admit him; the Bishop must act implicitly, and the Presbyter is only his
informer, where this way of Discipline had its use we know; the Dr. has yet
said nothing to vindicate the power that Christ gave to his Ministers, or to
justify the Discipline of the Church of England.

Sect. 15. Next, Sect. 15. He speaks of the Presbytes power in rejecting
these for scandal that have been Church Members, and shows out of the Rubric
before the Communion, that the Parochial Ministers may advertise a scandalous
sinner not to come to the Lords Table till he repent and amend, and if he
continue obstinate, ^e may repel him from the Communion, yet so as within
fourteen days he give account to the Ordinary. Ans. This is far from amounting
to the power that Christ gave to his Minsters, for 1. By what Law of Christ is
the Presbyter accountable to the Bishop, more then the Bishop is accountable to
him? Christ made them equal. 2. I see no reason why a Presbyter by himself
should have power to debar any, it should be done by Presbyters in Common; the
New Testament knows no such thing as Excommunication, either greater or
lesser by a single person, except it were by an Apostle. But our Bishops think
they have such a plenitude of power, that they may delegate as much of it as
they please to any other person. 3. I see the Dr. is at a stand, what sort of
censure this Act of the Parochial Ministers is, it is not the greater
Excommunication; and he confesses p. 277. that it is not the lesser
Excommunication used in this Church. I deny it not to be a Church censure, but
it is not such as argues that Power of Discipline in the inflicter of it, that
Christ has given to all his Ministers, to be exercised by them in Common. The
Dr. infereth p. 278. from the power of the Presbyter, that our Church does not
deprive them of all the necessary and Essential parts of Church Discipline. But
if it deprive them of any such part in which they may not meddle, it takes away
that power that Christ has given them; it is a fine Apology for Episcopal
Usurpation, that they suffer a Presbyter as their delegate, and as he will be
accountable to them to do some Acts that they themselves cannot attend; whereas
Christ gave no more power to a Bishop, than to any of the Presbyters.

Sect. 16. Mr. B. objecteth to the Dr. that it is Actionable by Law, if a
Parish Minister admonish a person by name, not censured by the ord^nary; to
which the Dr. has two sorry answers. 1. What need public Admonition by name?
Does the nature of Church Discipline lie in that? It is enough it be done
privately, and shows that Augustine bid people examine themselves, and
abstain if they saw cause; and the same Augustine says, that Church Discipline
may be forborne in some cases in a true Church. To this I reply, 1. How will the
Dr. reconcile this with what he cites out of the Rubric; will private dealing
with the offender amount to repelling of him from the Communion? 2. Discipline
is a public and Authoritative Act; and another thing then, private dealing
with a person, the Apostle calls it a rebuking before all, 1 Timothy 5. 20. And
it differs from Preaching, in that by Discipline reproofs are applied to the
person, in Preaching they are in more general Terms: Now how this should be
without public nameing the Man, I know not. 3. Who doubts that Augustine did
well in what the Dr. alleges; it must be our practice when Discipline is most
strictly exercis^d, because Discipline cannot reach the secret sins of Men: But
Augustine never thought that therefore Discipline was not to be publicly, and
personally inflicted on Offenders; and sure Discipline may in some cases be
forborne, hic and number, without fault, and where it is f^ul^ily forborne, it does
nullify the being of a Church; yet it must not always be forborne. His 2.
answer is, If a restraint be laid on Ministers by Law, whether the Minister
ought to admonish publicly, and debar in that Case? Reply; why does the Dr.
make the Rubric, and the Law thus to clash, especially seeing the Common
Prayers and its Rubri^k are settled by Law? And he does by this fairly yield,
that by the constitution of the Church of England now Established by Law, a
Parish Minister has no power to keep back any from the Lords Table that has a
mind to come. Why then has he taken so much pains to prove they can do
something, and at last conclude that this same thing is just nothing,
parturiunt montes.

Sect. 17. He frames an objection to himself, Sect. 16. that the neglects, and
abuse of Discipline among us, are too great to be justified, and too notorious
to be concealed. To this he has several Answers. The 1. is, That the question
is, whether this destroys the being of Parochial Churches; this I pass, for I
think it does not. The 2. is, It is easier to complain of this, or separate,
then find out a way to remedy it. We propose the Scripture remedy; to wit, to
put it into the hands of the Pastors of the Church in Common. The 3. is, That
ther^ is not that necessity of Church Discipline, as in the primitive times,
the Christian Magistrate taking care to punish scandalous offenders, and so to
vindicate the honor of the Church: And to confirm this, he cites a passage of
King Charles the First to the same purpose. Thus the Drs. zeal for Episcopacy
is swallowed up in the Gulf of Erastianism; to what purpose does he cite
Cyprians Tu^es petrus, and why has he pleaded so much for Episcopacy, even out
of these Fathers that lived under Christian Emperors, as Augustine, Theodoret,
etc. if Church Discipline be at the Magistrates disposal. But I see Men will
say any thing (...); let the Dr. answer what our Divines have written against
Erastus, and his followers, proving that the Church and Republic, are distinct
Societies, tho made up of the same Persons; that Christ has a visible
Mediatory Kingdom in the World; that the Rules, Laws, Punishments, and
immediate ends of Church State are different. Let him no more tell us of the
Church of England, but of the Civil Laws of England; as that which the
Ordinances of Christ are to be dispensed, and ordered by. I shall not digress
to refute this Assertion; but Men will be apt to think that this principle does
foully reflect upon Christ, and his Apostles, who gave all their directions
about Chruch Affairs, to Churchmen, and not to the Magistrate.

Sict. 18. His Fourth Answer, is, that Excommunication by Protestant Divines,
is not left to a Parochial Church; I do not plead for that; but against putting
it into the Hand of one Man. Neither will it hence follow, a Parish Minister
and his Elders may exercise no Discipline: The Protestant Divines abroad are
not of that mi^d. It is false, That among us a Minister (I mean with his
Elders) can only admonish, not repel from the Lords Supper. Why, (says he) may
not our Ministers be obliged to certify ^he Bishop, as well as theirs to
certify the Presbytery. Ans. Because Christ gave no power to a Bishop above
other Presbyters; and Discipline in the Apostolic and Primitive Church, was
exercised by a single person. If the Dr's principle be true; I think it is
fitter to certify the Justice of Peace, than either of both. What he says of
the Affrican Churches, is answered above. Let him prove that a Bishop by
himself exercised discipline in them. The Bishop is often named as the Speaker
in the Presbytery, by the declining of him, is meant declining of them. The
Inconveniences that he allegeth, by putting Excommunication into the Hands of a
single Congregation; we shun by a prudent reserving of that dreadful Ordinance,
to a meeting of Pastors. But if it were done by the meanest Congregational
Elder-ship, it could hardly be so ill managed, and made so ridiculous and
contemptible, as it is now in the Hands of Bishops, or rather their Servants,
in England. It is well known how solemn, and terrible it is, as practiced
(which is seldom) in Presbyterian Churches; and how it has tamed some
stout-hearted Sinners, without a Capias or Magistratical power to back it. I
wonder why the Dr. should use such Arguments, as he does against Parochial
Discipline; to wit, That there are no certain Rules to proceed by; no
Determination what faults deserve Excommunication; no method of Trial; no
security against false ^itnesses; no limitation of Causes; no liberty of
Appeals, besides multitudes of other Inconveniences. Sure this Author thinks
the Bible of little use to the Church, without a Book of Canons; such
reflections on the Word of God, are very unbecoming; a part of which is written
on purpose to teach Ministers, how to behave themselves in the House of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. I hope the Dr's more sober thoughts will satisfy him in all these;
and therefore I shall give no more particular Answer. But he might have
considered, if the Bishop have directions for all these in the Bible (and if he
have not, his Will must be his Law) why may not the Classical and
Congregational Presbytery, respective take the help of them. He thinks a
Parochial Court of Judicature (so he is pleased to speak in the Episcopal
Style) would prove more Tyranical, than any Bishops Court. It may be so, if
managed by bad men; but if they keep within the Rules they profess to go by, it
will seem Tyrannical to none but stubborn Sinners, whose galled Necks cannot
bear Christ's Yoke, And it could never be so grievous to Men's Persons and
Estates, as the Bishops Courts; for these we meddle not with. His fifth Answer I
say nothing against.

Sect. 19. He has yet a further Apology for the want of Parochial Discipline;
even supposing every one left to their own Consciences, as to their fitness for
the Communion; he says, 1. The greatest offenders abstain of themselves; and
they that come are usually the most devou^. 2. If Debauched Persons come, it is
upon some awakening of Conscience. Then both which nothing can be said more
contrary to common experience. 3. He says, This does not defile right
Communicants: That is true; and therefore it is no cause of Separation; but it
is the Churches fault, and should be amended. 5. and 6. Some Presbyterian
Churches, and the Church of Constantinople were for a Time without Discipline.
This is no imitable Example.

SECT. V. The National Constitution of the Church of England debated.
HAving now examined what the Dr. says for Diocesan Episcopacy, I proceed to
consider the next ground for Separation pleaded by some; to wit, the National
Constitution of the Church of England. I have above declared, that I look on
this as no ground for Separation; yea, nor cause of complaint, if it be taken
sano sensu. Though I think every organized Congregation has a governing power
in it self; yet this power is not Independent, but Subordinate to the
Association of such Churches. These Associations may be greater or smaller; one
contained in another, and so subordinate to it, as the Convenience of meeting
for Discipline does allow; and because the Association of Churches in a whole
Nation, contains all the Churches in it, and may all meet in their
representatives, for the governing them all in common. This we own as a
National Church; wherefore on this Head I have no debate with the Dr. except in
so far as he is, for National, and Provincial Officers in this National Church,
Arch^bishops, and Bishops, put but Provincial and National Synods in the place
of these, and I shall contend no further. I shall not then meddle with the
substance of this his Discourse; but only note a few things.

Sect. 2. The First thing that I take notice of, is, p. 289. Where the Dr.
makes the institution of the Apostolic Function in the Hands of twelve Men,
to be an Argument against Churches Power of governing themselves. This proves
nothing; for the ordinary Government of the Church must be regulated by what
the Apostles appointed, which is an abiding thing; not by their own governing
the Church, which ceased with them. Next, p. 290. he says, the Succession of
Bishops from the Apostles, is, Matter of Fa^t, attested by the most early,
knowing, honest, and impartial Witnesses; which I deny and have disproved. The
next remark shall be upon, p. 291. where he pleads for Bishops joining
together, and becoming one National Church (he shuneth mentioning a Primate
under, and in whom they unite) and this he seems to vindicate from making way
for Papal Usurpation, and and Universal Head of the Christian Church; by its
being intended for the good of the whole so united, and no ways repugnant to
the design of the Institution, and not usurping the rights of others, nor
assuming more than can be managed. This, he says, an Universal Pastor must do;
and he therefore mentions this, that any one may see that the force of this
reasoning will never justify the Papal Usurpation. I cannot, for all this,
see, that it is more justifiable, or consistent with Christ's Institution, to
unite a National Church under a Primate, than to unite the Universal Church
under a Pope: Save that the one is a further remove from Parity that Christ
instituted, and so a greater Evil, than the other; but magis and minus non
variant speciem, To clear this, I shall run over these Four qualities that he
mentions, in their uniting under a Primate; and consider whether they do
agree better to him, than to a Pope. The First is, it is intended for the good
of the Whole, so United. If we judge by Intentions; no doubt this intention
will be pretended to by the Papists also; and is de facto as much pleaded by
them, and with as specious pretenses. And if we consider the reallity of the
thing; sad experience shows, that neither the one nor the other does conduce
to the good of the whole; but is improved to Tyrannizing over men's Consciences;
and Rending, and Harassing the Church, for the sake of superstitious Concepts
of corrupt Men.

Sect. 3. The Second, This Union is no way repugnant to Institution. This he
should have proved; we deny it: Let him show us more Institution, or warrant
for a Metropolitan, than for a Pope. If we should own. Bishops as Successors to
the Apostles; yet an Archbishop, a Metropolitan, a Patriarch, a Pope, must
still be beside Institution, except the Dr. will own an Imparity among the
Apostles, and so be for Peter's Supremacy. The Third is, That in this Union
there is no usurping the Rights of others. I say, there is, as really as there
is in the Papacy; for it is the Right of every one of Christ's Ministers, to
govern the Church in equallity of power with the rest; this is taken from them,
and put into the hand of a Bishop; and that right that the Bishop has usurped
from the Presbyters, the Primate usurpeth from him, and the Pope does no more
but usurp the same from all the Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, that they had
usurped from these under them. The 4th. is, not assuming more than can be
managed. Nothing but prejudice could hinder a man of the Doctors understanding,
to see, that the Bishop assumeth more power than he can manage, as really as
the Primate or the Patriarch; yea, or the Pope does. For as the Pope cannot
administer the Word and Sacraments, and Discipline of the Church to all
Christians in his own person, no more can a Primate to a whole Nation, nor a
Bishop to a Diocese consisting of many thousands of People, and hundreds of
Congregations. And as the Bishop can do all this by the Parochial Clergy, for
Word, and Sacraments, and by his Chancellors, Archdeacons, etc. for his
Discipline, such as it is: And as the Primate can rule a whole National Church,
by his and the Bishops Courts: So can the Pope rule all Christian people (ut
cunque) by Cardinals, Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Bishops, by his Legate, or
other Officers of his appointment. I challenge the Doctor, or any man, to show
such a difference between a National Officer, and an Oecumenick Officer in the
Church, as makes one lawful, and the other unlawful. The Pope's usurping a
Plenitude of Civil Power, and more grossly abusing his pretended Church Power,
will not make this difference. For we speak of a Pope and Primate as such,
abstracted from all Accidents of such an Officer in the Church.

Sect. 4. Page 292. He seems to expose the framing of Church Government too
much, to the reason, or rather fancy, of Men; when he says, That Union being
the best way to preserve the Church, (the preservation of which Christ
designeth by his Institution) we may reasonably infer, that whatever tends to
promote this union, and to prevent notable inconveniences, is within the design
of the first Institution, though it be not contained in express words. The
Papists are dull if they cannot out of this principle hammer out a Pope, as
well as the Doctor can frame a Bishop, or Archbishop: This Inference as thus
loosly set down, is no way to be admitted; because Christ has not provided for
the unity, and preservation of his Church, by leaving it to Men's will, or
wholly to their reason either; but by his own Institutions to be wisely managed
by the Officers, that he has appointed in his house. Unity is then to be
preserved, Divisions and Heresies to be prevented by the painful and faithful
preaching of the Gospel by Christ's Ministers in their several particular
Charges, by private, and public Instructions, and Admonitions: By their joint
Concurrence in censuring, and drawing out the Sword of Discipline against
stubborn Offenders: These are Christ's Institutions, and will be effectual when
he is pleased to bless them; and this blessing we are to expect on his own
appointed means, not on men's Devices: But we deny that Unity in the Church is
to be preserved in any way that men in their Wisdom think fit, and
particularly, that it is to be preserved by setting up Archbishops, and
Bishops in the Church: These being none of Christ's means appointed for that
end. It is often seen that means thus devised of Men, by Crossing of Christ's
Institution, either fail of their end, or by mending one evil make a worse:
Peace, and Unity is sometim^s (and in the case in hand) procured to the Church,
with the bearing down of Piety, and shutting out of Purity.

Sect. 5. I dislike one Particle of that Definition that he gives of the
National Church of England diffusive, p. 299. to wit, he says, It is the whole
Body of Christians in this Nation, consisting of pastors, and people, agreeing
in that Faith, Government, and Worship which are established by the Laws of
this Realm. Had he put the word of God inste^d of the Laws of this Realm, I
should have fully assented to this description. But against that Particle I
have two Exceptions. 1. The Civil Law is accidental to the Church, and is
neither a constituent part of its essence, nor a necessary adjunct of it: The
Church has been without it, and I hope he will not say, That if the Laws were
taken away, the Church is unchurched for that. 2. This make^h the Church of
England, a variable and mutable thing, as the Laws of men are, for if
Presbytery, if Anabaptism, If Independency, Popery, Socinianism, and what sort
of Religion you can name, either as to Faith, or Worship, or Government, were
established by Law: They that are of that way should then be the Church of
England; which is not only absurd, but a dangerous notion in such a critical
time as this (I hope the Doctor did not design a fair retreat by this) if
Popery (which God forbid) should come to be establi^hed by Law: The Papists
were the Church of England, and all the Ties that men are under to the Church
of England, by the^r Oaths, and Subscriptions, should oblige them to be
Papists; and all the True Sons of the Church must turn with the Law, as the
Weathercock does with the Wind: This is like to be pleasing Doctrine to many.
But I p^rceive the Doctors design by this fine new notion is, To let men see
how easily the Church of England is distinguished from Papists on the one side,
and Dissenters on the other; which makes him wonder at them who cannot tell
what is meant by the Church of England. If Men wondered much before, they may
wonder far more now, what is meant by the Church of England, when they see her
painted in so changeable colors, as that she may be one thing now, and another
next year, and another the third year, and so on. The Scripture places the
Moon under the Churches Feet, and the Twelve Stars, Apostolic Doctrine, on her
Head, as her cognizance and Glory, but the Doctor has advanced the Moon to her
Head, that she must be known by it; what he will do with the Twelve Stars I
know not. He is more favorable to the Papists, and Dissenters, they are to be
known by their Conformity, or Nonconformity to Scripture; not to the Laws of
the Land: But if Papists or Dissenters should happen to get the Law on their
side, what will that party be that is now the Church of England? It seems the
Doctor is fond of this notion, for he has it up again, p. 300. to the
question, how comes it to be one National Church: He answers, because it was
received by the Common consent of the whole Nation in Parliament, as other Laws
of the Nation are, and is universally received by all that obey these Laws. And
thus he clears our Mists about the Church of England. He had debated much
with Mr. B. owning a Christian Kingdom, but not a National Church; but here he
homologateth all that Mr. B. had said, for the Parliament owning the Faith,
makes a Christian Kingdom, but it is some other thing that makes a National
Church, to wit, the Collective Body of all the Congregations of a Nation
agreeing in the same Faith, and Worship, and Government, as it is held forth in
the Word of God. If the Doctor say, thi^ leaves room for every party to call
themselves the Church; for all pretend to have the Word on their side. I
answer, This is not to be denied; for till the Lord cure our Divisions about
truth, and about his Ordinances, we are not like to come to a decision of that
question, Who is the Church? For all Congregations are parts of the Church; and
these that are nearest to the Scripture rule are the truest part of the Church:
The Apostle decided that Controversy, who is the Circumcision, (the Dialect of
some in that time, for who is the Church) not by the Laws of men; but by the
truth of God that they owned, Phil. 3. 3. The Doctor has found out a new Mark
of the Church that B^llarmine has not, (though he has more than enough) to
wit, They that have the Law on their side are the Church.

Sect. 6. He tells us that the representative Church of England is, the
Bishops and Presbyters of this Church meeting together according to the Laws of
this Realm to consult, and advise about matters of Religion. This is says not
of the Convocation at Westminster; but of the Consent of both Convocations.
Here I observe, 1. That the Law of the Land is so constitutive of a Church to
this Author, that without it there is neither diffusive, nor representative
Church. Then what becomes of the Apostolic Church, and that of the first 300
years, and of the Greek Churches under the Turk; yea, and of the Protestant
Church of France, where their Prince is not only Christian, but most Christian?
And yet his Law does not favor that Church. 2. I have showed before that the
Convocation can make no Church National representative: The Presbyters, and
Churches of the Nation being so insufficiently represented there. 3. Neither do
I understand how the Consent of two Convocations, that never meet personally
together, can be called a Church, or National representative Church: I thought
a Church had been a Me^ting, not a consent of men: A Personal Concurrence in
some Religious Acts; not a mental consent about them: Bodies are requisite to
make a Church, as well as Souls.

Sect. 7. I ple^d not for Mr. B's Constitutive Regent part of the Catholic
Church; though an Oecumenick Counsel, if it could be had, might better
challenge that Name than the Pope; and I think Christ's Headship over the
Catholic Church does not answer to what is debated about, to wit, a visible
power, super-intending all the Inferior Church powers on earth. We own a
Catholic, diffusive, visible Church; but wish, rather than hope for one
representative; for we are persuaded, the Pope has no title to such a
headship. But the question between him and Mr. B. being about a visible
representative or regent Head of the National Church of England: I have showed
that consent cannot stand in this room; and therefore brings in the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Presbyters summoned by the Kings Writ, whose
Conclusions must be enacted by a Parliament. Against this National Head I
object, 1. That it has no Warrant to represent the Churches of the Nation; of
which before. 2. He seems above to make two such Convocations, and so there
must either be two Churches of England, or the one Church of England must be
Biceps, and so a Monster. 3. This consent or Convocation (call it what you
will) is not a regent head of the Church of England, it medleth only with
making rules for Government (which is none of the Churches work, she is only
ministerially to execute Christ's Laws) but does not govern; by receiving
Appeals, censuring the Maleversation of inferior ruling Churches, inflicting
Censures, etc.

Sect. 8. Mr. B. asks whether the rules that unite the Church of England, be
Divine, or Humane. The Dr. answers, Sect. 22. The Church is founded on a
Divine Rule; but requires a conformity to the rules that she has appointed,
as agreeable to the Word of God. This, I conceive is not to answer the
question; he should have told us in which of the two rules their unity lies:
We know that all Churches as well as these of New England, (which he
mentions) if the Magistrate own them, have civil Privileges annexed to
Church Orders, but that is still wide from the question, whether these Orders
be Divine, or Humane. Does the Church, or do the Churches of New England make
Orders for observing Ceremonies in God's Worship, devised by Man, and place
their unity in that? It remains then still, that if the National Unity of the
Church of England, be made by Divine Rules that either are expressly, or by
Consequence in Scripture we are members of it, and will in all these join with
it; but if they place their unity in observing rules that have no Warrant from
Scripture; if we cannot join with them in so doing, we do not separate from
them, but they in so far separate from us, and from all the pure Churches of
Christ.

Sect. 9. He maintains, p. 305. against one of his Opponents, who had
objected, That the Church had no power to make Laws about Foederal Rules,
teaching Signs, and Symbols, etc. That such a Church has power to appoint
Rules of Order, and Decency not repugnant to the Word of God, and that all
settled Churches are for this, I reply. 1. He does not answer to the Objection:
I hope all Rules for Order, and Decency are not about Foederal Rites, and
teaching Symbols: Ordering the natural Circumstances of Worship comprehends
the one, but not the other. 2. It is false. that all settled Churches appoint
Rules for such Order, and Decency as consists in Religious Ceremonies,
teaching Symbols, and such like. 3. It is also false that all settled Churches
appoint Rules of Order, and Decency even in the Circumstantials of Religion; so
as to exclude all from their Privileges, and to incite the Magistrate to
punish them, who do not conform to these Rules (as he alleges) other Churches
use to rule by holding forth light, and Perswasives, not to impose with rigor
and force on the Consciences of men: Nor do they concern the Magistrate, but
where some notable violations of the Law of God, otherwise not to be
restrained, does require it. 4. It is a false supposition, that our Imposed
Rules about Ceremones, are not repugnant to the Word of God; but this is not
the place of that Debate.

SECT. VI. The Peoples Right of Electing their Pastors.
THe last of these four Pleas, that the Reverend Author ranketh under the first
Head, and which he alleges, some make use of for separation, is, That the
people are deprived of their right in the choice of their own Pastors: This he
proceeds to Sect. 24. I do not make the depriving the people of this power a
cause of separation; though I reckon it a notable Grievance, and earnestly
desire a redress of it, and pray that the Lord may move the Hearts of Rulers to
defend the people in this their Right, against them that take it from them. But
our work is now to defend this Right of the Members of the Church, against the
Doctor's Assaults. But before I come to this, I shall show 1. What this Right
is that they have in Electing their Pastors. 2. From whom they Derive it. 3.
What ground we have to think that they have such a Right.

Sect. 2. To show what this Right is, I assert, 1. That the people have no
Right to bestow the Benefice on their Pastor; nor to elect him to it, unless
either it be their own gift, or the giver of it has transferred that power on
them. It is Election to the Office, not to the Benefice, that we debate about;
which if the Doctor had considered, he might have spared a great deal of his
following Discourse. It is true, the Magistrate ought to provide for the
Church, so as the person, regularly chosen, may enjoy the Benefice; but if the
Magistrate please to reserve it to his own disposing, there is no Remedy; the
people must either choose the man that may have the maintenance, if he be
tollerably qualified, or they must provide for him themselves. And so when a
Patron gives a Maintenance on these terms, That he have the choosing of the
person who shall enjoy it, the Church should either reject it, and provide for
their Minister another way, or choose the person that the Patron presents. But
this Patronage is a sad Grievance to the Church, devised in Satan's Kitchen,
says Beza, confess. fid. c. 35. it is an oppressing of people in their
Spiritual Rights, and in that which concerns their Souls: A greater bondage
than if the whole Parish were obliged to eat nothing but what the Patron
pleases. And it had been less blameworthy, if these Donors of Church Livings
had kept their Gift to themselves, than thus to prelimit the people in that
which so nearly concerns their Souls; and to make that but an Accessory (to
wit, the charge of Souls) which should be the thing principally minded: As now
the Living is. 2. The Magistrate, or Patrons electing of a Minister, may give
him a Title to the Living; but it can never make him the Pastor of such a
people, nor fix a Relation between him, and them, of Pastor, and Flock: For it
is wholly Foreign to the Church as a Church; it is a thing of Worldly concern,
and therefore can never found that Relation, which is an Institution of Christ
in his Church. 3. We do not deny, but when the people have chosen a Pastor, and
the Presbytery has ordained him also, the Magistrate may Imprison, Banish, or
otherwise punish him, so as he is consequentially restrained from the exercise
of his Ministry among that people; if the man be guilty of a civil crime (of
which the Magistrate is Judge) but we deny that this Act does dissolve the
ministerial relation between that Pastor, and People; that cannot be done but
by the Church 4. We do not so put Election into the hand of the multitude, as
either to exclude the Eldership that is among them; or to exempt the people
from their guidance in this: The Eldership ought to regulate this Action; yet
so, as it be not done without the consent of the generality. 5. We are far from
saying, That the People by their Election, does make the Elected person a
Minister; that is done by Ordination, which is in the Hands of the Presbytery.
6. We do not say, That this Elective power of the people is Arbitrary, and
independent; they are to be bounded in it by the Rules of the Gospel, that set
forth the qualifications of Ministers; and if they choose contrary to these, the
Presbytery may reject the person, and refuse to ordain him. 7. We deny not but
a part of a Church, or the whole Church, may forfeit this Right, as to the
present exercise of it, by Ignorance, Scandal, Irreconcilable Contentions
about the matter, and such like; in which case the power of Election devolveth
into the hands of the Pastors of the Churches associated; I mean the
Presbytery. Yet, the peoples satisfaction should be endeavored as much as is
possible. 8. It is the Right of the people, which they ought not to be deprived
of, nor restrain^d from exercising, ordinarily, nor without singularly weighty
cause, to choose their own Pastors, and other Church Officers.

Sect. 3. As to the Author of this Right in the people, I maintain, that it is
neither from the Churches Determination, nor from any grant from the
Magistrate; neither do I plead any Law of nature for it: For by Divine
Institution (which is never contrary to the Law of Nature) it was otherwise in
the Jewish Church. And though there be abundant reason for it, it being the
privilege of Free Corporations, and other Societies, to choose these that are
to govern them; and it being rational, that a Corporation, or person, may choose
the Lawyer that they will entrust their Estates to; and the Physician in whose
hand they put their life; so men should not be imposed upon to entrust the
Conduct of their Souls to a person that they have not confidence in, and whom
they cannot choose for that end. Yet, I say, we do not lay the stress of the
matter on Humane Reason, but on Gospel Institution: I affirm then, that this is
the Institution of Christ; that it is the order that he has appointed in the
Gospel, that people should have liberty to choose their own Pastors, and other
Church Officers.

Sect. 4. I am next to show the grounds that we have to think so. I shall prove
this by showing that it was the constant practice in the Church, while the
Apostles managed the Affairs of it, that Church Officers were chosen by the
suffrages of the people; and I hope it will not be denied, that such practice
is declarative of Christ's Institution. The first Argument for it, is from Act.
14. 23. where though Ordination, or appointing, be expressed in our
Translation, yet the Greek Word (...); ^ignifieth a choosing by Suffrages; as
the manner of the Grecians was, by stretching out or lifting up the hand (for
that is the force of the Word) to declare their Votes. I deny not that this
Word is sometimes used figuratively, for potestative mission, the effect, or
consequent of Election; and that by one person, withot Suffrages, as Act. 10.
14. yet it is very rare that the Word is so used: And it is evident, that the
Word is most commonly us^d in this sense; of all the Instances that Scapula in
his Lexicon, gives of the use of this Word, not one of them is to the
contrary. And it cannot be Instanced, that ever this word is used for laying on
of hands; lifting up (which is the force of the Word) and laying them down,
being so opposite, it is not to be imagined that the one should be put for the
other. Neither is it fit to seek for the Figurative signification of the Word,
when the proper signification may be admitted. It is objected against this use
of the Word here, that they ordained (...) not (...) to them, not to
themselves, that is, the Apostles to the people ordained Elders. Answ. It
cannot be denied, but (...) is used indifferently for them, or themselves; and
why it may not here be understood of themselves, I see not; so as that here is
denoted the Action of appointing Elders for the people, in which the people had
a hand by Election, as the Word here imports, and the Apostles had a hand by
Ordination, as can be proved by other Scriptures? But if we should turn (...)
them, the sense may run plainly thus; the Apostles appointed by Ordination,
Elders for the people, upon their Electing them by Suffrages. It is no strange
thing in Scripture to see diverse Actions expressed by the same Word, where one
is the consequent of the other, as Is. 38. 17. Thou have Loved my Soul out of
the pit of corruption, i.e. delivered it, because thou loved it: Also Act. 7.
9. The Patriarchs are said to sell Joseph to Egypt; where both their Actions,
and the Actions of the Midianites who carried him to Egypt, and there sold him,
are included in one Word. Many Instances of this kind of Synthesis may be seen
in Gl^ss. Philol. Sacr. lib. 3. tract. 3. p. 229 -- It is also objected, that
these are said to Ordain who commended the people to the Lord; that is, the
Apostles, and that the Apostles are spoken of all along in the Nominative Case,
and not the people; and therefore they must be the Actors meant by this word.
Answ. We deny not the Apostles to be Actors meant in this Word, as the
Patriarchs were in the Word, Selling to Egypt, Act. 7. 9. but we say the
peoples action is also included, in the force of the Word; to wit, their
Voteing by lifting up their hands; which in no reason can be applied to the
Apostles, being but two men, the matter needed not such a way of Voteing between
them. I conclude, this being done (...) in every Church, the people respective
choosing their Pastors, and the Apostles Ordaining them, it is clear to have
been generally the practice of these times, and so the Institution of Chirst.

Sect. 5. Argument 2. The Apostles were so careful; yea, rather the Lord was so
careful, to preserve this right in Election or ordinary Officers; that when Men
for extraordinary Work were to be sent forth, the Peoples choice was not
neglected. Hence two were chosen by the Multitude, and presented to the Lord;
that by Lot the Lord might choose one of them to be an Apostle Successor to
Judas, Act. 1. 23. and Matthias being chosen by Lot, it is said of him, ver.
26, (...) he was reckoned by Votes, among the Apostles, and Act. 13. 1, 2. the
Lord chused Barnabus, and Paul for a special Service; but he would have the
Votes of the Church for it. If the Lord thus condescended to take the present
consent in such a matter; is it fit for Bishops or Patrons to neglect them, and
obtrude Men upon them, whether they will or not? Argument 3d. When ever any
extraordinary piece of work (I mean such as was not daily exercise) was to be
put into the Hands of Ministers, without a special Revelation; they were chosen
to it by the Suffrages of the People, as appears by. Act. 15. 22. where
Judas, and Silas are sent to Antiech, about carrying the Decrees of the Synod
at Jerusalem, and backing them with their Doctrine. So 2 Cor. 8. 19. 23. Some
are chosen by the Churches to accompany Paul in carrying a Collection to the
Jews in Judea; and are called the Messengers of the Churches. Argument 4th. The
Deacons were appointed to be chosen by the People, (...), also the other Church
Officers see, Act. 6. 2, 3. It is a frivolous Answer; that it does not follow,
that they should choose their Pastors, because they may choose the Distributers
of their Benevolence. For, 1. both are Church Officers, instituted by Christ:
In this then they are alike. 2. It were a less matter, that people were imposed
on in this lesser concern; than in that of greater consequence; and if the Lord
have taken care, that they should be satisfied about the one, much more that
they should be satis^ied about the other.

Sect. 6. Our 5th. Argument, is from the concurrent Testimony of the purer
primitive times; which we the rather use, because our Brethren lay so much
weight on this for the Power of Bishops, it should not be neglected by them in
the matter of Election; and that of other Church Officers. Also, because
nothing of Church-Ord^r is more clearly, and frequently, and unanimously in the
Writings of the Ancients; nor did longer continue untaken away, even in the
degenerate Ages of the Church; so that we may reckon Patronages, and ob^ruding
Ministers on the People, among the Novelties of Popery. I shall in the first
place bring some Canons of Council for this: Theoderet mentions an Epistle
from the Famous Council of Nice, to a Church in Egypt; in which are these
words, Dignum est vos potestatem habere and eligendi quem libet and eorum
nomine dandi quem clero St. Digni. And after, si quum vero con^igerit
requiescere in Ecclesia, tunc pro vehim honorem defuncti eos quem nuper
Assumpti St. solummodi si videantur digni, and populus eos Elegerit. The Synod
Constantinopolit. in an Ep. to Damasus, and others, show that they had ordained
Nectarius -- cuncta decernente pariter civetate, and that they had ordained
Flavianus, omni Ecclesia parriter decernente. Hist. inpert. lib. 9. c. 14.
Also, 4. Carthagin. cau. 1. It is required that a Bishop be Ordained, cum omni
consensu Clericorum, and Laicorum, and Council. 3. Carthag. can. 22. Nullus
ordin^tur Clericus sine Episcopi examinatione and populi Testimonio. Also the
Tenth Canon of Council. Cabilonens; (which was in the middle of the Seventh
Century) has these words, as they are in Caranz. Summa Council. Signis
Ep^scopus de quacunque Civitate fuerit defunctus, non ab aliis nisi a com.
provinicialibus, clero, and civibus suis, alterius habeatur electio sin autem
aliter fiet, ejus Ordinatio irrita habeatur. Here the want of Popular Election
is held to make void Ordination.

Sect. 7. Another sort of Testimonies out of Antiquity, are the Decrees of
Popes; it was of old the Canon Law, that the People should have a Hand in
El^ction of Ministers, Bishops, and others. Anacletus, who lived very near the
Apostles time, has these words in one of his Epistles, cum ejectionem summorum
sacerdotum sibi Pominus reservaverit, eorum electionem tamen benis sacerdotibus
and spiritualibus populis concessit; Caelestinus primus; who lived in the
beginning of the Fifth Century, has these words, nullus invitis detur
Episcopus cleri plebis, and ordinis consensus requiratur. Galasius about the
500 year decreed, Electionem Episcopi esse totius Ecclesiae. Also, Stephanus,
Pecretat. did. 63. says, Electionem non solum ad spiritual^s, sed etiam ad
Paicos pertinere. And L^o Magnus, Anno 440. did. 63. is plain, and full to
this purpose. So Gregorius Magnus, about 590. frequently writes to this
purpose. I instance only his Letter to Scholast^us; H^rtanum Magnitud^nem
vestr^m, ut cer^ocantes p^iores vel pl^bem civitatis, de electione alterius
Sacerdotis cogites, and when in case they found not one, he desires they may
send three to Rome, to consult about it, adding quorum and judicio pl^bs tota
consentiat. Hadriarus, who lived near the end of the Eighth Century, in an Ep.
to Charlemain, commends Can^nes Olitanos, and says, at elect^ones he caused
to proclaim the consuetudo Olitana; to wit, Plebs and clerus Ecclesiae illius
simul consistens, elegerunt sibi Episcopum.

Sect. 8. Also particular Fathers have frequently given their Vote for this
privilege of the People. Cyprian Ep. 3. often mentions his being chosen by
the Suffrage of the whole Church of Carthage, and in his Ep. de Martial. and
Basilid; he says, Plebs in sua potestate hab^t eligendi dignos sacerdotes. And
he says, Idemvidemus de divina Authoritate descendere. And he excuses himself
very carefully, that in a case of necessity, he had chosen Aurelius to be
Reader in the Church, without the Knowledge, and Consent of the People. Tertul.
apol. cap. 39. says of the Seniores that preside in their Assemblies, that is,
the Ministers, Approbantur Suffragiis eorum quos reger^debent. Greg. Nazianzen;
in a Funeral Sermon made on his Fathers Death; discourses much of this
privilege of the People, Chrysostom. lib. 4. de Sacerdotio, is of the same
mind. Also, Augustine naming Eracius, his Successor adds this express
caution, si Ecclesia Consentiat, and declares, hoc esse receptum provatumque
jus and consuetudine, ut tota Ecclesia sibi elegat Episcopum, aut in ipsum
consentiat. Hierom Ep. ad rustic. Monachum, Foll. (292.) cum ad perfectam
ae^atem veneris si tamen vita comes fuerit, and ^e vel populis vel pontif^x
Civitate Elegerint agito quae Clerici St. He supposes it as the received
practice; that the People should elect. Ambros. Ep. 82. Electio and vocatio
quae sit a tota Ecclesia, vere and certo est divina vocatio ad munus Episcopi:
Many more Citations might be added; but these may suffice, and abundance more
may be seen append. ad Catalog. Test. veritat. where this right of the People
is deduced from the Days of the Apostles, to the Eigth Century, by Testimonies
out of all sorts of Authors. That Author takes notice of this, as an ordinary
Clause in many of the Epistles, which Tinemeras, Archbishop of Rhemes, in the
Reign of Charlemain ab omnibus debet eligi, cui debet ab omnibus obediri.

Sect. 9. I shall now attend to what the Learned Dr. has to say in the
contrary of this right of the People, so divinely appointed, so anciently,
universally, and long approved. He discourses these three things to this
purpose, 1. What inherent Power the People had* 2. How they came to be divested
of it. 3. Whether there be suffic^ent Ground to resume it. One would think,
that if this Power be from Christ; his other two parts of his discourse might
have been spared: For who then could take it from them? And they always had a
Right to resume it, being unjustly deprived of it. As to the first of these,
his debate with Dr. O. about the Peoples Church Power, and the Government of
the Church being Democri^al, I meddle not with; we plead for this power in them,
not all Church Power. But he comes, Sect. 25. to this power of Election; for
disproving of which, he undertaketh to make out six things: I shall examine
them in order. But I think it had been more to the purpose to have answered the
Scriptures, and Testimonies out of Antiquity alleged by the opposites, which
he has not done. The First of these is, That the main ground of the Peoples
Interest was founded on the Apostles Canon; that a Bishop must be blameless,
and of good report, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 7. Ans. I have produced other grounds, and not
made this either the main, or any ground of this Right of the People; for
indeed that passage of Scripture does direct the Electors; but does not
determine who should Elect. I deny not but some of the Ancients made use of
that Scripture to this purpose, but they made use of others also; and having
established the Truth on other Grounds, they might well apply this place as
spoken to the People, to direct them how to manage that power of El^ction, that
the Lord had given them. This is a sorry Shift to shun the Dint of Arguments,
to pitch on that which is either no Argument, or a weak one, and to set up that
as the only Argument; and so by beating it down, to Triumph.

Sect. 10. He brings a passage out of Clem. on which he takes a great deal
of pains, to make it speak for him contrary to the manifest design of it. The
passage is, The Apostles, Preaching through Cities, and Countries, did appoint
the first Fruits; having made a Spiritual Trial of them, to be Bishops, and
Deacons. -- The Apostles foresaw the Contentions that would be about the Name
of Episcopacy (i. e. says the Dr. about the choice of Bishops) therefore they
appointed the Persons mentioned, and left the Distribution of their Office with
this Instruction; that as some dyed, other approved Men should be chosen into
their Office: These therefore who were appointed by them, or other eminent Men;
the Church being therewith all pleased, discharging their Office with Humility
-- cannot be justly put out of their Office. A Man of less learning than the
Dr. might easily draw the quite contrary Conclusion, from these words of
Clement; but it will require all his Skill, and more too; to conclude from them
against popular Election. But thus he argues; They were to be appointed by the
Apostles; therefore not of the Peoples choice. Ans. Non sequitur: The Deacons
were appointed by the Apostles, Act 6. 3. yet the People are to look out from
among them, i. e. to choose; and the Apostles to appoint them, i. e. set them
apart for their work. Many other Instances may be given; yet this Argumentation
the Dr. uses again, page 315. as if it were a mighty Argument. He says, it
seems some of the People were Contentious, and endeavored to throw out some of
their Officers, which occasioned this Ep. Ans. This Ep. is clear, that the
People may not cast out their Officers, doing their Work in Humility -- but not
a Word in it against their Electing of them, but clearly to the contrary; in
these words, the whole Church being therewith well pleased, implies, that it
is not to be done without them; and what Hand they can have in placing their
Officers, that does not amount to Election, I know not. He says, they took
this course of Purpose to avoid Contentions. What course does he mean? It
cannot be meant of Obtruding Officers on the Church; for he says, they must be
well pleased. Therefore the Course must be appointing Officers Authoritatively
by Ordination; who being so appointed, could not be ejected again, quemdiu se
been gesserunt, as appears by Clem. instancing the Blossoming of Arons Rod,
to put an end to the Emulation among the Tribes; which was a Strife not about
Election, but about changing of the settled Officers of the Church. He says,
all that the People had to do, was to give their Testimony. Clem. says, they
must be well pleased. And it is clear, that that excludes obtruding ^astors on
people, either by Patrons, or the Magistrate, or Bishop. He says, it seems
probable to him, that the reason of the Faction among them was, that some
represented it as a Grievance, that those Officers were appointed by others,
not chosen by them. Why this should seem to him, I know not; except that
prejudice represents things otherwise than they are; as colored Spectacles
do. It seems to me there could be no such thought among the People, because
Clement supposes the Officers to have been chosen by themselves; the whole
Church being well pleased. That these Factious Men had no Objection against the
Presbyters themselves; the Dr. Asserts, but he does not prove: It is true,
Clem. supposes there was no Ground for Objection; and therefore they could not
be cast out, while they were humble, quiet, ready, and blamless; but for all
that, Factious Men will find fault, and pick quarrels, with the most innocent
men.

Sect. 11. He next brings Cyprian to plead against popular Election; that is,
to plead against himself. For he says, p. 316. That he requires no more but
their Testimony, that it be done, sub populi. Assistentis conscientia; that by
their presence, either their Faults might be published, or their good Acts
commended, that so it might appear to be a just, and lawful Ordination, which
has been examined by the Suffrages of all: And after Cyprian says, It came
down from Divine Tradition, and Apostolic practice that a Bishop should be
chosen, plebe present (not by the Votes of the people, (says the Doctor.) One
would think all this time, the Doctor is secretly undermining his own cause;
and yet will outface plain light to defend it. Does not Cyprian mention the
Suffrages of all, and yet the Doctor makes him deny them Votes; if their
presence, their Testimony, commending or publishing the faults of the
Candidate, their knowledge, and assistance, can consist with Patronage, and
obtruding of Ministers on the people, as a Master of a Flock sets a
Sheepherd over his Sheep (it is one of Bellarmin's Arguments for the Doctor's
Conclusion.) If these do not import the peoples consent to be required; and so
amount to Election; let any indifferent Reader judge. It is plain that Cyprian
not only allows the people this power, but makes it a Divine Right; and
makes Ordination without it to be unjust, and unlawful: Wherefore if we should
adhere to Cyprian's judgment, there would be few Ministers in the Church of
England; and so more cause for separation than he is aware of; but I do not
improve his Testimony to that end. The Doctor, p. 317. brings Cyprians
Testimony, That it belongs chiefly to the people to refuse the bad, and choose
the good; and yet has the Brow to say, That this is no more then their
Testimony; but if Testimony be choosing, we require no more but Testimony; It is
nothing to the purpose that Lampridius says Severus, proposed the Names of
Governors of Provinces to the people, to see what they had to say against them;
and that this will not infer popular Election of these Governors. For 1. This
was never declared to be necessary, and appointing Governors unjust or
unlawful without it, as it is in our case. 2. We have proved, that the people
have power of Suffrage, and of choosing: which was not granted by Severus. That
Origin says a Bishop must be Ordained Astante populo, is such an Argument
against us, as shows a very weak cause, especially when so Learned a Man
thought better to use it then say nothing. For it is Election we speak of, not
Ordination; in which we confess, the people have no hand, neither does Origin
say, That this Ordination could proceed without the peoples being more
concerned about the person, than standing by while he was Ordained; and yet
even this favor is not granted to the people in England, the Bishop will not
be at the pains to come to the several Parishes to ordain the Ministers before
the people.

Sect. 12. The 2. thing that the Dr. insisteth on is, p. 318. That the people
upon this, Assuming the power of Elections, caused great Disturbance, and
disorders in the Church. To this I answer in general, 1. I desire to know on
what the people assumed the power of Election, whether on Christ's Institution,
or any subsequent ground; if the latter let him show it, if the former, it is
improper to say they assumed, what was ever their due: The Doctor seems to
speak of it as an act of the people, after that privilege had been out of
their hand for some time. 2. There is no Institution of Christ, but
inconveniences may follow on it, as long as sinful men have the managing of it:
Has none followed on Church Power in the hands of Bishops, and Presbyters?
Yea, of civil power in the hands of Magistrates; yea, of power of Election, in
the hands of Patrons. It were easy to fill a Volume with Histories to this
purpose: Will the Doctor thence conclude, that all these should be abolished?
3. As few inconveniences can be instanced, as following on the peoples Election
of their Pastors, as of most other things. The Doctor instanceth but four in
the space of 1000 years, that this power of the people lasted unviolated; and
that through all the Christian Churches. I do not deny but more there might be;
but when so few occurr as observable to a man of so great reading, it says
more against the Doctors design, than all these Instances say for it. 4. Most
of these disturbances fell out by the Ambition of Bishops influencing the
people, and leading them into Factions; and were occasioned by the worldly
advantage of Episcopacy, in the degenerate State of the Church; and were not to
be seen where Bishops kept within due bounds, and were in a mean condition; so
that indeed this Consideration is more against Episcopal grandeur, and
imparity, than against popular Elections. As is evident from Ammian. Marcellin*
whom the Doctor cites, as the Author of that Story of a Bloody Election at
Rome, when the Contest was about Damasus, where he shows, That they aspired
to that Bishopric with all their might, considering how the Bishop was
enriched, Oblationibus Matronarum, rode in Chariots, were Gorgeously attired,
fared sumptuously; and says, They might have shuned these inconveniences, had
they despised this grandeur, and imitated the Bishops in the Provinces, whose
humble carriage, poor fare, and mean habit, commended them to God and good men.
5. It is worth our Observation, that not one of these Disorders fell out for
300 years after Christ, when the Church was in her Integrity, and had not
degenerated, as she did afterward. 6. There is a better means of preventing
these disturbances, to wit, the Magistrate ought to suppress them; and the
Rulers of the Church ought to regulate Elections, and take away the exercise of
that power from the unruly, as they take the Sacraments, though peoples
privilege, from them that walk unworthy of them. When inconveniences fall in,
we must take God's way not our own, to set things right again.

Sect. 13. This might suffice for Answer to all, the Doctors Alledgeances on
this head; but further there is not so fair a representation made of matters of
fact as need were. For the ^st. Instance, the Disorder at Antioch, it was not
as he represents it, about the choosing of a new Bishop to a vacant place; but
about putting an Arian Bishop (at least supposed to be so) into the place of
Eustathius, who had long been peaceably in that place, and regularly chosen;
but was injuriously deposed by the Arians. Neither was Eustathius chosen at
last (as the Doctor says) but rid out the Storm; and kept his place against
the violent attempts of these Heretics. And therefore this Instance is wide
from the purpose. The next Instance is at Caesarea: The person that carried the
Election was Basil, the Magistrates, and the worst of the people opposing him.
Of this Nazianzen justly complains; and it cannot be justified; but cannot
infer, that popular Elections should be taken away. Gregorius Nazianzenus's
wish to that purpose, is unduly represented; it was, That the Election might be
in the hands of the Clergy, and the more holy part of the people, and that not
only, but (...) Chiefly. This does evince that he looks on the right of
Election to be in them; and only wished, that bad men might be deprived of the
use of that privilege; and so do we, when they abuse it: So it be taken from
them orderly. The 3d. Instance is at Alexandria, where Dioseurus was chosen,
and Proterius killed. This is a gross mistake, or misrepresentation. It was not
at the Election; but long after, yea, Proterius's Murder was 5 or 6 years
after; beside, it was done, and the Sedition raised by Heretics: Shall not the
Church choose her Pastors now, because Papists would oppose it, if they be not
curbed? Of the 4th Instance I have already spoken; to wit, that at Rome about
Damasus. What he says of Chrysostom, Jerome, and others, complaining of peoples
unfitness to Judge, does not prove his point: For all these Men were for
popular Election, as I have showed above. Beside, that the Pastor's fitness is
to be judged by the Ordainers, after the Electors have done their part.

Sect. 14. His third thing is, p. 320. That to prevent these inconveniences
many Bishops were appointed without the choice of the people, and Canons were
made for regulation of Elections. For proof of this, he tells us, that at
Alexandria the Bishop was not only to be chosen out of the twelve Presbyters,
but by them, and cites for this Jerome, Ep. ad Enagrium, Severus, and
Almacintus, and Hilarious the Deacon. Answ. 1. It is no wonder the Bishop was
chosen out of the Presbyters, and by them; for he was their Moderator, and had
no power over the people, more than the rest had; as has been showed above: If
he can prove that he was chosen to be Pastor of his particular Flock without
their consent, that were to the purpose. 2. This can make nothing for
Patronages, or the Magistrate obtruding a pastor on the people, or a single
Bishop doing it. 3. Jerom^'s words are, Presbyteri unum ex selectum in
excelciori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant; he says, not unum a
selectum: Severus speaks not a word of the Presbyters ^lecting alone: What is
said by Hilarious of the altering of the custom, is not who should Elect; but
that he might be Elected either from among the Presbyters, or from any place
else. What is all this against popular Elections? We find (says he) Bishops
Consecrating others (in the room of the deceased) in several Church^s, without
mention of choice made by the people: and mentions several instances. A. A
negative Testimony in this case signifies nothing. The Election being the
constant practice, might well be supposed, but needed not be mentioned. That
Severus of Milevis, and Augustine named, their Successors is no proof, unless
he prove that they were obtruded on the People without their consent: No doubt
any man, more the Great Augustine, may name a Minister to the People; but this
takes not away the Peoples free consent or choice; which the Dr. does not deny
to have been had in both these Cases. Yea, Augustine himself took it ill, that
Severus named his Successor, without acquainting the People, and therefore in
his own case did acquaintthem.

Sect. 15. What he alleges out of the Greek Canonists (whom he does not name,
and so cannot be examined) that the Council of Nice took away the power of
Election from the people; is inconsistant with the Epistle of that same Synod
above mentioned; and therefore these Canonists are not to be believed: He
cites Council. Anti^ch; to show that Bishops were sometimes consecrated without
the consent of the People; which that Council does not approve; but rather
allows the people to reject such a one; yet they will have him to retain the
Honor, and Office. The words are, Si Episcopus ordinatus, ad paraeciam minime
cui est electus, accesserit, non suo vitio, sed aut axuia cum populus volet --
hic and honoris sic and Ministerii particeps. -- This seems to show the
Election of the people to be necessary to a Man's officiating as their Past^r;
whether it go before Ordination, or follow after it: The same Council, Can. 17.
mentions the case of a Bishop, consecrated, and neglecting to go to his
charge; which the Dr. improve^h to show, that a Bishop was not always
consecrated in his Church. I deny not, that such abuses were committed: The
Council does not approve of such a thing; nor does it hence follow, that it was
ordinary, but rather the contrary; it is pity to see the Dr. put to such
shifts, as to instance Gregorius, being made Bishop of Alexandria before he
went thither; seeing this was done by the Arians, and he took possession by
military Force, and it was disliked by the rest of the eminent Persons of the
Churches. But the main thing that makes this instance to be inimitable, is,
that Anastasius was in the place, and by this means expelled. The next Instance
of Basil ordaining Euphronius before the peoples consent, was irregular; but
that he behoved to have the peoples consent before he settled there, makes it
wholly impertinent to the thing in hand. Nothing can be less to the purpose,
than what follows, of the peoples pititioning the Metropolitan to Ordain
their Bishop; for this supposes their Election of him; and that the
Metropolitan had power to refuse him, is no more then we allow to the
Presbytery, who may reject an unqualified person, though chos^n by the people.
The Dr. is not yet weary of Writing beside the purpose, when he tells us of a
Canon of the Council of Laodicea, that a Bishop chosen by the people, taking
possession without the Provincial Synod, was to be turned out: We say the same;
because the people may Elect; but the Pastors must Ordain. This does not show
(as he alleges) that the business of Election was in the East, brought into
the Bishops power, but only that the peoples Election was not sufficient
without the Bishops, and other Pastors Ordination.

Sect. 16. He next cites Justinians Law; that the Clergy, and better sort of
Citizens name three to the Metropolitan; whence the Dr. infers, that the
common People were excluded from the Election. Ans. 1. Justinians Law cannot
make void the Law of God and they that have not given their Names to Erastus,
do think that Christ's Laws, which are to be declared by his Church, and not
Justinians Laws should take place in the Church of God. 2. It is not said they
must present Three; but they might do it; but they might also present two, or
but one. 3. It is not said, that the Clergy and better Citizens were to Elect;
but they were (...), that is, to draw up the Decrees, as they were then called,
wherein the Election was contained. 4. In another Law of Justini^n, it is
appointed that the Election be made by the Inhabitants of the City. And I hope
he will not impute Contradictions to Justinian's Laws. He next objecteth
Council. Laodic. can. 13. He does not cite the Words, and I meet only with the
Title in these Words, Deo quod non sit populis concedendum electionent facere
eorum quam altaris Ministerio sit applicandi. Ans. If this be meant of
excluding the People wholly, it is inconsistent with other Canons above cited,
and therefore not to be minded. Therefore the meaning must rather be, that the
Election is not to be left to the Rabble; but they are to be assisted, and
directed in that Action by the Presbyters, and bettersort of the People. The
Second Council of Nice, is next cited; but much amiss; for it is Ordination,
not Election that is restrained to Bishops, i. e. not to be done without them;
and Election is only taken out of the Hand of the Magistrate. That Second
Council cites for Conformation of their Decree, the Fourth Can. of Council.
Nice. 1. Where there is not a Word of Election by Bishops, but only of
Ordination. He concludes with Council. Constantinop. 2. Can. 28. Carazanze has
it, 22. Whereas the Greek Church owned but Fourteen of these Canons; and the
rest are looked on as a Forgery. Beside, That Council was in the end of the
Ninth Century; when the Bishop of Rome had got very high; and therefore less to
be regarded.

Sect. 17. The Fourth thing the Dr. considers, is, p. 323. That the
Magistrate, when Christian, did interpose in this, as he judged expedient. Ans.
We are not against the Magistrates interposing; to repress Tumults, assist the
Oppressed, oppose unpeaceable Persons, etc. But the question is, Whether the
Magistrate did take away the Election from the People, and did interpose
generally; and when there was no special necessity for his interposing. 2. We
deny not but some Mag^strates did interpose against Right, and Reason; but quo
jure did they do so. But let us hear his Instances; the first is, Constantine
recommended to the Synod, two Men to choose either of them, or whom they should
judge fit, without taking notice of the Interest of the People. Ans. 1. This is
far from taking away the Peoples right, to deprive them of the present use of
it, on occasion of their dissension. 2. How does he prove, that no notice was
taken of the Peoples Interest: That it is not mentioned, is no proof; it was so
universally owned in those days, that it might well be supposed without
mention. 3, Yea, the Emperor in his Ep. to the People of Antioch, does mention
it several times, as Eus^bius relates, for he wills them not to desire the
Bishop of Anti^ch; but to choose one according to the Custom of the Church, as
our Savior had d^rected them. His next instance is, in a Dissension at
Constantinople, about Paulus, and Macedonius. The Emperor Constantius put them
both by; and put in Eusebius of Nicomedia. And after his Death, when the
Oxthodox party chused Paulus, the Emperor put him out by force, and put in
Macedonius. Ans. Such Instances will be little to the Credit of his cause; for
all this was done by a persecuting Emperor Constantius, for r^oting out the
sound Faith, and planting Arianism; and was complained of by all the Orthodox,
as an Encroachment on the Liberties of the Church. What follows is far short
of the point; to wit, the Emperors restoring Athenasius, and several other
Bishops, who had been duly Elected and Ordained, and by him thrust from their
plac^s. Next, Theodosius would have Nectarius made Bishop of Constantinople,
when many of the Bishops opposed it. Ans. This makes more against Episcopal
Ordination, than against Popular Election. But that the peoples Election was
not here Impedited, is clear from the Synod at Ep. cited above, Sect. 6. where
the consent of the whole City is mentioned. Next, Chrysostom was app^inted by
the Emperor to Constantinople, without the People, for Palladius does not
mention any consent, but what was subservient to the Emperors determination.
Ans. Whether the c^nsent was Antecedent or Subsequent, if it was, it destroys
his design. Beside, both Socrates and Sozomen do expressly m^ntion the peoples
Votes; and Palladius, whom the Dr. in this leans to, does not deny them.
Next, he says, the Emperor would have none of the Clergy of Constantinople
chosen to succeed Sinsinnius; therefore Nestorius was brought from Antioch.
Ans. It does not follow that he was not chos^n by the People; and the Emperor
laying this restraint on the People, is only, if at all, exc^sable, because he
feared disturbance: Such pretenses have often given occasion to Oppression. His
last instance is, Proctus was made Bishop by the Emperors order, before the
Burial of his Successor. Ans. It is not proved that the People did not choose
him, yea, the People had chosen him before Maximanus his predecessor got the
place, and he being now dead, he might enter in without the Formality of a new
choice. Let the Reader now judge, whether any Orthodox Emperor did ever disown
this privilege of the People, either by declaring that the power was not in
them, but in himself, or by interposing ordinarily, or without hazard of the
Civil Peace, in the Elections of the Pastors of the Church; wherefore the Dr.
in all this has said nothing, that can conclude against this power of the
people.

Sect. 18. His fifth Consideration, p. 325. is, That upon the alteration of the
Government of Christendom, there was greater reason for the Magistrates
interposing th^n before. I suppose by the alteration of the Government of
Christendom; the reverend Author means the breaking of the Roman Empire, and
the setting up of many Kingdoms out of it; which fell out in the latter, and
very corrupt times of the Church: Himself dateth it from the endowment of
Churches, by the liberality of the Northern Princes. Against this I argue, 1.
This practice being so long after the Churches purity began to decay; and when
Christian Religion was almost destroyed by the increase of Apostacies, and when
Princes, and Prelates had, as it were divided the spoils of the Church between
them; and robbed the People both of their Rights, and many of the Ordinances of
God, as to the purity of them; it has no weight to conclude against the
Peoples right of Election, which they had from Christ, and enjoyed in the purer
Ages of the Church, for many Centuries of years. If this reasoning have any
force, it will make as much for the Mass, Imagi^s, denying the Cup in the Lords
Supper to the People; and many such things, which I hope the Dr. will not argue
for; though he unwarily says more for them, than w^^ld have been expected. 2. He
acknowledges, p. 325. That this was obtained by Princes by degrees, and indeed
it was very late before it became common; and the Power was wholly wrested out
of the peoples Hands. He confesses that this way was not always observed in
the days of Clo^harius in France (which of them he mea^e^h, I know not; there
were three of that Name; the first of them was about the Year 560. the last a
hundred years after) now if the Infancy of this usage was so late, and it grew
by degrees; the adult State of it must be (as indeed it is) a very Novel device
of men to subject Religion to their Lusts.

Sect. 19. 3. I deny that on that alteration of Government in the State, there
was either greater reason than before, or any reason, for Princes to interpose
so in the Election of the Pastors of the Church, as to take it out of the
peoples Hand. That there was no greater reason then before I prove, both
because he cannot show us such reason; and also because before this, there were
Tumults, and Confusions, which might require the Magistrates interposition; and
also because the Christian Emperors had as much power over the Church in their
large Dominions, as Christian Kings could pretend to in their lesser Kingdoms.
No difference in this can be assigned, either from any grant of Christ to the
one, more then to the other; nor from sound reason. That which the Dr. brings
for a Reason, is none at all; to wit, The Northern Princes endowing Churches
liberally: For, 1. Did not the Emperors so too. Co^stantin's liberality was
exce^ding great, which occasioned that saying, hodie veninum infusum est in
Ecclesiam, and yet he laid not out that Treasure to purchase the Rights that
Christ had given to his People. 2. The Liberality was no sufficient price to
purchase Gospel Privileges, from them that Christ had granted them to, more
than Jacobs Pottages was for Es^us's Birthright. It is a Conceit unworthy of a
Divine, and only fit for Simon Magus; that the Liberality of Princes, or
others, to the Church, can entitle them to be Masters of her privileges. As
there is no more reason now then before, so there neither was, nor is any
reason at all, why Magistra^es should m^dle with the Election of Church
Officers; because it is the peoples right, by Christ's Institution, and has
been owned by the Church, and the Magistrate for many Ages, as has been showed
above.

Sect. 20. The Dr. says, that after the solemn Assemblies of the people came
to be much used, these privileges (in Election of Churchmen) of Princes came
not only to be Confirmed by the consent of the people; but to be enlarged. This
he insisteth much upon af^erward; alleging that the people of England, by
their representatives in Parliament, have given away their power of Elec^ion,
and put it into the Hand of the Magistrates, Bishops, and other Patrons. A s.
1. I deny that the people could give away this right; it was Christ's Legacy to
them, and not alienable by them. It does concern their Souls, not their
temporal Estates, and such concerns are not at Men's disposal. 2. I deny that
this was done; people never gave away this Right; it was partly by violence,
and partly by Fraud, wrested out of their Hands; what he says of the
Parliaments giving it away, wherein the People are represented; is a mistake;
for the people are represented in Parliament, as they are Members of the Body
Politic; and they instrust all their worldly Interests, and Lives, and
Estates, to them whom they choose; and they may dispose of these, by making Laws
to secure them; and also to take them away when the public good does so
require; but they are not there represented, as they are Members of the Church;
neither do they, or can they, entrust the Parliament with the concerns of their
Souls, or the Church Rights, and Privileges: These Christ has made Laws
about, and no Man can make Laws about them; all that men can do in reference to
these is Ministerial, not Magisterial, as Acts of Parliament are; it is to
declare Christ's Laws, and to put them in Execution; and Christ has not
entrusted Kings, nor Parliaments with these Affairs, but only his Ministers;
and the people can entrust no other with them. The (...) in this discourse of
the Dr's, on which all of it is built, is his confounding of Church, and State,
with Erastus; which is to mingle Heaven and Earth.

Sect. 21. He says, The Princes obtained by degrees, not only the Con^irmation
of the Election, b^t the Liberty of Nomination, with a shadow of Election by
the Cl^rgy, and others of the Court, as appears by the formula of Marculphus.
Answ. Here is plain dealing, both to let us see what fra^dulent ways were used
to cheat the people of their Right, by leaving a Shadow of Election, when the
substance was taken away; and also that Princes were not in ancient possession
of this Privilege, that they behoved by such Policies, to wind themselves
into: And further, that it is so grossly evil, that Princes are ashamed openly
to own such a Power over the Church; but must thus hide the shame of this
practice; if they have a good Title, why leave they a shadow of Election? If
not, why do they assume the substance of it? He ci^eth on the Margin, in
Confirmation of this grant made to Kings; several Acts of Cou^cils, as Council.
Aurelian. An. 549. but this destroys his cause, for Can. 3. (which I suppose
is that he aims at) does barely name the King (whose interest in all Church
matters no man denies, so far as the peace of the State is concerned in t^em,)
but expressly requires the Election of the Clergy, and People; and again their
consent, and moreover makes this Election a clero and plebe, to be as it is
written in the Ancient Canons, Council. Aurelan. 2. Can. 7. does also expressly
mention popular E^ection, and Council Aurel^an. 3. Can. 2. does require their
consent. And Council. Aurelian. 4. Can. 4. requires a Bishop to be ord^ined in
his Church, to which he was Elected decreto: that was the ordinary Term for the
Writing, wherein the peoples Election was con^ained. And in all these Canons,
there is not one word of the Magistrate, except in the first, as abovesaid. His
Council. Tarraco^. I cannot find, Council. Tolet. 12. that he cites, was in the
end of the seventh Century; when Corruptions were come to a great height, and
it was but provincial, it says indeed, quoscunque p^testas regia ^l^gerit; but
the peoples Election is not exluded, tho not mentioned; and there is an express
salvo (it is the 6th. Can.) for the liberty of the Provinces, which cannot well
be understood, but of the privilege of the people of the Province.

Sect. 22. He tells us of great Contests, between the Papal, and Regal power;
and how the latter prevailed in England, and cites several Acts of Parliament;
as of Edward 6th. and others. A^sw. What does all this prove? If two contend
about a Third Persons Estate, and the one prevail against the other, does that
give him a Title? We deny that either Pope or Prince had a right to that they
strove about; and neither possession, ^or Acts of Parliament can take that
right that Christ has given to h^s people, and b^stow it on another. His
Allegation that the peoples consent is swallowed up in the Parliaments Act, is
answered above. That this right has been owned in the King from the first
planting of Christianity in England, is said with more confidence, than any
semblance of Truth, or shadow of Reason: That Edward 3d asserted it in an Ep.
to Clement will not prove it; men use big words, sometimes instead of strong
Arguments; and I believe that his Ass^rtion was so far true, that from the
beginning of Christianity he^e, the Pope had not that power which he had
claimed, and which the King was debating with him.

Sect. 23. He says, p. 326. That the right of inferior Patronage is justly
thought to bear equal da^e with the first settlement of Christianity in peace,
and quietness. A bold Assertion: It must then have begun in the days of
Constantine the Great. His proof of this is, Presbyters were settled in Country
Cures, what then? In the First Council of Orange, express mention is made of
Patronage, and it is reserved to the first Founders of the Churches: If a
Bishop (says the Dr.) built a Church on his own Land, in another Bishop's
Diocese, yet the right of presenting the Clerk was reserved. When first I read
this, I could think of no other Answer, but that this was far from what was to
be proved. Christianity was settled in peace long before this time; for I
doubted not of the Truth of a Citation, made by a Man of so much Learning,
Reading, and Integrity; but I now find it is fit we should see with our own
Eyes; for in that Cano^ (it is the 9th. the Dr* calls it the 10th.) there is
no mention, expressly, nor implicit, of Patronage, nor presenting of a Clerk;
only this Favor is reserved to the Builder of the Church, ut quos desiderat in
re sua videre, ipsos ordinetis, in cujus civitatis terri orio est, vel si
ordinati jam sint, ipsos habere acquiescat. It is evident that no contest
between the People and the Bishop is here determined, who should choose the
Clerk; but between the Bishop that builded the Church, and him in whose Di^cess
it is built. The Builder of the Church is to have his desire, as to the
Officers of the Church; and not the Bishop in whose Diocese it is; but it may
be rationally thought that the Bishop's desire was not to cross Christ's
Institution, nor the ancient Canons, in depriving the people of the Election.
Such a desire this Counc^l could not grant him; nor is it rational to suppose,
that they granted it. But it might be supposed, that the Builder of the Church
might more influence the People (they being his own Vassals, or Tena^ts (as we
now speak) then the other Bishop, in whose Diocese the Church was; and
therefore the one is here decreed to have his desire, rather than the other. He
says this was confirmed by Council. Arelat. 2. c. 36. it is (mihi) Can. 35. Now
let any judge, whether this Canon does affirm any such thing, or rather does
not speak plainly for popu^ar Election: The words of it are, placuit, in
ord^natione Episcopi hunc ordinem custodiri; ut primo loco, ven^litate, vel
ambitione, su^inata, ad Episcopis nec nominentur; de quibus Clerici vel Lai^i
Cives erga unum eligendi haebe^nt potestate. The Relative de quibus, is not
Diacritick, as if some might be named by the Bishops (which is the only ground
on which this Canon could be drawn into the Dr's design) for here Bishops, (not
a Bishop) are m^n^ioned; and the choice is of a Bish^p; not a Presbyter, of
whom a Bishop might be a Pa^ron; the Relative is then to be understood,
Vnivers^lit^r, that the Clergy and L^ity have the power of chu^ing their
Bishop, and theref^re the rest of the Bishops must not name him.

Sect. 26. He brings next the Constitutions of the Emperors Zeno, and
Jusiinian. I have above answered to this; they were out of their Line, when
they meddled in these matters. The Citati^ns t^emselves I cannot examine; not
having the Books; but if they be like what goes before, it is little matter.
He says, this was setl^d also in the West^rn Church, as appears by the 9th.
Council of ^oledo. Ans. 1. This Council was held, An. 650. says the Dr. 656.
says Alstedius; this was in a time, when Corruptions in the Church were come
to a great height. 2. In this Provincial Council were bu^ ^^xteen Bishops: With
what face then can it be said, that what they did was brought into the Western
Church? This it is to speak big words, instead of using strong Arguments. 3.
The 1st. ^anon impowere^h the Heirs of Founders of Churches to prevent
Dilapidations in those Churches. The Second impowereth the Founder himself
(quum diu in h^c vita supe^stes extiterit) during Life, to have a care of these
places, and to offer fit Rectors to ^erve in them. Where it is to be noted, 1.
That the Founder might be p^esumed to be a good Man, by his liberality; and
theremore trust might be reposed in him, as to this matter, but his Heirs who
might be profane, Heretics, or Atheists, are not entrusted with a con^ern of
that nature, as it is with us: Where Papists must choose a Minister for
Protestants, or an Atheist or Drunkard, etc. 2. It is not said, that the people
shall not choose, nor must consent, but he was to offer a Pastor, which might
well consist with the Peoples Election. All that follows is nothing but a
raking into the Dunghill of the latter Corruptions of the Church, to confirm
this right of patronage, I therefore wave it.

Sect. 27. He is now arrived at his last consideration, p. 328. Things being
thus settled by general consent, and established by Laws, there is no ground for
the people to resum the liberty of Elections. I hope the weight of this is
already taken of in the judgment of the unbyassed Reader; that there never was
such general consent, nor Laws, till the Church was quite corrupted, and that
these, if they had been, could not take away the peoples right of Election; and
therefore they are to own i^ still. He gives three reasons for this Assertion.
1. It was not unalterable. That is denied. 2. No inconvenience can be alleged
against the settled way of disposing of Livings, but may be remedied by L^w,
easier than those which will follow on popular El^ctions in a divided Nation.
Ans. 1. It is not only inconveniences that we object, but crossing of Christ's
Institution. 2. The Doctor has nothing in his eye but Livi^gs; it is the
Pastoral Relation that we mind, and the con^ern of Souls in it: we desire to
know who put the power of disposing of these into the hand^ of Pa^rons. 3. We
deny his Asser^ion; for though the Law will restrain a Popish Patron from
presenting a Popish Priest that is openly so, yet he may present a Protestant
in Masquerade, or one of the meanest of men for parts, and other qualities of a
Minister, which it is known they often do; when yet the Law of the Land can
ha^dly re^ch the Man. And a Debauched Patron may present one who will not
reprove him too severely, who yet may have qualifications to satisfy the Law.
But the dissen^ions that arise among a divided people, may be remedied by
Church D^scipline; or if they break out into external disorders by the
Magistrate. 3. Because (says he) other reformed Churches have thought this an
unreasonable pretense. Answ. Men's Authority must not preponderate with us,
against that of Christ. He proves what he says, 1. By Beza declaiming against
popular Election. see this in B^z. Ep. 83. Answ. Beza speaks only against
Election by the people, without their Church-guides to manage them in that
action. The Lutheran Churches that he next adds, are no Examples to us. Their
way is much applauded by the Church of England men, much more then the way of
Engl^nd is by them: For as Pezel. mel^fic. ^ist. part 3. p. 345. observes,
none did more fiercely persecute the Exiles in Qu. Mary's days, than they did
in Denmark, Lubeck, Rostoch, and especially at Hamburgh. The Salvo of the Synod
of Dort shew^th, that they did not allow Patronages, but must proceed warily in
removing them; which has been the case of other Churches, but makes against
the Doct^r's opinion, not for it. That the Ministers in France, or the Council
of State at Gen^va, choose Ministers and obtrude them on the people without
their consent, we deny.

Sect. 28. I have by what is said, preoccupied most of the Doctor's Reasons
against Mr. B. contained Sect. 26. I shall only take notice of a few things. We
make void no Laws about Patronage, but so far as they respect the peoples right
of choosing a pastor for their Souls; and thus far they are cassate by the Laws
of christ: As to Temple and Tithes (as he speaks we meddle not with Laws about
them; only we wish the removing of them, as a Gri^vance; and that Rulers would
provide for the Church in a way that the peoples right of El^ction might not be
hindered, nor restrained in its Exercise. Mr. B. objecteth. p. 330. That the
Patron by giving a right to Temple and Tithes, does not make the man a Minister
to that people^ Souls, and the Parliament cannot dispose of peoples Souls. The
Doctor instead of an Answer, gives the meaning of this, that if the people be
humorsome and factious, they may run after whom they please in opposition to
Laws. This is ad populum f^l^ras, but no fair way of Arguing. The true meaning
is, that though the Pa^non by Law, may give a man a title to the Temple and
Tithes, and the people can neither keep him out of the Church, nor deny to pay
his dues; yet the Law cannot make him their Pastor without their consent. I do
not say, they should run after another; it is fit they should consent to a
tolerable person, so imposed on them, for peace sake; yet it is not the Law,
but their consent that makes him their Minister: That Anabaptists, Quak^rs,
and Papists will put in for a share in this privilege, is but a m^an
objection; for Christ has given people power to choose sound Pastors, not whom
they will. The Doctor asks, Whether all must have equal Votes? then the
worst, who are the most part will choose one like themselves. Answ. This is to
be regulated by the Guides of the Church, the worst are to be instructed; yea,
and censured, if need be, and if they choose a bad man, the Pastors are not to
ordain him. He alleges, few are competent Judges. Answ. Many can judge
tolerably, and they who cannot, are to be guided by others: but the matter is
not wholly left to their judgment, the Elected man being to be tried by the
Eldership. He enlarges on the tumul^s, and strifs in popular Elections: This
has been abundantly answered above. That the matter is devolved, on a few,
does not take away the right of others, who are willing to be advised by these
few. The Doctor is as certain that Christ never gave people such an unalterable
right, as he is, that he designed Peace and Unity in the Church. This certainty
is built on no good grounds, and therefore amounts to no more but fancy. I
have showed ground for a contrary persuasion, and a way that Christ has laid
down for peace consistent with this right.

SECT. VII. Of the Terms of Communion imposed by the Church, and First of the
Liturgy.
THe Reverend Author is now at last, Sect. 26. come to that which I reckon the
main plea for our withdrawing from the Communion of the Church of England; to
wit, the Terms of Communion, that she imposes on all that shall partake with
her in the Ordinances of God, which we count unlawful, and therefore cannot
submit to them; the Church imposes them so, as none are permitted to join with
her who forbear them; and therefore we cannot partake without them. This
puts us on a necessity of forbearing Communion with her; and the necessity
of Worshipping God, does not suffer us to live without the Ordinances, and
thence resulteth a necessity of keeping sep^rate meetings, which our Brethren
blame us for, and we blame them for for^ing us to it against our will. If these
Terms of Communion, upon due examination prove lawful, we refuse not the blame
of separation, which we think as great as they do; but if they prove unlawful,
then does the blame lie at their door, who impose them. Yea, unbyassed men will
say, that if the things be but indifferent, and of no necessity, the Imposers
cannot justify the imposing of them, when so sad inconvenience follows upon
them.

Sect. 2. These Terms of Communion in particular are, the constant use of the
Liturgy, and the Ceremonies; which are the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling in the
act of receiving the Lord's Supper, and observing of Holy Days, that God has
not appointed. ^^her Ceremonies they have, which we also dislike; but because
they are not imposed as Terms of Communion, we do not here mention them. What
is to be said of Godfathers, and ^odmothers, in Baptism, we shall in its place
examine. The Doctor excuses himself from saying any thing about the Litu^^y,
because it has la^ely been so very well defended by a Divine of this Church,
ci^eing on his Margin, Dr. Fal^oner's Vindication of Liturgies, and I for the
like cause forbear this debate, or answering Dr. Falkoner, that having been
exceeding well done, Anno 1681. by the Learned G. F. in his Questions between
the Conformist and Nonconformist, truly stated, and briefly discussed; which
the Doctor if he had pleased to read the Writings on both sides (the neglect of
which he blames us for) might have taken notice of before his Third Edition
came out, 1682. But beside that, neither Doctor Falkoner, nor any other, has
answered what has been said against the Liturgy, and the use of it, in the
Anatomy of the Service Book, Interest of words in prayer, Smectyminis,
Jerubbaal's necessity of Reformation, and other pieces, to which I refer the
Reader for satisfaction in this point. Although I have made some Collections on
this subject, yet so much being said by others; and neither the Doctor (nor any
other) being ple^sed to Answer it; I also shall wave this Controversy. Only
hinting a few of the chief grounds of our Scruple in this matter, because the
Dr. p. 332, 333. charge his Answerers with pretending to scruple, without
giving reason for their Scruples.

Sect. 3. We do not simply, nor generally condemn Forms of Prayer; they may be
used when that work cannot be tollerably performed without them; neither do we
condemn joining in such a way of praying even when the man that chooses that
way might and ought to do otherwise: Neither do we scruple joining in the use
of the Liturgy, merely because it is imposed by Authority. I know we are
misrepresented in all these. But 1. We condemn using of set Forms of Prayer,
either in private, or public, without such necessity, as that duty cannot be
tollerably performed without that help. 2. We think it unlawful for the Church,
or any other, to impose on the Ministers of the Gospel the use of a set Form of
Praying, where there is not absolute necessity. 3. We think in the present case
of the Church, there is no such absolute necessity of that imposition, seeing
Ministers may be had, who are tollerably gifted for their Work: And seeing it
is Christ's Institution that none but such should be in the Ministry; and
seeing any Escapes, or Indecencies that can be observed in a Ministers
Administrations, are to be Corrected by the Discipline of the Church; which is
Christ's way, not by imposing a Liturgy, which is Man's way. 4. We think it
unlawful for Ministers, who are tollerably gifted for their Work, (and if they
be not such, in the judgment of the Church, they should lay aside that Work,
and betake themselves to other Callings.) To submit to such Impositions, or to
use such Forms of Prayer. 5. What is said of Forms of Prayers, let it be also
understood of Forms of Preaching, Administration of Sacraments, and
Exhortations at them, and of other parts of the Service of God: Here we may
rationally except Forms of singing praise unto God, and that on two Grounds. 1.
The Scripture has furnished the Church with such Forms for all cases of a
Soul, and of the Church, in the Book of Psalms, which is not done in Prayer,
and other Admin^strations. So that these Forms are not humane, as other Forms
must be^ 2. The Gift of composing Spiritual Songs, fit to be sung in the
Church, is not to be expected that it should be Commonly given to the Pastors
of the Church, as the Gifts of Preaching and Praying are given. 6. We think it
unlawful for people to join in Worshipping God, by a frame of Service, not
instituted, nor warranted in the Word of God; both as to the matter, and as to
the manner of it. 7. The English Service Book is such a frame of Service as is
not warranted, nor instituted in the Word; and so it is unlawful for us to join
in Worshipping God by it.

Sect. 4. If we can give good reason for the 2d, 4th, 6th, and 7th, of these
Assertions, sufficient ground will appear for our scrupling the use of the
Liturgy, imposed as one of the Terms of our Communion with the Church of
England. For the First of these, That Men may not impose set Forms on Gifted
Ministers. Arguments for this are, 1. There is no warrant for such practice; if
there be, it must be either Christ's Command, or his Permission, or the
necessity of it: The first nor second is not alleged, because no such thing
can be proved from the Word. Nor the third, for such a necessity is contrary to
our supposition, that the men, so imposed on, are gifted. If it be said, the
best gifted may slip into unfit expressions. Reply, This unfitness is either
tolerable, and so no necessity can arise from that hazard; or into^erable, and
then it is to be cured by Christ's means, Church Discipline, not by the
invention of man. 2. No such imposition, nor usage was ever heard of in the
Apostolic Church, nor in the Primitive Church for 300 years and more; and yet
there were Ministers subject to Infirmities, as Men now are; and the Worship of
God was by them fitly managed. May not the means of securing Worship from
abuse, serve us that served them? Or will we be wiser and m^re wary than they?
That there was any Forms used or imposed in the Apostles times, we need not
prove, the Lord's Prayer is no Instance to the contrary, it cannot be made
appear, that ever it was intended to be a form of words, or used as such. And
for the Primitive times, it is evident that when Constantine would help his
Soldiers, newly come out of Heathenism, with a Form he behoved to get some
composed, which needed not, had they then been in the Church. Justin Martyr,
Apol. 2. p. 98. Edition. Paris. giving account of their public Exercises on
the Lord's day; to wit, reading Scripture, Exhortation, Prayer, Singing,
Administration of the Lord's Supper, he says, (...). That is, the Minister
sends up Prayers and Thanksgivings, as he is able; then not by Book, but his
Ability as the Lord furnished him. Tertullian, Apol. c. 30. says, They prayed
in their Assemblies, sine monitore, quum de pectore; and in his Book de
Oratiore, he shows that there are many things to be asked according to every
ones occasions; the Lord's Prayer being laid as a Foundation: where the true
use of the Lord's prayer (note that by the way) is hinted; to wit, to be a
Directory, not a Form. Socrates Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 21. which is wholly
spent in showing what diversity of usages was in the Primitive times, in diverse
places; and how little weight was laid on uniformity (the great Argument for
the Common Prayer) has these words, (...). that is generally and every where,
in all Religions, in Prayer, there are not two to be found that agree in one;
which surely must be meant of Agreement in the same words.

Sect. 5. A third Argument for this is, such imposing does thwart one great
design of Prayer in public, which is to lay out before the Lord all the
several cases of the people, or the Church; their sins, and wants; which do so
vary, that no Book can suit them all; I am sure ours does not. If it be
answer^d, th^s design may be answered by leaving a liberty to Minist^rs
sometimes, as after Sermon (...) use their gifts. I reply, that this L^berty
does frustrate the design of set prayer, which is to prevent venting of error,
and indecency, is not that hazard in permitting prayer after Sermon, as well as
at other times: Wherefore either this imposing must shut out all Prayer; or it
is a needless thing, and so unlawful in the Church. Argument 4. Imposing set
Forms on the Ministers of the Gospel, is a restraining, if not making void the
Charismata, the Gifts of the Spirit that the Lord has furnished his Ministers
with, for the benefit of the Church. For clearing and confirming this Argument,
I offer these Considerations. 1. The Lord has furnished his Church with Gifts
that are needful for her edification. There was a large pouring out of the
Spirit at first, Act. 2. 1. and though that degree and manner, and some of the
uses of it, be ceased; yet the thing it self shall never cease, Isa. 59. 21.
for without the Gifts of the Spirit, the Church could not subsist, 1 Cor. 12.
3. It is by the Holy Ghost that we must profess Christ, preach him, pray in his
Name, etc. Hence Christ sent the Spirit in his own room, when he left off to
manage the Affairs of the Church in his person, as he had done on earth in the
days of his humiliation; and the Spirit is on this account called by the
Ancients Vicarius Christ's. 2. The Gifts of the Spirit are particularly given to
the Ministers of the Gospel, for assisting them to manage their work for the
Churches advantage: For these Gifts are mentioned with reference to them, and
their work, and the fruit of their work; as is clear, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12. 1 Cor.
12. 28. with 1. -- having discussed of diversity of Gifts, the Apostle there
shows to whom especially they are given. 3. The ordinary Ministers of the
Gospel, have their interest in these Gifts, and a share of them (though
differently) as well as the extraordinary: For both sorts are mentioned in both
the places last cited.

Sect. 6. 4. The Spirit is given to Ministers, and people; as for other
supplies, so to assist them in right managing the work of Prayer; and that not
only to assist as to the manner of praying, or praying Graces, and Affections;
but as to the matter of Prayer, to furnish the mind with fit and pertinent
P^tions, Romans 8. 26. The Spirit not only helps our Infirmities by making
intercession with Groans, but on account that we know not what to Pray for as
we ought. The Spirit also gives utterance, Act. 2. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 5. 5. It is
the will of Jesus Christ, that his Ministers should make use of the Gifts that
he has given for their proper ends; to wit, the Edification of the Church,
that they should pray for them, improve them, and use them; yea, lean to the
help of the Spirit, not to the Book for helping their Infirmities. This is
clear from, Romans 12. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Ministers must give account to their
Master, of the Use and Improvement of their Gifts: this is clear, not only from
the Parable Mat. 25. 19. Though Theologica Parabolica is said not to be
Argumentativa; yet none denies, that an Argument may be brought from the Scope
of a Parable; which here is to show, that God will reckon with men about their
using, and improving what he entrusteth them with. But the thing is evident of
it self; for this giving of Gifts to Men, cannot be imagined to be, that men
may use them or not, as they will; or as other men will; but for the ends they
were given for. 7. It is Christ's appointment, that none should be in the
Ministry, but Gifted Men: they must be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2. That is fit
for their work, in all the parts of it. 8. The Imposing of set Forms does
hinder the exercise of the Gifts that Ministers have received, and so hinders
that Edification, that the Church should receive by that means. This cannot be
denied, when ever they use set Forms; there is no use of these Gifts. All these
put together, may warrant us to conclude, that imposing of set Forms on
Ministers of the Gospel, is a restraining; yea, in a great measure, a making
void, of these Gifts that are given them to profit with all. I conclude this
with the opinion of Wickliff, that to bind men to Set and Prescript Forms of
Prayers, does derogate from that liberty that Christ has given them. Full. Chapter
Hist. lib. 3. cent. 14. Page 133.

Sect. 7. The Proof of the second thing that I undertake; to wit, That it is
unlawful for Ministers to submit to such a restraining of their Gifts by such
Impositions as was mentioned. It follows from what has been already
discoursed; all the Arguments for the former Assertion do also prove this, for
they ought not to worship God in a manner, that is neither warranted by any
necessity, nor by Christ's allowance, that were to worship God by the Prescript
of Man's Will alone. Neither is it lawful to serve God in the way, that the
Apostate used used; but was never used by the Church in her best times: Nor
ought we to cross the design of Prayer by our way of praying; nor to make void
the Gifts given to profit the Church by. All which, this way of being Tied up
to set ^orms, has been proved to be guilty of.

Sect. 8. The next thing to be proved, is ^ur sixth Proposition; to wit, That
it is unlawful to worship God by a Frame of Service, that is not warranted in
the word, both as to its matter, and manner. This I prove, 1. From Christ's
condemning the Traditions of Men as vain Worship, Mat. 15. 9. They taught these
Traditions, e. i. says Lucas Burgensis, in locum; they followed them, and
taught others to follow them. The same Author calls these Men's Traditions,
that, are so of men; that they are not of God; or are devised, by Man, ibid. So
also Vat^blus, Erasmus, Maldonate, Tirinus, Piscator, Calvin and Chemintius
say, here is meant, whatever is brought into Religion without the Word. Now it
is mani^est, that a Frame of Divine Service, not warranted in the word, falls
under this general head. 2. The Lord condemns all Worship offered up to him,
that he has not commanded, Jer. 7. 31. where not being commanded, but devised
by Men, is made the Ground on which that practice (though otherwise evil also)
is condemned. And Jeroboam's Frame and way of Service is condemned, because
devised (Heb. created) of his own Heart, 1 King. 12. 33. 3. Even Reason
teaches that God ought to choose how He will be Honored, or Worshipped by his
Creatures. He best knows what will please him; and His Sovereignty in all
things must especially appear in this, that Himself is so nearly concerned in.
This is a Principle so rooted in Nature, that among the Heathens, they that
contrived their Liturgies, or ways of Worship, behoved to pretend Revelation
from their Gods, to guide them in this. It was never heard of among the more
religious Heathens, that Religion, or the manner of worshipping their Gods, was
injoined only by man's Authority, and devised only by him. Yea, in the so much
magnified Rozary of the Virgin Mary; it is alleged, that St. Domini^us had it
revealed by the Virgin her self, that this form of Service was most acceptable
to her; and it is added, That she was fittest to choose what way she would be
Worshipped: I hope they, and such as Symbolize with them, in ordering of the
Worship of God, will give us leave to say the same of her Blessed Son. 4. For
the matter of Worship, I think it will not be questioned, whether that m^st be
appointed by God or not; otherwise the five Popish Sacraments, that they have
added to Christ's woe, could not be condemned; and men might make an^ kind of
Action, as Dancing, Walking, Leaping, to be religious worship. And even the
Frame, Composure, or mode of Divine Worship should have Divine Warrant;
otherwise it is not Acceptable to God. The Lord has appointed in his House, as
Acts of his Worship, Reading Scripture, Preaching Praying, Praising, Baptism,
and the Lords Supper; and the Service that we offer up to him in our
Assemblies; should be an orderly performance of these. But when Men devise a
Frame of Service, which is none of these, distinctly and orderly performed; but
all of them confusedly jumbled together, and some modes of their own added to
them. This Mode or Frame of divine worship the Lord has not warranted; there
is no example of it in Scripture, nor in the purest and first times of the
Gospel; and therefore we ought not to worship God in such a manner. I hope it
will not be asserted by our Brethren, that it is in the power of the Church to
cast the divine Offices (as they speak) into what Frame or Mould they will; to
make it look like a Theatrical Show, if they like that way, and think some
carnal minds will be taken with it; and if this be granted; then it follows,
that there may be a Frame of Worship unlawful as to the manner of it; which it
may be a Sin for people to join in. I do not say, that the order of religious
Acts in the public Assemblies is fixed; so as we may not begin either with a
Psalm or Prayer, or Exhortation, etc. but there is an order to be observed; and
there may be a sinful swerving from it, which we are obliged to shun.

Sect. 9. The last thing to be proved, is, That the Liturgy now under debate is
unwarranted; and that it is unlawful to join in worshipping God by it: For this
I bring five Reasons, 1. The Ordinance of God for reading the word in the
Assembles of his people, is by this Service much perverted; for the Scripture
is read in a very corrupt Translation; following the vulgar Latin Translation,
as the Papists do, as may be showed in many instances, where the Sense of the
Hebrew or Greek Text, is either contradicted, or distorted Additions are made
to the Scripture; as the 5th. 6th. and 7th. verses of Psalm. 14. are not in the
Hebrew. Many Chapters of the Bible are never read in the Church at all; and
instead of them, humane Writings: Yea, which contain fabulous things, as
Ecclesiasticus 44. Judith 9. Tobit 5. much more also of Apocripha is read as
the Word of God. Yea, with justling out the Word of God. This we judge a
depraving of God's Ordinance. These Apocriphical writings, tho they be not said
to be divine Scripture; yet they are so placed with it, and in its stead, and
no hint given of their humane Original; that the people cannot but look on them
as Scripture; yea, wise men have ground to judge that they were so looked on by
the first contrivers of that Frame of Service, I mean the Papists. Some
Scriptures are so read, as the reading of them with express reference to such
occasion, as they are in the Book, appropriate to, is an abusing and
mis-applying of them; as on the Festivity of Michael the Archangel, is read,
Rev. 12. 7. as if Michael that fought with the Dragon, were not Christ, but a
created Angel. 2. It has a great and scandalous appearance of superstition; if
superstition it self can be separated from its use in appropriating Scriptures
to be read, to days, not only ordinary days, but such as they without warrant
have separated from other days, and made Holy, and restraining Ministers from
reading such portions of Scripture to the people, as suit the present case of
them, or of the Church, also the appointing one piece to be said in the Desk,
another at the Altar; one with the Ministers Face to the people, another with
his Face to the East, and his Back toward the People; the many changes of
postures, sitting, standing, kneeling, bowing, etc. we cannot persuade our
selves, that such a Mode of worship is appointed by Christ, Was ever practiced
in the purer times of the Church, or is acceptable to God.

Sect. 10. The Frame or Composure of it is unwarranted, unprecedented in
Scripture, and the purer Antiquity, and unsuitable to so holy an Action, as is
Gospel Worship; as appears, in the jumbling of Prayer, and reading Scripture
together; so many short Collects, two or three Lines, and then reading; then
another ^crape of Prayer, and then of Scripture; also the Responds, tossing the
Service between Minister and People, and the Clerk and Minister; the mutual
Salutations; the Letany, of Hethenish Original; like O Baal hear us, reiterated
so often; and other repeating of the same things so often, as is nauseous to
serious worshippers of God: We dare not worship God in a way that is so unlike
to any worship, that we read of among his people; and that is so Theatrical and
Pompous. 4. Several passages in it are not sound; others have a great
appearance of unsoundness; and others are unwarrantable. There is a Prayer,
that We with this our Brother (the Man to be Buried) and all our Brethren
departed, may have perfect Consummation: Where the Dead are prayed for; and it
is supposed that every one that dies is Saved: The words have that appearance;
they pray to be kept from all deadly Sin. It has an hew at least, of approving
the distinction of Mortal and Venial Sins: They pray to be delivered from
several dangers and Afflictions, which there is no more reason to mention in
Prayer, than there is of other things that are ordinary.

Sect. 11. 5. It is a Symbolizing with Idolaters, in our manner of worshipping
God, which the Scripture condemns, Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31. I hope it will not be
denied by our Brethren, that the Papists are Idolaters; and that this Service
is a Symbolizing with them, is too evident, which may appear, 1. If we consider
the Manner and Frame of this Service, and compare it with the Mass: It is true,
they differ in that this is in English, that in Latin; and that some parts of
the Mass are left out; but otherwise they are as like to one another, as one
thing can be to another; and this was not denied by our Reformers, who
professed that their design in retaining this Service, was to bring Papists to
the Church (though it proved, after a while, rather a mean of carrying
Protestants to the Mass.) And King Edward 6th. with the Council, did affirm as
much in a Letter to the Rebels in the West, who had risen in defense of Popery;
saying, that the Service that now they had in English, was almost the same that
before they had in Latin. And any that reads the Bible, and the Mass, and
this Service, may easily see that there is a far greater Simitude between it
and the Mass, than between it and all the Worship of God, that the Scripture
gives account of, to have been practiced in the Apostolic Church. 2. This may
appear, if we consider the Original of this Service; it was taken out of
several Popish Books; the Prayers out of the Breviary, the Sacraments, Burial,
Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, out of the Ritual: Adminstration of the
Lords Supper, out of the M^ss-book; and Consecration of Bishops, out of the
Pontifical; as any may see, who will be at the pains to compare the Books
mentioned together.

Sect. 12. I know it will be said, that they retain only those parts of those
Books, that were composed by the Orthodox Fathers of the Church, and used in
the primitive times. But this is no sufficient defense; for, 1. Suppose that
Frame of worship had so good an Original; yet being now of late so grossly
abused to Idolatry, and being so like to the Idolatrous worship of the Papists,
rather than like Apostolic Worship; and we having departed from that Church on
good Grounds, why should we choose their way of worship, and in so doing, both
differ from the primitive times, especially the Apostles times, and from all
other Reformed Churches? 2. It is false, that this Frame of Service was
composed by the Fathers; it is indeed said by some, that Jerome composed some
Prayers for the use o^ weak Christians; but that he, or any other such, did
compose this Frame, or any thing like it, is denied; and I have proved, that
there was no such thing in these Times. The Prayers were made by Gregory the
Great, Anno 600. or thereabout, other parts were added by other Popes; the
Responds came not in till many years after. What is commonly talked of the
Liturgies of the Apostles or Evangelists, James, Peter, Matthew, Mark, is now
so exploded, as learned men among our Brethren, do not plead for them. This
shall suffice concerning the Liturgy, about which more might have been said;
but I have said more than at first I intended.

SECT. VIII. The other Terms of Communion that they impose, considered.
I proceed now to attend the Learned Dr's Discourse, about these other Terms of
Communion, that his Church imposes, and we scruple: And first I take notice,
that he charge his Answerers with remaining in Generals, and pretending that
they judge, they esteem, the Terms of Communion unlawful; but bring no
particular Arguments to prove the unlawfulness of them. He says, Protestants
do not do so when they charge the Church of Rome with unlawful Terms of
Communion. The Answer to this is easy, 1. They were charged with Separation,
and in answering the Dr's Sermon, acted the part of Defendants; it was enough
for that de^ence, to plead that they did not Separate without good Ground, and
to show that they scrupled such and such Terms of Communion, imposed on them by
the Church. It was not needful in this debate to resume all the Controversy
about the Liturgy and Ceremonies. 2. Our Party have given abundant proof of the
reasonableness of their scrupling at these things; the Books above mentioned
against the Liturgy, and against the Ceremonies; Didoclavius, the Author of the
Book, called the English Popish Ceremonies; Mr. Jeans Treasu^e out of Rubish, a
Treatise of Divine Worship: English Puritanism. Twelve Arguments against
Ceremonies: Smectymn. G. F. questions betwixt Conformists and Non-conformists,
and many other pieces. There is so much said in these, and yet unanswered, that
it was needless to repeat what is there said. I must be guilty of the same
fault, if it be one; having at length disputed against the Ceremonies, and
proved them to be unlawful to be used, in a Piece entitled, A Vindication of
the Purity of Gospel Worship, against Mr. Geo^ge Ritchel, and others. I may
without blame referr the Reader thither and not repeat what is there written;
provided I leave nothing unanswered, that the Dr. has here said on that
Subject. 3. Our Party do not stand on equal Ground with the Dr. and his Party:
Neither have we the liberty of the Press as they have, nor that immunity to
speak out our Arguments; but we are ready to be concluded, by a Prison, instead
of Arguments; but let not the Dr. think our Cause is laid low, because our
Persons, and worldly Interests are so.

Sect. 2. He resumeth an Argument (out of his Sermon) against our Separating;
that there ought to be no Separation, where there is agreement in Doctrine and
Substantial parts of Worship; and that this Agreement is acknowledged in our
case. He says Mr. A. denies such Agreement both in Doctrine (of this I have
given my judgment above, Part 2. S. 1. Section, 2. also in Substantial parts of
Worship, and alleged the Cross in Baptism, to be a Substantial part of
Worship: Hence the Dr. undertaketh, p. 335. 1. To show what he means by
Substantial parts of Worship. 2. That the Cross is not made such. The Dr.
seems to lay some weight on this distinction of parts of Worship, to wit;
Substantial and Circumstantial, or Accidental; and alleges that many of us
are misled, by not considering it. I much desire the clearing of it, and
therefore resolve carefully to observe what he says, and shall be ready to
receive Light. He says, that, The Nonconformists great Principle is, That what
ever was any ways intended or designed for the Worship of God, was a Real and
Substantial part of his Worship; and when their Adversaries told them, that
Divine Institution was needful to make a part of Worship; they said, that made
True Worship, but without it an Act might be Worship, that is, False Worship;
and yet they allowed the Application of common Circumstances to Acts of
Worship. This Subject I have discoursed at large, in the Book above cited, cap.
3. sect. 1, 3, 4. But shall now a little consider, what representation the Dr.
is pleased to make of our Principles. 1. I know no Nonconformist that ever
asserted that all that was intended or designed for Worship, was Worship,
either Real or Substantial; for they well know, that the Meeting Place, the
Ministers Maintenance, the Pulpit, Communion Table, etc. are designed for
Worship, and yet are no Worship, Real nor Imaginary, Substantial nor
Accidental, True nor False. If he mean by being designed for Worship; that the
person doing such an Act, intends to Worship God by so doing (which I cannot
take to be his meaning); I hope himself will acknowledge that though such a
design is needful to make an act of Worship acceptable; yet Worship may be
without it, else the three Children might have fallen down before the Image,
keeping their intention to themselves, without the guilt of the external act of
Idolatry.

Sect. 3. I observe here, 2. That the Dr. confounds his own distinction, by
jumbling together the terms of Real and Substantial Worship: To real Worship,
must be opposed that which is no Worship, or but such in imagination: To
substantial Worship, must be opposed that which is circumstantial, or
accidental Worship. This is as if we should distinguish Eus in substantiam, and
accidens; and speaking of the first Member of the Division, call it,
substantiam, or eus reale, which comprehends both substantia and accidens.
Let the Dr. then tell us plainly, whether by substantial Worship, he mean all
that is really Worship, or is truly Worship, Veritate Metaphysica, though it be
not so, Veritate Theologica. And if this be his Meaning, what needed such a
distinction of Worship? Had it not been as easy to deny the Ceremonies, in
debate, to be Worship, or any part of Worship, as others of his Party do? What
needed he blame the Non-conformists for want of Clearness and Distinction in
this matter, when himself has confounded it? I see no use of this his clear
Notion, but to confound the debate, and hide the nakedness of his Cause. We
say, the Ceremonies are parts of Worship, though false Worship; others of his
Party say, they are no Worship, but mere Circumstances of Worship: The Dr. will
clear the Matter, by telling us, That they are accidental Worship, but not real
nor substantial Worship: Let any, that has a clear sight, judge, whether this
be a clearing or a confounding of this Matter.

Sect. 4. The Dr. will now (p. 336.) seriously consider this Matter; because he
designeth not to confute, but to convince the Non-conformists; and his work for
this end, is, To find out a plain discernable Difference between substantial
parts of Divine Worship, and mere accidental Appendices; and this, he says,
may more disintangle scrupulous Minds, than the multiplying of Arguments, to
prove the Lawfulness of our Ceremonies. I doubt not of the Doctor's good
design, in this debate, but he is not very like to attain it by such Methods,
as is this proposing a distinction to clear the Subject in dispute, and then
confound the Terms; and then at last, as he does here, to over-turn it wholly;
for here he calls the Ceremonies, mere accidental Appendices of Worship; that
is, no Worship, nor parts of Worship at all. But let him call them what he
will, we strive not about Names; we maintain, that they are parts of Worship,
(but parts of false Worship) and in such a Religious State, as nothing but the
Institutions of Christ can lawfully have; in that they are used in Religion
appropriated to it, designed for the Honoring of GOD by them, for the
bettering of Religious Actions, and for the Religious end of edifying the Souls
of them that use them: These Qualities are in the Ceremonies; and if these
conjoined, do not make an Action to be Religious, and a part of Worship, (they
belonging to no other part of Religion) I know not what can make a thing to be
an Act of Worship; for to say, that nothing can be a Religious Act, but what
has Divine Institution, is to deny, that there can be such a thing as an
external Act of Idolatry, or Superstition.

Sect. 5. In pursuance of this Enquiry, and to find out this plain and
discernable difference between substantial parts of Worship, and accidental
Appendices of it: The Dr. brings several things agreed on both sides; they
are five in number; I shall not repeat them, nor except against them, save that
I wish he had showed in the Second of them, how these things under the Law,
that by divine Institution, became parts of Worship, were of themselves Ritual,
and Ceremonial: I rather think that without divine Appointment, it was unlawful
to use them as Rites or Ceremonies in Gods Worship. He comes now, Sect. 27. To
find out the Marks of Distinction, to satisfy the Conscience of the Difference
between Innocent Ceremonies, and superstitious parts of Divine Worship. Here is
yet another Face of our Proteus-like distinction, but I wave that, finding that
the Dr. cannot make it appear, that there is any part of Worship that is not
substantial and real Worship; and that all that is a part of Worship, is, even
by him, looked on as superstitious, if it be not appointed by divine Authority:
For his Notion of Innocent Ceremonies, I apprehend not his Meaning by this
Term, Accidental Appendices of Worship he calls them before, which also
needs a Commentary. If he mean natural Circumstances, I know these may be
very innocent, and yet not instituted: But a Ceremony (as I have showed in the
before cited Vindic. of Purit. C. 3. Sect. 3.) is properly a thing in Statu
Religioso, or appropriate to Religion, but no natural part of Worship; and
therefore I see not how it can be innocent, unless instituted: For accidental
Appendices of Worship, if they be any thing beyond natural and necessary
Circumstances determined by natural or civil Custom, I see not how these
either can be innocent, unless instituted. I humbly conceive, the Dr. has
hitherto brought little light into this Controversy, but rather Darkness and
Confusion.

Sect. 6. Seeing we cannot agree about these Notions, let us labor, if we can,
to concert the thing. He tells us of Two ways, by which Ceremonies may become
parts of Worship; 1. By supposing them to be necessary, and pleasing to GOD,
without a humane Law imposing them. 2. By supposing them unalterable. We need
not debate with the Dr. whether things become parts of Worship, and so
superstitious, when not instituted by these two ways or not: But all this
Discourse is wide from the purpose, unless he make it appear, that no
uninstituted thing can be a part of Worship, nor superstitious, but by one of
these Two Means: Or if we can make it appear, that without both these Opinions
of men, about the Things that they use in Worship, without Institution, they
may be guilty of false Worship, or Superstition; which I here do briefly,
because I have done it sufficiently, in the place cited against Mr. Ritshell,
who objected the same thing, in defense of the Ceremonies, that the Dr. now
does. 1. If this were true, there could be no external Act of false Worship,
without an Erroneous Opinion of the Mind; but that is absurd, for then a man,
who, to shun Persecution, should fall down before an Idol, and in Words and
Gestures, do all that Idolaters do, should not be guilty of the outward Act of
Id^latry; yea, it would follow, that is, the Church should erect a Statue, and
impose it as a necessary Term of Communion with her, that her Members should
once a week kneel before that Statue, and pray to GOD, and then kiss that
Statue, with a reverend Bow, when, mean while, the Church declares that this
is not commanded out of an Opinion that such kneeling, etc. is antecedently
pleasing to GOD; nor that this their Command is unalterable, nor binding to
all; nor that the things commanded, are unalterable, and so binding; but only
the Church judges this decent and fit to adorn the other parts of Worship: I
say in this case, this bowing, should be innocent Ceremony, and no Act of false
Worship; which, I think, will hardly go down with the greatest
Ceremony-Mongers: And, in a word, let us but receive this one Principle, that
there is no false Worship without such Opinion, as he mentions; and men may
do what they will, and the Church impose what she will, in the Worship of GOD,
provided they keep a right Opinion about the nature of these things; so that it
is no more our concern to look to Scripture, that we may learn how to order the
external Worship of GOD, but to look to our Opinion, that it be not faulty: And
by this means, there are few of the Ceremonies that ever Papists, or Heathens
used, but a Church sound in the Faith, and in opinion about Superstition, might
bring them into the Worship of GOD, which is to open the door for Ceremonial
Worship a little too wide, in the opinion of most sound Divines.

Sect. 7. Another Exception I make against the Dr. Two ways, how an Act
becomes superstitious, is, let them (especially the first of them) be applied
to our Ceremonies, and I doubt not, but even what himself has said, might
condemn them; for however the pliable People that use the Ceremonies, because
commanded by the Church, and see no antecedent necessity, or goodness in them,
may by this means be acquitted from Superstition; the Church that imposes
them, cannot be so innocent; for either the Church must have reason for this
Imposition, or none, but, sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione Voluntas. The
Latter, I hope, the Dr. will not say, lest by purging his Church of
Superstition, he make her guilty of as great a Crime; to wit, being Lords over
GOD's Heritage, and Church-Tyrants. If he say the Former, this Reason must be,
that these things are needful, that they please GOD: No, say our Adversaries,
the Churches Reason for imposing them, is, She thinks them decent, and
edifying: But does she not think this Decency, and that Edification that is by
them, to be antecedently pleasing to GOD, and needful for the Church? If she do
not, she acts by mere will; if she do, she is guilty of a superstitious
opinion, in supposing uninstituted things in Worship, to be pleasing to GOD,
antecedentally to a humane Law; for if the use of them be pleasing to God, so
must the things, out of which that usefulness does result. And indeed, it may
abundantly appear, to the Conviction of all unbyassed Men, what opinion of the
necessity of these Ceremonies our Bishops have, when they appoint them by their
Canons, impose them with Rigor and Severity, punish the Neglect of them with
such Violence; and when they force them upon the Consciences of them, who agree
with themselves in all things else; and when they make such distractions and
divisions in the Church, rather than lay aside these things. Can any man of
common sense, whose reason is not fettered by Prejudice and Interest, judge,
that men who act so, have no opinion of the antecedent Goodness of the
Ceremonies, or that they do not think them pleasing to God? He that thinks
otherwise, can think what he will.

Sect. 8. I come now to examine what the D^. says in defense of these Two
things, which he requires to make an uncommanded Act in Worship to be
superstitious. The 1st. is, That it be supposed to be necessary and pleasing to
God, and the omission of it unpleasing to God, antecedently to a humane Law.
All the proof that he brings of what he says, is, that the Observations that
Christ condemned in the Pharisees, had no other evil in them, nor were
condemned on any other account, but because of this Opinion that they had about
them, (as Grocius observes) that Touching any thing unclean, by Law, did
communicate uncleanness to Soul and Body, and that Washing did cleanse both; on
which supposition, they thought this Washing pleasing to God. Three things I
here reply, before I come to answer the Drs. Proofs of this his Allegation. 1.
All this is nothing to our purpose, unless it can be made appear that Christ
condemns only their erroneous Opinion, and not the^^ Practice; or that they
might Lawfully have added these Religious observations, to these that the Lord
had appointed in his Law, provided they had no opinon of the antecedent
necessity of the things which is so far from being proved, that the Contrary is
evident, for our Lord does expressly Condemn the observing of these things Mark,
7. 8. Ye hold the Tradition of men, as the Washing of Pots and Cups, and many
other such things do ye. Their Doing, not their Thinking only, is condemned;
Will any man say, that if any of the Pharisees should have laid aside that
Opinion that the Dr. imputes to them, and looked on these observations, as of
no necessity, antecedent to the Tradition of the Elders; and yet observed them
Carefully and Religiously, that such a one had sufficiently complied with
Christ's Doctrine? no, surely, for the Controversy between the Disciples and
Pharisees, was not about Thinking, but about Doing; the Disciples not only were
not of their Opinion, but abstained from their Practice.

Sect. 9. It is evident from Galat. 4. 9, 10. that the Apostle condemns the
observation of the old Jewish Ceremonies, though it is clear, that he is mainly
disputeing against their opinion of Justification by works, and these among
other works; yet this does not hinder the practice of these, abstracted from
that opinion to be evil, it being expressly condemned; wherefore it is not
enough that our practice, in Gods Worship, be not built on a bad opinion; but
it self must have warrant from God. 2. Christ in that debate is mainly dealing
with the Imposers of these Ceremonies, the Pharisees, who continued that Yoke
on the People, that their Ancestors had laid on them; and therefore it is no
wonder that he took notice of a perverse opinion in them, which moved them so
to impose on the People, whereas the people that obeyed, might be moved only by
the authority of their Guides; hence he calls them their Traditions, because
they continued them, and put new life in them, by their Authority. The parallel
then still holds between our Case and theirs, as they behoved to have some
undue esteem of these washings that made them Impose them with the same (yea
more) Zeal than that with which they enjoined the Ordinances of God; so there
must be in our Church-Guides, some apprehension of Good in the Ceremonies more
than is meet, that makes them not only intermix them with Divine Worship, but
impose them with equal (if not superior) Zeal, with the Ordinances of God. 3.
Any variation of their opinion about their Washings, from our opinion about our
Ceremonies, that can be observed, arises from the difference that is between
their Church and Ordinances, and ours; and so cannot make their imposition
unlawful, if ours be lawful; for God had appointed Washings, for removing of
Ceremonial uncleanness, which affected both Soul and Body; to wit, at the
touching of the Dead, or any unclean thing; and all (...) Jews knew, that
antecedently to the Command, no uncleannes^ ^ould be contracted by these
Touches, nor removed by these Washings. The Rabbis, in the Apostate State of
that Church, added such like observations to Gods, out of a desire of more
ample strictness, and that their purity might be more conspicuous; knowing
well, that before the Command, these things were in the same state, that the
other things were in, before God's Command. Just so does our Church; God has
instituted some Ceremonies for his own Honor, and Edification of his People;
so as we all know, that antecedently to his command, they were indifferent
things, as Water, Bread, and Wine; and the Church not content with these, add
some other Ceremonies, for further honoring of God; to wit, making his Worship
more decent, and further edification, stirring up the dull minds of men; yet
protesting, that antecedently to their command, these things are indifferent.
Is not here an exact parallel; if it be said, that the Rabbis thought the
things that they enjoined, to be comprehended under God's commanded Worship,
before they enjoined them; this is denied, and the contrary is evident, from
Christ's Reasoning with them; he all along makes a distinction between God's
Command, and their Tradition: which they might easily have objected against, if
they had pretended a Command of God, for the things that they by Tradition
imposed.

Sect. 10. In order to the proving his Opinion in this matter, he says, p.
339. that, the Reason of Christ's opposing the Pharisees was, not because a
thing in it self unnecessary was determined by their Superiors, but because of
the superstitious opinion that the Pharisees had about these Washings. Here is
a wrong state of the Question hinted; we never quarrelled with superiors for
determining a thing in it self unnecessary; we know they may determine this
Time, and that Place of Worship, and yet neither of these in it self is
necessary, seeing another time or place may do as well. But the Question is,
whether Superiors may determine a thing, that is not at all needful to be
determined? as the Habit, Gesture, etc. and appropriate this their
determination to Religious Worship, that so it shall be done in Worship, though
it be not so done in other Actions; and this without warrant from the Lord,
whom we Worship. His Proofs, that the Pharisees were condemned only because of
their superstitious opinion (and if this only be not understood by the Dr. he
speaks not to the point in hand) are two. From the force of our Savior's
Reasoning: Thus then he argue^^* p. 340. He proves that they set up their
Tradition above the Law of God; as in the Vow Corban. (The force of which
Argument extends to all that they observed, because of the Tradition of their
Ancestors) therefore they thought these things pleasing to God, and that men's
Consciences were strictly obliged to observe them. This is the sum of the Drs.
Argument. To which the Answer is obvious; to wit, that this does not at all
prove, that the Pharisees thought these things obliging, antecedently to their
Tradition, which is the only thing in Question; Christ's Reasoning proves no
more, but that they had an undue esteem of their own Authority, and did (upon
the matter) equal it with, if not prefer it, to that of God; by laying such
stress on things that stood merely on their Authority; but he does not so much
as hint, that they thought these things antecedently obligeing, or that the
omitting of them would have defiled the Conscience, though there had been no
such Tradition. Is not our Case parallel to theirs in this? We say, the
Ceremonies oblige not, there is no Sin in not observing them, nor Indecency in
not using them, antecedently to the Law; so did the Pharisees of their
Washings; and if they were Zealous for their Washings, are not ye so, to as
great a degree, for your Ceremonies when imposed? what disobedience,
ungovernableness, contempt of the Worship of God, and indecency in it, are we
charged with? and we are prosecuted with more rigor for neglect of these, than
others are for the highest Immoralities. Is not this to prefer your Tradition
to God's Law? Do not ye make void the Law of God, neglecting Love, studying
Unity, Mercy, etc. for these your Traditions?

Sect. 11. But says the Dr. The Pharisees thought a man's Conscience defiled,
if he did not observe the Traditions, as appears by Christ's subsequent
Discourse, showing what it is that defiles a man, and what not. A. This they
thought, only because they had put these things in that state, by their
Tradition, but never taught that these things would have defiled the man if
there had been no such Tradition; and do not our Brethren think, that omitting
the Ceremonies now enjoined, defiles a man? Do they not think the
Non-conformists have need of Repentance and Pardon for their Nonconformity: If
they think not so, why do they so blame, and prosecute them? The Dr.
concludes, p. 341. That the main thing in question, was, whether this Ceremony
of washing hands, could be omitted without defileing the Conscience, otherwise,
says he, our Savior's Conclusion does not reach the Question. This is a great
Mistake (though it were no hazard to our Cause to grant it) for this Question
was but consequential to another; to wit, Whether the Church had power to
institute Ceremonies, such as Christ had not instituted; and then charge People
with sin, and not keeping a good Conscience, for not observing them: This was
the main Question, as appears by his reproving them for making such
Traditions, and for bringing the Commandments of men into God's Worship: Our
Saviors Conclusion that he speaks of; to wit, his discourse about what
defiles a man, is not the thing he first intended to prove; to wit, by his
reproving them for their Traditions; for the Conclusion of that Argument, is,
That men ought not to teach for Doctrines, the Comman^ments of men, i. e.
institute in Worship, what Christ has not instituted: But this discourse,
about what defiles a man, is a Consequence drawn from that Conclusion; to wit,
That things, so forbidden, may be forborne without sin; and that it is
transgressing of God's Command, not of man's, that defiles the Conscience;
wherefore there is no ground for what the Dr. says, that Christ condemned
them, not merely with respect to the Command of Superiors, (understand a
Command of Superiors bringing into the Worship of God, what was not instituted
by God; otherwise, it reaches not our Question) for condemning the Traditions
of men, is a condemning merely with respect to the Command of Superiors, in
that sense.

Sect. 12. This next Proof is from the general sense of the Jews, p. 342. for
this he shows, That Mr. A. himself quoteth several Passages of the
Talmudists, to prove, That they equalled their Traditions, with the Commands of
God; and h^nce infers, that this was not looked ^n as an indifferent
Ceremony, but as a thing, whose omission brought guilt on the Conscience. The
former Answer does fully take away the force of all that he here discourses;
to wit, the Jews thought the Conscience defiled by such omission, after the
thing was imposed by the Authority of the Church, not before; so our Prelatists
in reference to the Ceremonies. Wherefore, Mr. A. is far from overturning all
the rest of his Discourse, by this one saying, as the Dr. alleges. I well
know, what Sanctity the Rabbis placed in the strict Observance of these
things, and therefore I contradict none of his Citations out of them: But all
this Sanctity they founded, not only natural, or antecedent goodness of the
things observed, but on the great duty of Obedience to the Orders of the
Church, in which our Brethren are not much inferior to them. He tells us,
that they said, Whosoever disesteemeth this Custom, deserves not only
Excommunication, but Death too: and what less do the Prelatists say of omitting
the Ceremonies, except that it is not yet made death by the Law; though the
cruel usage that many have met with on this account, has brought them to their
death. I could tell you of Rabbis in the Church of E^gland, that talk as high
against not observing the Ceremonies, as ever the Jewish Rabbis did against
not observing their Washings. He admireth, p. 344. That Mr. A. would make
People believe, that this was no more but an indifferent Ceremony among the
Jews, and required for Order and Decency, as our Ceremonies are. A. He need not
admire, for none of us say so of that Washing, when imposed; and he cannot
prove that it was any other but indifferent to them before imposition, as our
Ceremonies are. That washing was not imposed for Order and Decency, as our
Ceremonies are; a Reason of the difference is already given; to wit, That it
was an addition to Christ's Ceremonies, for taking away Uncleanness: Ours are
an addition to Christ's Institution, for honoring Him, and edifying of Souls.

Sect. 13. He proceeds, Sect. 28. to enlarge and enforce this Truth, by
considering the Popish Ceremonies, and their opinion of washing away Sin, and
Justification by them. And for this, he cites many Authors, all which pains
might have been spared: For this Argument does not at all differ from what he
has said about the Jews opinion of their Washings, and needs no other
Answer. All the Efficacy that Papists attribute to their Ceremonies, is
consequent to, and dependent on, their being enjoined by the Church: None of
them say, that they have such Efficacy in themselves, and that they attribute,
taking away of sin, to them, arises from the opinion they have of the Merit of
good Works, which the Church of England does not maintain. The Church of
England makes them good Works, but denies their Merit; because she denies
that, even to the Works that God has commanded: The Papists do but make them
good Works also, and that they think them meritorious, is from this their
opinion, that all good Works are such, and not from an opinion that they can do
such Feats by any power in themselves, without Institution. They ascribe
spiritual Effects to them, says he; so do you to your Ceremonies; as, stirring
up of dull Minds, engaging the Soul to God, etc. I think the Cross has no more
Efficacy for this, without a Divine Institution, that it has to drive away
Devils, as the Papists allege Amesius ought not to have been charged with
disingenuity, by the Doctor, on this ground. He does not equal the Evil of the
English Ceremonies, with these of Rome, but that this Church has no more power
to make them Religious Rites, than that has to make them Causes of Grace. He
tells us, page 346. That our Church receives them no otherwise, than as
purged from Popish Superstition; and for this, cites Praef. to Common Prayer,
and Can. 30. Answer. Neither the Dr. nor his Church will be condemned, if they
may be their own Judges; it is Amicum Testimonium. I confess they have purged
out much Popish Superstition out of them, but to purge out all, is impossible:
The things themselves, as stated in the Worship of God, without His
Institution, being such: Whatever the Dr. has gained to his Cause, by this
Discourse, our Cause gains from it a good Argument against the Ceremonies;
viz. That these things (being unnecessary in themselves) that have been so
grossly abused to Idolatry and Superstition, ought not to be brought into God's
Worship, by them who abhor that way; nor indeed, can they without much scandal:
But of this, and other Arguments, I have treated elsewhere.

Sect. 14. His second way, how Ceremonies become parts of Divine Worship, he
has, page 347. viz. If they be supposed to be unalterable, and obligatory to
the Consciences of all Christians: And this he purges the Church of England
from: What is already said, does abundantly refute this; for I have showed that
Ceremonies may be parts (tho bad ones) of Worship, without this, and the former
too. And indeed, if this were necessary to make them parts of Worship, none of
the Popish Ceremonies were such; for the Pope will not part with his Power of
altering the Worship of God, as he pleases, more than the English Convocation
will* And I believe, there was never Church in the world, that held, That she
could enjoin what God had not enjoined, unalterable, and so as to bind all
Christians. But still the Doctor (as his Cause does necessitate every Defender
of it to do) makes an Inconsistency and Irreconcileableness between the
opinion of the Church about the Ceremonies, and their Practice, in reference to
them: If they be alterable, why will ye rather ruin your Brethren, hazard
Souls, rend the Church, than alter them? If they bind not our Consciences, why
do ye charge us with Sin, for refusing them? If they bind not all men, why is
the Worship of other Churches so cried out upon, by many of your Church?

Sect. 15. The Reverend Dr. comes now, Sect. 29. to examine the Charge against
the Church, and brings the Arguments of his Adversaries, that tend to prove
the Ceremonies to be parts of Worship, and answers them. It is here to be
observed, that the Arguments that he mentions, are but some of many, that we
use against the Ceremonies: And these, not they that are most directly against
them. Mr. A. Argues thus: An outward visible Sign of inward invisible Grace,
whereby a Person is dedicated to a Profession of, and Subjection to the
Redeemer, is a substantial part of Worship. The Dr. Answers: An outward
visible Sign, representing between men, the duty or engagement of another, is
no part, much less a substantial part of Worship. I know not how this answers
the Argument, or to what end it is brought; for the Argument speaks of a Sign
dedicating us to the Redeemer, the answer of one man's duty to another. I also
wonder that the Dr. who a little above confounded a real and substantial part
of Worship, should distinguish between some part of it, which is all one with
a real part, and a substantial part.

For further Answer, the Dr. distinguishes a threefold Sign: 1. Representing
Gods Grace to us, as Sacraments. 2. Representing men's subjection to God, these
are parts of Worship. 3. Signs from men to men, to repres^nt some other thing,
beside the bare Action, and these are significant Ceremonies, such as is the
Cross in Baptism, He says that, after the child is Baptized, the Cross is used
in token that he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ Crucified.
This sign is made not to God, even as the Primitive Christians used the sign of
the Cross as a declarative sign to man; it in Baptism represents the Duty,
not the Grace; that is ours, and we appoint the sign for it; this God's, and he
must appoint the sign for it.

Sect. 16. To this his Answer, I repone. 1. Sacraments do not only represent
Gods Grace to us, but our Duty to him; for they are Seals of the Covenant, and
the Covenant is mutual containing a Promise of Grace from God, and our duty to
Him; wherefore, a Sacrament, as it Seals both, does also Represent both. I
wonder that the Learned Dr. for the sake of a few paultery Ceremonies, should
thus mangle the use of the Sacraments of the New Testament, when he cannot
otherwise defend these Ceremonies; but what will not men do or say to serve a
design? 2. Signs representing our Duty to God; are parts of Worship, he
acknowledges; he means representing to God that which is our Duty. Now the
Dr. should have told us what are these Signs that represent our Duty to God; it
is like, he means Prayer, Praises, and such like; but these do not so much
represent to God our Duty, as offer it, or pay it to him: when I pay money to a
man that I owed him; this is not a sign representing the money to him which is
his due, but a giving of it to him: And indeed, we cannot without a very unfit
Catachresis be said to represent to God, by a sign, what is our Duty. For,
Signum (as Augustine defines it) est res praeter speciem quam sensibus ingerit
aliud aliquid ex se faciens in cognitionem venire. And all acknowledge, that it
is essential to the notion of a sign, to bring one to the knowledge of
somewhat, which cannot be applied to God who knows all things actually, and
intuitively, at all times; beside, that a sign is a sensible thing, and Senses
are not to be ascribed to God, and therefore God knows not any thing by signs.

Sect. 17. 3. His thoughts seem to run very muddy in managing this distinction;
especially in explaining the third member of it, Signs from men to men,
representing some other thing than the bare Action. What means he by this
last Clause? do not all Signs represent somewhat beside the bare Action, or
beside themselves? so that he here describes his third Member of his
distinction, by the general notion of the thing distinguished, which is a great
error in Logic. 4. Signs are rather to be distinguished by their Original,
which gives them a signification, or makes them representative, than by the
persons to whom they hold forth what they signify; for every Sign does
represent the thing signified by it, to all that can discern. Hence all who
treat of Signs, use to distinguish them in natural, customary and instituted,
as having their power to signify, or represent somewhat, either from their
nature, or from custom, or from institution, or they will of the Imposer of the
signification; and this last sort they make to be Divine, when they are
appointed by God for their use of signifying or representing somewhat, or
Humane, when they are appointed by man. This distinction of Signs gives some
light, but I know no use of the Drs. new Coined distinction, but to confound
the matter and serve a design. Now the Sacraments are Signs instituted by God
to represent his Grace, and our Engagement, and this is represented to our
selves, and to all the world; the other duties wherein we express our
subjection to, and dependence on God before all the world, and offer up our
acknowledgments of these to him; these are also appointed by him, and so are
parts of Worship that are acceptable to him; for the Ceremonies, they are
merely humane Signs, appointed by man, and therefore they are not acceptable
Worship; but that they are parts of Worship, is not from their Original, but
from the Religious state that they are placed in; they are Solemn Actions, done
in and with the Solemn Worship of God, and so appropriated to it, as that they
are not done but in it; they have all that could make an external act of
Worship, except Divine institution; they are designed for the same uses with
true Worship; viz. Honoring God, and Edifying Men. On these Accounts they are
to be accounted parts of Worship, and want of God's appointment does not
hinder that, otherwise there could be no false Worship, neither can their
signifying to man, what they do signify, hinder it; for the true Worship of
God does that as has been said.

Sect. 18. 5. The Dr. seems to lay some weight on this, that the Cross is
used after Baptism; but he will not deny; 1. That it is used immediately after
it, or rather conjoined with it, as near as two actions can be to one another.
Nor, 2. Will he deny that it is included in, and not used after the complex
action of Baptism, which takes in Instruction about the nature of Baptism,
Prayer and Thanksgiving; it is not after all this, and so it is stated in, and
mixed with this solemn piece of Religious Worship, and therefore must be a
religious thing; it cannot possibly be a civil right under such circumstances.
6. It was to no purpose to mention here the Ancients use of the sign of the
Cross, for that was in War, or other civil Actions, which could have no
appearance of making it a Religious Ceremony. 7. That the Cross in Baptism
represents the Duty, and not the Grace of Subjection to the Redeemer, does
not hinder it to be a Sacramental Sign; (though we never thought it a Sign of
Grace, as the Sacraments are) for Sacraments represent, also our Duty, as has
been showed; and its being so conjoined with the Sacrament; makes a show as if
men would by it represent that Grace by which we must subject our selves to the
Redeemer, which yet they cannot do. When men take upon them to add a new Sign
to the Sacramental Sign instituted by Christ, for representing the one half of
what is represented by Christ's Sign; viz. one part of the Covenant there
sealed which is subjection to, and owning of the Redeemer, and put this their
sign, in the same Religious state with Christ's Sign, so as there is no
difference between them, but the Authority by which they are instituted; it may
be warrantably said that they make a Sacramental Sign, and that they make a new
Sacrament as far as man can make it. 8. That we may devise a Sign to represent
the Duty in Baptism, because the Duty is ours, as God appoints the Sign to
represent the Grace, because that is his, is a strange assertion; for that is
to allow man an equal share with God in instituting a Sacrament, in which both
the Grace of God, and the Duty of Man, or his engagement to his Duty, are
sealed, and represented. If Ceremonies must have such Divinity to defend them,
I shall be less in love with them than before.

Sect. 19. He denies, p. 349. that the Cross in Baptism, is intended by the
Church as a Sign of immediate Dedication to God, but of Obligation on the
person, and labors to clear the thirtieth Canon, asserting the contrary,
which says, that by it the Infant is dedicated to the service of him who died
on the Cross. What he says for vindicating this Canon, is, that Baptism is
complete before Crossing, and so it is no part of Baptismal dedication; and
that, the Minister Baptiseth in the Name of Christ, but signeth with the Cross
in the name of the Church, who by that Rite, receives the Infant into their
number; and thus understanding the use of the Cross, he says, all the
difficulties about dedicating, covenanting Symbolical Sacramental Signs, will
appear to be of no force. Answer, 1. The Dr. would say something, by mentioning
Immediate D^dication: and if what he intends by it be to the purpose, it must
be, that the Church may not institute a Sign, whereby one is Immediately
dedicated to God; but they may institute one, whereby he is Immediately
dedicated to God: Now if the Dr. had given any hint of a ground for this
distinction, or to show that the one is more lawful than the other, he would
have obliged us; but that not being done his employed distinction is to be
rejected as without all ground. 2. A Sign of Obligation of the Person to
dedicate himself to the Redeemer, used in a piece of Gods solemn Worship, and
appropriated to that Worship, is by its Signification, its End, its concomitant
Circumstances, so stated, as the using of that Sign cannot but be a Religious
Act, and so a part of God's Worship, which (as the Dr. himself confesses)
needs Divine Institution, and cannot lawfully be appointed by the Church. 3.
I wonder why the Dr. should endeavor to vindicate that Canon that he cites,
from meaning what it expressly says; viz. that by the sign of the Cross, the
Infant is dedicated to the service of him who Died on the Cross; it is
impossible to shun expounding this of a dedicating Sign without doing the
greatest violence Imaginable to the plain words, neither is there the least
shadow of ground, to think, that Immediate dedication is not here meant, seeing
the Infant is said to be dedicated by this Sign, without the least hint of any
intervenient dedicating sign, or cause between the sign, and that which the Dr.
will call Immediate Dedication. 4. When he says the Cr^ssing is no part of
Baptismal dedication, the meaning must be, it is not a part of D^dication by
that Sign that Christ appointed; viz. Baptising in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, none doubts of that; but how does this show that it is no
dedicating sign, as the Canon says; or no immediate dedicating sign, as the
Dr. alleges: It is a sign devised by men, to dedicate the Infant, added to
the sign appointed by God for the same end. Now our Question is, What warrant
have men for making such an Addition to so great an Ordinance of God? 5. The
next thing for vindicating the Canon is, that the Minister Baptiseth in the
Name of Christ; but Signeth in the Name of the Church, is as little for his
purpose: for who gave the Church Power to Institute a dedicating Sign to be
Administered in her name, and set it up by Christ's dedicating Sign, to be
Administered in his Name? This seems to be an addition to Christ's Ordinance,
and a reflection on it as imperfect; as if the Child were not sufficiently
dedicated to the Redeemer by Christ's Sign that he has Instituted for that
End. 6. It does least of all vindicate the Canon, which he adds; to wit, that
by it (the sign of the Cross) the Church receives the Infant into their
number; for this is a quite other thing than the Canon says; and to make that
the meaning of the Canon, is to take a liberty to impose what meaning upon it
he pleases. Let the Reader now judge, whether by any thing that he has said,
all the difficulties about Dedicating, Covenanting, Symbolical, Sacramental
signs, do appear to be of no force.

Sect. 20. He asks, page 350. Why may not the Church appoint such a rite of
admission of one of her Members, declaring it to be no part of Baptism? Answer.
The Church has not appointed it as a rite of admission of a Member, but a rite
of dedicating the Person to Christ as has been showed. And the reason why he
may not do it, is, because Christ has already done it sufficiently: He has
appointed Baptism both for dedicating the Person to himself, and for admitting
him into his Church: Therefore men ought not to contrive their signs for that
end, which he has abundantly provided for, by his own means. Another reason
why this may not be done, is, because this sign is so stated in the Word of
God, by being done in the Solemn Exercise of it, for a Religious end; and
appropriated to this Religious Exercise, that it cannot be otherwise looked on
than as a piece of Gods Worship. He parallelleth this with holding up the hand,
in an Independent-Church presently after Baptism, as a sign of admission into
that particular Church. Answer, 1. I know no warrant for such an admitting
rite, Baptism is sufficient to make one a Member of Christ's Church, and that
makes one a Member of any particular Church, where Providence casts his lot.
2. If Independents should state this admitting rite in the very Solemnity of
Baptism, before the complex action be finished, they were to be blamed, but
they do not so; they make an observable difference as to time, and other
circumstances, between these two actions. 3. Signing with the Cross, is not a
mere admitting sign into a particular Church, as shall afterward be discoursed,
but also a dedicating sign; as the Canon expressly says, and therefore this
parallel is null.

Sect. 21. He next blames Mr. B. for supposing, that the Minister signing the
Child, speaks in the Name of Christ, or as his Officer, and says, it is
evident that he does it in the Name of the Church; because he says, We receive
him into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign him, etc. Answer, It is
not material to our debate, which of the Two be said; for the question is,
Whether the Church has power to appoint a sign for dedicating a person to
Christ, when he has already appointed a sign for that end? We desire to see a
warrant for the Churches appointing Dedication to Christ by her sign, to be
done in her name; after the person is already dedicated by Christ's sign, and in
His name. If he say the Church only appoints him to be received by this sign
into her number; and that may be done in her name. I answer, by Christ's sign
that is also done, by Baptism the person is admitted as a Member of Christ's
Flock. But beside this, it is evident, that by the sign of the Cross is not
intended bare admission as a Member of the Church; but dedicating of the person
to Christ, not only from the plain words of the Canon, of which already, but by
what follows in the words used at the signing; which are, We receive him into
the number of Christ's Flock, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross, in
token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ
Crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner against Sin, the World, and
the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and Servant, unto his
lives end, Amen. Will any man say that this is mere admission, as a Member of
the Church, or into the Church of England; and that no more is intended by
these words? Is it not made a sign of our Covenant, or Engagement to the same
duties that we are engaged to by Baptism? To wit, all the duties that the
Covenant of grace brings us under the Obligation of. The absurdity of this
notion; to wit, that Crossing is merely an admitting sign, will yet further
appear, if we consider, that in the same office of Baptism, used by the Church
of England, the Minister having put the Godfathers in mind of Christ's promise
to the Infant to be baptized, he is to say: Wherefore after this promise made
by Christ, these Infants must also faithfully for their part promise by you
that be their sureties, that they will forsake the Devil, and all his works,
and constantly believe Gods Holy Word, and obediently keep his Commandments:
This is the baptismal Dedication. I hope that will not be denied: Now, is not
the Cross used to betoken our obligation to the very same things? And therefore
it must be a dedicating Sign, as well as Baptism. And it may as well be said,
that Baptism is merely a rite of admission into the Church, as that is such.

Sect. 22. He tells us, page 351. that all public admissions into Societies
have some Ceremony; belonging to them. That we deny not, and therefore Christ
has made Baptism the Ceremony for Solemn admitting the Members of his Church;
which he having done, how dare any take upon them to invent new rites for that
end? As Baptism (says the Doctor) is a rite of admission into Christ's
Catholic Church, so is the sign of the Cross into our Church of England, in
which this Ceremony is used, without prescribing to other Churches.

This now, is the fine new Notion, for the sake of which, all the foregoing
discourse is designed: The Dr. deserves the honor of inventing it; for I do
not find that ever any had thought of it before: But I doubt it will prove but
a Mouse brought forth by the long labor, and hard throws of a Mountain. I
shall here remind the Reader of what I have observed already, Part 2. Sect. 1.
Sect. 9. that by this one Notion, the Dr. destroys the great design of his
Book; which is to charge them with separation; most of whom he here does
implicitly, and by necessary consequence, acknowledge never to have been
Members of the Church of England; they never having been signed with the Cross:
For if they never were Members, they were not capable of separation, more than
another Man's Leg can be said to be cut off from my body, to which it never was
united. 2. This to be the use of the sign of the Cross was never declared by
the Church, but the quite contrary; as is evident from what is already cited,
both out of the Thirtieth Canon, and out of the Office of Baptism, both which
are the authentic Writings of the Church; wherefore this is to be looked on as
but one Doctors Opinion; and we are to take the scope, and meaning of the
Churches Ceremonies from her own declaration, and not from the thoughts of any
one man, when he is straightened in defending of these rites. 3. I ask the Dr.
if we who never were yet signed with the Cross, should be willing now to join
as Members of the Church; and to submit to all her terms of Communion, whether
must we be signed with the Cross at our admission? The same may be enquired
concerning any Baptized in France, Scotland, or any other Church. I suppose he
will not own such Crossing, I am sure it was never heard of; if he say, it is
not to be done, How do these become Members of the Church? The Independents
will require some token of owning their Church Covenant, even where it is not
joined with Baptism, why then do not the Church of England, (for the Dr.
parallelleth these two admissions into the Church) require this Crossing out of
Baptism, if it be merely a sign of admission into the Church of England? 4. If
the Church, and the Dr. too, and all the Divines that Write in defense of the
Church, would declare never so often that this is the use, and the only use of
Crossing, all this could not satisfy, as long as the words used with it, and
the Religious State in which it is by their practice sixed, do make the
contrary apparent.

Sect. 23. Mr. Bs. allowing some Religious use of the sign of the Cross, his
Brethren do not approve; yet his argument is good against the use of the Cross
as a dedicating, or common professing sign of Baptized Persons; to wit, that
God has appointed Sacraments for that end: Then the Dr. answers; True, but
not only for that end, but to be means and instruments of conveying grace to
men; for which God only ought to appoint means. Reply, 1. It is not enough that
men do not appoint other means beside Christ's for all the ends that they are
appointed for; but they ought not to appoint other means for any of these ends;
because Christ's means are sufficient for all the ends that they are appointed
for: Sacraments are not only sufficient to signify Gods promise of giving
grace, but also to signify our engagement to perform duty: Wherefore we ought
not to add new signs for the one, more than for the other* 2. The sign of the
Cross is intended as a mean and instrument of conveying grace to men: Ergo, ex
concessis, it is unlawful to be appointed by men. The antecedent I prove, for
the Church makes her Ceremonies to stir up the dull minds of men; and this in
particular, to be a token that h^reafter the party baptized shall not be
ashamed of Christ; therefore it must be a mean of stirring up one to own
Christ; and is not this the very use of Baptism? What difference is there, but
that the one is a mean appointed by God for conveying the grace that he has
promised; the other is a mean appointed by man for the same end?

Sect. 24. The Dr. charge the Church of Rome with Insolence, in appointing
Rites for applying the Merits of Christ; and says, This is the only possible
way for a Church to make new Sacraments. Answer, Though we have many other
Arguments against the Ceremonies, than that they are Sacraments of men's making;
yet we will not pass even from that Argument. The Drs. assertion (...) false;
for a Sacrament is a visible Sign of inv^si^le Grace and if men appoint signs
of their own, for representing or conveying Grace, they make new Sacraments;
though they do not intend by these to apply Christ's Merit: Sacraments are for
applying the Spirit of Christ, as well as for applying the Merit of Christ; and
therefore if men pretend to make signs for the one, though not for the other,
they make new Sacraments. We do not say, that every significant Custom in a
Church is to pass for a new Sacrament, as the Dr. would make us say: Sitting at
the Sacrament, putting off the hat in Prayer, etc. (which he paralleth with the
Ceremonies, are quite of another nature, being Actions made sit by civil
Custom, and for their fitness, used in, worship, but not appropriated to it.
Mr. B. objecteth against the Cross, being a bare Rite of admission; that the
obligation is to the Common Duties of Christianity. The Dr. Answers; And is
not every Churchmember bound to perform these? How this Answers the
Objection, I see not: For the Question, is not what Church Members are obliged
to, but when Christ has appointed a Sacramental sign, to represent the common
duties of Christianity; whether the Church may appoint another sign for the
same end, and join that sign with Christ's sign, to be performed with it, with
the same Solemnity, and in the same Office of divine worship? He says that, To
show that Crossing is a solemn Rite of Admission, the Church allows it to be
forborne in private Baptism. Answer, 1. This only shows it to be a solemn
action, not that it is a solemn rite of admission; for all this, it may be a
solemn Sacrament, or a solemn piece of other worship. 2. This allowance of the
Church does quite cross the Drs. Conceit of its being a Rite of admission into
the Church of England; for if it were so looked on, the Church would rather
injoin it then, because without it, the person baptized, should not at all be
admitted into the Church, and so be no Member of it; and surely the Rite of
administration to the Church, is more needful, where admission into the
universal Church; to wit, Baptism is more questionable, whether it has been
done or not, as in private Baptism, than where it is public and known to all.
To Mr. B's. Objection, That Christ's Sacraments or Symbols are sufficient, and
therefore we need not devise more. He Answers, If it be lawful, the Church is
to judge of the Expediency, and to appoint other Rites that do not encroach on
the Institutions of Christ, by challenging any effect peculiar to them, is no
charging them with insufficiency. Reply, 1. Mr. B. and others assert, and prove
the unlawfulness of these Rites, as the Dr. well knows; wherefore he might
well have expounded, We need not devise, by, We ought not devise. 2. There are
other ways how men's Rites may encroach on Christ's Institutions, than by
challenging any effect peculiar to them, when as they are appropriated to
Religion, used in, or amidst Religious Exercises, and for Religious Ends. 3.
Dedicating a person to God, engaging the Soul to own Christ, and such like, are
effects peculiar to Christ's Institutions; for they are instituted for these
ends, and nothing else has any efficacy that way, being destitute of the
promise of a Blessing: Wherefore, even on that account, and by his own
Confession, our Ceremonies import a charging of God's Ordinances with
insufficiency.

Sect. 25. The rest of his debate with Mr. B. page 353, 354. I wave, it being
ad hominem, only on a principle of Mr. B's. that I allow not. He pleads
against Mr. B. page 355. that the sign of the Cross, if it had Christ's
Institution, would be a Sacrament; because then it should have promises
annexed, and the nature of it quite changed, and the Minister should sing in
Christ's Name not in the Church's. Answer. The Nature of it would be then
changed, no doubt, because it would be a true Sacrament, and have the annexed
Blessing; but there would be no other Change from what it now is, than what
depends upon the Authority, by which it is instituted. But that does not
hinder it to be now a Mock Sacrament, and to have as much of a Sacrament as is
possible, without divine institution. The Ministers signing now in the name of
the Church, which he then would do in the Name of Christ, says no more, but
that in the one case it is Christ's Ordinance, but in the other case it is Man's
Ordinance, but does not hinder it in that case, to be a humane Sacrament.
Whether Mr. B. do misrepresent the Popish Doctrine, about the efficacy of
Sacraments, or not (which the Doctor by many Testimonies endeavors to prove,
page 357, 358.) is not much to our business. The Doctor says, That if by the
Protestant Doctrine, the Sacraments do at all convey Grace, whatever way it be
done, it shows that the sign of the Cross-can never be advanced to that
Dignity; since, in no sense it is held to be an Instrument for conveying of
Grace. Answer. It is true, it is by this excluded from being a true Sacrament:
But it may, for all that, be a false Sacrament; for though it be not their
opinion, that it conveyeth Grace, yet it is by them held to be a mean of
stirring up the mind, and engaging the Soul to these Acts, to which, nothing
but the Grace of God can effectually help a person. I hope the Doctors
Conclusion of this debate with Mr. B. may now appear to be groundless; to wit,
That this Phrase of a new Sacrament is groundless, and only invented to amuse
People: Neither can I understand what sort of people these should be, who have
been satisfied against all the other Arguments (which he calls conveying
their prejudices) and have so stuck at this stumbling block; for we bring many
Arguments against the Ceremonies, that more weight is to be laid on, though
this wants not its force.

Sect. 26. The Dr. is pleased, Sect. 32. to engage in a debate with Mr. A.
about bowing at the Name of Jesus, and counts opposing it; a blow at the
Church. If the Dr. would have defended this Ceremony, he should have answered
what is of purpose, learnedly and solidly written against it by Mr William
Wicken, and twelve arguments against it by another hand; and not satisfied
himself with answering some occasional reflections made on it by Mr. A.: But
this Ceremony being imposed by the Church, as one of the terms of her Communion
(which I knew not till I find the Dr. here does not deny it) I shall a little
consider it, by proposing our scruples against the use of it; and taking off
the edge of what the Dr. brings in defense of it. But we must first consider
the true state of the controversy; which is not, whether all possible Honor be
due to the Glorious Person who is so Named? Nor whether it be unlawful at the
hearing of that Name or any other Name, whereby that Blessed Person, or either
of the other Persons of the Godhead are designed, to have the heart raised to
adore that Majesty, whom Saints and Angels Worship? Yea, nor thirdly, whether
it be in it self, and always a sin to express our adoration of him by an
outward sign of kneeling, as bowing, or lifting up the eyes, when the heart is
thus excited by the mention of his Name or any of these other Names? All these
we readily yield: And our Brethren, on the other hand, grant, that no Worship,
direct or indirect, mediate, nor immediate, (such as Papists give to their
Images) is due to the Name, i. e. the Word. 2. That there is no duty lying upon
People always, and every where to bow at the hearing of this Name; for they
appoint it only to be done in the time of Worship: The 18 Canon prescribes it
only in time of divine Service; it is not there restricted to the Lessons, and
the Creed, as the Dr. alleges, page 362. In the Injunctions of Queen
Elizabeth's Sermons are also taken in, and a general clause (when otherwise in
the Church mentioned) carries it to all acts of Worship; which the Dr. without
ground would limit; to wit, when they are not employed in any other act of
Devotion. 3. They make it no natural, but instituted piece of Worship; the Dr.
all along speaks of it only as lawful, never pleads for the necessity of
it, and defends it only so far as it is required by the Church. It is true,
some of them plead Scripture for it; to wit, Phil. 2. 10. and by consequence
must make it a duty, as naturally necessary, as praying, and believing: But I
do not find that the learned among them do insist on this. The question then
is, 1. Whether it be lawful for the Church to command People to use outward
signs of reverence, by bowing the head or knee, or otherwise, when ever they
hear the Name of Jesus mentioned in Divine Worship, when yet no such injunction
is given in reference to any other Name of Gods? 2. Whether it be lawful for
People to obey such commands? To both, our Brethren answer affirmatively; and
we answer negatively.

Sect. 27. The same reasons will serve for both parts of our opinion. They are
1. This Bowing is an uncommanded piece of Worship. Ergo, it is unlawful. The
consequence depends on Christ's condemning of Men's Traditions in his Worship,
as vain, on this account, that they are the Commands of Men, Math. 15. 9. Mark
7. 7. of which before. And I think the Doctor will not deny it, who owns that
Acts of Worship must have divine Warrant, page, 348. The Antecedent has Two
Parts; to wit, that this Act is uncommanded, and that it an Act of Worship. For
the First: Few of our Brethren allege a Command for it; for then it should not
be indifferent, as they make it, and they that plead a Command, found it in
Phil. 2. 10. But that place does no way injoin any such Rite: For first, the
Greek Text is plain, not at, but in, the Name of JESUS: (...); which to expound
of Bowing at the hearing of the Word, is the greatest Violence that can be done
to plain Words: For the plain sense, is, that subjection to his Dignity and
Power, shall be yielded by all Creatures. 2. This Text can no way be restricted
to the Reverence given in Divine Service, but must either prove this a duty at
all times, when this Name is uttered, or it proves no such expression of
Reverence at all. 3. The Text speaks only of kneeling; and I know not that it
is in the Churches Power, where the Lord commands kneeling, to change it into
bowing of the Head. 4. If this be injoined, so is confessing with the Tongue,
ver. 11. What power has the Church, to pick and choose Scripture-Commandments,
to injoin one, and neglect another of equal Authority? But why do I stay on
this, many Episcopal men, and even some Papists, look on this Text, as nothing
to the purpose in hand; for the Second Part of the Antecedent, that this Bowing
is an Act of Worship, I hope that will not be denied, it being a direct and
solemn adoring of Jesus Christ; and the stating of it in Divine Service, and
appropriating it to that, does constrain men to look so upon it.

Sect. 28. Argument 2. It is not reasonable Service; Ergo, It is not acceptable
Service. The Consequence, I hope, will not be denied: The Antecedent I prove,
because no Reason can be given for bowing at the hearing of this Word, rather
than at the mention of these other Names, by which, God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, or our Blessed Redeemer are called. It is not enough, that some Reason
can be pretended for this practice singly considered: For 1. Whatever Reasons
be given for it, do equally concern other Names of GOD and CHRIST; and
therefore, must either prove the Church faulty, in not instituting Worship to
all these names, or they prove nothing at all. 2. Our main scruple is at the
discrimination that is made by this Ceremony, between this name, and others
that are equally holy; therefore, they must either give a reason, why adoration
is fit in this case, rather than in the other cases, or they do not reach the
Question. The Reasons given by the learned Hooker, Eccles. polic. lib. 5. Sect.
30. are not concludent; to wit, 1. It shows a reverend regard to the Son of
God. Answer, 1. Let the Father and Spirit have the same reverend regard. 2.
Every way of expressing our regard to him, is not warrantable: He has
appointed ways for it, and not left them to our devising. 2. He says, It
makes much against the Arians, who deny his God: head: Answer, 1. His way of
convincing gainsayers, is by the Word; we must not devise ways of our own to
convince Heretics; Moses and the Prophets, being God's way, are more powerful
to convince, than if one were sent from the dead; and therefore, much more than
such a foolish Ceremony. 3. If this Argument prove any thing, it would make it
our duty rather to bow to him, when his name is mentioned in Blasphemy, or
Swearing: Then such a Testimony is more needful, than when all present are
worshipping him.

Sect. 29. Argument 3. It is superstitious Worship, not only on the account of
its not being commanded; but also because it is impossible to make that use of
a name, without ascribing more to it than is due, to a word, or any external
sign. I know our Brethren will deny all respect to the word, and affirm that it
is only the Person of the Redeemer that they reverence: And I am obliged to
believe that they make not the name, the Objectum Terminans, of any part of
their Worship, yet the setting such a mark of discrimination on that name, from
others, and giving such Reverence on that occasion, is such a violent
presumption of some inward Respect to that word, rather than to another of
equal Excellency, that a man ought not to believe himself, when he denies it
of himself, much less are others obliged to believe him: Especially, the
Church-Guides, who impose this, must either see some Reason for it, or none; if
none, it is Church-Tyranny, to impose so arbitrarily in the Worship of God: If
they see a Reason, that Reason cannot shun to be superstitious; to wit, a
making a difference in this name from others, where there is no such
difference: And if it were possible to free the mind of superstitious Conceits
in this matter, it is altogether impossible to free the action from a^candalous
appearance of superstition; for what other Construction can the Beholder put on
bowing so many times at the recurrent mention of a word, when no such thing is
done at the mention of other words of the same signification? May not one
rationally think, that it is not the thing signified, but the sound of the word
that moves men, when they see them bow at that word, and not at another, that
expresses the same thing? If I see a man frighted at the hearing the word
Eusis, and not moved at hearing Gladius, I have reason to think, that it is not
the apprehension of a Sword, which is signified by both words, that does so
move him, but some Antipathy he has at the sound of the word E^sis: This is
easily applied.

Sect. 30. Argument 4. It is impossible to observe this usage punctually,
without having the mind diverted from that attention to the other Acts of
Religion, that is fit. Men may talk what they will, but common Experience will
convince the unbyassed, that it is impossible to hear with serious attention,
toward the matter read, or otherwise spoken, to go along with it in the heart,
and at the same time to be ready at the sound of the word Jesus, to catch it,
and to use the Reverence required. I appeal to the Experience of them who do
seriously mind this bowing, whether their mind be not taken up with thoughts
about the word, waiting for it before they hear it, so as they cannot at the
same time, mind what else is spoken, as they ought. Here we may apply that
Adage; Vides aliquem de vocibus solicitum, scito animum in pusillis occupatum.
The mind cannot be intent on two things at once, such as are one single word,
and the matter of a coherent Discourse. Argument 5. It is an usage unknown to
the Apostolic and purest Primitive Times of the Church; yea, it is amongst the
most novel Inventions of the later, and more corrupted Times of the Church,
under the Antichristian Apostasy; no mention of it, till the middle of the
13th. Century. It was never injoined, till Council. Lugdunens. 1273. and
Basiliens. 1431. Argument 6th. It has been grossly abused to Superstition and
Idolatry, in the Popish Church, and therefore being confessed to be an
indifferent thing, it ought to be abolished. In a Council at Auspurg, this
bowing is injoined at the name of the body and blood of Christ, of the Virgin
Mary, and several others of their (...), Council. Lugdun. it is injoined chiefly
in the Mass. It argues a strange respect to that way, thus to symbolize with
them in their usages, that have no warrant in the word; and by so doing, to
differ from all Protestant Churches.

Sect. 31. I come now to attend the Doctor's debate with Mr. A. about this
matter, where I am troubled to find the Dr. treating his Adversary with such
Contempt, and indecent Reflections, on his learning, which makes him be
honored in the eyes of men, as able to discern, as they who despise him;
tells us, He had before defenced these things, as required by the Church,
against Papists; and Mr. A. borrows their Weapons, but does not so well
manage them. We give the Author his due Praise for his learned Labors against
the Papists, but are not thereby obliged to be silent, when he opposes any of
the Truths of God: But I cannot understand how Mr. A. should borrow the Popish
Weapons in this Controversy, seeing the Papists, and the Doctor are in this
matter (...); and Mr. A. does oppose them both: It is true, a Nonconformist
may say, that Papists have as good reason for their Ceremonies, as the Church
of England for hers: But this is not to use their Weapons; for we think neither
has reason on their side. Mr. A. blames the Doctor in answering his Popish
Adversary, for saying, That bowing at the name of Jesus, is no more, than going
to Church at tolling of a Bell. To which Mr. A. replyeth, That it is Motivum
cultus, at least; and so more than the tolling of a Bell, to call people to
Church; and he adds, that an Image may as well give warning to the eye, to
worship, as a Bell to the ear. Here Mr. A. is far from either pleading for
Popish Tenets, or using Popish Weapons; but shows the absurdity of the
Doctor's opinion, by a parallel opinion of the Papists, which the Dr.
condemns; which is a good way of reasoning ad hominem, and needed not be so
cried out against. The Dr. gives some good Reasons, why Images are not to be
used in worship, but he does not touch the Point in hand, between him and Mr.
A. who never intended to parallel a Bell and Images any further than this; that
a Bell in the Act of Worship (the sound of the word Jesus is in the same
quality) must be Motivum cultus, and so is an Image. Therefore, if an Image not
only on other accounts, that the Dr. mentions, but even on account of this
lower use of it, its being motivum cultus, be evil; so is the sound of the word
Jesus.

Sect. 32. The Dr. exposes Mr. A. as a cracked delirious man, for saying, that
the Papists go too far in preserring an Image higher than to be motivum cultus,
but the question is, whether they do not sin in applying it to this lower use,
to make it an ordinary stated motive to Worship. And after, if men sin who make
an Image an ordinary stated motive of Worship, yet how shall we excuse our own
adorations? Sure the application of all this to the present Controversy is not
so hard to be understood; but that a man, whose wit is not a wool-gathering,
may see these are not the words of a delirious man. He does not charge the
Church of England, with using Images, but with using the sound of a word to the
same purpose, with the lower use that Papists ascribe to Images; and infers,
that if the one be a sin, so is the other; and the one may as lawfully be done
as the other. The adorations he speaks of are worshipping God by the help of
the sound of that word, as a motivum cultus; and therefore there is no need of
proving that ye Worship any other beside God, before ye need excuse your
adorations. The Dr. confesses, page 361. that their Church never denied that
men sin in making Images a stated motive of Worship: Hence Mr. A. infers,
that their Church sins in making the sound of a word a stated motive of
Worship; but this the Dr. is not pleased to take notice of: But when Mr. A.
asserteth, that they may bring in Images with equal reason, the Dr. denies
that we may worship Images on the same reason, that we perform external
adoration to Jesus at the mention of his Name; still he will not take notice
wherein the parallel, and consequently, the strength of the reason lies; to
wit, in making Images a motive of worship; and making a word such; but the Dr.
parallelleth making Images the object of Worship, and making the word Jesus,
the occasion only of it; which is to seek subterfuges; not to stand to the
argument insisted on.

Sect. 33. Mr. A. gives a difference between the tolling of a Bell to call
People to Church, and the word Jesus occasioning, our bowing, that the one is
out of worship, the other in it; when we should be intent on devotion. In
answering this the Dr. says, They contend not for the seasonableness of this
bowing when they are in other acts of devotion, and immediate application to
God; but about the lawfulness of it in repeating the Lessons or the Creed.
Reply, 1. I have before showed that this is not the sense of the Church, which
injoineth it in time of Divine Service; which I hope takes in prayer: yea,
when ever that Name is mentioned in the Church, wherefore the Dr. must be sore
put to it, when he must defend the Church by contradicting her, and setting up
his private opinion that he is forced upon, against her Authentic and public
Records. 2. Here are two distinctions hinted, equally useless to this design.
The first is, he pleads not for the seasonableness, but for the lawfulness of
this usage; but if it be unseasonable, even at these times, that he will have
it used, then it is also unlawful; seeing duties acceptable to God must be done
in their season. 3. The other distinction is, it is not to be done in acts of
devotion, and immediate application to God; but in the Lessons and Creed. I
desire to know whether hearing the Word read, and hearing the Articles of our
Faith rehearsed in a solemn manner, while we are about Worshipping God, be not
acts of Devotion, and immediate Application to God, as well as prayer; which he
seems to understand by that expression. The word read, as well as preached,
Heb. 4. 2. should be mixed with Faith, and so should the hearing the Articles
of our Faith; and is not Faith in its exercise Devotion, and an immediate
Application to God? At least it cannot be denied, that serious exercise of the
whole Soul is requisite in these exercises, as well as in that which he will
call Devotion; and therefore it must be as unseasonable to be diverted by
waiting for the fall of a Word, in the one exercise as in the other. 4. The Dr.
takes no notice of the main strength of Mr. A's. reason; to wit, that the toll
of the Bell is out of Worship; the sound of the Word in it. The one is in statu
Civili, or Communi; the other in statu Religioso;: For I hope he will not deny
these exercises in which this bowing is to be used, to be Religious acts. He
says it signifies nothing to this purpose whether persons be in the Church or
out of if when the Bell rings; for in the same page he (Mr. A.) mentions the
Mass-bell, which ringeth in Worship; and if the object of their Worship were
right, it would make him better understand the parallel. Reply, It is a rash
assertion to say there is no difference between the Bell ringing when People
are in the Church, and when they are out of it, (he must mean when they are in
the act of Worship, and when not; otherwise what he says is impertinent) for
the one is motivum Cultus, and in status Religioso, the other not: It is true,
Mr. A. mentions the Mass-bell in the next page, but he parallelleth it with
the sound of the Word Jesus; both being a stated motive of Worship, and
therefore that is mentioned by the Dr. to no purpose.

Sect. 34. He says, when it is said in the Injunctions, that we must bow at
mentioning the Name Jesus in divine Service -- or when it is otherwise in the
Church pronounced: Yet, says he, by the manner of showing this reverence, viz.
with lowliness of courtesy, and uncovering the heads of mankind, it supposes
them at that time not to be employed in any other act of devotion. Answer, By
this way of commenting he may easily make the Church say whatever he pleases;
for this is to contradict the Text by his Commentary. Let him tell us when is
that Name pronounced in the Church, and yet People at no other act of Devotion:
This manner of reverence required, proves nothing; for it is no wonder to hear
them speak inconsistencies in requiring low courtesy, and uncovering of the
head in time of Devotion, when the head is already uncovered; who injoin the
same in the Church out of that Devotion, when that Word is mentioned, though
heads be already uncovered, as all must be in time of Divine Service; by Can.
18. the same that injoineth this Bowing. He says, it gives no interruption to
Devotion: But does it give none to other parts of Worship, which he is not
pleased to call Devotion? He will still have it lawful, as long as the object
of Worship is true; the mention of this Name only expresses the time as the
Bell does of going to Church. Answer, It will then follow, that if Papists will
only Worship God, not the Image; and use it only as a stated motive of Worship,
that were lawful too. But he considers not that the manner and mean of
Worship may be sinful; when the object to which it is directed is true; and
that this is so, is clear from what has been said. I have also showed how
irrational it is to parallel the Bell to call People together with a sign
stated in Worship to stir up, or put in mind of it; what Mr. A. objecteth,
that there is more need of this reverence in our ordinary converse, I have
touched before: The Dr. makes it a strange crossness, to deny it in Worship,
and then plead for it in other cases. But Mr. A. does not plead for it in any
case, but uses this as a good reason to show the folly of their imposition:
But enough of this.

Sect. 35. The rest of his debate with Mr. A. may soon be dispatched. Mr. A.
commends the moderation of the Canon 640. not imposing Worship toward the
East or Altar; but leaving it indifferent, and pleads for the same Indulgence
in other rites, as little necessary in themselves; as Crossing, Kneeling, etc.
according to the Apostles rule, that differing parties should not judge nor
censure one another, Romans 14. 3. The Dr. in his answer, brings two reasons of
this different practice; one is, the one sort of things were settled at the
Reformation, not so the other; another is, the one is settled by Law, the other
not. It is strange the Dr. should lay weight on either or both of these reasons
in opposition to the Apostles command of forbearance; for the question still
recurreth on the first setler of these, either by Law or otherwise: Why did
they impose things so severely that the Apostle would have us bear with one
another in? And then it recoileth on the upholders of this unwarantable
settlement: Why do they continue such impositions as may be for-born, and
divide the Church by so doing? We do prove these things unlawful as the Dr.
requires; but though we should fail in that proof, their counting them
indifferent is enough to condemn such severe imposing of them. He says, page
364. that Mr. A. thinks the rule of forbearance Romans 14. to be of equal force
in all ages, and as to all things about which Christians have different
apprehensions; and then Papists may come in for a share as to worshipping the
Host, Images, etc. Had Mr. A. talked at this rate, the Dr. would (as he does on
less ground) have said his fancy had been disordered, and all things were not
right somewhere. Did ever Mr. A. or any of us say this, or words to that
effect? We say this of things indifferent, not of things about which Christians
differ; and so I hope the Papists are sufficiently shut out.

Sect. 36. When Mr. A. or any of us, blame the leading Churchmen for using
these things that are not imposed, we make this no grounds of Separation, as
the Dr. would insinuate. What Mr. A. says of disagreeing in a circustantial
part of Worship, is not the conclusion of his discourse, to prove a
disagreement in substantial parts of Worship; but an Antithesis (sufficiently
proved) to the Dr's. assertion, that all our difference was about circumstances
of Worship; and he makes it appear, that not only they with the Dissenters,
but they among themselves did so disagree; while some of them Bow to the Altar,
others not. If this be not a part of Worship, I see not how Bowing to an Image
can be called such. He further blames Mr. A. page 365. at the end, for making
a sort of middle things (able to justify Separation) between Substantial parts
of Worship, and mere Circumstantials. And the Dr. does most unjustly infer
from thence, that Separation is justified by things that are neither
Substantial nor Circumstantial parts of Worship, and no part of it at all. For
he will not consider, that though Mr. A. does not make the Ceremonies mere
Circumstantials, yet he makes them Circumstantial parts of Worship; that is,
parts of Worship without, which all that Worship that Christ has instituted
is confessed to be entire. And if Mr. A. do also go about to prove that the
Ceremonies are made by the Churchmen Substantial parts of Worship, it is no
incoherency in him, but in them who talk so variously of these rites; sometimes
as the veriest trifles that can be, sometimes as so much conducing to the Glory
and Decency of Gospel-VVorship. The truth is, Substantial parts of Worship, is
a term of the Drs. (as Mr. A. tells him) none of ours; and therefore if we do
not apply it sometimes to his mind, let him blame himself for not making it
more intelligible to us by his explication of it.

SECT. IX. The other Pleas pretended for Separation.
WE come now with the Dr. to the next Plea used for Separation; to wit, that
the Dissenters are still unsatisfied in their Consciences about the Churches
terms of Communion, and the Church excommunicateth them; and therefore they
cannot join. He is pleased to join these two, though very distinct, yet he
prosecuteth them severally. For the latter, which he speaks first of, the
Dissenters Plea, that he is pleased to take off is, the Excommunication ipso
facto by the Canon 6. that we all lie under. Before I consider his answer to
this, I must tell him of two things that have more weight to justify our
Separation than that Canonical Excommunication. 1. That many thousands of us
are otherwise Excommunicated for our noncompliance with the Ceremonies; even
by the personal application, and publishing of the sentence against us; yea,
multitudes may not go to Church if they would, being under the Writ de capiendo
Excommunicato, and daily watched for to be apprehended; this puts on us a
forcible necessity of Non-communion, and conscience of Worshipping God, and
waiting on the means of Grace, engages us to meet privately to enjoy these
ordinances that we cannot have publicly. The second thing is, even they who
are not under the sentence of Excommunication, yet are materially
Excommunicated by your Church if they will not comply with your Ceremonies; for
we can have none of the Sacraments without them; and your Canon excludes us
out of the Church unless we Bow at the Name of Jesus. So that we cannot, if we
never so fain would, enjoy God's Ordinances among you, without partaking your
Ceremonies. Wherefore all the blame that can be cast on us, is not using the
Ceremonies. From which we have sufficiently cleared our selves in the eyes of
unby-assed Men; all that follows on this is not to be charged on us, but on
the rigor of your Church, which forces us from among them.

Sect. 2. The Dr. answers to the Plea from the Canonical Excommunion, Sect.
33. page 367. that, that Excommunication is not against such as modestly
scruple the lawfulness of the things imposed, but against those who obstinately
affirm it; and he blames Mr. B. as misciting the words of the Canon. Wherefore
I shall set down the whole Canon, it is the Can. 6. of the Convocation, 1603.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, by Law Established, are wicked, antichristian, or superstitious;
or such as being commanded by lawful Authority, men who are zealously, and
godly affected, may not with any good conscience approve them, use them, or as
occasion requires subscribe to them, let him be Excommunicated ipso Facto, and
not restored until he repent, and publicly revoke these his wicked Errors.
The Dr. has a subtle distinction here between, but affirm, which term Mr. B.
had used, and affirm: One would think that affirm, and no more added to it,
signifies no more than but affirm: But the Dr. says, that affirm, signifies
these circumstances, which according to the common sense of mankind, do deserve
Excommunication, viz. that it be done publicly and obstinately. What ground
the Dr. has for this criticism, I know not; I am sure his citation out of
Augustine, that a man is born with till he find an accuser, or obstinately
defend his opinion, says nothing of the sense of the word affirm. Neither do I
think that our Courts will be ruled by Augustine or the Dr. either. If a man
with the greatest modesty imaginable, being asked, why he does not Conform;
shall say, he cannot do it with a good conscience, he falls under the plain
letter of this Law, and goes against the express words of it; and this is the
least that a modest man can say, unless he will say, I will not do it, and that
will be called obstinacy; and so bring him under the Law, in the Dr's. own
sense. But if the man (as a modest man may) give reasons for his
Nonconformity, when men require him to Conform, every word he says, will
bring him under this Excommunication.

Sect. 3. Another answer that the Dr. brings against this Plea, is page 368,
369. where he tells us of the opinion of Canonists, that such an
excommunication is but a commination, and cannot affect the person till a
sentence be past, applying it to him; and that men under such excommunication
are not obliged to execute it against themselves, by withdrawing from the
Church. I shall not contend about this, though one would think that such
excommunication as he describes, were rather ipso Jure, than ipso Facto; and
that excommunication ipso Facto, brings one under the sentence as soon as the
fact is committed. But to let that pass, this excommunication declares what we
are to expect; and the frequent, yea, general execution of it, puts most
part out of capacity to come to Church, and may justly alarm the rest to seek a
retreat for themselves in time. It is as when an act of banishment is passed by
the Magistrate, the party is so far loosed from his Obligation to that Society,
that he may with a good conscience withdraw before he be violently transported;
sure such excommunication, and the fact, (which we neither deny, nor are
ashamed of) are enough to loose our tie that we had to the Church.

Sect. 4. He answers a question; Can these be called Schismatics who are
first excommunicated by the Church? He says, they may in two cases. 1. When
there is just cause for the sentence. Reply, I deny not but such are to be
condemned for their giving just cause for such a sentence, and it may be on the
same ground they may be called Schismatics; but to call men Schismatics for
not joining with a Society that has cast them out, seems to be such a
figure, as when men are called Fugitives, who are justly banished; but I will
not contend about words: If the Dr. can prove our excommunication just, let him
call us what he will. The instances he gives, make nothing for that; none of
these Churches require sinful terms of Communion, imposing men's devises in the
Worship of God, and then excommunicate men for not submitting to them. His
second case, in which excommunicates are Schismatics, is, if they set up New
Churches, which he proves from the instances of the Churches that he had
before mentioned. Reply, He now supposes the excommunication to be unjust,
else this case were coincident with the former: And in that case I distinguish
his assertion. The unjust excommunication is either for an alleged personal
fault, or for a principle of Religion unjustly called false. Again, it is
either past against one or few, or it is against a great multitude, a
considerable part of a Church or Nation. If it be for an alleged personal
fault (where it is hardly supposed that a great part of the Church can be
concerned) I do not say that such may set up new Churches. It is fit such
should quietly wait till they can be cleared; they having in that case no
ground to charge the Church with any fault in Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline;
but in the mis-application of a true and right way of Discipline. But where the
unjust excommunication is for a sound principle, falsely called error; and it
also reaches a great part of the Church, Ministers and People: I see no reason
why they should not have the Worship of God among themselves, let men call it
setting up of new Churches, or what they will. For, 1. It were strange if the
half of a Church or Nation, or near so many, should be obliged to live without
the Ordinances of God, for the Caprice of some ambitious Churchmen, who
excommunicate them, because they will not dance after their Pipe. 2. In this
case, the Orthodox had been Schismatics, when they were excommunicated by the
Arians, and set up New Churches. 3. Christ should oblige his People to live
without his Ordinances, because of their love to the purity of them. What the
Author objecteth out of Augustine is not to be understood of our cases, but for
private men excommunicated for falsly-imputed crimes; not for any thing of
their Faith, for he bids them keep the true Faith, without Separate meetings.

Sect. 5. Our Author proceeds, in the end of page 371. and forward, to
consider another Plea, made for separation; to wit, scruple of Conscience,
which, I think, none do make the sole ground of separation; but they have a
ground for their scruple: If that ground be good, it will warrant the scruple,
and the separation too; if not, it can do neither. And therefore I shall not
insist on this as a plea, distinct from what I have already defended. I suppose
the Author that mention it intend no more than I say; only they may rationally
maintain, that a scruple not sufficiently warranted, in a person otherwise
sober and sound, about a matter indifferent, or not intollerably evil, though it
does not free the scrupler from all blame, yet may oblige the Church not to
impose with rigor the things so scrupled on such a person. The Dr. here does
not act the part of a Disputant, nor a Casuist; but of somewhat else that I
shall not name. For when it had been pleaded, that these scruples are great, of
long standing, not to be removed without very over-powering impressions on men's
minds: He answers, by a harange full of contempt of his adversaries, that a
little impartiality and consideration would do it, but that we read, judge, and
hear only on one side; think it a temptation to examine, cry out, we are
satisfied already, are not willing to be informed, nor glad of light; fly out
into rage at them who endeavor to remove our scruples, etc. If we be such men,
why has the Learned Dr. written so long a Book to refute us; it is no wonder
that he stir up the Magistrate against such, and the People too; to cry out,
away with such fellows from the Earth, it is not fit they should live. He
asks, where lies the strength and evidence of our scruples? If I should
speak in his dialect, I should answer in the arguments by us produced, which he
and all his party are not able to answer, nor have ever answered; but I had
rather-dispute than scold: He says, we may see light if we will: We say, we
would see it if we could, and think we could see it, if it were to be seen. He
tells us how easy this dispute is. We assent, and wonder that so Learned a
Man should go about to darken so plain a truth. He charge us with willful
mistake; a mistake we deny, and make the contrary of it appear; but if it be a
mistake, that it is willful, we also deny; and though we cannot in this,
satisfy them who are resolved to cast Iniquity upon us, etc. yet we can make
our appeal the to Searcher of hearts, who will one day judge us, and our rash
judgers.

Sect. 6. He contesteth, page 373. with Mr. A. about some expressions of his
that he alleges Mr. A. mistook; there is no need of insisting on such
debates: Brethren should study to understand one another, and construe every
thing to the best. But if the Dr. had been as careful to vindicate his own
cause as his own words, he would have refuted Mr. A's pertinent and weighty
discourse, page 72, 73, 74. which he has but lightly, or hardly at all
touched. He proceeds, page 376. to deal with another of his Antagonists, who
objecteth, that these who cannot conquer their scruples, as to Communion with
our Church, must either return to the state of Paganism, or set up new
Churches, by joining with the ejected Ministers. The Dr's. Answer is, that this
is new Doctrine; the old Puritans supposed men obliged to continue in the
Communion of our Church, although there were somethings that they scrupled at.
Reply, I have formerly showed that there were old Puritans, that did both
scruple and act as we do; but I deny not that some did join with the Church,
but then their scruples and ours do differ: They thought the Ceremonies were
inconvenient, yet might be used; we think them unlawful, and not to be used:
There was also another difference, they met with some indulgence, and were
suffered to Worship God with the Church, and forbear the things that they
scrupled; We meet with nothing but rigor and severe imposing of these, and
therefore, whatever they did, we are under this unpleasing choice, either to
sin against God and our Consciences, or to set up Separate Meetings, or to
return to the state of Paganism; i. e. to live without the Ordinances of God.

Sect. 7. It is objected, that we scruple joining in the Sacraments, and living
under some of the Ministers. He answers, that he never heard this last
alleged for a ground of Separation; neither do I insist on it, as I have
before declared; save, where they Preach false Doctrine, or otherwise corrupt
the Ordinances, so as we cannot join in them without our personal sin: And this
scruple has been often heard of. It is too vulgar a way of reasoning, it is a
hard case if People must fly into separation, because all their Ministers are
not such as they ought to be. Pray, who ever said so? But the Dr. would fain
know whether, as often as men do scruple joining with others, their separation
be lawful. This is easily known by a less knowing person than the Learned Dr.
St. for all men knows and acknowledge, that scrupling can never make Separation
lawful; it is good ground for these scruples that must do that. Wherefore all
the instances that he heapeth up of unjustifiable Separations, might have been
spared, as wholly impertinent; O how easy is it to prove Learnedly that which
no man denies. After one of his Historical instances of a Separation from the
Churches of New England, he asks, what is there in this case but is every
whit as justifiable, as the present Separation? Ans. There is in it, that these
Separatists could not with any reason object to the Church from which they
Separated, that she imposed on them any Religious Ceremonies of men's devising,
or other unlawful terms of Communion, and then excommunicated them for not
submitting to these. He tells us, page 378. that no settled Church does allow
this liberty of Separation, because men cannot conquer their scruples. It is
true, neither is it fit they should allow it merely on that account; but withal
he might have added, that few settled Churches except that of Rome, and that of
England, do tempt, or rather force men to scruple, and to Separate by imposing
unnecessary terms of Communion, which they know many count unlawful. What he
says ibid. for Papists, Anabaptists, and Quakers pleading for the same liberty
of Separating, does no way come up to our case. Neither are their scruples
built on good grounds, nor are the things that they scruple, known by the
Church that imposes them to be unnecessary things. He wondereth that none has
taken care to put a stop to Separation, by showing what scruples are to be
allowed, and what not. Has this never been done by Non-conformists? Have we
not also taught that the Church ought to bear with them who soberly dissent in
the lesser concerns of Religion; and not impose unnecessary things on Peoples
Consciences: If these were attended to, a stop might soon be put to Separation;
but if Men will scruple without cause on the one hand, and the Church will
impose without cause on the other, there is no putting a stop to Separations,
till the Lord cure our Distempers. Rigor and Persecution, if it succeed to
root out the Dissenting Party, is one way to put a stop to Separation, but it
is none of Gods way; and as it never had his approbation, so it seldom has had
success.

Sect. 8. The Learned Author, Sect. 36. falls on a new Subject; to wit, the
use of Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism. I never looked on this as a
sufficient ground of Separation, and therefore might wave this whole debate:
But I think it is an abuse, and therefore shall say a little on this Subject.
Here we have not any institution to guide us, there being nothing in Scripture,
that I know of, about Spo^sion for the party Baptized: And therefore, as on the
one hand, what the nature of the thing and reason make necessary, should not be
withstood; so on the other, what is beyond that, should not be practiced, and
far less imposed. All the question is about the use of Sponsers in the Baptism
of Infants, for the adult are to undertake for themselves. Some make the use of
Godfathers, to be witnesses of the Childs-Baptism. That is very needless, for
the whole Church are witnesses of that. The true use of them is to represent
the Child as a party covenanting with God, in this Solemn Sealing of the
Covenant of Grace between God and the Infant; and consequential to this, to
undertake the instruction and education of the Child in the Christian Religion;
and endeavoring to engage him to a personal owning of the Covenant. The
original of other Sponsors beside the Parents was, in the Primitive Church,
many young ones, either born of Heathen-Parents, or Orphans of
Christian-Parents, falling into the Tuition of Heathen-Relations, in reference
to their worldly concerns, were in hazard by that means to be bred in
Heathenism: Wherefore it was judged needful that some faithful, and intelligent
Christian should undertake for their Religious Education. This usage which
reason had first brought in, ostentation did afterward enlarge, by multiplying
Godfathers and Godmothers; and after that, Superstition did perver^ it, by
excluding the Parents, and putting strangers in their room; till at last in
Popery, it was quite depraved, by making a spiritual kindred to result from
this action. Wherefore, we do not deny the use of Sponsors, but think the
Parents the most proper Sponsors; both on account of their opportunity,
obligation and natural inclination, to do the office of a Sponsor for the
Child, which may rationally be thought to be more in them than in a stranger;
and we think it a gross abuse to admit of other Sponsors, except in the want of
Parents, or their Inhability. I think also, considering things as they are, not
barely in the notions that men have of things that they will defend; this
practice is fallen into such abuse, that even that should make it be laid
aside; for it is manifest and most common, that Godfathers and Godmothers are
chosen most unqualified for, and most unconcerned in that which they make a
solemn promise to God to perform, which is a horrid mocking of Him and his
Ordinances: Are not Boys and Girls chosen, or Debauched and Ignorant Persons;
or Strangers, that may be, shall never see the Child again, nor mind it, except
it be to send it a new Coat?

Sect. 9. The Dr. tells us of Mr. Cartwright; yea, and all Protestant
Churches approving of this. But will he say, that they are for Excluding the
Parents? which is the very thing that we controvert; For as the Dr. confesses,
Can. 29. Ordains, That Parents need not be Present, and that they shall not
be admitted to Answer: that is, they must not undertake for the instruction and
education of their own Child. But says he, The Parents are to provide such as
are Fit. I desire to know what Warrant is for this, even from sound reason? Who
can be so Fit, by his opportunity and care, as the Parent? And if he be wholly
unfit, as to understanding, and respect to true Religion, we are not against
his having a Deputy, in that Case; that it is done with the Parents consent, is
better so than otherwise; but that the Parent can transfer his right to
another, is without all reason, unless the Person to whom such a Translation is
made, do really take the education of the Child; which though by a private
compact between the Parent and Sponsor, might be done; yet, what shadow of
reason can be for a Canon compelling every Parent to do it? It is (says he)
but like an occasion of absence; to wit, of the Parent, in which case all allow
of a Sponsor. Ans. It is no way like it, for the one has necessity to warrant
it; the other has nothing but men's will, or superstitious conceit. Is it alike
for, the State to make a Law that neighbors should feed and cloth the Orphans
of poor Parents; and to make a Law that they shall feed and cloth the Children
of their rich Neighbors, who are alive? The case is just so here. It is an
injury to a man, to have his Child taken from him without a cause, and given to
another to be educated; so it is to be obliged, yea, forced to transfer upon
another all that right he has to represent his own child, and to engage for
his education. He says, it is not the Churches intention to supersede the
obligation of the Parent, but to superinduce a further obligation upon other
Persons. Had the Parent been permitted to undertake for the Child jointly with
the Sponsors, there had been some color for this assertion; but that being
expressly denied by the Canon, it is evident that the Church does what she can
to make the Parent think that no obligation at all lies on him. I meddle not
with his debate against Mr. B. about Mr. B's Argument against Sponsors, from
the Child's having right to Baptism, only from the Parents; many learned men
differ from Mr. B. in that, and I shall not digress to dispute it.

Sect. 10. The Dr. page 386. says, he finds nothing particularly objected
against Kneeling at the Communion, that deserves consideration, which he has
not answered in another place; to wit, Conferences First Part, which Book I
have not seen; wherefore I shall in a few words lay down our Ground of
Scrupling that Practice, and so leave it. We do not scruple Kneeling at Prayer,
which is joined with receiving of that Sacrament; nor do we deny that all
possible reverence should be used in going about that Holy Ordinance; but we
think the expression of that Reverence should be of Gods appointing in his
Word, or grounded on Nature, or civil Custom, and not instituted by man's Will.
1. Then we scruple it, because it is an uncommanded Act of Worship; that it is
Worship, I think will not be denied; Kneeling in Prayer cannot be denied to be
an Act of external Worship, no more than this: That it is uncommanded, we must
believe, till they show us a Command for it. They allege, that Kneeling, being
unquestionable a fit gesture to express Humility and Adoration; it cannot be
unfit, but needful in this Case where both are required. To this I reply,
Humility is not fitly expressed by Kneeling, though Adoration be, and therefore
we think Kneeling in the Act of Receiving to be no fit gesture, because
Adoreing, however needful it be in the complex Action of Communicating; to wit,
before and after Receiving the Elements; it is not the Souls work in that Act,
Believing or Covenanting with God, is the proper Exercise of the Soul in that
Act, which is a solemn sealing of the Covenant, and this Covenanting is very
unfitly expressed by Kneeling. He that is about solemn Prayer or Adoration
(which might be well expressed by Kneeling) in the Act of receiving that
Sacrament, does little know, or consider, the nature and use of it; whence I
form our Argument thus; that Religious Gesture which is neither Commanded by
God, nor necessarily Connected with the Souls exercise in Worship by nature,
and dictated by it; nor is by civil custom made a fit expression of the inward
exercise of the Soul in that Worship; but is only imposed by the Will of man,
is unlawful to be used in that Worship; but Kneeling in the Act of receiving
the Sacrament is such; Ergo, etc. The major is clear, for that must in that
case be Will Worship; the minor is proved by what is said, and the conclusion
follows, ^i^syllogistica.

Sect. 11. Another ground of our scruple is; this Practice is unprecedented in
the Apostolic and purest Primitive Church; Christ with his Disciples Sat or
leaned; they used the table gesture, then made decent by civil custom, and yet
they used as much humility in receiving, and knew as well what was fit and
decent as we now do, or can. In after Ages this Practice was not used, it is
well known that in Tertullians time, and till the beginning of the Fifth
Century, they did not use to Kneel on any Lords Day between Easter and
Pentecost, so much as at Prayer; and the Canon of the Famous First Council of
Nice did forbid it; how then did they make the Communion Kneeling? A third
ground is; this Kneeling is a Religious Adoration before a Creature, with a
Religious respect to the Creature; but this is unlawful, etc. The first
proposition is clear, for it is with respect to the Consecrated Elements before
them, that we Kneel; and it will not be denied that we there adore God
Religiously. The second proposition I prove, because Protestants do generaly
condemn Praying before an Image (as on other accounts, so on this) because it
is an adoring of God before a Creature, with a Religious respect to it; let our
Brethren show us what the more moderate of the Papists give to their Images,
that we do not give to the Consecrated Elements. We use the one as a a stated
motive of Worship, as they do the other; they deny that they give any Worship
to the Image, as we do with reference to the Elements. A fourth Ground is; this
Practice, (as acknowledged by its Patrons to be Indifferent,) has been grossly
abused to Idolatry, the Papists in the same external way worshipping the Host.
And it is known that this Practice came in with the belief of Christ's Bodily
presence in the Sacrament, and the Papists profess, that if they did not
believe that, they would not so Kneel; and is it fit that we should so
symbolize with them? which by this Practice we do to that degree, that it is
not easy to distinguish our Adoration from theirs, by the spectators of both.
These grounds I have but hinted, being spoken to more largely by others.

Sect. 12. He debateth next with Mr. A. page 386. for saying that on the same
reason that the Church imposes these Ceremonies, she may impose some use of
Images, etc. to which the Dr. brings three Answers filling four Pages. All
this discourse might have been waved, for neither Mr. A. nor any of us, did
ever make that a ground of Separation; though we plead against the Ceremonies on
that ground. If they will remove the present Ceremonies, we shall not for the
asserting an Imposing power leave them; nor out of fear of what may come.

Sect. 13. The last plea for Separation that the Dr. first devises, and then
refuteth is, Sect. 38. That there is a parity of reason for our separating from
the Church of England, and from the Protestants separating from the Church of
Rome; and this Plea he imputes to Mr. A. in his Preface (he should have said,
Epistle Dedicatory) to Mischief of Impositions; but I do not find that Mr. A.
or any other, ever used such a plea. All that he says there is, ad hominem,
against the Dr's. ordinary crying out on us for Separating from a true Church;
whereas the Dr. himself had owned Rome to be a true Church; Ration: account. p.
293. And def. against T. G. p. 785. and yet allows. Separation from that
Church: Wherefore I shall no further consider any thing that he says on that
head. And I conclude with the Dr. and declare as he does to the contrary, that
I have examined all that he has said on the present Subject, and do find still
remaining sufficient Plea to justify the present practice of Non-conformists in
not joining with the Church of England, but Worshipping God in Meeting apart
from it.

Sect. 14. The Learned Dr. is pleased to append to his Book, to set it off
(...), three Letters of three French Divines, Printed first in French, and then
in English, ad pompam; for it is little ad pugnam. But he might know, what ever
difference we give to learned and good men, their authority, without Scripture
proof (which we yet desiderate) will not prevail with us to alter our opinion
or practice; let the Dr. call it obstinacy, or by what name he pleases. The
first of them is from Monsieur le Moyne professor of Divinity in Leyden, to the
Bp. of London; the authority of which Letter (not of the learned Author of it)
we have good cause to neglect; because it is apparent to any that read it, that
it is written by a stranger to us, upon gross misinformation of our
principles: For he says, page 404. that he could not have persuaded himself
that there had been any who believed that a man could not be saved in the
Communion of the Church of England: And I join with him so far; that I know
not, nor hear of one Nonconformist of that opinion; but thus it seems we are,
by our Brethren, represented abroad; and then precarious Letters got by such
means must be produced as witnesses against us. He also represents us as if
we condemned all to hell that use the Ceremonies, page 405. and the same he
says about the Church Discipline, ibid. and that we imagine that we are the
only men in England, yea in the Christian World, that are predestined to
eternal happiness, and that hold truths necessary to Salvation, as they ought
to be held, so he page 408. he also, page 409. tells us of a
Non-conformist-Meeting he was at in London, where he exposes the Meeting and
Preacher, as very ridiculous; and his calling the Preacher one of the most
famous Non-conformists, shows him to be either a very great stranger to them,
or somewhat that is worse. Let any now judge, whether such a Testimony be to be
received against us.

Sect. 15. The second Letter from Monsieur de l' Angle, speaks the Reverend and
Learned Author of it, to be an ingenious and sober Person, but in some things
misinformed by the Episcopal Party: He lamenteth our Divisions, so do we; he is
for compliance with the Ceremonies, being settled, but is far enough from
approving of them. The former part of this, I impute to his being less
concerned to consider these things, than we are. He stateth our Separation
mainly upon Episcopacy, which we do not; and he, no doubt, does it upon
Misinformation: But it is observable, that this good man, whom the Dr. brings
as a Witness on his side, does as much blame the Church as us, whilst he is for
their quitting of Ceremonies, that occasion Separation; which he insisteth much
on, as the way to peace. A notable piece of Misinformation that this worthy
Person has met with, is, That at a Conference held for Union with the
Dissenters, a little after His Majesty's Restoration, nothing let the
Agreement but some of the Presbyterians; the contrary of which, and their great
Condescendency for Peace, is known to all England, and a lasting Monument of it
to Posterity, is the Book called, A Petition for Peace, containing the things
that the Presbyterians proposed, while the Prelatical Party would not part
with, yea, nor forbear their Brethren in the least Ceremony, or mode of their
Service.

Sect. 16. The Third Letter is from the Famous and Excellent, Monsieur Claude,
who walks by the same Spirit, and in the same steps with his Reverend
Colleague, Monsieur de l' Angle: He speaks of Episcopacy as tolerable; that
one may, with a good Conscience, live under it: This is not our Question; but
it seems the Question has been so stated to him, by them who had a mind to
procure his Testimony to their Cause. He tells us, they admit of Ministers
that had been Ordained by Bishops; so do we: He does highly commend Love and
Concord: And we think it cannot be overvalued* where it can be had without Sin.
He speaks of Advantages, both by Episcopacy, and Parity; and of disadvantages
by both, when managed by bad men. Nothing of which do we contradict. He
complains of Extremes on both sides, we do the same: We never yet thought all
of our Party so moderate, as they should be: After a proof of Independency, he
comes to speak of Presbyterians, with that decent respect that becomes a man
of his understanding and breeding, and in a far other dialect than Dr. St.
does. He wishes them to be moderate in reference to the scandal that they
think they have received from the Episcopal Order, and to distinguish the
persons from the Ministry; this we refuse not. He does indeed condemn our
holding assemblies apart, but stateth it on this ground, page 445. as if we did
Separate because the public assembles are held under Episcopal Government; and
that we think our presence there were an approving of it, which is wide from
our case; but no doubt is according to his information, for which we ^hank our
Episcopal Brethren, and commend their ingenuity. To the same purpose is what he
has page 446. as if we thought we cannot with a good Conscience be present in
the Assemblies; but only when we do fully and generally approve all things in
them: which is far from our thoughts: These Principles he does most solidly
refute. He says, page 447. that he cannot believe that any of ^us
(Presbyterians) look on their Episcopal Discipline, or Ceremonies as blots and
capital errors that hinder a man from Salvation. And does in this truly judge,
for we have always disowned such sentiments, we judge them sinful evils, which
we dare not own; but have much charity to some who own them. He next advises
the Bishops to moderation, and when the dispute is about Ceremonies, that are a
stumbling block, and nothing in comparison of communion, they would make it be
seen that they love the Spouse of Christ, better than themselves. O that this
advice were followed, how soon might Peace return to our Land Now wherein has
Mr. Claude, or his Colleague touched our controversy. Alas! good Men, they are
abused by mis-representations. Their Letters give just ground to think, that if
they were made Umpires between the two parties, Prelatical and Presbyterian,
and heard the true state of our debate, and true matters of fact: they would be
of the same mind with us. And I am sure the Church way that they practice is
the same that we are for. Wherefore the Dr. with no loss to his cause might
have waved the producing of these Letters. What acts are used by the Prelatical
party to get foreign Divines to be on their side, or at least to say nothing
against them, may be gathered from a passage in the Life of the Famous and
great antiquary, Monsieur l' Arrogie; who having writ a Book, wherein he
shows the Conformity of the Discipline of the Protestant Church of Rome
(which all know to be Presbyterian) with that of the Primitive Church; And
another in defense of Monsieur Dialle, touching the Letters of Ignatius, and
the Apostolical Constitutions, against Mr. Pearson and Beverige, and having
designed a reply to their answer that they had made to him, at the request of
some that favored ^piscopacy, he did not finish his answer. These are pitiful
shifts to support a tottering cause; of the same kidney is their denying relief
to the French Protestants, Ministers and others, who do not Conform to the
Church of England; the Ceremonies being to them of more value than the great
Gosple Duty of charity. At Dublin 1685. a French Minister who Preached to some
of these Exiles, was suppressed because he did not use the Ceremonies, nor
English Liturgy. Since I wrote this, I have met with another instance of
Episcopal inge^uity, for exposing the Presbyterians among the foreign Churches.
It is in a Letter of the Famous Bochart, dated Nov. 2d. 1680. in answer to a
Letter from Dr. Morley, wherein the Dr. represents the Presbyterian
Principles in three po^itions; whereof the third is a gross calumny, and
excellently disproved by Bochart, and the Presbyterians fully vindicated by
him; the position is, Reges posse vi and armis a subditis cogi in ordinem* and
si se praebeant immorigeros, de soliis deturbare, in carcerem c^njici, si^^i in
jus and carnificem deniqne capite plecti; and the Dr. asserts that these
Principles were proved by the murder of K. C. 1st. The Reader may abundantly
satisfy himself of the impudence of this calumny from Mr. Bocharts Letter, as
it is Printed after his Phaleg, and Canaan; from page 66. of that Letter Ed.
Francford, 1681.

FINIS.

