John. 14. 6. Jesus says unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the Life,
etc

TWO DISCOURSES; VIZ. A DISCOURSE OF TRUTH. By the late Reverend Dr. RVST, Lord
Bishop of Dromore in the Kingdom of Ireland.

The Way of HAPPINESS And SALVATION. By Joseph Glanvil, Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, in the Temple-passage from Essex-Street.
1677.

A DISCOURSE OF TRUTH. By the late Reverend Dr. RVST, Lord Bishop of Dromore in
the Kingdom of Ireland. Together with a LETTER, giving an Account of the Author
and the Book: Written by JOS. GLANVIL, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, in the New Temple-passage from
Essex-street, 1677.

A LETTER Concerning the Subject and the Author.
SIR, I Have now perused, and returned the Manuscript you sent me; it had
contracted many and great Errors in the Transcription, which I have corrected:
I was enabled to do it by a written Copy of the same Discourse which I have had
diverse years in my Hands. The Subject is of great and weighty importance, and
the Acknowledgment of the Truths here asserted and made good, will lay a
Foundation for right conceptions in the Doctrines that concern the Decrees of
God, For the first Error, which is the ground of the rest, is, That things are
good and just, because God Wills them so to be; and if that be granted, we are
disabled from using the arguments taken from natural Notions, and the
Attributes and Perfections of the Divine Nature, against the Blackest and most
Blasphemous Opinions that ever were entertained concerning Gods proceedings
with the Sons of Men. If there be no settled Good and Evil, Immutable and
Independent on any Will or understanding, then God may have made his reasonable
Creatures on purpose to damn them for ever. He may have absolutely decreed that
they should sin, that he may damn them justly; He may most solemnly and
earnestly prohibit Sin by his Laws, and declare great displeasure against it;
and yet by his ineluctable Decrees Force men to all the sin that is committed
in the World: He may vehemently protest his unfeigned desire of their Life and
Happiness, and at the same time, secretly resolve their Eternal Destruction; He
may make it his Glory and Pleasure to triumph eternally in the torments of poor
Worms, which himself has by his unalterable and irresistible Will made
miserable; yea (as the discourse instanceth) he may after his Decrees
concerning the Salvation of the Elect, after the death of his Son for them, and
the mission of his Spirit to them, and after all the promises he has made to
assure them; thrust them also at last into the dreadful Regions of Death and
Woe; I say if there be no immutable respects in things, but Just and Unjust,
Honorable and Dishonorable, Good and Cruel, Faithful and Deceitful, are
respects made by mere arbitrarious will, it will be in vain to dispute from
Them against any such dismal Opinions: yea it will be great folly to argue for
the Simplicity of the Divine Nature against the vile conceits of the old
Anthropomorphites, and the Blasphemies of the present Muggletonians, of God's
having a Corporal shape, Parts and Members, if there be no necessary
Independent Connection, Immensity, Spirituality and Perfection; but this being
established, that there are immutable respects in things, and that such and
such are Perfections, and their contrary Defects and imperfections, hence it
will follow, that it is impossible the forementioned Doctrines can be true
concerning God, who cannot lie, cannot deny himself: viz. He being Absolute and
Infinite Perfection, cannot act any thing that is Evil or imperfect; But all
the expressions in Scripture, that at first sight look toward such a sense,
must be interpreted by the general Analogy and course of them, which declares
his Infinite, Immutable Excellencies; and these Notions of himself, which he
has written on the Souls of Men.

So that the Subject of this little Discourse, is of vast Moment, and the truth
asserted in it, is, I think confirmed with an irresistible Strength and force
of Reasoning; and not to be convinced by it, will argue either great weakness
of Understanding, in not perceiving consequences that are so close and plain,
or great obstinacy of Will, in being shut up by prejudices, and preconceiv'd
Opinions against Light that is so clear and manifest.

The Author was a Person with whom I had the Honor and Happiness of a very
particular acquaintance; a man he was of a clear Mind, a deep Judgment and
searching Wit: greatly learned in all the best sorts of Knowledge, old and new,
a thoughtful and diligent Enquirer, of a free Understanding, and vast Capacity,
joined with singular Modesty, and unusual Sweetness of Temper, which made him
the Darling of all that knew him: He was a Person of great Piety and
Generosity; a hearty Lover of God and Men: An excellent Preacher, a wise
Governor, a profound Philosopher, a quick, forcible, and close Reasoner, and
above all, a true and exemplary Christian. In short, he was one who had all the
Qualifications of a Primitive Bishop, and of an extraordinary Man-This I say
not out of kindness to my Friend, but out of Justice to a Person of whom no
Commendation can be extravagant. He was bred in Cambridge, and Fellow of
Christ's College, where he lived in great Esteem and Reputation for his
eminent Learning and Virtues; he was one of the first that overcame the
prejudices of the Education of the late unhappy Times, in that University, and
was very Instrumental to enlarge others. He had too great a Soul for the
trifles of that Age, and saw early the nakedness of Phrases and Phancyes; He
out-grew the pretended Orthodoxy of those days, and addicted himself to the
Primitive Learning and Theology, in which he even then became a great Master.

After the return of the Government, the excellent Bishop Tailor, foreseeing
the vacancy in the Deanery of Connor, sent to Cambridge for some Learned and
Ingenious Man, who might be fit for that Dignity: The motion was made to Dr.
Rust, which corresponding with the great Inclination he had to be conversant
with that incomparable Person: He gladly accepted of it, and hastn'd into
Ireland, where he landed at Dublin about August 1661. He was received with much
Respect and Kindness by that great and good Bishop, who knew how to value such
Jewels; and preferred to the Deanery as soon as it was void, which was shortly
after. He continued in that Preferment during the Bishops Life, always dearly
loved, and even admired by him.

At his Death (that sad stroke to all the Lovers of Religion and Learning) he
was chosen for the last solemn Office to his deceased Father and Friend; and he
preached such a Funeral Sermon as became that extraordinary Person and himself.
It has been since published, and I suppose you may have seen it, upon the
lamented Death of Bishop Tailor, which happened August 13th 1677. The Bishoprics
were divided: Dr. Boil Dean of Cork, was nominated Bishop of Down and Connor;
and Dr. Rust Dean of Connor Bishop of Dromore; he lived in the Deanery about
six years, in the Bishopric but three; for in December 1670 he dyed of a Fever
(in the prime of his years) to the unspeakable grief of all that knew his
Worth, and especially of such of them as had been blessed by his Friendship, and
most sweet and indearing Conversation: He was buried in the Quire of his own
Cathedral Church of Dromore, in a Vault made for his Predecessor Bishop
Tailor, whose sacred Dust is deposited also there: and what Dormitory has two
such Tenants?

This is the best account I can give you of the Work and the Author: and by it
you may perceive his Memory deserves to live, and this Product of him: but
there is so much reverence due to the Manes of so venerable a Person, that
nothing should be hastily published under his honored name: I know, had he
designed this Exercitation for the Public, he would have made it much more
complete and exact than we now have it: But as it is, the Discourse is weighty,
and substantial, and may be of great use. As it goes about now in written
Copiesit is, (I perceive) exceedingly depraved, and in danger of being still
worse abused; the Publication would preserve it from further corruptions.
However I dare not advise any thing in it, but this, that you take the judgment
of that Reverend Doctor you mention (the deceased Authors Friend and mine,) and
act according as he shall direct. I am,

Your real Friend Jos. Glanvil.
A DISCOURSE OF TRUTH.
TRUTH is of aequivocal signification, and therefore cannot be defined before
it be distinguished. It is two fold; Truth in things, which you may call Truth
in the Object: and Truth in the Understanding, which is Truth in the Subject.
By the first I mean nothing else but that Things necessarily are what they are:
By the second that there are mutual respects and relations of Things one unto
another. Now that Things are what they are, and that there are mutual Respects
and Relations Eternal, and Immutable, and in order of Nature antecedent to any
Understanding either created or uncreated, is a thing very plain and evident;
for it is clearer than the Meridian Light, that such Propositions as these, Homo
est animal rationale, Triangulum est quod habet tres angulos, are not
arbitrarious dependancies upon the Will, Decree, or Understanding of God, but
are Necessary and Eternal Truths; and wherein it is as impossible to divide the
Subject, and what is spoken of it, as it is for a thing not to be what it is,
which is no less than a Contradiction; and as indispensible are the mutual
respects and relations of things both in Speculatives and Morals.

For can it be imagined that every. Argument can be made a proportioned Medium
to prove every Conclusion, that Any thing may be a suitable means to Any end?
that any object may be conformable to any Faculty? Can Omnipotence it self make
these Propositions that twice two are four, or that Parallels cannot intersect,
clear and convincing Arguments to prove these grand Truths, That Christ came
into the World to dye for Sinners, and is now exalted as a Prince and a Savior
at the Right Hand of God? Is it possible that there should be such a kind of
Geometry, wherein any problems should be demonstrated by any Principles;
quidlibet ex quodlibet; as that a Quadrangle is that which is comprehended of
four right Lines: Therefore the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two
right ones?

Can the infinite Wisdom it self make the damning of all the Innocent and the
unspotted Angels in Heaven a proportionate means to declare and manifest the
unmeasureableness of his Grace and Love, and goodness toward them? Can Lying,
Swearing, Envy, Malice, nay hatred of God and goodness it self, be made the
most acceptable Service of God, and the readiest way to a man's Happiness? And
yet all these must be true, and infinitely more such contradictions than we can
possibly imagine, if the mutual respects and relations of things be not Eternal
and Indispenfible: which that they are, I shall endeavor to prove; and in
order to it

First, we must premise that Divine Understanding cannot be the Fountain of the
Truth of things; nor the Foundation of the references of one to another. For it
is against the Nature of all Understanding, to make its Objects; it is the
nature of Understanding, ut moveatur, illuminetur, formetur: etc. Of its
Object, ut moveat, illuminet, formet: Intellectus in actu primo has its self
unto its object, as the Eye unto the Sun; it is irradiated, enlightened and
actuated by it: And Intellectus in actu secundo, has its self unto its
objects, as the Image to that it represents; and the perfection of
Understanding consists in being actuated by, and in an adaequate Conformity to
its object, according to the nature of all Idea's, Images or Representations of
things. The Sum is this, No Idea's or Representations are the things they
represent; all Understanding is such; therefore no Understanding does make the
Natures, Respects and Relations of its Objects.

It remains then, that absolute, arbitrarious and independent Will must be the
Fountain of all Truth; and must determine the References and Dependencies of
things: which assertion would in the First place destroy the Nature of God, and
rob him of all his Attributes. For then it is impossible that there should be
such a thing as Divine Wisdom and Knowledge, which is nothing else but an
apprehension of common notions, and the natures and mutual respects and
relations of things. For if the Nature of God be such, that his arbitrarious
imagination that such and such things have such and such natures and
Dependencies, does make those things to have those Natures or Dependencies, he
may as easily Unimagine that Imagination; and then they that before had a
mutual Harmony, Sympathy and Agreement with one another, shall now stand at as
great a distance and opposition. And thus the Divine Understanding will be a
mere Protaean Chymaera, a Casual Conflux of intellectual Atoms: Contradictions
are true, if God understands them so, and then the foundation of all Knowledge
is taken away, and God may as truly be said to know nothing as every thing;
nay, any Angel or Man may as truly be said to know all things, as God himself;
for then every thing will be alike certain, and every apprehension equally
conformable to Truth. These are infallible consequences, and a thousand more as
absurd as these, if contradictory Propositions may be both true: and whether
they be so or no, it is a mere casual Dependence upon the Arbitrarious pleasure
of God, if there be not a necessary immutability and eternal opposition betwixt
the being and the not being of the same thing, at the same time and in the same
respect. Likewise all those Truths we call Common Notions, (the Systeme and
Comprehensions of which, is the very Essence of Divine Wisdom; as the
conclusions issuing from them, not by any operose deduction, but a clear
intuitive light, are the very Nature of Divine Knowledge, if we distinguish
those two Attributes in God) I say, all these propositions of immediate and
indemonstrable Truth, if these be only so, because so understood by God, and so
understood by God because he pleased so to have them, and not because there is
an indispensible relation of Harmony and Proportion betwixt the Terms
themselves; then it is a thing merely casual, and at the pleasure of God to
change his former apprehensions, and Idea's of those Truths, and to make their
contradictories as Evident, Radical and Fundamental as themselves but even now
were; and so Divine Wisdom and Knowledge will be a various, fickle and mutable
thing, a mere tumult and confusion: all these consequences infallibly flow from
this certain Principle, that upon a changeable and uncertain Cause, Effects
must needs have a changeable and uncertain Dependence. And there is nothing
imaginable in it self more changeable and uncertain than Will not regulated by
the dictates of Reason and Understanding.

If any deny these Consequences and Deductions, because they suppose that God
is mutable and changeable; I answer, by bringing this as another absurdity,
that if there be no indispensable and eternal respects of things, it will rob
God of his Immutability, and unchangeableness: for if there be no necessary
dependence betwixt Unchangeableness and Perfection, what should hinder, but
that if God please to think it so, it will be his perfection to be changeable;
and if Will, as such, be the only principle of his Actions, it is infallibly
his Perfection to be so. For it is the perfection of every Being to act
according to the principle of its Nature, and it is the nature of an
arbitrarious Principle to act or not, to do or undo upon no account but its own
will and pleasure; to be determined, and tied up, either by it self, or from
abroad, is violent and contranatural.

And therefore from this Principle, that absolute and sovereign Will is the
Spring and Fountain of all Gods Actions, It was rightly inferred by a late
Pamphliteer, that God will one day damn all Mankind, Good and Bad, Believers
and Unbelievers, notwithstanding all his Promises, Pretensions or Engagements
to the contrary; because this damning all mankind in despite of his
Faithfulness, Justice, Mercy and Goodness will be the greatest advancement of
his Sovereignty, Will and Prerogative imaginable. His words are, God has
stored up Destruction both for the Perfect and the Wicked, and this does
wonderfully set forth his Sovereignty; his exercising whereof is so perfect,
that when he has tied himself up fast as may be, by never so many promises,
yet it should still have its scope, and be able to do what it will, when it
will, as it will: here you have this principle improved to the height. And
however you may look upon this Author as some new Light, or Ignis fatuus of the
times, yet I assure you in some pieces by him set forth, he is very sober and
rational.

In the next place, to deny the mutual respects and rations rerum to be
immutable and indispensible, will spoil God of that universal rectitude which
is the greatest Perfection of his Nature: for then Justice, Faithfulness,
Mercy, Godness etc. will be but contingent and arbitrarious Issues of the
Divine Will. This is a clear and undeniable Consequence, for if you say these
be indispensible perfections in God, for instance, if Justice be so, then there
is an eternal relation of Right and Equity betwixt every Being and the giving
of it, that which is its propriety; if Faithfulness, then there is an
indispensible agreement betwixt a promise, and the performance of it; if Mercy,
then there is an immutable and unalterable suitableness and harmony between an
indigent Creature, and pity and commiseration; if Goodness, then there is an
everlasting Proportion and Symmetry between fullness and its overflowing and
dispreading of it self, which is the thing denied: for to say they are
indispensibly so, because God understands them so, seems to me extreme
incogitancy; for that is against the nature of all understanding, which is but
the Idea and Representation of things, and is then a true and perfect Image,
when it is exactly conformed to its object: and therefore, if things have not
mutual respects and Relations eternal and indispensible, then all those
perfections do solely and purely depend upon absolute and independent Will, as
Will; And consequently, it was and is indifferent in it self that the contrary
to these, as, Injustice, Unfaithfulness, Cruelty, Malice, Hatred, Spite,
Revenge, Fury; and whatever goes to the constitution of Hell it self should
have been made the top and highest perfections of the divine Nature: which is
such Blasphemy as cannot well be named without horror and trembling, for
instead of being a God, such a nature as this is, joined with omnipotency would
be a worse Devil than any is in Hell. And yet this is a necessary and
infallible consequence from the denial of these mutual respects and relations
of things unto one another, to be eternal and unchangeable. And as by the
denial of these, the Nature of God is wholly destroyed, so in the second place,
the mind of Man would have no certainty of Knowledge, or assurance of
Happiness. He can never come to Know there is a God, and consequently not the
Will and Mind of God, which if there be no intrinsecal and indispensible
respects and relations of things, must be the ground and foundation of all
Knowledge: for what means or arguments should we use to find out, or prove a
Divine Nature? It were folly and madness to sit down and consider the admirable
contrivement and artifice of this great Fabric of the Universe; how that all
natural things seem to act for some end, though themselves take no Cognizance
of it: How the Sun by its motion and situation, or (which is all one) by being
a Center, of the Earths Motion, provides Light and Heat, and Life for this
inferior World, how living Creatures bring forth a most apt composure and
structure of parts and members, and with that a being endued with admirable
Faculties, and yet themselves have no insight into, nor consultation about this
incomparable Workmanship; how they are furnished with Powers and Inclinations
for the preservation of this Body when it is once brought into the World; how
without praevious deliberation they naturally take in that Food which without
their intention or animadversion is concocted in their Ventricle, turned into
Chyle, that Chyle into Blood, that Blood diffused through the Veins and
Arteries, and therewith the several Members nourished, and decays of strength
repaired; I say, the gathering from all these (which one would think were a
very natural Consequence) that there is a wise Principle which directs all
these Beings unknown to you, in their several motions, to their several ends,
(supposing the dependence and relations of things to be contingent and
arbitrarious) were a piece of folly and incogitancy; for how can the Order of
those things speak a wise and understanding Being, which have no relation or
respect unto one another, but their whole agreement, suitableness and
proportion is a mere casual Issue of absolute and independent Will? If any
thing may be the cause of any effect, and a proportionate mean to any end, who
can infer infinite Wisdom from the dependence of things and their relations
unto one another? for we are to know that there is a God, and the Will of that
God before we can know the mutual Harmony, or Disproportion of things; and yet,
if we do not know these principal respects that things have among themselves,
it is impossible we should ever come to the knowledge of a God: for these are
the only arguments that any Logic in the World can make use of to prove any
conclusion: But suppose we should come to know that there is a God, which, as I
have demonstrated, denying the necessary and immutable truth of common Notions,
and the indispensible and eternal relations of things is altogether impossible.
However, let it be supposed; yet how shall we know that these common Notions,
and principles of natural instinct, which are the foundation of all Discourse
and Argumentation, are certain and infallible Truths; and that our Senses,
(which with these former Principles, we suppose this Divine Nature to have
given us to converse with this outward world) were not on purpose bestowed upon
us, to befool, delude and cheat us; if we be not first assured of the Veracity
of God? and how can we be assured of that, if we know not that Veracity is a
perfection; and how shall we know it is so, unless there be an intrinsecal
relation betwixt Veracity and perfection? for if it be an arbitrarious respect
depending upon the Will of God, there is no way possible left whereby we should
come to know that it is in God at all; And therefore we have fully as much
reason to believe that all our common Notions and Principles of natural
instinct, whereupon we ground all our reasonings and discourse, are mere
Chymera's to delude and abuse our faculties; and all those Idea's Phantasms and
Apprehensions of our external senses, we imagine are occasioned in us by the
presence of outward objects, are mere Spectrums and Gulleries, wherewith poor
mortals are befooled and cheated; as that they are given us by the first
Goodness and Truth to lead us into the Knowledge of himself and Nature.

This is a clear and evident consequence, and cannot be denied by any that does
not complain of darkness in the brightest and most Meridian Light. And here you
have the foundations laid of the highest Skepticism; for who can say he knows
any thing, when he has no bassion which he can raise any true conclusions?

Thus you see the noble faculties of man, his Mind and Understanding, will be
to no end and purpose, but for a Rack and Torture; for what greater unhappiness
or torment can there be imagined, than to have Faculties, whose Accomplishment
and Perfection consists in a due conformation unto their objects, and yet to
have no objects unto which they may be conformed; To have a Soul unmeasurably
breathing after the embraces of Truth and Goodness, and after a search and
enquiry after one and the other, and to find at last they are but aerie empty
and uncertain Notions, depending upon the arbitratious determinations of
boundless and independent Will; which determinations she sees it beyond her
reach ever to come to any knowledge of?

Here you have likewise the true Foundations of that we call Rantism, for if
there be no distinction 'twixt Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil, in the nature
of the things themselves, and we never can be assured what is the mind and
pleasure of the supreme and absolute Will (because Veracity is not
intrinsecally and ex natura rei, a Perfection, but only an Arbitrarious, if any
Attribute in the Deity) then it infallibly follows, that it is all one what I
do, or how I live; and I have as much reason to believe that I am as pleasing
unto God, when I give up my self unto all Filthiness, Uncleanness and Sin; when
I swell with Pride, Envy, Hatred and Malice etc. as when I endeavor with all
my Might and Strength to purge and purify my Soul from all pollution and
defilement both of Flesh and Spirit; and when I pursue the mortification of all
my carnal Lusts and Inclinations: And I have fully as much ground and
assurance, that the one is the ready Way to Happiness as the other.

And this is another branch of this second Absurdity, from the denial of the
intrinsecal and eternal respects and relations of things, that a man would not
have any assurance of future Happiness; for though it be true indeed, or at
least we fancy to our selves that God has sent Jesus Christ into the world,
and by him has made very large and ample promises, that whosoever believes in
him and conforms his life unto his Precepts, shall be made heir of the same
Inheritance and Glory which Christ is now possessed of and invested with in the
Kingdom of his Father, yet what ground have we to believe that God does not
intend only to play with and abuse our Faculties, and in conclusion to damn
all those that believe and live as is above expressed; and to take them only
into the Enjoyments of Heaven and Happiness, who have been the great Opposers
of the Truth, and Gospel, and Life and Nature of Jesus Christ in the world: for
if there be no eternal and indispensible Relation of Things, then there is no
intrinsecal Evil in Deceiving and Falsifying, in the damning the Good, or
saving obstinate and contumacious Sinners (whilst such) notwithstanding any
promises or threatenings to the contrary: and if the things be in themselves
indifferent, it is an unadvised Confidence to pronounce determinately on either
side. Yea further, suppose we should be assured that God is Verax, and that the
Scripture does declare what is his Mind and Pleasure, yet if there be not an
intrinsecal opposition betwixt the Being and not being of a thing at the same
time, and in the same respect; then God can make a thing that has been done,
undone; and that whatever has been done or spoken either by himself, or
Christ, or his Prophets, or Apostles, should never be done, or spoken by him on
them; though He has come into the world; yet that He should not be come;
though he has made these promises, yet that they should not be made; though
God has given us Faculties, that are capable of the enjoyment of himself, yet
that he should not have given them us; and yet we should have no Being, nor
think a thought while we fancy and speak of all these contradictions; In fine,
it were impossible we should know any thing, if the opposition of contradictory
terms depend upon the arbitrarious resolves of any Being whatsoever. If any
should affirm, that the terms of Common Notions have an eternal and
indispensible relation unto one another, and deny it of other truths, he
exceedingly betrays his folly and incogitancy; for these common Notions and
principles are foundations, and radical truths upon which are built all the
deductions of reason and Discourse, and with which, so far as they have any
truth in them, they are inseparably united. All these consequences are plain
and undeniable, and therefore I shall travel no further in the confirmation of
them.

Against this Discourse will be objected, that it destroys God's Independency
and Self-sufficiency; for if there be truth antecedently to the Divine
Understanding; the Divine Understanding will be a mere passive principle, acted
and enlightened by something without it self, as the Eyes, by the Sun, and
lesser objects, which the Sun irradiates: And if there be mutual congruities,
and dependencies of things in a moral sense, and so, that such and such means
have a natural, and intrinsecal tendency, or repugnance to such and such ends,
then will God be determined in his actions from something without himself,
which is to take away his independency, and Selfsufficiency. The pardoning of
Sin to repenting Sinners seems to be a thing very suitable to infinite Goodness
and Mercy, if there be any suitableness, or agreement in things antecedently to
Gods Will; therefore in this case will God be moved from abroad and as it were
Determined to an act of Grace. This will also undermine and shake many
principles and opinions which are looked upon as Fundamentals, and necessary to
be believed: It will unlink and break that chain and method of Gods Decrees,
which is generally believed amongst us. God's great plot, and design from all
eternity, as it is usually held forth, was to advance his Mercy and Justice in
the Salvation of some, and Damnation of others; We shall only speak of that
part of Gods design, the advancement of his Justice in the Damnation of the
greatest part of mankind, as being most pertinent for the improving of the
strength of the objection against our former Discourse: That I may do this, He
decrees to create man, and being created, decrees that man should sin, and
because, as some say, man is a mere passive principle, not able, no not in the
presence of objects, to reduce himself into action, Or because in the moment of
his creation, as others, he was empowered with an indifferency to stand or
fall; Therefore, lest there should be a frustration of God's great design; he
decrees in the next place, infallibly to determine the Will of man unto Sin,
that having sinned he might accomplish his Damnation; and what he had first,
and from all eternity in his intentions, the advancement of his Justice. Now if
there be such an intrinsecal relation of things, as our former Discourse
pretends unto, this design of God will be wholly frustrated. For it may seem
clear to every man's understanding that it is not for the Honor and Advancement
of Justice to determine the will of man to sin, and then to punish him for that
Sin unto which he was so determined; Whereas if God's Will, as such, be the
only Rule and principle of actions, this will be an accommodate means (if God
so please to have it) unto his design. The Sum is, We have seemed in our former
discourse to bind and tie up God, who is an absolute and independent Being, to
the petty formalities of Good and Evil; and to fetter and imprison freedom, and
liberty it self, in the fatal and immutable chains, and respects of things.

I answer. This objection concerns partly the understanding of God, and partly
his Will; As for the divine understanding, the Case is thus; There are certain
Beings, or natures of things which are Logically possible; it implies no
contradiction that they should be, although it were supposed, there were no
power that could bring them into being; which natures, or things, supposing
they were in being, would have mutual relations of agreement or opposition unto
one another, which would be no more distinguished from the things themselves,
than Relations are from that which founds them. Now the Divine Understanding is
a representation, or Comprehension of all those natures or beings thus
logically, and in respect of God absolutely possible, and consequently it must
needs be also a comprehension of all these Sympathies, and Antipathies, either
in a natural or a moral Way, which they have one unto another: for they, as I
said, do necessarily, and immediately flow from the things themselves, as
relations do, posito fundamento and termino. Now the Divine understanding does
not at all depend upon these natures, or relations though they be its objects;
for the nature of an object does not consist in being motivum facultatis, as it
is usually with us, whose apprehensions are awakened by their presence; but its
whole nature is sufficiently comprehended in this, that it is terminativum
Facultatis; and this precisely does not speak any dependency of the faculty
upon it, especially in the divine understanding; where this objective,
terminative presence flows from the faecundity of the Divine nature: for the
things themselves are so far from having any being antecedently to the Divine
understanding; that had not it been their exemplary pattern, and Idea, they had
never been created, and being created they would lie in darkness; (I speak of
things that have not in them a principle of understanding, not conscious of
their own natures, and that beauteous harmony they have among themselves) were
they not irradiated by the Divine understanding, which is as it were an
universal Sun that discovers and displayes the natures and respects of things,
and does as it were suck them up into its beams.

To the second part of the Objection, the strength whereof is, that to tie up
God in his actions to the reason of things, destroys his Liberty, Absoluteness,
and Independency. I answer, it is no imperfection for God to be determined to
Good; It is no bondage, slavery, or contraction, to be bound up to the eternal
Laws of Right and Justice: it is the greatest impotency and weakness in the
world to have a power to evil, and there is nothing so diametrically opposite
to the very being and nature of God; Stat pro ratione voluntas, unless it be as
a redargution and check to impudent and daring inquirers, is an account no
where justifiable. The more any Being partakes of reason and understanding, the
worse is the imputation of acting arbitrariously, and pro imperio. We can
pardon it in Women and children, as those from whom we do not expect that they
should act upon any higher principle, but for a man of reason and
understanding, that has the Laws of goodness and rectitude (which are as the
Laws of the Medes and Persians that cannot be altered) engraven upon his mind,
for Him to cast off these golden reins, and to set up arbitrarious Will for his
Rule and Guide, is a piece of intolerable rashness and presumption. This is an
infallible rule, that liberty in the power or principle is no where a
perfection, where there is not an indifferency in the things or actions about
which it is conversant: And therefore it is a piece of our weakness and
imbecility, that we have natures so indetermined to what is good. These things
need no proof, indeed cannot well be proved, otherwise than they prove
themselves: for they are of immediate truth, and prove themselves, they will,
to a pure unprejudiced mind.

2. Our former Discourse does not infer any dependency of God, upon any thing
without himself; for God is not excited to his actions by any foreign, or
extrinsecal motives; what He does, proceeds from the eternal immutable
respects, and relations, or reasons of things, and where are these to be found,
but in the Eternal and divine Wisdom; for what can infinite Wisdom be, but a
steady, and immovable comprehension of all those natures and relations: and
therefore God in his actions, does not look abroad, but only consults, (if I
may so speak) the Idea's of his own mind. What Creatures do, is but the
offering a particular case, for the reducement of a general principle into a
particular action; or the presentment of an occasion for God to act according
to the principles of his own nature; when we say that God pardons Sin upon
repentance, God is not moved to an act of grace from any thing without himself;
for this is a principle in the Divine Wisdom, that pardon of Sin to repenting
sinners, is a thing very suitable to infinite goodness, and this principle is a
piece of the Divine nature: therefore when God upon a particular act of
repentance puts forth a particular act of grace, It is but as it were a
particular instance to the general rule, which is a portion of Divine
perfection, when it is said, to him that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance, the meaning is, He that walks up unto that light, and improves that
strength, that God has already communicated unto him, shall have more abundant
incomes of light and strength from God: It does not follow that God is moved
from without to impart his Grace. For this is a branch of Divine Wisdom; it is
agreeable to the infinite goodness of God, to take notice of, and reward the
sincere, though weak endeavors of his Creatures, after him; so that what is
from abroad is but a particular occasion to those divine principles to exert,
and put forth themselves.

Thus have we spoken concerning the truth of things. It follows that we speak

Concerning Truth in the power, or faculty, which we shall dispatch in a few
words.

Truth in the power, or faculty is nothing else but a conformity of its
conceptions or Idea's unto the natures and relations of things, which in God we
may call an actual, steady, immovable, eternal Omniformity, as Plotinus calls
the Divine Intellect, (...), which you have largely described by him. And this
the Platonists truly call the intellectual world, for here are the natures of
all things pure, and unmixed, purged from all those dregs, refined from all
that Dross and alloy which cleave unto them in their particular instances. All
inferior and sublunary things, not excluding man himself, have their
excrescencies, and Defects, Exorbitances, or privations are molded up in their
very frames and constitutions. There is somewhat extraneous heterogeneous and
preternatural in all things here below, as they exist amongst us; but in that
other world, like the most purely fined gold, they shine in their native and
proper glory. Here is the first goodness, the benign Parent of the whole
creation, with his numerous offspring: the infinite throng of created Beings:
Here is the fountain of eternal Love, with all its streams, and Rivulets: Here
is the Sum of uncreated glory, surrounded with all his rays, and beams: Here
are the eternal, and indispensible Laws of right and Justice, the immediate and
indemonstrable principles of truth, and goodness: Here are steady and
immovable rules, for all cases and actions, however circumstantiated, from
which the Will of God, though never so absolute, and independent from
everlasting to everlasting, shall never depart one Tittle. Now all that truth
that is in any created Being, is by participation and derivation from this
first understanding, and fountain of intellectual light. And that truth in the
power or faculty is nothing but the conformity of its conceptions, or Ideas
with the natures and relations of things, is clear and evident in it self, and
necessarily follows from what has been formerly proved concerning the truth of
things themselves, antecedently to any understanding, or will; for things are
what they are, and cannot be otherwise without a contradiction, and their
mutual respects and dependencies eternal and unchangeable, as has been already
showed: so that the conceptions and Ideas of these natures and their relations,
can be only so far true as they conform and agree with the things themselves,
and the harmony which they have one to another.

FINIS.
THE WAY OF HAPPINESS And SALVATION Rescued from Vulgar Errors. BY JOSEPH
GLANVIL Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, in the Temple-passage from Essex-Street,
1677.

Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker.

April 9th 1670.

To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Herbert, Eldest Son to the most Honorable
HENRY Lord Marquis of WORCESTER.
My Lord,

ALthough I have not had the Happiness to see your Lordship since your very
tender years, by reason of your distance in Foreign parts; yet I have heard so
much of your great Improvements in Knowledge and Virtue, that I cannot slip
this occasion to congratulate your early Fame, and the hopes, or rather
Assurance you give of being an extraordinary Person. For that season of Life
which so many others pass away in Frolicks, and Riot, and vain Amors; In
Raillery, and the wanton Essays of Buffooning and Versifying Wit, (which
contemptible childishness the youth of the present age seems to value as the
highest Perfection) your Lordship wisely, and worthi'y imploys in gaining those
real Acomplishments, which may fit you for Public Service, in that high
Station in which Providence has set you.

My Lord, you are descended from an Ancient Stock of most Noble Progenitors,
and are the immediate Son of a Lord and Lady, whose Virtues may inspire all who
have the Honor and Happiness to be related to them, with the Noblest Thoughts
and Endeavors; and doubtless a generous Ambition prompts your Lordship to
appear worthy the Glories of such Ancestors. Nobility is the mark of the favor
of Princes, and when it is adorned with intellectual and moral Excellencies, it
has then the Signatures of God upon it, and the Personal gives Luster to the
Hereditary Greatness. Secular Honors extort outward shows of Respect and
Homage; while the unsuitable Dispositions of such as are painted with misplaced
Titles, make them Objects of the real scorn of their pretended Adorers; But the
Nobleness of a wise and Virtuous Spirit commands inward Venerations, and has a
large Empire over the Souls of Men. Knowledge is a Beam of the Celestial
Light, and Virtue a Branch of the Divine Image; Great Excellencies in
themselves, and true Accomplishments of humane Na ure: In both your Lordship
has outdone your few years and given a Pattern to young Noblemen, how to
employ their Youth Honorably and Becommingly, to the Reputation of their
Quality, and Families; and their own Happiness and Glory.

But, my Lord, there is a Perfection beyond these, or more properly, it is the
height and perfection of them, and that is Religion: this makes Honorable in
both Worlds; and enters those that are truly possessed of it, among the Nobility
of God. I doubt not but your Lordship has taken care to season your Active and
Considerate Youth with the Study and Practice of this best Accomplishment: such
a Dedication of the first Fruits to our Maker is most just in it self, most
acceptable to Him, and will be most comfortable to the Person that makes the
Offering. Your Lordship is by the Bounty of Providence incircled with all
Circumstances of Earthly Felicity; Piety and a Religious Life will procure the
Divine favor, bless all your Enjoyments in this World, and assure infinitely
better in another. There dwells our Happiness, and Religion is the way to it.
This is the Subject of the little Book with which I here humbly present your
Lordship. If it may contribute any thing to your Service, in these highest
Concerns, it will be a mighty Pleasure, and Satisfaction to,

My Lord,

Your Lordships Most humble and most obedient Servant,

Jos. Glanvil.

The Preface.
THis Discourse was first printed about six years ago; since which time it had
the fortune of a stolen Edition in Scotland. The ocasion of its Publication was
this, I being desired to preach at a Neighbor-city, recollected the last
Sermon I had delivered to mine own people, and made use of that: some of the
Hearers, that thought themselves fit Judges, misapprehended my meaning in
diverse things, and past Sentence upon their own mistakes as mine: this induced
me to transcribe it out of my memory; which I did while it was yet fresh in my
mind, exactly as to the matter, though possibly with some small difference as
to the frame of words, and with some additions at the end: The Copy was
accidentally seen by a near Relation, who desired it should be published, which
I permitted; and do it now again at my Bookseller's Instance.

Luke 12. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: For many, I say unto you,
shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
The Way OF HAPPINESS AND SALVATION.
WHEN I consider the goodness of God; and the merits of his Son, our Savior;
and the Influences of the Holy Spirt; and all the advantages of the Gospel; The
certainty of its Principles, the reasonableness of its duties, the greatness of
its ends, the suitableness of its means, the glory of its Rewards, and the
Terror of its punishments; I say, when I consider these, and then look upon
Man as a reasonable Creature, apprehensive of Duty, and interest, and apt to be
moved by hopes and fears; I cannot but wonder, and be astonished to think, that
notwithstanding all this, the far greater part of men should finally miscarry,
and be undone. It Is possible some such Considerations might be the occasion of
the Question propounded to our Savior in the verse immediately foregoing the
Text. -- Lord, are there Few that be saved? God is Love, and all the Creatures
are His, and man a noble sort: He is the Lover of Men, and Thou art Redeemer of
Men; and though Man has offended, yet God is propense to pardon, and in Thee
he is reconciled; He is desirous of our happiness, and Thou art come into the
world to offer, and promote it; and the Holy Ghost is powerful and ready to
assist our endeavors; We were made for happiness, and we seek it; And -- Lord,
are there Few that be saved? The Text is Christ's return to the Question,
Strive to enter in at the straight Gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter, and shall not be able. In which words we have three things.

(I) An Answer implied; straight is the Gate.

(II) A duty expressed, strive to enter.

(III) A Consideration to engage our greater care and deligence in the Duty;
For many will seek to enter, and shall not be able.

By the Gate, we may understand the entrance, and all the way of Happiness, and
that is, Religion; By the straightness of it; the Difficulties we are to
encounter. By striving; earnest and sincere endeavor: By seeking; an imperfect
striving. And from the words thus briefly explained, These Propositions offer
themselves to onr Consideration.

I. There are many and great difficulties in Religion, The Gate is straight.

II. The difficulties may be overcome by striving, Strive to enter.

III. There is a sort of striving that will not procure an entrance, For many
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

I begin with the First in order, viz. That there are many and great
difficulties in Religion; And to what I have to say about it, I premise this
negative Consideration. That,

The Difficulties of Religion do not lie in the Understanding. Religion is a
plain thing, and easy to be understood. It Is no deep subtilty, or
high-strain'd notion; it is no gilded fancy, or elaborate exercise of the
brain; It Is not placed in the clouds of Imagination, nor wrapped up in mystical
clothing; But it is obvious and familiar, easy and intelligible; First
preached by Fishermen and Mechanics, without pomp of speech, or height of
speculation; addreft to Babes and Plebeian heads; and intended to govern the
wills of the honest, and sincere; and not to exercise the wits of the notional,
and curious. So that we need not mount the wings of the wind to fetch Religion
from the stars; nor go down to the deep to fetch it up from thence; For it is
with us, and before us, as open as the day, and as familiar as the light. The
great Praecepts of the Gospel are clothed in Sunbeams, and are as visible to
the common eye, as to the Eagle upon the highest perch. It Is no piece of wit or
subtilty to be a Christian, nor will it require much study, or learned
retirement to understand the Religion we must practice. That which was to be
known of God, was manifest to the very Heathen, Romans 1. 19. The Law is light,
says Solomon, Prove. 6. 13. And it is not only a single passing glance on the
eye; but it is put into the heart, and the promise is, that we shall all know
him, from the greatest to the least. Our duty is set up in open places, and
shone upon by a clear Beam; 'Twas written of old upon the plain Tables of
Habakkuk, Hab. 2. 2. So that the running Eye might see and read: And the
Religion of the H. Jesus, like himself, came into the world with Rays about its
Head.

Religion, I say, is clear, and plain, and what is not so, may concern the
Theater, or the Schools; may entertain men's Wits, and serve the Interests of
Disputes; but it is nothing to Religion, it is nothing to the Interest of men's
Souls.

Religion was once a Mystery, but the Mystery is revealed; And those things
that we yet count Mysteries, are plainly enough discovered as to their being
such as we believe them, though we cannot understand the manner how; and it is
no part of Religion to enquire into that, but rather It injoyns us meekly to
acquiesce in the plain declarations of Faith without bold scrutiny into hidden
things. In short I say, the difficulties of Religion are not in the
Understanding; In prompto and Facili est aeternitas, said the Father; The
affairs of eternity depend on things Easy and Familiar. And I premise this to
prevent dangerous mistakes.

But thoug Religion be so facile and plain a thing to be understood, yet the
way to Heaven is no broad, or easy Path; The Gate is straight enough for all
that; and I now come to show what are the real difficulties of Religion, and
whence they arise.

1. One great Difficulty arises from the depravity of our Natures. The
Scripture intimates, That we are conceived in sin, Psalm 55. 5. Transgressors
from the Womb. Isaiah 48. 8. And Children of Wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. And we find by
Experience that we bring vile Inclinations into the Would with us. Some are
naturally Cruel and Injurious; Proud and Imperious; Lustful and Revengful;
Others, Covetous and Unjust; Humoursome and Discontented; Treacherous and
False: And there is scarce an instance of habitual vice, or villainy, but some
or other are addicted to it by their partieular Make and Natures: I say, their
Natures, for certainly it is not true what some affirm, to serve their
Opinions, in contradiction to Experience; That Vices are not in Men's natural
Propensions; but instilled by corrupt Education, evil Customs and Examples: For
we see that those whose Education has been the same, do yet differ extremely
from each other in their inclinations; And some, whose Breeding has been
careless and loose, who have seen almost nothing else but Examples of Vice; and
been instructed in little, besides the arts of Vanity and Pleasure; I say,
there are such who notwithstanding these their unhappy circumstances, discover
none of those vile Inclinations, and Propensions, that are in others, whose
Education has been very strict and advantageous. This I think is enough to
show that many of our evil habits are from Nature, and not from Custom only.

And yet I cannot say that Humane Nature is so debaucht, that every Man is
inclined to every Evil by it: For there are those, who by their Tempers are
averse to some kind of Vices, and naturally disposed to the contrary Virtues;
some by their Constitutions are inclined to hate Cruelty, Covetousness, Lying,
Impudence and Injustice, and are by Temper, Merciful, Liberal, Modest, True and
Just. There are kinds of Vices which our Natures almost universally rise
agaisnt, as many Bestialities, and some horrid Cruelties; and all men, except
Monsters in Humane form, are disposed to some Virtues, such as Love to
Children, and Kindness to Friends and Benefactors. All this P must confess and
say, because Experien^ce constrains me; and I do not know why Systematick
Notions should sway more than that.

But notwithstanding these last concessions, it is evident enough that our
Natures are much vitiated, and depraved; and this makes our business in the way
of Religion, difficult. For our work is, to cleanse our Natures; and to destroy
those Evil Inclinations; to crucify the Old Man; Romans 6. 6. and to purge out
the old Leven; 1 Cor. 5. 7. This is Religion, and the Way of Happiness, which
must needs be very difficult, and uneasy. For the vices of Inclination are
very dear, and grateful to us; They are our Right Hands, and our Right Eyes,
and esteemed as our Selves: So that to cut off, and pluck out these, and to bid
defiance to, and wage War against our selves; to destroy the first born of our
Natures, and to lop off our own Limbs; This cannot but be very Irksom and
Displeasant Employment, and this is one chief business; and a considerable
thing that makes Religion difficult.

II. Another Difficulty arises from the Influence of the Senses. We are
Creatures of sense, and sensible things do most powerfully move us, we are born
Children, and live at first the life of Beasts: That Age receives deep
Impressions; and those are made by the senses, whose Interest grows strong, and
established in us before we come to the use of Reason; and after we have arrived
to the exercise of that, sensible objects still possess our Affections, and
sway our Wills, and fill our Imaginations, and influence our Understandings; so
that we love, and hate; we desire and choose, we fancy, and we discourse
according to those Impressions; and hence it is that we are enamored of
Trifles, and fly from our Happiness; and pu^sue Vexation, and embrace Misery;
and imagine Perversely, and reason Childishly: for the influence of the Body
and its Senses are the chief Fountains of Sin, and Folly, and Temptation: Upon
which accounts it was that the Platonical Philosophers declaimed so earnestly
against the Body, and ascribed all Evils and Michief to it; calling vice (...),
corpore^ Pestes, material Evils, and bodily Plagues. And the Apostle that
understood it better, calls Sin by the name of Flesh, Gal. 5. 17. Works of the
Flesh, Gal. 5. 19. Law of the Members, Romans 7. 23. and cries out upon the Body
of this Death, Rom 7. 24.

And now this is our natural Condition, a state subject to the prevalent
influences of Sense, and by this means to Sin and Temptation; and it is our Work
in Religion, to mortify the Body, Romans 8. 13. and to cease from mkaing
provision for the Flesh, Romans 13. 14. and from fulfilling the Lusts thereof,
Gal. 5. 14. To render our selves dead to the prevalent life of Sense and Sin,
Romans 6. 8. and 11. 5. and to arise to a new Life, Romans 6. 4. The Life of
Righteousness, and Faith, Hab. 2 4. A Life that has other Principles, and
other Pleasures; other Objects, and other Ends, and such as neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear heard, nor any of the Senses perceived. Yea, this is a Life that
is exercised in contradiction to the Judgments of sense. Its Joy, is
Tribulation; Jam. 1. 2. Its Glory, Reproaches; 2 Pet. 4. 14. Its Height, is
Lowness; Luke 14. 11. Its Greatness, in being Meanest; Matthew. 20. 27. And its
Riches, in having Nothing; 2 Cor. 6. 10. To such a Life as this, Religion is to
raise us; and it must needs be difficult to make us, who are so much Brutes, to
be so much Angels; us, who seem to live by nothing else but sense, to live by
nothing less; This with a witness is an hard, and uneasy Work, and another
difficulty in Religion.

III. A Third proceeds from the natural Disorder and Rage of our Passions. Our
Corrupt Natures are like the troubled Sea, Isa. 57. 20. And our Passions are
the Wa^e of that Ocean; that tumble and swell, and keep a mighty noise; they
dash against the Rocks, and break one against another; and our Peace and
Happiness is shipwrackt by them. Our Passiions make us miserable. We are
sometimes stifled by their Numbers, and confounded by their Disorders, and torn
to pieces by their Violence; mounted to the Clouds by Ambition, and thrown down
to the deeep by Despair; scorcht by the flames of Lust, and overwhelmed by the
Waters of unstable Desire; Passions fight one against another, and all against
reason; they prevail over the Mind, and have usurpt the Government of our
Actions, and involve us in continual Guilt and Misery. This is the natural
State of Man; and our work in the way of Religion, is to restrain this
Violence, and to rectify these Disorders, and to reduce those Rebellious
Powers under the Empire and Government of the Mind, their Sovereign. And so to
regain the Divine Image, which consists much in the order of our Faculties; and
the Subjection of the Brutish, to the reasonable Powers. This, I say, Religion
aims at, to raise us to the perfection of our Natures, by mortifying those
Members, Col. 3. 5. our unruly Passions and Desires; and crucifying the Flesh
with its Affections and Lusts; Gal. 5. 24. And thereby to make us humble in
Prosperity, quiet in Adversity; meek under Provocations, steady amidst
Temptations, modest in our Desires, temperate in our Enjoyments, constant to
our Resolutions, and contented in all Conditions. Here is our great Business,
and our Work is this: And certainly it is no easy thing to bring order out of a
Chaos, and to speak a Tempest in a Calm; to resist a Torrnt, and to stop and
turn the Tide; to subdue a Rebellious Rabble, and to change them from
Tyrannical Masters, to Modest and Obedient Servants: These, no doubt, are works
of difficulty enough, and these must be our Employment in the way of Religion;
and on this score also, the Gate is straight.

IV. Our Work in Religion is yet more difficult, upon the account of Custom, to
which we are subject, and by which we are swayed much. This is vulgarly said to
be another Nature, and the Apostle calls it by that name, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does
not Nature it self teach you, that if a Man have long Hair, it is a shame unto
him? By the word Nature, the best Interpreters say only Custom is meant; since
long Hair is not declared shameful by the Law and Light of Nature, taken in its
chief and properest sense: For then it had never been permitted to the
Nazarites: But the contrary custom, in the Nations that used it not, made it
seem shameful and indecent. There are other places in Scripture and ancient
Authors, wherein Nature is put for Custom: But I must not insist on this; the
thing I am about is, that Custom is very powerful; and as it makes a kind of
Nature, so, many times it masters and subdues it. Wild Creatures are hereby
made gentle and familiar; and those that naturally are tame enough; are made to
degenerate into wildness by it.

And now besides the original depravities of our Natures, we have contracted
many vicious habits by corrupt and evil usages; which we were drawn into at
first by pleasure and vanity in our young and inconsiderate years, while we
were led by the directions of sense: These, by frequent acts, grow at last into
habits; which though in their beginning they were tender as a Plant, and easy
to have been crushed or blasted, yet time and use hardens them into the firmness
of an Oak, that braves the Weather, and can endure the stroke of the Ax and a
strong Arm.

Now to destroy and root up these obstinate customary evils, is another part of
our Work. And Religion reaches us to put off concerning the Old Conversation,
the Old Man, Ephesians. 4. 22. and to receive new Impressions and Inclinations; to be
renewed in the spirit of our Minds, 5. 23 and to put on the New Man, 5. 24. To
make us new Hearts, Ezekiel. 18. 31. and to walk in newness of Life, Romans 6. 4.
This we are to do, and this we may well suppose to be hard work; the Scripture
compares it to the changing the Skin of the Ethiopian, and the Spots of the
Leopard, Jer. 13. 23. and elsewhere. How can they do good, that are accustomed
to do evil? Jer. 13. 23. It Is hard, no doubt; and this is another difficulty in
Religion.

V. The Power that Example has over us, makes the way of Religion difficult.
Example is more prevalent than Precept, for Man is a Creature given much to
Imitation, and we are very apt to follow what we see others do, rather than
what we ought to do our selves.

And now the Apostle has told us, That the whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and we sadly find it: we cannot look out of doors, but we see
Vanity and Folly, Sensuality and Forgetfulness of God; Pride and Covetousness,
Injustice and Intemperance, and all other kinds of Evils: These we meet with
every where, in Public Companies, and Private Conversations; in the High Ways,
and in the Corners of the Streets.

The Sum is, Example is very powerful, and Examples of Vice are always in our
Eyes; we are apt to be reconciled to that which every one does, and to do like
it; we love the trodden Path, and care not to walk in the Way which is gone in
but by a few.

This is our Condition, and our work in Religion is, to overcome the strong
Biass of corrupt Example; to strive against the Stream, to learn to be good,
though few are so, and not to follow a Multitude to do Evil, Exodus 23. 2. This
is our Business; and this is very Difficult.

VI. The last Difficulty I shall mention, arises from Worldly Interests and
Engagements. We have many Necessities to serve, both in our Persons and our
Families. Nature excluded us naked into the World, without Clothing for
Warmth, or Armature for Defense; and Food is not provided to our Hands, as it
is for the Beasts; nor do our Houses grow for our Habitation, and comfortable
abode. Nothing is prepared for our use without our Industry and Endeavors. So
that by the Necessity of this State, we are engaged in Worldly Affairs: These,
Nature requires us to mind, and Religion permits it; and nothing can be done
without our Care; and Care would be very troublesome, if there were not some
Love to the Objects we exercise our Cares upon: Hence it is, that some Cares
about the things of this world, and Love to them is allowed us; and we are
commanded to continue in the Calling wherein God has set us, 1 Cor. 7. 20. and
are warned that we be not slothful in Business, Romans 12. 11. We may take some
delight also in the Creatures that God gives us, and love them in their degree:
For the animal Life may have its moderate Gratifications; God made all things,
that they might enjoy their Being.

And now, notwithstanding all this, Religion commands us to set our Affections
upon things above, Col. 3. 2. not to love the World, 1 John 2. 15. to be
careful for nothing, Phil. 4. 6. to take no thought for to morrow, Mat. 6. 34.
The meaning of which Expressions is, That we should love God and Heavenly
things, in the chief and first place; and avoid the immoderate Desires of
Worldly Love and Cares. This is our Duty: and it is very difficult: For by
reason of the burry of Business, and those Passions that Earthly Engagements
excite; we consider not things as we should, and so, many times perceive not
the Bounds of our Permissions, and the Beginnings of our Restraints; where the
allowed Measure ends, and the forbidden Degree commenceth: what is the
difference between that Care that is a Duty, and that which is a Sin;
Providence and Carking; and between that Love of the World which is Necessary
and Lawful, and that which is Extravagant and Inordinate? I say, by reason of
the hurry we are in, amidst Business and worldly Delights, we many times
perceive not our Bounds, and so slide easily into Earthly-mindedness and
anxiety. And it is hard for us, who are engaged so much in the World, and who
need it so much, who converse so much with it and about it, and whose time and
endeavors are so unavoidably taken up by it; I say it is hard for us, in such
Circumstances, to be crucified to the World, Gal. 6. 14. and to all inordinate
Affections to it: to live above it and to settle our chief Delights and Cares
on things at great distance from us, which are unsuitable to our corrupt
Appetites, and contrary to the most relishing Enjoyments of Flesh; which Sense
never saw nor felt, and which the Imagination it self could never grasp. This,
no doubt, is hard Exercise, and this must be done in the way of Religion; and
on this Account also, it is very difficult.

Thus of the First Proposition, That there are great Difficulties in Religion.
I come now to the Second.

II. THat those Difficulties may be overcome by striving; which imports both
the Encouragement and the Means; That they may be vanquished, and how.

(I.) That the Difficulties may be subdued, is clearly enough employed, in the
Precept; we should not have been commanded to strive, if it had been impossible
to overcome. God does not put his Creatures upon fruitless Undertakings: He
never requires us to do any thing in order to that, which is not to be
attained. Therefore when he was resolved not to be entreated for that stubborn
and rebellious Nation. He would not have the Prophet pray for them, Jer. 7. 16.
Pray not for this People, for I will not hear thee. He would not be petitioned
for that, which he was determined not to grant. He puts not his Creatures upon
any vain Expectations and Endeavors; nor would he have them deceive themselves
by fond Dependences. When one made this Profession to our Savior, Lord, I will
follow thee whithersoever thou go. Christ tells him, that he must expect
from him no worldly Honors or Preferments; no Power or sensual Pleasure, no,
not so much as the ordinary Accommodations of Life. The Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his
Head. Luke 9. 5, 8. He would not have the man that likely might look for these,
upon the opinion of his being the Messiah, in the Jewish sense, one that should
at last, whatever the meanness of his Condition was at present, appear as a
Mighty, and Triumphant temporal Monarch; I say, our Savior would not have the
Man follow him for that, which he had not to bestow upon him. Since then that
he who would not put us upon fruitless labors, has commanded us to strive to
enter; it is evident, that an entrance may be procured into the Gate by
striving, and that the Difficulties may be overcome.

The next thing in my Method is to show, How; the manner is employed in the
Text; and expressed in the Proposition, viz. By striving; and by this, is meant,
a resolute use of those means that are the Instruments of Happiness. They are
three, Faith, Prayer, and active Endeavor.

(1.) Faith is a chief Instrument, for the overcoming the Difficulties of our
way.

And Faith in the general, is the belief of a Testimony; Divine Faith the
belief of a Divine Testimony; and the chief things to be believed, as
encouragements and means for a Victory over the Difficulties in Religion, are
these; That God is reconciled to us by his Son; That he will assist our weak
endeavous by the Aids of his Spirit; That he will reward us if we strive as we
ought, with immortal Happiness in a World of endless Glory.

By our belief of God's being reconciled, we are secured from those fears, that
might discourage our approaches and endeavors, upon the account of his Purity
and Justice. By the Faith of his Assistance, all the objections against our
striving, that arise from the greatness of the Difficulties, and the
disproportionate smalness of our Strength, are answered. And from our believing
eternal rewards in another World, we have a mighty motive to engage our utmost
diligence, to contest with all difficulties that would keep us from it.

What satisfaction is there, says the believer, in the gratification of my
corrupt Inclinations and Senses, in comparison with that, which arises from
the favor of God, and an Interest in his Son? What difficulties in my Duty,
too great for Divine Aids? What pains are we to undergo in the narrow and
difficult way, that the Glory which is at the end of it, will not compensate?
What is it to deny a base Inclination that will undo me; in obedience to him
that made, and redeemed me; and to despise the little things of present sense,
for the hope of everlasting enjoyments; Trifting pleasure, for Hallelujabs?
What were it for me to set vigorously upon those Passions that degrade my noble
Nature, and make me a slave and a beast, and will make me more vile, and more
miserable; when the Spirit of the most High is at my right hand to assist me?
Why should my noble Faculties, that were designed for glorious ends, be led
into infamous practices by base Vsages, and dishonorable Customs? What is the
example of a wicked, sensual, wretched World, to that of the Holy Jesus; and
all the Army of Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs? What is there in the World,
that it should be loved more than God? and what is the Flesh, that it should
have more of our time and care, than the great interests of our Souls?

Such are the Considerations of a mind, that Faith has awakened; and by them
it is prepared for vigorous striving. So that Faith is the Spring of all; and
necessary to the other two Instruments of our Happiness. Besides which, it is
acceptable to God, in it self, and so disposes us for his gracious helps, by
which we are enabled to overcome the Difficulties of our way. While a man
considers the Difficulties only, and weighs them against his own strength, let
him suppose the Liberty of his Will to be what he pleases, yet while it is
under such disadvantages, that will signify very little; and he that sees no
further, sits down in discouragement; But when the mind is fortified with the
firm belief of Divine help, he attempts then with a noble vigor, which cannot
miscarry, if it do not cool and faint. For he that endures to the end, shall be
saved, Mat. 24. 13. Thus Faith sets the other Instruments of Happiness on work,
and therefore it is deservedly reckoned as the first; and it is that which must
always accompany the exercises of Religion, and give them life and motion.

(II.) Prayer is another means we must use, in order to our overcoming the
Difficulties of the way. Our own mere, natural Strength is weakness; and
without supernatural helps those Difficulties are not to be surmounted. Those
Aids are necessary, and God is ready to bestow them on us; For He would have
all men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
But for these things he will be sought unto. And it is very just, and fit that
we should address our selves to him by Prayer, to acknowledge our own
insufficiency and dependence, on him for the mercies we expect; and thereby to
own Him for the giver of every good and perfect gift; and to instruct our
selves how his favors are to be received and used, viz. with Reverence and
Thanksgiving: This, it is highly fit we should do; and the doing it prepares us
for his blessings; and he fails not to bestow them on those that are prepared
by Faith and Prayer; For he gives liberally and upbraids not; And our Prayers
are required, not as if they could move his will, which is always graciously
inclined to our Happiness; But as it is that tribute which we owe our Maker and
Benefactor; and that without which it is not so fit he shonld bestow his
particular favors on us. For it by no means becomes the Divine Majesty, to
vouchsafe the specialties of his Grace and Goodness to those, that are not
sensible they want them; and are not humbled to a due apprehension of their
weakness and dependence. But for such as are so, and express their humble
desires in the Ardours of Holy Prayer, God never denies them the assistances of
his Spirit: For if ye being evil (says our Savior) know how to give good
gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven
give good things to those that ask Him? Mat. 7. 11.

And These Divine Helps obtained by Faith and Prayer, and joined with our
active constant endeavor, will not fail to enable us to overcome the
Difficulties, and to procure us an entrance at the straight Gate. And so I come
to the Third Instrument of our Happiness, which is employed in striving, viz.

(III.) Active Endeavor, in which Repentance and the fruits of it are implied;
Both Faith and Prayer are in order to this; and without it neither can turn to
account. For Faith without works is dead, Jam. 2. 20. and Prayer, without
endeavor fruitless; yea indeed, in the Divine Estimate, it is none at all:
It Is bodily exercise; no Prayer. For when we invoke Gods help, we desire it,
that we may use it; Divine Grace is not a Treasure to lay up by us, but an
Instrument to work with; and when we pray that God would assist us in our
endeavors, and endeavor not at all, we mock God, and trifle with him in our
Prayers: Endeavor then is necessary, and necessary in a degree so eminent,
that this is always included in Faith when it is taken in the highest and
noblest Evangelical sense, viz. for the Faith which justifies and saves; for
that comprehends all those endeavors, and their fruits, whereby we are made
happy.

We must not expect that God should do all (exclusively) in the work of our
Salvation. He does his part, and we must do ours; (though we do that, by his
help too.) He that made us without our selves, will not save us without our
selves, said the Father. We are commanded to seek, Mat. 7. 7. To Run, 1 Cor. 9.
24. To fight, 1 Timothy 6. 12. To give diligence, 2 Pet. 1. 10. These all import
Action and Endeavor. And that endeavor must not be only a faint purpose, or
formal service; but it must be employed in the highest degree of Care and
Diligence. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11. 12. and this
violence must not be used in an heat, and sudden fit only, that cools and dies,
and contents it self with having been warm for a time: But it must be a steady
and constant course of activity, a continual striving to overcome the remaining
difficulties of the way.

We must endeavor vigorously and constantly; and in that, (after our Faith is
strengthened by deep consideration, and Divine assistance implored by ardent
Prayer) our course is,

(1.) To abstain from all the outward actions of Sin, and to perform the
external acts of the contrary Virtues. To cease to do evil, Isa. 1. 16. is the
first step. When the Publicans asked John the Baptist, Luke 3. 12. what they
should do; His direction was, that they should not exact, verse. 13. and to the
Soldiers, asking the same question, he answers, Do Violence to no man, verf.
14. These were the sins of their particular Professions, which were to be
quitted, before any thing could be done higher. We have ordinarily more power
over our actions, than our habits, and therefore we should begin here, and
resolve deeply, by divine help, to cut off those supplies that feed vicious
inclinations; for wicked habits are maintained by actions of Wickedness; when
they ceafe, the inclinations grow more faint, and weak: and when we are come
but thus far, to have confined our lusts, we shall be encouraged to proceed to
destroy them. It Is said, There is no great distance between a Princes Prison
and his Grave; The saying is most true in the case of Tyrants and Usurpers; and
the habits of sin are both; when they are restrained, they are not far from
being destroyed, if we employ our endeavors, and the divine aids, as we ought.

This then must be done First, and the other part of the advice must be taken
with it, viz. we must practice the outward actions of the contrary Virtues. We
must do well, when we cease to do evil. When we turn from darkness, it must be
to light, Acts 26. 18. Not from one kind of darkness to another. When we cease
to opprefs, we must be charitable; when we leave to tyrannize over our
inferiors, we must be kind and helpful to them. When we forbear to slander, we
must speak all the good we can of our Neighbor.

The outward actions of Virtue are in our power; and it is somewhat to come so
far as this: What is more, viz. The inward love and delight in goodness, will
succeed in time, if we persevere. It Is not safe for us to propose to our selves
the greatest heights at first; if we do, we are discouraged, and fall back. God
accepts even of that little, if it be in order to more. He despises not the
day of small things, Zech. 4. 10. If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? Christ loved the young man who had kept the external part of the
Commandments, Mark 10. 12. If he had had the courage to have proceeded; what he
had done, would have steaded him much. The inward love of Virtue and Holiness
is promoted by the outward exercises of them, and hereby the contrary evils are
both pined and thrust out.

Thus of the First thing that Endeavor implies; upon this must follow,

(2.) An attempt upon evil habits, viz. Those that have been super-induced on
us by Carelessness and Temptation, bad Customs and evil Company. Every victory
is a means to another; we grow stronger, and the enemy weaker by it. To have
overcome the outward acts of sin, is a beginning in our spiritual warfare; but
our chief enemies are the habits; these must be attempted also, but with
Prudence; wild Beasts are not to be dealt with by main strength; Art and
Stratagem must be used in this War; and it is good policy, I think here, to
fight the least powerful foes first, the contracted habits, before we fall on
the inbred natural Inclinations. While our forces are weak, it is dangerous
setting upon the strongest holds, viz. the vices of Complexion, which are woven
into our very Natures. If a man apply all his force where he has not
resolution enough to go through with what he undertakes, he receives a foyl,
and it is odds but he sits down and faints. Prudence therefore is to be used,
where we distrust our strength: Fall upon Sin, where it is weakest, where it
has least of Nature, and least of Temptation; and where we have arguments from
Reputation and worldly Interests wherewith to war against it. If we prevail, we
are heartned by the success: Our Faith and Resolution will grow stronger by
this experience, when we have triumph't over the sins of evil Custom, Example,
and sensual Indulgence.

And when that is done, we must remember that it is not enough that those habits
are thrust out; others must be planted in their room: when the soil is
prepared, the seed must be sown, and the seeds of virtuous habits, are the
actions of virtue. These I recommended under the last head, and shall say more
of the introducing of habits, under one that follows on purpose.

(3.) The next advance in our endeavors, is, In the Strength of God, and in
the Name of his Son, to assault the greater Devils, and to strive to cast out
them; I mean the Sins of Complexion, and particular Nature. This is a great
work, and will require strong Faith, and many Prayers, and much Time, and great
Watchfulness, and invincible Resolution: Employ these heartily; and though thou
now and then may receive a foyl, yet give not off so, but rise again in the
strength of God, implore new aid, and fortify thy self with more
considerations, and deeper resolves; and then renew the Combat upon the
encouragement of Divine Assistance, and Christ's Merits and Intercession, and
the promise that sin shall not have Dominion over us, Romans 6. 14.

Remember, that this is the great work, and the biggest difficulty; if this be
not overcome, all our other labor has been in vain, and will be lost. If this
root remain, it will still bear poisonous fruit, which will be matter for
Temptation, and occasion of continual falling; and we shall be in danger of
being reconciled again to our old sins, and to undo all; and so our latter end
will be worse than our beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Or, at least, though we stand
at a stay, and satisfy our selves with that; yet though we are contented, our
condition is not safe.

If we will endeavor to any purpose of duty, or security, we must proceed
still after our lesser conquests, till the sins of Complexion are laid dead at
our feet. He that is born of God, sins not, and he cannot sin, 1. Joh. 3. 9.
Till we come to this, we are but struggling in the Birth.

Such a perfection as is mortifying of vicious temper, is I hope attainable,
and it is no doubt that which Religion aims at; and though it be a difficult
height, yet we must not sit down this side: At least we must be always pressing
on to this Mark: if Providence cut off our days before we have arrived to it,
we may expect acceptance of the sincerity of our endeavors, upon the account
of the merits of our Savior: For he has procured favor for those sincere.
Believers and Endeavoureres, whose Day is done before their work is completed;
this I mean, of subduing the darling sins of their particular Natures.

But then if we rest, and please our selves with the little Victories and
Seize, and let these our great Enemies quietly alone, it is an argument
our endeavors are not sincere, but much short of that striving, which will
procure an entrance into the straight Gate. The next thing (and it is the last I
shall mention) which is employed in striving, is,

(4.) To furnish our selves, through Divine Grace, with the Habits and
Inclinations of Holiness and Virtue. For Goodness to become a kind of Nature to
the Soul, is height indeed; but such a one as may be reached: the new Nature,
and new Creature, Gal. 6. 15. are not mere names.

We have observed that some men are of a Natural Generosity, Veracity and
Sweetness; and they cannot act contrary to these Native Virtues without a
mighty Violence: why now should not the New Nature be as powerful as the Old?
And why may not the Spirit of God, working by an active Faith and Endeavor,
fix Habits and Inclinations on the Soul, as prevalent as those? No doubt, it
may, and does, upon the Diviner Souls: For whom to do a wicked, or unworthy
Action, 'twould be as violent and unnatural, as for the meek and compassionate
temper to butcher the innocent; or for him, that is naturally just, to oppress
and make a prey of the Fatherless and the Widow. I say, such a degree of
perfection as this, should be aimed at, Heb. 6. 1. and we should not slacken or
intermit our endeavors till it be attained.

In order to it, we are to use frequent meditation on the excellency and
pleasure of Virtue and Religion; and earnest Prayer for the Grace of God; and
diligent attendance upon the public worship; and pious Company and Converses:
For this great design, these helps are requisite, and if we exercise our selves
in them as we ought, they will fire our Souls with the love of God and
Goodness; and so at last, all Christian Virtues will become as natural to us,
as si^ was before. And to one that is so prepared, the Gate of Happiness will
be open, and of easy entrance; the difficulties are overcome, and from
henceforth the way is pleasant and plain before him, Prove. 3. 17.

Thus I have shown, that the formidable difficulties may be overcome, and How:
it is a plain course I have directed, that will not puzzle men's understandings
with needless niceties, nor distract their memories with multitndes. Let us
walk in this way, and do it constantly, with vigor and alacrity; and there is
no fear, but in the Strength of God, through the merits and mediation of his
Son, we shall overcome, and at last enter.

I had now done with this general Head, but that it is necessary to note three
things more.

(1.) Those Instruments of our Happiness which we must use in striving, viz.
Faith, Prayer, and active Endeavor, must all of them be employed. Not any one
singly, will do the great work; nor can the others, if any one be wanting. If
we believe, and do not pray; or pray, and do not endeavor; or endeavor,
without those, the Difficulties will remain, and 'twill be impossible for us to
enter.

(2.) We must be diligent in our course: If we do not exercise Faith
vigorously, and pray heartily, and endeavor with our whole might, the means
will not succeed; and it is as good not at all, as not to purpose. The
Difficulties will not be overcome by cold Faith, or sleepy Prayers, or remiss
Endeavors: A very intense degree of these is necessary.

(3.) Our striving must be constant; we must not begin, and look back, Heb. 10.
38. or run a while, and stop in midd course, 1 Cor. 9. 24. and content our
selves with some seize, and think we have arrived, Phil. 3. 14. If we do
so, we shall find our selves dangerously mistaken. The Crown is at the end of
the Warfare, and the Prise at the end of the Race. If we will succeed, we must
hold on: The life of one that strives as he ought, must be a continual motion
forwards; always proceeding, always growing.

If we strive thus, we cannot fail; if any of these qualifications be wanting,
we cannot but miscarry. And hence no doubt it is, that many that seek to enter,
shall not be able, and the presumed sons of the Kingdom are shut out, Mat.
8.12. They seek, and are very desirous to be admitted; They do some thing, and
strive; but their striving is partial, or careless, or short; by reason of
which defects, they do not overcome, and shall not enter.

This is a dangerous Rock, and perhaps there are as many undone by cold and
half striving, as by not striving at all. He that has done some thing,
presumes he is secure; He goes the round of ordinary Duties, but advances
nothing in his way; He overcomes none of the great Difficulties, none of the
Habits or depraved Inclinations; He is contented with other things that make a
more glorious show; though they signify less; and perhaps despises these,
under the notion of Morality; and so presuming, that he is a Saint too soon, he
never comes to be one at all: such are the Seekers that shall not be able to
enter: Their seeking imports some striving; but it is such, as, though it be
specious, yet it is imperfect, and will not succeed. And hence the Third
Proposition arises, that I proposed to discourse.

(III.) THat there is a sort of Striving that will not procure an entrance:
employed in these words, For many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

It Is a dangerous thing to be flattered into a false peace; and to take up with
imperfect Godliness; to reconcile the hopes of Heaven to our beloved sins, and
to judge our condition safe upon insufficient grounds. This multitudes do, and
it is the great danger of our days; Men cannot be contented without doing
something in Religion; but they are contented with a little. And then they
reckon themselves godly, before they are virtuous; and take themselves to be
Saints, upon such things as will not distinguish a good man from a bad.

We seek after Marks of Godliness, and would be glad to know, how we might try
our state: The thing is of great importance; and if the Signs we judge by are
either false, or imperfect, we are deceived to our undoing. Mere Speculative
mistakes about Opinions, do no great hurt; but error in the Marks and Measures
of Religion is deadly. Now there are sundry things commonly taken for signs of
Godliness, which though they are something, yet they are not enough; They are
hopeful for beginnings, but nothing worth when they are our end and rest. They
are a kind of seeking and imperfect striving; but not such as overcomes the
difficulties of the way, or will procure us an entrance at the Gate. Therefore
to disable the flattering, insufficient Marks of Godliness, I shall discover in
pursuance of the Third Proposition, How far a man may strive in the exercises
of Religion, and yet be found at last among those seekers that shall not be
able to enter. And though I have intimated something of this in the general
before, yet I shall now more particularly show it in the instances that follow.
And in these I shall discover a Religion that may be called Animal, to which
the natural man may attain.

(I.) A Man may believe the Truths of the Gospel, and assent heartily to all
the Articles of the Creed: and if he proceeds not, he is no further by this,
than the faith of Devils, Jam. 2. 19.

(2.) He may go on, and have a great thirst to be more acquainted with Truth;
He may seek it diligently in Scripture, and Sermons, and good Books, and
knowing Company; And yet do this, by the motion of no higher Principle, than an
inbred Curiosity, and desire of Knowledge; and many times this earnestness after
Truth, proceeds from a proud effection to wiser than our Neighbors, that we
may pity their darkness; or the itch of a disputing humor, that we may out
talk them; or a design to carry on, or make a party, that we may be called
Rabbi, or serve an Interest: and the zeal for Truth that is set on work by such
motives, is a spark of that fire that is from beneath: It Is dangerous to a man's
self, and to the public Weal of the Church and mankind, but the man proceeds,
and is,

(3.) Very much concerned to defend and propagate his Faith; and the Pharisees
were so in relation to theirs, Matt. 23. 15. and so have been many Professors
of all the Religions that are, or ever were. Men naturally love their own
Tenants, and are ambitious to mould others judgments according to theirs. There
is glory in being an Instructor of other men; and turning them to our ways and
opinions: So that here is nothing yet above Nature; nothing but what may be
found in many that seek, and are shut out. But,

(4.) Faith works greater effects than these, and Men offer themselves to
Martyrdom for it; This, one would think, should be the greatest height, and an
argument that all the difficulties of the way, are overcome by one that is so
resolved; and that the Gate cannot but be opened to him. And so, no doubt it
is, when all things else are suitable: But otherwise these consequences by no
means follow. St. Paul supposes that a man may give his Body to be burned, and
not have Charity, without which his Martyrdom will not profit, 1 Cor. 13. For
one to deny his Religion, or what he believes to be certain, and of greatest
consequence, is dishonorable and base: and some out of principles of mere
natural bravery, will die rather than they will do it; and yet, upon other
accounts be far enough from being heroically virtuous. Besides, the desire of
the glory of Martyrdom and Saintship after it, may in some be stronger than the
terrors of Death: and we see frequently, that men will sacrifice their lives
to their Honor and Reputation; yea to the most contemptible shadows of it. And
there is no passion in us so weak, no lust so impotent, but has, in many
instances, prevailed over the fear of dying. Every Appetite has had its
Martyrs; and all Religions theirs; and though a man give his Body to be burnt
for the best, and have not Charity, viz. Prevalent love to God and Men, it will
not signify: So that Martyrdom is no infallible mark, nor will it avail any
thing, except sincere endeavor to overcome the greater difficulties, have gone
before it. Thus far Faith may go without effect: and yet one step further.

(5.) Men may confidently rely upon Christ for Salvation, and be firmly
persuaded that he has justified, and will make them happy. They may
appropriate him to themselves, and be pleased mightily in the opinion of his
being theirs. And yet notwithstanding this confidence may be in the number of
those seekers that shall not enter. For Christ is the Author of Eternal life,
only to those that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. and to obey him, is to strive
vigorously and constantly, to overcome all our sinful Inclinations and Habits.
And those that trust he will save them, though they have never seriously set
about this work, deceive themselves by vain presumption, and in effect say,
that he will dissolve or dispense with his Laws in their favor. For he
requires us to deny our selves, Mar. 8. 34. To mortify the body, Rom 8. 13. To
love enemies, Mat. 5. 44. To be meek, Mat. 11. 29. and patient, Jam. 5. 8. and
humble, 1 Pet. 5. 7. and just, Mat. 7. 12. and charitable, Heb. 13. 16. and
Holy, as he that called us is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. And he has promised to save
upon no other terms; For all these are included in Faith, when it is taken in
the justifying sense, and this is the Way of Happiness and Salvation: If we
walk not in this, but in the paths of our own choosing, our relying upon Christ
is a mockery, and will deceive us.

We may indeed be confident, and we ought, that he will save all those that so
believe as to obey him; but may not trust that he will save us except we are
some of those. To rely upon Christ for our Salvation, must follow our sincere
and obedient striving, and not go before it. The mistake of this is exceeding
dangerous, and I doubt has been fatal to many. The sum is to rely on Christ,
without a resolute and steady endeavor to overcome every sin and temptation,
will gain us nothing in the end but shame and dissappointment: For it is not
every one that faith unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into Heaven, but he that
does the will of his Father which is in Heaven. Mat. 7.21. The foolish Virgins
relied upon him, and expected he should open to them; Lord, Lord, open to us,
Mat. 25. 11. but he kept them out, and would not know them, v. 11.

Thus of the First imperfect Mark of Godliness; A man may upon the account of
mere Nature, arrive to all the mentioned degrees of Faith; and yet if his
endeavors in the practice of Christian virtues be not suitable, he will
certainly come short at last.

(II.) A man may be very devout, given much to Prayer, and be very frequent and
earnest in it; He may have the gift of expressing himself fluently, without the
help of Form or Meditation: yea, and so intent and taken up in these exercises,
that he may as it were be ravished out of himself by the fervours of his
Spirit; so that he really kindles very high Affections as well in others, as in
himself: And yet if he rests in this, and such like things as Religion, and
reckons that he is accepted of God for it; if he allow himself in any
unmortified lusts, and thinks to compound for them by his Prayers, he is an
evil man notwithstanding, and one of those seekers that shall not be able to
enter. The Pharisees, we know, were much given to Prayer: They were long in
those Devotions, and very earnest in them often repeating the same expressions
out of vehemence. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Jesuits, was a man almost
ecstatical in his Prayers; and Hacket the Blasphemer, executed in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, was a person of Seraphical Devotion, and would pray those that
heard him even into transports. Basilides the cruel Duke of Mos^o, is said to
have his hands almost continually lifted up in Prayer, except when they were
employed in some barbarous and bloody Execution: And we have known and felt one
not much unlike him. There are infinite instances in our days of this dangerous
sort of evil men.

And we may learn hence, that the greatest gift of Prayer, and earnestness and
frequency in it, is no good mark of Godliness, except it be attended with
sincere, constant and virtuous endeavors.

For some men have a natural spice of Devotion in a Religious Melancholy, which
is their temper; and such have commonly strong Imaginations and zealous
affections, which when they are heated, flame forth into great heights and
expressions of Devotion: The warm Fancy furnishes words and matter readily and
unexpectedly, which many times begets in the man a conceit that he is inspired,
and that his Prayers are the breathings of the Holy Ghost; or at least, that he
is extraordinarily assisted by it; which belief kindles his affections yet
more, and he is carried beyond himself, even into the third Heavens, and
Suburbs of Glory, as he fancies, and so he makes no doubt, but that he is a
Saint of the first rank, and special favorite of Heaven; when all this while,
he may be really a bad man full of Envy and Malice; Pride and Covetousness;
Scorn and ill Nature; contempt of his Betters, and disobedience to his
Governors. And while it is so, notwithstanding those glorious things, he is no
further than the Pharisee. Hearty and humble desire, though imperfectly
expressed, and without this pomp, and those wonders, is far more acceptable to
God, who delights not in the exercises of mere Nature Psalm. 147. 10. but is
well pleased with the expressions of Grace in those that fear him.

So that a sincere and lowly-minded Christian that talks of no immediate
incomes, or communications; and perhaps durst not, out of reverence, trust to
his own present conceptions in a work so solemn, but uses the help of some
pious form of words suitable to his defires and wants, who is duly sensible of
his sins, and the necessity of overcoming them; and is truly and earnestly
desirous of the Divine aids, in order to it: such a one as this Prays by the
Spirit, and will be assisted by it; while the other does all by mere Nature and
Imitation, and shall not have those spiritual aids which he never heartily
desires nor intends to use.

This, I think, I may truly and safely say: But for the Controversy between
Forms and Conceived Prayers, which of them is absolutely best, I determine
nothing of it here. And indeed I suppose that in their own nature, they are
alike indifferent, and are more or less accepted, as they partake more or less
of the Spirit of Prayer, viz. of Faith, Humility and holy desire of the good
things we pray for; and a man may have these that prays by a Form; and he may
want them that takes the other way, and thinks himself in a dispensation much
above it. So that my business is not to set up one of these ways of Devotion
against the other, but to show, that the heights and vehemencies of many warm
people in their unpremeditated Prayers, have nothing in them supernatural or
Divine, and consequently, of themselves, they are no marks of Godliness: which
I hope no one thinks I speak to discredit those pious ardours that are felt by
really devout Souls, when a vigorous sense of God, and Divine things, does even
sometimes transport them: Far be it from me to design any thing so impious; my
aim is only to note, that there are complexional heats raised many times by
fancy and self-admiration, that look like these, in persons who really have
little of God in them; and we should take care that we are not deceived by
them. Thus far also those may go that shall not enter. I add,

(III.) A man may endeavor somewhat, and strive in some degree, and yet his
work may miscarry, and himself with it.

(1.) There is no doubt, but that an evil man may be convinced of his sin and
vileness, and that even to anguish and torment. The Gentiles says the Apostle,
Romans 2. 14. which have not the Law, show the works of the Law written in their
Hearts, their thoughts in the mean time accusing, or excusing one another.
Conscience often stings and disquiets the vilest sinners; and sometimes extorts
from them lamentable confessions of their sins, and earnest declamations
against them. They may weep bitterly at their remembrance, and be under great
heaviness and dejection upon their occasion. They may speak vehemently against
sin themselves, and love to have others to handle it severely. All this bad men
may do upon the score of natural fear, and self love, and the apprehension of a
fature judgment. And now such convictions will naturally beget some endeavors:
A convinced understanding will have some influence upon the will and
affections. The mind in the unregenerate, may lust against the Flesh, as that
does against it.

So that (2.) such a mere animal man may promise, and purpose, and endeavor in
some pretty considerable measure; but then, he goes not on with full
Resolution, but wavers and stops, and turns about again; and lets the law of
the members, that of death and sin, to prevail over him. His endeavor is
remiss, and consequently ineffectual; it makes no conquests, and will not
signify. He sins on, though with some regret; and his very unwillingness to
sin, while he commits it, is so far from lessening, that it aggravates his
fault: It argues that he sins against conscience and conviction; and that sin
is strong and reigns.

It Is true indeed, St. Paul, Romans 7. makes such a description seemingly of
himself, as one might think concluded him under this state; he says verse. 8.
That sin wrought in him all manner of concupiscence: verse. 9. That sin revived,
and he died: verse. 14. That he was carnal; and again; sold under sin, verse. 20.
That sin dwelt in him, and wrought that which he would not: verse. 23. That the
Law of his Members led him into captivity to the law of Sin: and verse. 25. That
he obeyed the law of sin.

If this be so, and St. Paul, a regenerate man, was in this state, it will
follow, that seeking and feeble endeavor, that overcomes no difficulty, may
yet procure an entrance, and he that is come hitherto, viz. to endeavor; is
safe enough though he do not conquer.

This objection presses not only against this head, but against my whole
Discourse, and the Text it self. Therefore to answer it, I say, That the St.
Paul here is not to be understood of himself; He describes the state of a
convinced, but unregenerate man, though he speaks in the first person; a Figure
that was ordinary with this Apostle, and frequent enough in common speech: Thus
we say, I am thus, and thus, and did so, and so, when we are describing a
state, or actions in which perhaps we, in person, are not concerned.

In this sense the best Expositors understand these expressions, and those
excellent Divines of our own, Bishop Tailor, and Dr. Hammond, and others have
noted to us, That this description is directly contrary to all the Characters
of a regenerate man, given elsewhere by this, and the other Apostles. As he is
said to be dead to sin, Romans 6. 11. Free from sin, and the servant of
Righteousness, Romans 6. 18. That he walks not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8. 1. That the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has
made him free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. That he overcomes the
world, Joh. 5. 4. He sins not, 1 John 3. 6. He has crucified the flesh with
its affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Which Characters of a truly regenerate
person, if they be compared with those above cited out of Romans 7. it will
appear, that they are as contrary, as it is possible to speak, and by this, it is
evident that they describe the two contrary states.

For can the regenerate be full of all manner of concupiscence, and at the same
time be crucified to the Flesh, and its affections and lusts? one in whom sin
revives while he dies; and yet one that is dead to sin? carnal, and yet not
walking after the flesh, but after the Spirit? sold under sin, and yet free
from sin? Having sin dwelling in him; and a captive to sin; and obeying the Law
of sin; and yet free from the law of sin and death? how can these things
consist? To tell us, It Is so, and it is not so, and to twist such contradictions
into Orthodox Paradoxes, are pretty things to please Fools and Children; but
wise men care not for riddles that are not sense. For my part I think it clear,
that the Apostle in that mistaken Chapter, relates the feeble, impotent
condition of one that was convinced and strove a little, but not to purpose.
And if we find our selves comprised under that description, though we may be
never so sensible of the evil and danger of a sinful course, and may endeavor
some small matter, but without success, we are yet under, that evil, and
obnoxious to that danger: For he that strives in earnest, conquers at last, and
advances still, though all the work be not done at once. So that if we
endeavor and gain nothing, our endeavor is peccant, and wants Faith or Prayer
for Divine aids, or constancy, or vigor; and so, Though we may seek, we shall
not be able to enter.

But (3) an imperfect Striver may overcome sin in some Instances, and yet in
that do no great matter neither, if he lies down, and goes no further: There
are some sins we outgrow by age, or are indisposed to them by bodily infirmity,
or diverted by occasions, and it may be by other sins; and some are contrary to
worldly Interests, to our credit, or health, or profit; and when we have in any
great degree been hurt by them in these, we fall out with those sins, and cease
from them, and so by resolution and disuse, we master them at last fully:
which, if we went on, and attempted upon all the rest, were something: But when
we stop short in these petty victories, our general state is not altered; He
that conquers some evil appetites, is yet a slave to others; and though he has
prevailed over some difficulties, yet the main ones are yet behind.

Thus the imperfect Striver masters, it may be, his beastly appetite to
intemperate drinking, but is yet under the power of Love and Riches, and vain
Pleasure. He cease from open debauchery, but entertains spiritual wickedness
in his heart: He will not Swear, but will backbite and rail: He will not be
Drunk, but will damn a man for not being of his opinion: He will not profane
the Sabbath, but will defraud his Neighbor.

Now these half conquests, when we rest in them, are as good as none at all.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have regard to all thy Commandments, says
the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 119. 6. It Is shameful to give off, when our work is
but half done; what we do, casts the greater reproach upon us for what we omit.
To cease to be profane, is something as a passage, but nothing for an end. We
are not Saints as soon as we are civil. It Is not only gross sins that are to be
overcome. The wages of sin is death, not only of the great and capital, but of
the smallest, if they are indulged. The Pharisee applauded himself, that he was
not like the Extortioners, Adulterers and Unjust, nor like the Publican, that
came to pray with him, Luke 18. 11. and yet he went away never the more
justified. The unwise Virgins were no profligate Livers, and yet they were shut
out.

He that will enter, must strive against every corrupt appetite and
inclination. A less leak will sink a Ship, as well as a greater, if no care be
taken of it. A Consumption will kill, as well as the Plague; yea sometimes the
less Disease may in the event prove more deadly, than the greater; for small
distempers may be neglected, till they become incurable; when as the great ones
awaken us to speedy care for a remedy. A small hurt in the finger slighted, may
prove a Gangreen, when a great wound in the Head by seasonable applications is
cured.

It Is unsafe then to content our selves with this, that our sins are not foul
and great, those we account little ones, may prove as fatal, yea they are
sometimes more dangerous: For we are apt to think them none at all, or Venial
infirmities that may consist with a state of Grace, and Divine favor; we
excuse and make Apologies for them, and fancy that Hearing, and Prayer, and
Confession are atonements enough for these. Upon which accounts I am apt to
believe, that the less notorious Vices have ruined as many as the greatest
Abominations. Hell does not consist only of Drunkards, and Swearers, and
Sabbath Breakers: No, the demure Pharisee, the plausible Hypocrite, and formal
Professor, have their place also in that lake of fire. The great impieties do
often startle and awaken conscience, and beget strong convictions, and so
sometimes excite resolution and vigorous striving; while men hug themselves in
their lesser sins, and carry them unrepented of to their Graves.

The sum is, we may overcome some sins, and turn from the grosser sorts of
wickedness, and yet if we endeavor not to subdue the rest, we are still in the
condition of unregeneracy and death, and though we thus seek, we shall not
enter.

(4.) A man may perform many duties of Religion, and that with relish and
delight, and yet miscarry. As,

(1.) He may be earnest and swift to hear, and follow Sermons constantly from
one place to another, and be exceedingly pleased and affected with the Word,
and yet be an evil Man, and in a bad state. Herod heard John Baptist gladly,
Mark 6. 20. and he that received the seed into stony places, received it
joyfully, Mat. 13. 20. Zeal for hearing does not always arise from a
conscientious desire to learn in order to practice, but sometimes it proceeds
from an itch after novelty and notions, or an ambition to be famed for
Godliness; or the importunity of natural conscience, that will not be satisfied
except we do something; or a desire to get matter to feed our opinions, or to
furnish us with pious discourse? I say, earnestness to hear, arises very often
from some of these; and when it does so, we gain but little by it: yea, we are
dangerously tempted to take this for an infallible token of our Saintship, and
so to content our selves with this Religion of the Ear, and to disturb every
body with the abundance of our disputes and talk, while we neglect our own
Spirits, and let our unmortified affections and inclinations rest in quiet,
under the shadow of these specious services.

So that when a great affection to hearing seizes upon an evil man, it is odds
but it does him hurt; it puffs him up in the conceit of his Godliness, and
makes him pragmatical, troublesome and censorious; He turns his food into
poison: Among bad men, those are certainly the worst, that have an opinion of
their being godly; and such are those that have itching ears, under the power
of vicious habits and inclinations. Thus an earnest diligent hearer, may be one
of those who seeks, and is shut out. And so may

(2.) He that Fasts much, and severely: The Jews were exceedingly given to
fasting, and they were very severe in it. They abstained from all things
pleasant to them, and put on sackcloth, and sour looks, and mourned bitterly,
and hung down the head, and sat in ashes; so that one might have taken these
for very holy, penitent, mortified people that had a great antipathy against
their sins, and abhorrence of themselves for them: And yet God complains of
these strict severe Fasters, Zach. 7. 5. That they did not Fast unto him; but
fasted for strife and debate, Isa. 58. 4. Their Fasts were not such as he had
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burden, and to let
the oppressed free, verse. 6. But they continued, notwithstanding their Fasts,
and God's admonitions by his Prophets, to oppress the Widow, and Fatherless,
and Poor, Zach. 7. 10.

Thus mere natural and evil men sometimes put on the garb of Mortification, and
exercise rigors upon their Bodies and external persons, in exchange for the
indulgences they allow their beloved appetites; and while the strict Discipline
reaches no further, though we keep days, and Fast often, yet this will not put
us beyond the condition of the Pharisee, who fasted twice in the week, as
himself boasted, Luke 18. 12. And,

(3.) An imperfect striver may be very much given to pious and religious
discourses: He may love to be talking of Divine things; especially of the love
of Christ to sinners, which he may frequently speak of with much earnestness
and affection, and have that dear name always at his tongues end to begin and
close all his sayings; and to fill up the void places, when he wants what to
say next; and yet this may be a bad man, who never felt those Divine things he
talks of; and never loved Christ heartily as he ought.

'Twas observed before, that there are some who have a sort of Devoutness, and
Religion in their particular Complexion; and if such are talkative (as many
times they are) they will easily run into such discourses, as agree with their
temper, and take pleasure in them for that reason; As also for this, because
they are apt to gain us reverence, and the good opinion of those with whom we
converse. And such as are by nature disposed for this faculty, may easily get
it by imitation and remembrance of the devout forms they hear and read: so that
there may be nothing Divine in all this; nothing but what may consist with
unmortified lusts and affections: And though such talk earnestly of the love of
Christ, and express a mighty love to his name, yet this may be without any real
conformity unto him in his Life and Laws. The Jews spoke much of Moses, in him
they believed, and in him they trusted, John 5. 45. His name was a sweet sound
to their ears, and 'twas very pleasant upon their Tongues; and yet they hated
the Spirit of Moses, and had no love to those Laws of his which condemned their
wicked actions. And we may see how many of those love Christ, that speak often
and affectionately of him, by observing how they keep his Commandments, John
14. 15. especially those of Meekness, Mercy, and universal Love.

Thus imperfect Strivers may employ themselves in the external offices of
Religion: I have instanced only in Three, the lik may be said of the rest. And
to this, I add,

(IV.) That they may not only exercise themselves in the outward matters of
duty, but may arrive to some things that are accounted greater heights, and are
really more spiritual, and refined. To instance.

(I.) They may have some love to God, Goodness, and good Men. The Soul
naturally loves Beauty and Perfection; and all mankind apprehend God, to be of
all Beings, the most beautiful and perfect; and therefore must needs have an
intellectual love for him: The reason that that love takes no hold of the
passions in wicked men, is, partly because they are diverted from the thoughts
of Him, by the objects of Sense; but chiefly, because they consider him as
their enemy, and therefore can have no complacency or delight in him, who they
think has nothing but thoughts of enmity, and displeasure against them. But if
once they come to be persuaded (as many times, by such false marks, as I have
recited, they are) that God is their Father, and peculiar Friend; that they are
his chosen, and his darlings, whom he loved from Eternity, and to whom he has
given his Son and his Spirit, and will give Himself, in a way of the fullest
enjoyment; Then the Love that before was only an esteem in the understanding,
does kindle in the affections by the help of the conceit of Gods loving them so
dearly, and the passion thus heated, runs out, even into seraphick, and
rapturous Devotions; while yet all this, is but mere animal love, excited
chiefly, by the love of our selves, not of the Divine Perfections. And it
commonly goes no further, then to earnest expressions of extraordinary love to
God in our Prayers and Discourses, while it appears not in any singular
obedience to his Laws, or generous and universal love to mankind: which are the
ways whereby the true Divine Love is expressed: for, This is the love of God,
that we keep his Commandments, says the Apostle, 1 John. 5. 3. And as to the
other, thus, If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfected in us, 1 John 4. 12. And on the contrary, If a man say I love God,
and hates his brother, he is a liar, John 4. 20. Charity then and universal
obedience are the true arguments and expressions of our love to God; and these
suppose a victory over corrupt inclinations and self-will. But the other love
which arises from the conceit of our special dearness to God upon insufficient
grounds; that goes no further then to some suavities, and pleasant fancies
within our selves; and some passionate complements of the Image we have set up
in our imaginations. This Love will consist with Hatred and contempt of all
that are not like our selves; yea, and it will produce it: those poisonous
fruits, and vile affections may be encouraged, and cherished under it. So that
there may be some love to God in evil men: But while self-love is the only
motive, and the more prevalent passion, it signifies nothing to their
advantage.

And as the imperfect striver may have some love to God, so he may to piety and
virtue: every man loves these in Idea. The vilest sinner takes part in his
affections with the virtuous and religious, when he sees them described in
History or Romance; and has a detestation for those, who are charactered as
impious and immoral. Virtue is a great Beauty, and the mind is taken with it,
while it is considered at a distance; and our corrupt interests, and sensual
affections are not concerned. It Is these that recommend sin to our love, and
choice, while the mind ftands on the side of virtue: with that we serve the Law
of God, but with the flesh the Law of Sin, Rom 7. 25. So that most wicked men,
that are not degenerated into mere Brutes, have this mental and intellectual
love to goodness: That is, they approve, and like it in their minds, and would
practice it also, were it not for the prevalent biass of flesh and sense.

And hence it will follow likewise, That the same may approve and respect good
men; They may reverence and love them for their Charity, Humility, Justice and
Temperance, though themselves are persons of the contrary Character; yea, they
may have a great and ardent affection for those that are eminently pious and
devout, though they are very irreligious themselves. The conscience of virtue,
and of the excellency of Religion, may produce this in the mere natural man,
who is under the dominion of vile inclinations and affections; and therefore,
neither is this a good mark of godliness. Our love to God and goodness will not
stead us, except it be prevalent. And as the love described, may be natural,
and a mere animal man may arrive unto it: So,

(2.) He may to an extraordinary zeal for the same things that are the objects
of his love. Hot tempers are eager, where they take either kindness or
displeasure. The natural man that has an animal love to Religion, may be
violent in speaking, and acting for things appertaining to it. If his temper be
devotional and passionate, he becomes a mighty zealot, and fills all places
with the fame of his godliness: His natural fire moves this way, and makes a
mighty blaze. Ahab was very zealous, and it is like 'twas not only his own
interest that made him so, 2 Kings 10. 16. The Pharirisees were zealous people,
and certainly their zeal was not always personated, and put on, but real;
though they were Hypocrites, yet they were such, as, in many things deceived
themselves, as well as others. They were zealous for their Traditions, and they
believed 'twas their duty to be so. St. Paul while a persecutor, was zealous
against the Disciples, and he thought he ought to do many things against that
name. And our Savior foretells, that those zealous murderers that should kill
his Saints, should think, They did God good service in it, John 16. 2. So that
all the zeal of the natural man is not feigning, and acting of a part; nor has
it always evil objects. The Pharisees were zealous against the wickedness of
the Publicans and Sinners. Zeal, and that in earnest, and for Religion may be
in bad men. But then, this is to be noted, that it is commonly about opinions or
external rites, and usages, and such matters as appertain to first Table
Duties, while usually the same men are very cold, in reference to the Duties of
the Second: And when Zeal is partial, and spent about the little things that
tend not to the overcoming the difficulties of our way, or the perfecting of
humane nature, it is a mere animal fervor, and no Divine Fire. And the natural
man, the Seeker that shall not enter, may grow up to another height that looks
gleriously, and seems to speak mighty things. As,

(3.) He may have great comforts in religious meditations, and that even to
rapturous excesses. He may take these, for sweet Communion with God, and the
joys of the Holy Ghost, and the earnest of Glory, and be lifted up on high by
them, and enabled to speak in wonderful ravishing strains; and yet
notwithstanding be an evil man, and in the state of such as shall be shut out.

For this we may observe, That those whose complexion inclines them to
devotion, are commonly much under the power of melancholy; and they that are
so, are mostly very varius in their tempers; fometimes merry, and pleasant to
excess; and then plunged as deep into the other extreme of sadness and
dejection: one while the sweet humors enliven the imagination, and present it
with all things that are pleasant and agreeable; And then, the black blood
succeeds, which begets clouds and darkness, and fills the fancy with things
frightful and uncomfortable: And there are very few but feel such varieties, in
a degree, in themselves. Now while the sweet Blood and Humors prevail, the
person whose complexion inclines him to Religion, and who has arrived to the
degrees newly discoursed of (though a mere natural man) is full of inward
delight, and satisfaction^ and fancies at this turn, that he is much in the
favor of God, and a sure Heir of the Kingdom of Glory; which must needs excite
in him many luscious, and pleasant thoughts: and these further warm his
imagination, which, by new, and taking suggestions still raises the affections
more; and so the man is as it were transported beyond himself; and speaks like
one dropped from the Clouds: His tongue flows with Light, and Glories, and
Communion, and Revelations, and Incomes; and then, believes that the Holy Ghost
is the Author of all this, and that God is in him of a truth, in a special way
of Manifestation and Vouchsafement. But when melancholic vapors prevail
again; the Imagination is overcast, and the Fancy possessed by dismal and
uncomfortable thoughts; and the man, whose head was but just before among the
Clouds, is now grovelling in the Dust: He thinks all is lost, and his condition
miserable; He is a castaway, and undone; when in the mean while, as to Divine
favor he is just where he was before, or rather in a better state, since it is
better to be humbled with reason, then to be lifted up without it. Such effects
as these do mere naturalpassions and imaginations produce, when they are
tinctured and heightened by religious melancholy. To deny ones self, and to
overcome ones passions, and to live in a course of a sober Virtue, is much more
Divine than all this.

It Is true indeed, and I am far from denying it, that holy men feel those joys
and communications of the Divine Spirit which are no fancies; and the Scripture
calls them great peace, Psalm. 119. 165. and joy in believing, Romans 15. 13. and
the peace of God that passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. But then, these
Divine Vouchsafements are not rapturous, or ecstatical: They are no sudden
flashes that are gone in a moment, leaving the Soul in the regions of sorrow,
and despair; but sober lasting comforts, that are the reward's and results of
virtue; the rejoycings of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and the
manifestations of God to those rare souls, who have overcome the evils of their
natures; and the difficulties of the way, or are vigorously pressing on toward
the mark, Phil. 3. 14. But for such as have only the forms of godliness I have
mentioned, while the evil inclinations and habits are indulged, (whatever they
may pretend) all the sweets they talk of, are but the imagery of dreams, and
the pleasant delusions of their fancies.

THus I have shown how far the mere animal Religion may go, in imperfect
striving: And now. I must expect to hear,

(1.) That this is very severe, uncomfortable Doctrine; and if one that shall
eventually be shut out, may do all this, what shall become of the generality of
Religious men that never do so mtch? And if all this be short, what will be
available? who then shall be saved?

To which I Answer, That we are not to make the measures of Religion and
Happiness our selves; but to take those that Christ Jesus has made for us: And
he has told us, That except our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 5. 20. Now the Scribes and Pharisees did things in the way of Religion,
that that were equal to all the particulars: I have mentioned; yea they went
beyond many of our glorious Professors, who yet think themselves in an high
form of Godliness. They believed their Religion firmly, and Prayed frequently
and fervently, and Fasted severely; They were exact, and exceeding strict in
the observation of their Sabbaths, and hated scandalous and gross sins; and
were very punctual in all the duties of outward Worship; and in many things
supererrogated and went beyond what was commanded: Such zealous people were
They; and They separated from the conversations and customs of other Jews, upon
the account of their supposed greater Holiness and Purity. These were heights
to which the Pharisees arrived; and a good Christian must exceed all this: And
he that lives in a sober course of Piety and Virtue; of self Government, and
humble submission to God; of obedience to his Superiors, and charity to his
Neighbors: He does really exceed it, and shall enter, when the other shall be
shut out. So that, when our Savior says, that the Pharisaick Righteousness
must be exceeded, the meaning is not, That a greater degree of every thing the
Pharisees did, is necessary; but we must do that which in the nature and kind
of it is better, and more acceptable to God, viz. That whereas they placed
their Religion in strict Fastings, an nice observations of Festivals; in loud
and earnest Prayers, and zeal to get Proselytes; we should place ours, in
sincere subjections of our wills to the will of God; in imitation of the life
of Christ, and obedience of his Laws; in amending the faults of our natures and
lives: in subduing our Passions, and casting out the habits of evil: These are
much beyond the Religion of the Phanatick Pharisee; not in show and pomp; but
in real worth, and divine esteem. So that, upon the whole, we have no reason to
be discouraged, because They that do so much are cast out; since, though we
find not those heats, and specious things in our selves which we observe in
them, yet if we are more meek and modest, and patient, and charitable, and
humble, and just, our case is better; and we have the Power of Godliness, when
theirs is but the Form; And we, whom They accounted Aliens and Enemies shall
enter; while they, the presumed friends and domestics, shall be shut out.

But (2.) I expect it should be again objected against this severity of
Discourse, That our Savior says, Mat. 11. 20. That his yoke is easy, and his
burden is light: which place seems to cross all that has been said about the
Difficulties of Religion. And it is true it has such an appearance, but it is no
more; For the words look as cross to the expressions of the same Divine Author;
concerning the straightness of the Gate, and narrowness of the Way, as to any
thing I have delivered from those infallible sayings. Therefore to remove the
semblance of contrariety, which the objected Text seems to have to those
others, and to my Discourse, we may observe,

That when our Savior says, that his yoke is easy, the word we read is
(...), which signifies very good, excellent, gracious; and the meaning I
suppose is, That his Precepts had a native beauty and goodness in them; That
they are congruous and suitable to our reasonable Natures, and apt instruments
to make us happy; In which sense, this expression has no antipathy to the
Text, or to any thing I have said. And whereas it is added, [ My Burden is
light] I think by this, we are to understand, That his Commands are not of that
burdensome nature, that the Ceremonies of the Jewish Laws were: Those were very
cumbersome, and had nothing in their nature to make them pleasant and
agreeable; whereas his Religion had no expensive, troublesome Rites appendant
to it; nor did it require any thing but our observation of those Laws which
eternal Reason obliges us to, and which of our selves we should choose to live
under, were we freed from the intanglements of the World, and interests of
Flesh. So that neither does this Objection signify any thing against the scope
of my Discourse.

AND now I descend to the Improvement of what I have said; and the things I
have to add will be comprehended under these two Generals (1.) Inferences, and
(2.) plain Advice in order to practice. I begin with the Inferences and
Corollaries that arise from the whole Discourse. And,

(1.) We may collect, What is the state of Nature; and What the state of Grace.
We have seen that it is the great business of Religion to overcome evil
Inclinations, and the prevailing influence of sense and passion, and evil
customs and example and worldly affections; And therefore the state of Nature
consists in the power and prevalency of These. This is that the Scripture calls
the Old man, Ephesians. 4.22. The Image of the earthy, 1 Cor. 15. Flesh, Gal. 5. 17.
Death, Romans 7.24. Darkness, Joh. 3. 19. and old leven, 1 Cor 5. 7. On the
contrary, The state of Grace is a state of sincere striving against them; which
if it keeps on, ends in Victory. And this is called Conversion, Acts 3. 19. and
Renovation, while it is in its first motions; And the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.
4. the Image of the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 20. The Spirit, Gal. 5. 16. Light,
Ephesians. 5. 8. and Life, 1 John 3. 14. when it is arrived to more compleatness and
perfection.

For our fuller understanding this, we may consider, That Grace is taken (1.)
for Divine favor; (2.) for Christian Virtue. As it signifies Divine favor, so
it is used,

(1.) For those helps and aids God affords us, viz. the Gospel, Joh. 1. 17. and
the influences of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 9. In this sense we are delivered from
the state of Nature by Baptism, viz. We are entitled to divine helps, which is
a kind of regeneration; for we are born in a condition of importence, and
weakness, and destitution of spiritual assistances; This is the world of mere
nature; But then in Baptism, we are brought into the world of the Spirit, that
is, are put under its influences, and are assured of its aids, and so are
morally born again; Not that this Regeneration alone will save us, without our
endeavors; it imports only an external relation, and right to privileges, and
by these we may be powerfully assisted in our striving, if we use them.

But then (2.) Grace, as it signifies divine favor, implies his special love
and kindness, such as he vouchsases to holy and virtuous men; so that we may
observe that there may be a distinction between a state of Grace, and a state
of salvation. A state of Grace, in the former sense, is a condition assisted by
the influences of Gods Spirit, and all baptized persons are in that. But if
they use not those helps, they are not in Gods special favor; and so not in a
state of Salvation. But when those assistances are duly employed, and joined
with our sincere endeavor, then the person so using them, is in a state of
Salvation also; and in God's special love and favor. Thus of the state of
Grace in the first sense, as taken for divine favor.

(2.) The word is also used for Christian Virtue, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and Virtue is
called Grace, because it is wrought in us by the assistance of Gods Spirit and
the light of the Gospel, which are divine favors; and to be in a state of
grace in this sense, is to be a virtuous man, which supposes divine aids, and
intitles to divine love.

These things I have taken an occasion thus briefly to state; because there is
oft-times much confusion in men's discourses about Grace and Nature, from which
much trouble and many controversies have arisen. And by what I have said also
in these brief hints, the doctrine of our Church in the office of Baptism, may
be understood clearly, and will appear to be very sound and true,
notwithstanding the petty exceptions of confident Dissenters.

(II.) I may infer, That the great Design of Religion and the Gospel is to
perfect humane nature. The perfection of our natures, consists, in the
subjection and subordination of the affections and passions to the Mind, as it
is enlightened, and directed by the divine Laws, and those of Reason. This is
the state of integrity, in which we were first made; and we lost it by the
rebellion of our senses and inferior powers, which have usurpt the government
of us ever since. Here is the imperfection, and corruption of our natures.

Now Religion designs to remove and cure these; and to restore us to our first,
and happy state. Its business is not to reform our looks, and our language; or
to model our actions, and gestures into a devout appearance; not only to
restrain the practice of open profaneness and villainy; nor to comfort us with
the assurance of Gods loving us we know not why: But to cure our ill natures,
to govern our passsions, to moderate our desires, to throw out pride and envy,
and all uncharitable surmisals, with the other spiritual sorts of wickedness;
and thereby to make us like unto God, in whom there is no shadow of sin, or
imperfection; and so to render us fit objects of his delight, and love.

So that whatever does not tend to the making us, some way or other really
better: better in our selves, and better in all Relations, as fathers, and
children, and husbands and wives, and subjects, and governors, and neighbors,
and friends, is not Religion; It may be a form of Godliness, but it is nothing
to the life, and power. And where we see not this effect of Religion, let the
professor of it be never so high and glorious in his profession, we may yet
conclude that either his Religion is not good, or that he only pretends, and
really has it not.

This I take to be a consideration of great moment and great certainty, viz.
That Christian Religion aims at the bettering and perfecting of our natures.
For the things it commands relate either to worship or virtue. The instances of
external worship are prayer, and praise; both which are high acts of gratitude
and justice, and they fit us for divine blessings, and keep us under a sense of
God, and prepare us for union with him, which is the highest perfection of
which the creature is capable. Thus the outward acts of worship tend to our
happiness; and the inward do infinitely the same.

These are, Faith, and Love, and Fear. Faith in God supports and relieves us in
all afflictions, and distresses. The love of him is a pleasure and solace to us
in all losses and disappointments, since he is an object most filling, and
satisfying; and one that cannot be lost, except we wilfully thrust him from us.
Fear of God has no torment; It Is no slavish dread of his greatness and Power;
but a reverence of his perfections, and a lothness to offend him; and this
disposes us also for the communications of his grace, and love, Ps. 85.9. And
this it does by congruity, and its own nature; which is to be said likewise of
the others. So that they would make those happy that practice them, whether
they had been positively enjoined, or not; And though no express rewards had
been annexed unto them.

There are other two acts of worship which Christianity requires, which are
instituted and positive, and respect Christ our Lord; They are, the Sacraments;
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; both which are holy Rites of high signification;
and seals of an excellent Covenant between God and us, assuring us of pardon of
sins, and all divine favors, upon the conditions of our Faith. and repentance;
and more firmly obliging us to holy obedience, and dependence; The only way in
which we can be happy. Whence we see briefly, that all the parts of worship
which Christianity binds upon us, tend to our perfection and Felicity.

And all the virtues that it commands do the same; both those that respect us
in a personal capacity, and those others that relate to us as members of
Societies. Thus humility, recommended Mat. 5. 3. Meekness blessed, ver. 5.
purity, ver 8. are virtues that accomplish our particular persons, and make us
happy in our selves. For of Pride comes Conteution, Prove. 13. 10. And a great
part of our troubles arise from stomach and self-will; which humility cures.
Meekness also takes away the occasion of the numerous mischiefs we run into
through the rage and disorder of our passions; and it is in it self a great
beauty and ornament, since it arises from the due order, and government of our
faculties. Purity which comprehends temperance of all sorts, frees us from the
tormenting importunity of those desires that drag us out of our selves, and
expose us to sin, and folly, and temptation, and make us exceeding miserable;
besides which it is a perfection that renders us like unto God, and the blessed
Spirits of the highest rank. And Christian virtues do not only accomplish, and
make us happy in our particular persons, but they do the same in our public
capacities, the more public capacity also; They dispose us to a quiet
obedience to our governors without murmuring, and complaining; and thereby the
public peace is secured; and all good things else in that.

But there are other virtues that Christianity enjoins, which have a more
direct tendency to the happiness of others, as Justice, Mat 7. 12. Charity, 1
Cor. 13. Loyalty. Romans 13. and all other public virtues may, I think, be
comprehended under these. Where there is no Justice, every man preys upon
another, and no man's property is safe, Where Charity is wanting, Jealousies,
hatreds, envying, back-bitings, and cruelties abound, which render the world
deplorably unhappy. Where there is not Loyalty and conscionable submission to
Governors, the public is upon every occasion of commotion, involved in
infinite miseries, and disasters. So that all the precepts of our Religion are
in their own nature proper instruments to make us happy; and they had been
methods of Felicity to be chosen by all reasonable creatures, though they had
never been required by so great, and so sacred an Authority.

These things I have said, because I could not choose but take this occasion to
recommend the excellency, and reasonableness of our Religion; And I have done
it but only in brief hints, because it arises but upon a Corollary from my
main subject, and from this I infer further.

(III.) That Christanity is the height, and perfection of morality. They both
tend to the real bettering, and accomplishment of humane nature: But the rules
and measures of moral Philosophy were weak and imperfect till Christ Jesus
came; He confirmed and enforced all those precepts of virtue, that were written
upon our hearts; and cleared them from many corruptions that were grown upon
them, through ignorance and vice, the glosses of the Jews, and false conceits
of the Gentiles; and he enforced them anew by his Authority and the knowledge
he gave of divine aids, and greater rewards, and punishments, than were
understood before; yea he enlarged them in some instances; such as, loving
enemies and forgiving injuries. Thus Christ Jesus taught morality, viz. the way
of living like men; And the 5. Chapture of Matthew is an excellent Lecture of
this kind.

So that to disparage morality, is to disgrace Christianity it self; and to
vilify one of the ends of Christ's coming into the world. For all Religion and
all duties respect either God, our neighbor, or our selves; and the duties
that relate to these two last, are acknowledged moral virtues. The Apostle St.
James counted these Moralities of visiting the Widow and Fatherless, to be the
pure Religion and undefiled. Jam. 1. 17. And the prophet Micah intimates, that
those moral virtues of Justice and mercy were some of the main things that God
required of us Micah 6. 8. Our Savior says that the whole Law is summed up in
these two, to love God with all our souls, and our neighbor as our selves,
Math. 22. 13 which latter contains the duties of morality. And that which the
grace of God in the Gospel teaches, according to St. Paul is, to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11, There is no godliness
without morality. All the fruits of the Spirit reckoned up Gal. 5. 22. are
moral virtues. And when we are commanded to grow in grace, 2 Pet, 3. 18. virtue
is partly understood. For one branch of what is called Grace in us, is moral
virtue, produced by divine aids, Christian principles, and encouragements;
though it is true, the word is extended to those duties that relate immediately
to God also.

By which we see how ignorantly, and dangerously those people talk, that
disparage morality as a dull, lame thing of no account, or reckoning. Upon this
the Religion of the second Table is by too many neglected; and the whole
mystery of the new Godliness is laid in frequent hearing, and devout seraphick
talk, luscious phancies, new lights, incomes, manifestations, sealings,
in-dwellings, and such like. Thus Antinomianism, and all kinds of Phanaticism
have made their way by the disparagement of morality, and men have learnt to
believe themselves the chosen, precious people, while their hearts have been
full of malice, and bitterness, and their hands of violence, while they
despised dominions, and spoke evil of dignities, rebel'd against the
Government, destroyed public peace, and endeavored to bring all into misery
and confusions. It Is this diabolical project of dividing morality from Religion
that has given rise and occasion to all these villainies. And while the
Practisers of such things have assumed the name of the only Godly, Godlyness it
self has been brought into disgrace by them; and Atheism encouraged to show it
self, in open defiance to Religion, Yea, through the indiscretions, and
inconsiderateness of some preachers, the phantastry, and vain babble of others,
and the general disposition of the people to admire what makes a great show,
and pretends to more than ordinary spirituality; things are, in many places,
come to that pass, that those who teach Christian virtue and Religion, in
plainness and simplicity without senseless phrases, and fanyastick affectations,
shall be reckoned for dry moralists, and such as understand nothing of the
life, and power of Godliness. Yea, those people have been so long used to
gibberish and canting, that they cannot understand plain sense; and virtue is
become such a stranger to their ears, that when they hear: it spoken of in a
pulpit they count the preacher a broacher of new divinity; and one that would
teach the way to heaven by Philosophy: And he escapes well, if they do not say,
That he is an Atheist; or that he would reconcile us to Gentilism, and Heathen
Worship. The danger and vanity of which ignorant humor, the contempt of
morality, is apparent in the whole scope of my Discourse, and therefore I add
no more concerning it here; but proceed to another Inference, which is.

(IV.) That Grace and the new nature, make their way by degrees on the Soul;
for the difficulties will not be removed nor the corrupt nature fubdued all at
once. Habits that grow by repeated acts, time, and continuance, will not be
expelled in a moment. No man can become greatly evil or good, on a sudden. The
Path of the just shines more and more to to a perfect day, Prove. 4. 18, We do
not jump from darkness into full light, We are not fully sanctified and
converted in an instant. The day begins in an insensible dawn, and the Kingdom
of heaven is like a grain of Mustard seed, Mat. 13. 31. It does not start up
presently to the stature of a tree. The Divine birth begins like the Natural,
in an imperfect embryo.

There are some seeds of Knowledge and Goodness that God has sown in our
natures; these are excited by the Divine Grace and Spirit to convictions, which
proceed to purposes; these to resolutions, and thence we pass to abstinence
from all gross sins, and the performance of outward Duties; and so at last by
degrces, to vigorous attempts, for the destruction of evil habits and
inclinations. When Grace is arrived to this eminent growth, it is very visible,
as the Plant is when it is above the ground. But the beginnings of Conversion
are not ordinarily perceived.

So that to catechize men about the punctual time, and circumstances of their
Conversion, is an idle device, and a great temptation to vanity and lying. Who
can tell the exact moment when the night ends, and the dawn enters? It Is true
indeed, the passage from the excesses of Wickedness, which begins in some
extraordinary horrors and convictions, is sometimes very notable; but it is not
so in all, or most. The time of St. Paul's conversion was eminent, but that
change was from great contrarieties and miraculous, and therefore it is not to
be drawn into instance. Both the beginnings and minute progressions of Grace,
are usually undiscerned: We cannot see the Grass just putting out of the earth;
or actually growing; but yet we find that it does both. And Grace is better
known in its fruits, than in its rise. By their Fruits ye shall know them,
says our Savior, Mat. 12. 33. and the same way we may know our selves.

(V.) We see that there is an Animal, as well as a Divine Religion: A Religion
that is but the effect and modification of complexion, natural fear and
self-love. How far these will go, we have seen, and how short it will prove in
the end. The not noting this has been the sad occasion of deceiving many. Some
observing great beats of zeal and devotion in the modern Pharisees, take these
to be the Saints and good people; believing all the glorious things which they
assume to themselves: When others, that know them to be envious and malicious,
unjust, and covetous, proud and ungovernable, and cannot therefore look on them
as such choice holy people, are apt to affirm all to be hypocrisy and
feigning. In which sentences, both are mistaken for want of knowing that there
is a mere Animal Religion, that will produce very specious and glorious
effects; So that though the Pharisee Prays vehemently, and Fasts severely, and
talks much of the love of God, and delights greatly in hearing, and pious.
Discourse, and will suffer all things for what he calls his Conscience; yet he
is not to be concluded a Saint from hence, because the mere Animal Religion may
put it self forth in all these expressions.

And though this Professor be a bad man, proud and covetous, malicious and
censorious, Sacrilegious and Rebellious, yet we cannot thence be assured that
he is an Hypocrite, in one sense, viz. such an one as feigns all that he
pretends: But we may believe that he is really so affected with Hearing and
Praying, and devout Company, as he makes show, and yet for all this, not alter
our opinion of his being an evil man: since the Animal Religion will go as far
as the things in which he glories.

There is nothing whereby the common people are drawn more easily into the
ways of Sects and Separations, than by the observation of the zeal and
devotion of those of the factions: These they take to be Religion, and the
great matters of Godliness, and those the religious and only godly people. And
so first they conceive a great opinion of them, and then follow them
whithersoever they lead. For the generality of men are tempted into Schism and
Parties, not so much by the arguments of dissenters, as by the opinion of their
Godliness, which opinion is grounded upon things which may arise from the mere
Animal Religion, and very commonly do so. This they understand not, and by this
ignorance are betrayed into the snare of Separation, to the disturbance of the
Peace of the Church, and their own great hurt and inconvenience. Whereas could
they be made to know and consider, that complexion and natural passions may
bring forth all these fruits, they might be secured by this means against the
tempting imposture; and learn that Meekness and Patience, Affability and
Charity, Justice, and a Peaceable, humble temper, are better arguments of
Saintship than all these. Thus a great mischief might be prevented; and there
is another that might be remedied by the same Observation: The inconvenience is
this,

While the enemies of Factions object Hypocrisy to them, affirming that all
they do and say, is mere personating and pretense; they confirm and settle
those people in their way; for many of them know, that they are in earnest, and
consequently, that their opposers are mistaken in their judgments concerning
them; by which they are better established in their own good opinion, and
hardened against conviction whereas, did they consider such things as I have
suggested, about the Animal Religion, and grant to them that they may be
serious, believe themselves infinitely, and feel all those Warmths, which they
pretend, and yet be evil men, and far enough from being Godly; Did they show
them, that all their zeal and Devotion, and more and greater than theirs, may
arife from a principle that has nothing Divine and supernatural in it: They
would thereby strike them in the right vein, and bring them down from the high
perch, whereon, by their false marks, they had placed themselves; and thereby
disabuse them, and prevent the abuse of others.

(VI.) We see how we may know our state, whether it be that of Grace and Life;
or the other sad one of Unregeneracy and Death. The state of Grace is a motion
toward the recovery of the Divine Image, and a perfect victory over our
selves, and all corrupt inclinations and affections, The state of Unregeneracy
and Death, is the continuance under the power and prevalency of sense, passion,
and evil habits. Now when it is questioned by our selves in which of these
states we are; it must be supposed that we are arrived at something of
Religion: For the grossly wicked cannot but know what their condition is. And
the way I would propose to those others, who are yet uncertain, is this, viz.
To take notice,

Whether they really design, and make any progress in Goodness. Every motion
indeed cannot be felt or perceived; but if we go on, though never so
insensibly, time will show that we are grown. If we consider what are our
particular defects, and studiously apply proper instruments to remove them: if
we find success in those endeavors, and that we are better this year than we
were the former; That our Passions are better governed, and our inordinate
affections more restrained, and our evil habits and inclinations less powerful
with us, it is an infallible sign, that we live and are in a state of Grace;
that we shall at last arrive to a perfect man in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 13. and
shall ^attain if we faint not, 2 Cor. 4. 1. whereas on the other hand, if we
come to some hopeful pitch, and stand still there; if sin and temptation be as
powerful with us now, as they were a year ago, and our inclinations and
passions just at the same pass; we are in a bad state, and dead. While the
Plant grows, it lives, and may become a great tree, though at present it be but
small: whereas that whose stature is bigger, and more promising, if it proceeds
not, decays and comes to nothing.

Though we are imperfect, if we are striving and going toward perfection, God
overlooks our. Infirmities, and pardons them for Christ's sake. This is our
sincerity, and an effect of true Faith. But if on the other hand, we think our
selves well, and do not always attempt forwards, our state is bad, and our sins
will be imputed: Be our pretenses what they will, our Faith is not sincere, and
will not stead us.

When we get to a certain pitch in Religion, and make that our state, it is an
argument that our Religion was merely Animal; and but a mode of complexion,
self-love, and natural fear. When we overcome some sins, and are willing to
spare and cherish others, it is a sign that we are not sincere in our attempts
upon any, and that what we have done, was not performed upon good and divine
motives.

Sincerty is discovered by growth, and this is the surest mark that I know of
Trial, So that we have no reason to presume, though, as we think, we have gone
a great way, if we go not on. Nor on the other side, have we any to despair,
though our present seize are but small, if we are proceeding. The buds
and tenderest blossoms of Divine Grace, are acceptable to God; when the fairest
leaves of the mere Animal Religion are nothing in his esteem.

This is a great advantage we have from the Gospel, that imperfection will be
accepted, where there is sincerity; whereas according to the measures of exact
and rigorous Justice, no man could be made happy in the high degree of glory,
but he that was perfect, and whose victories were absolute.

(VII.) It may be collected from our Discourse, Wherein the Power of Godliness
consists, viz. In a progress toward perfection, and an entire victory over all
the evils of our Natures. The Forms of Godliness are not only in the ceremonies
of Worship, and external actions of feigned Piety; But all the fine things of
the Animal Religion are of this kind; and they are the worst sort: By the
grosser Forms men hardly deceive others; by these they effectually gull
themselves. So that many that vehemently oppose Forms, are the greatest
Formalists. Forms of Worship may well agree with the Power of Godliness; whenas
zeal against Forms, may be a Form it self; whatever makes show of Religion, and
does not make us better, that is a Form, at least to us. There are Spiritual
Forms, as well as those of the other sort, and these are most deadly. Poison is
worst in Aqua Vitae. He that speaks his Prayers ex tempore with vehemence and
lowdness, if he strive not against his ill nature and self-will, is as much a
Formalist, as he that tells his Prayers by his Beads, and understands not one
word he says. And those that run away from Forms in Churches, meet more
dangerous ones in Barns and private corners. Orthodox Opinions, devout Phrases,
set Looks, melting Tones, affected Sighs, and vehement Raptures, are often mere
Forms of Godliness, that proceed from the Animal Religion, which it self is a
Form likewise. O that the observers of so many motes in their Brethrens eyes,
would learn to throw out the Beams of their own!

The Form of Godliness that pretends it self to be no more, is not so hurtful:
But the Forms, that call themselves the Power, are deadly. It Is the Formality
and Superstition of Separatists that keeps on the Separation: They contend for
phancies and arbitrary trifles; We for order and obedience. The people are
abused by names, and being frighted by the shadows of Superstition and
Formality, they run into the worst Formality, and silliest Superstition in the
World. The Kingdom of Heaven consists not in meats and drinks, Romans 14. 17.
neither in Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, 1 Cor. 7. 19. not in zeal for
little things, nor in zeal against them; both the one and the other are equally
formal.

The power of Religion lies in using Divine aids heartily and constantly, in
order to the overcoming the Difficulties of our way. This Godliness is not
exercised so much in reforming others, as our selves: The chief design is to
govern within, and not to make Laws for the World without us, This is that
Wisdom that is from above, which is pure and peaceable. Jam. 3. 17. It makes no
noise and bluster abroad, but quietly minds its own business at home.

So that certainly the best men have not always had the greatest fame for
Godliness; as the wisest have very seldom been the most popular. They are the
effects of the Animal Religion that make the biggest fhew. The voice of true
Religion is heard in quiet, it sounds not in the corners of the street. The
power of Godliness is seen in Justice, Meekness Humility, and Charity, things
that look not so splendidly as the Spiritual Forms.

And thus of the Inferences and Corollaries that may be drawn from my
Discourse, which though they cannot all be inferred from any of its minute and
separated parts, yet they lie in the design and contexture of the whole.

I Come now to the Advice for Practice. The way of Happiness is difficult, but
the difficulties may be overcome by striving. A little will not do; many
seekers are shut out; what remains then, but that we persuade our selves to
strive, and that diligently; with constant resolution and endeavor?

We were made for Happiness, and Happiness all the World seeks: Who will show
us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. is the voice of all the Creatures. We have sought it
long in emptiness, and shadows; and that search has still ended in shame and
disappointment. Where true substantial Felicity is we know, and the Way we
know, Joh. 14. 4. It is not hid from us in Clouds and thick Darkness; or if it
were, 'twere worth our pains to search after it. It is not at so great a
distance, but it may be seen, yea, it may be brought so near as to be felt.
Though the way is straight, yet it is certain; or if it were otherwise, who
would not venture his pains upon the possibility of such an issue? Many
Difficulties are in it; but our Encouragements and Assistances are infinite.
The love of God, and the gift of his son; the blood of Christ, and his
intercession; the aids of the Spirit, and the directions of the Gospel; the
Invitations and Promises, the rare Precepts, and incomparable Examples of those
holy men that have gone before us: These are mighty helps and great motives to
assist us in striving, and to quicken us to it.

Let us then arise in the strength of Faith, and in the encouragement of those
aids, and attempt with courage upon the Difficulties of our way. Let us engage
our deepest Resolutions, and most diligent endeavors. Here is no need to
deliberate, the things are necessary, the benefits unspeakable, and the event
will be glorious. It is no Question, I hope, whether God, or the Creature is to
be first chosen; whether Heaven or Hell be better? and therefore there is no
cause that we should stay and consider; we cannot be rash here, we cannot hurt
our selves by a too sudden engagement; we have delayed too long already, and
every moment we sit still, is one lost to our Duty, and our Happiness. Let us
resolve then, and begin with courage, and proceed with diligence, it is our End
and Felicity for which we are to strive; and every thing is active for its End
and Perfection.

All Creatures are diligent in serving the Designs of Providence; the Heavens
are in restless motion, and the Clouds are still carrying about their fruitful
Waters; the sluggish Earth it self is always putting forth in variety of Trees,
and Grass, and Flowers; the Rivers run toward the Sea, the Brooks move toward
them, and the Sea within it self. Thus all things even in inanimate Nature may
mind us of acting toward our end. And if we look a little higher, the Beasts
of the Field, the Fowls, and Cattle, and creeping things are diligent in
striving after the good and perfection of their Natures, and Solomon sends the
Sluggard to those little Insects, the Ant and Be, to teach him activity and
diligence, Prove. 6.6. And shall the Beasts act more reasonably than the
professed Sons of Reason? May it not shame us, that we need Instruction from
the Creatures that have no understanding? With what face can we carry our heads
so high, and look down with contempt upon inferior Animals, when they live
more wisely and more regularly than we?

The Sum is, All things are incessantly moving toward an End; and Happiness is
ours, which therefore should engage our most careful Thoughts, and most active
Endeavors

We are sollicitous and diligent about things of infinitely less moment, and in
effect of none, viz. uncertain Riches, sensual Pleasures, and worldly Honors;
though the way to these is sufficiently difficult and uneasy, yet we are not
discouraged; we attempt all those Difficulties with an obstinate Courage,
though without promise of any equal assistance, or assurance of success. We are
often defeated in our pursuits, and yet we go on. We are overmaster'd by cross
events, and yet we try again. We miss our happiness, when we have attained our
end, and yet we are as active in courting disappointment another time; either
we attain not the things we seek, or find no true satisfaction in them, or they
die in our hands presently, and yet we strive. And does not this activity about
uncertain, unsatisfying Trifles, shamefully reprove our Negligence in reference
to our great End, Happiness and Perfection? In striving for which we have all
the powers of Heaven to aid us, and the Word of God, and the Blood of his Son,
and the experience of all that ever tried, to assure us that we shall neither
fail of the things we seek, nor of the pleasure that we expect from them. And
why then do we lazily sit down, and with the Sluggard say, There is a Lion in
the way, while we despise greater discouragements, when vain things are to be
sought? The Merchant does not give off, because there are Storms, and the
numerous Dangers of the Deep to be met with in his way to the Indies; nor the
Soldier lay by his Arms, because of the hazards and toils of War. And do we
act courageously for petty purchases; and faint and despond when we are to
strive for Crowns and eternal Glories?

It Is true indeed our own natural strength is small, in proportion to the
Difficulties we are to encounter; but the Grace of God is sufficient for us, 2
Cor. 12.9. and we may do all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil.
4. 13. Nature is weak, and imperfect, but we are not left in the condition of
mere nature: For we are not under the Law but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. We are
under the influences of the holy Spirit, which will remove the mountains, and
plain the way before us, if we take care to engage those aids by Faith and
sincere endeavor.

For this we may be sure of, that God will never be wanting to us, if we are
not so unto our selves, So that the case as to our natural inability, and the
assistance of Gods Spirit, seems to be thus. A man in a Boat is cartied from
the Harbor he designs, by the violence of the Current; he is not able only by
playing the Oar, to overcome the resistance of the Tide; but a gen tle Gale
blows with him, which will not of it self carry him up against the Torrent:
Neither of them will do it single: But if he hoist the sail, and use the Oar
too, this united force prevails; and he gets happily to the Harbor, This
methinks resembles our Condition; we are carried down the Torrent of evil
inclinations and Affections, our own unaided powers are too little for that
great force: but the Holy Spirit is with us, It breaths upon us, and is ready
to assist, if we are so to use it, and by the superaddition and engagement of
those blessed Aids, there is no evil in our natures but may be overcome. So
that we have no reason to be discouraged at the apprehension of our impotence,
out of weakness we shall he made strong Heb. 11. 24. If we employ our Talent,
though it be but a very small one, we shall have more, Mat. 25. 29. And if we
accept of those divine helps, and use them, what was before, to mere natural
consideration, uneasy, will be pleasant and sweetly relishing.

One of the greatest Difficulties in the way of Religion, is to begin: the
first steps are roughest to those feet that have been unaccustomed to it. The
helps and manifold encouragements we shall meet with in the Progress, will
render it more agreeable and delightsome. Those very toils will be grateful;
there is scarce any great sense of pleasure, but where there is some Difficulty
and Pain. Even our Work it self will be Wages. And it is not only the End of
Wisdom that is pleasantness, but the very way, Prove. 3. 17. So that though we
are called upon to strive, and to run, and to fight, (which words import
Labor) yet we are not required to Quit our pleasures, but to change the
objects of them; to leave the delights of Swine for those of Angels; sensual
for spiritual Satisfactions.

Thus all things encourage, and invite us to strive; God calls upon us, and our
own Interests call; Christ Jesus came to engage us to this Work, and the Holy
Spirit waits to assist it. If notwithstanding all this, we sit still, our
Negligence will be inexcusable and fatal: or if we arise and go a little
forward, and then lay us down to take our ease and rest, our state (in the
judgment of one that knew) will be worse, more desperate, and excuseless, 2.
Pet. 2. 21.

I Conclude all then, in the words of the Blessed Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.
Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your Labor is not in vain in
the Lord: To him be Glory and Honor henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books published by Mr. Glanvil.
ESSAYS on several important Subjects in Philosophy and Theology.

Seasonable Reflections and Discourses in order to the Cure of the Scoffing and
Infidelity of a degenerate Age.

Lux Orientalis; being a modest Philosophical Enquiry into the Doctrine of
Pre-existence.

Catholic Charity, recommended in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of London.

A Fast-Sermon on the King's Martyrdom.

An Earnest Invitation to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

The Way of Happiness, represented in its Difficulties and Encouragements, and
freed from many popular and dangerous mistakes.


