JOSHUA's Resolution TO Serve the Lord.

CONTAINING, The Resolution of every True Christian, fully and wholly to Cleave
unto the Lord, and to Dedicate himself to the Lord and his Service.

Wherein is Showed, What the Resolution of a Christian is. And the Reasons of
the Necessity of this Resolution With a Word of Exhortation both to Private,
and Family Worship.

To which is Added, A Prayer for a Family.

By Robert Russel in Sussex.

Jer 10.25. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the
Family that call not upon thy Name.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for ^. Blare at the D^^^ing glass on London Bridge. 1694.

Joshua's Resolution, etc.
Joshua 24. part of verse. 15. But as for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord.


THese are the words of Joshua to the Tribes of Israel; for ^^ving, in this
chapter, declared unto them, the many benefits which God, of his mercy has
bestowed on them, as particular in verse. 15. in ^^at he has given them a Land
they labored nor for; and Cities which they bui^^ ^ot; and Vineyards, and
Oliveyards to ^at of, wh^^ they planted not, Joshua having thus laid before
their (...) God's benefits; he in verse 14. Exhorts them, to offer unto God a
thankful and obedient heart, for those benefits which he has bestowed upon
them. Now therefore, fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth:
And put away the gods which your Fathers served, and serve ye the Lord. And so
I fall immediately upon the (...) of the Text, wherein we have these two things
conaderable.

First, The freedom which Joshua seems to give the Tribes of Israel, in case
they refuse to serve the Lord, that they should choose who they will serve.

Secondly, His Reselution concerning himself and his family: As for me and my
house we will serve the Lord.

Now in this small Book I shall join these two together into this one
Observation: that is, How ever the Men of this world live, what ever they do,
what ways soever they follow; a Child of God is fully bent, and resolved to
cleave to the Lord, and to cake care that his family, and all under his charge,
walk in the ways of Holiness and Piety.

Now for my funderstandling of this Subject, I shall praceed after this manner.

First, I shall show you what the Resolution of a Christian is. Secondly, the
Reasons of this Resolution. And lastly, the Application.

First, to show you what the Resolution of a christian is. First, it is a full
and firm Resolution. Secondly, it is a present resolution. Thirdly, it is a
settle and deliberate revolution. First, the resolution of a Christian is, a
full and firm resolution, the men of this world they naturally choose Sin, Death
and Hell, they choose death and damnation, before life and salvation, they
resolutely run on in the ways of Luxery, Wantonness, Drinking, Gaming, and all
manner of lewd and loose Practices, and though they are told and told again, both
by the Messengers of God's word, and their godly friends, whether these ungodly
ways will lead them, yet they will run on still, and take their own course, as
if they were in love with their own ruin and destruction. But a true Christian,
after all his Reproofs and Admonitions, when he finds that they will not be
reclaimed, he as it were hids them take their course, and choose whom they will
serve, as Joshua did the people of Israel. But for his part, he resolved with
full bent and purpose of heart, to give himself up to the Lord, and choose him
for his portion, and to yield up himself soul and body as instrument for his
service. Now the resolution of a christian is not a sick bed promise, but a
full bent and purpose of heart; to lead a new life, there are many that fa^^ly
promise, but few resolve, every weak promise is not a full resolution. Alas!
how many are there who under a sharp fit of sickness, or under some judgment
ready to ^efal them, they will promise fair what a now Creature they will
become, what new lives they will lead, how holy and how purely they will live,
but if it please God to spare them, and give them a time of respire, then how
soon are these vows and promises forgot, thus the Children of Israel, how
fairly did they promise, Deuteronomy. 5.27. All that the Lord our God shall speak, we
will hear and do. But though they had a tongue to promise, yet they had no heart
to perform, as you may see verse. 29. O that then such an heart in them, that
they would fear me, and keep my commandments, that it may be well with them.
But as for a sincere returning sinner, he not only promises, but resolves to
yield up himself body and soul to be the Lord's, yea, the whole frame of his
heart is bent that way, as an unconverted wicked sinner goes on in sin with a
full purpose of heart, even so a returning sinner, who is a coming to Jesus
Christ, serves him with full Purpose, and resolution of heart. And as a wicked
resolute sinner, neither Mercies nor Judgments, neither Reproofs nor
Admonitions, neither Persuading, nor Entreating by Ministers nor Friends, will
stop him in his sinful Course, so on the other side, a returning sinner, that
is resolved for Christ and Holiness, will not be drawn back, neither by
promises nor threatenings, neither by frowns nor flatteries, let his sinful
Companions ^ntice him by never so many orguments, he will not consent, but he
is full ben^ and resolved for Heaven and Happiness, whatever it cost him, and
therefore seeing the weakness of his own flesh, and his natural inclination to
be overcome by the least temptation, therefore he plys the chrone of Grace, and
there he pours out earnest prayers and supplications for the assistance of
divine grace to streng then him in the inner man, he daxes not trust to his own
strength, he considers how soon Peter was overcome, notwithstanding his
Resolution to stand saying, If I should dye with thee I will not deny thee, and
yet because he was to consident of his own strength it pleased Bod for his
trial to leave him to himself, how soon he denied and forswore his Lord and
Savior, he began to curse and swear that he knew him not, Mat. 26. Now I say a
returning sinner, considering this, he dares not resolve in his own strength,
but Labors and orders in the use of all means to get strength from Heaven, and
in the strength of Christ, he strides and labors to go on toward the Heavenly
mark he aims at, he rests not in any certain seize, but truly resolves by
the help of Divine Grace toward the mortification of the whole body of sin,
and for the attainment of Grace and Holiness unto perfection.

And after he had done his best, yet still he feels Lust to be strong in him
and grace weak, therefore he is more and more outrageous against his natural
inclinations, and his earnest de^^ce, and endeavors to be more and more
humble, more patient, more meek, more holy, and more heavenly, let the Devil
tempt him with Riches, Honor, Long-li^^, and all Earthly Happiness on
condition, that he (...) back again into the ways of sin, yet (...) will not
yield, but resist him with all his might and strength, nay, though all the
Powers of Hell seek their utmost endeavors to d^aw him back, though the Flesh
entice, and the wicked World use all means to discourage him, yet, in spire of
them all, he is resolved to go on in his Holy Course, for neither Death, nor
Life, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any Creature,
is able to Separate him from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans 8. Thus a sincere returning Sinner is fully beat and resolved to
give himself up Body and Soul to the Lord. And the whole frame and bent of his
heart is toward Grace and Holiness. That is the first thing Considerable, that
a Christians Resolution, is a full Resolution.

Secondly, It is a present Resolution, he is not for delays and put offs, but
resolves presently to turn. A Man, you know, that is fully bent and resolved to
do a. thing, his earnest desire is to be about it, that it may be done, he is
not for putting it off from one time to another, as if he did not care whether
it were done or no. Even so a Christian that is fully bent and resolved after
Grace and Holiness, be longs and desires for the attainment of his Holy Ends,
the whole frame of his heart is set that way, and therefore he presently sets
about the Work without delay. Indeed a Hypocrite has many purposes and
resolutions to Repent, and become a New Creature, but he delays and puts off
from one time to another, being loath, for ^e present, to part with sweet Sin,
with his Beloved Lust, which shows that his resolution is not a firm and settle
resolution, his purposes are unsound and ^ipocritical. There was one, Luke
9.61. who made a kind of a resolution to follow Christ, but this resolution was
not for the present, he begged liberty to go once more to his sinful
Companions, and take his leave of them: Lord, says he, I will follow thee, but
let me first go and bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. This shows
that his purpose and resolution was not sincere, he made a kind of a resolution
to follow Christ. But here lies the case, there was not a through change wrought
in him, he had not rooted out his Beloved sin, the frame and bent of his heart
was more toward the following of his Lust, than it was to follow Christ,
therefore, in setting his hand to the Plow, by making a resolution to follow
Christ, and yet looking back with pleasure and delight upon his old sinful
course of life, he was not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, as our Savior tells
him, verse 62. Lord, says he, I will follow thee, but let me first go and bid
them farewell which are at home at my house. Thus a Wicked Man, when he is
entreated and persuaded by a Minister of God's Word, or by any of his Godly
Relations, to Repent and forsake his Evil Practices, and to lead a New Life, he
perhaps under these Godly Admonitions, makes fair promises, and has some
Purposes and Resolutions to Repent, and become a (...) Creature, and yet,
notwithstanding these purposes and resolutions, he has many delays and put
offs, because his heart remains still wedded to his (...), the Drunkard ^e
promises that he will return and follow Christ, but he takes leave first to go
once more to the Alehouse, and take leave of his Drunken Companions, and take
one merry Cup more with them, and then he will come and follow Christ. He has
friends at home at his House, and he must first go and take his leave of them,
and make one merry meeting more among t em, and enjoy a little more of their
Jovial Company, and then he will follow Christ. The Covetous he must have ^ave
first to pursue after a little more of this worlds Goods, and then he will
follow Christ. The Valupteous he must have leave first to partake a little more
of the Sweet of Sin, he must enjoy a little more of his Beloved Pleasure, he
must down with one sweet Morsel more, and then he will follow Christ. Thus Sin
is so sweet unto a Wicked Man, the World and the Flesh is so bewitching, that
notwithstanding a Sinners fair promises and purposes to Repent and turn to God,
that by these he is hindered of putting any thing into practice, but
procraserates and puts off from one time to another, until perhaps time is at
an end, before he has done any thing in order to his Eternal Salvation.

But a Christian that is fully and firmly resolved to dedicate himself to the
Lord and his Service, so that the whole frame of his heart is bent that way, he
is so far from delaying, and putting off from ^ne time to another, that he is
even restless, and ^an find no contentment in any thing he enjoys, until he has
got an intrest in Christ, until he has got some assurance of the love of God,
and the pardon of his Sins, it grieves him to the very heart, to think that he
should be so wild and follish, as to wast so much of his precious time as he
has done, in fleshly Lust, in abusing of God's Mercy and Goodness, and grieving
his Spirit, in that he has made a good and gracious God wait upon him so many
years, whilst he continued to run on in a Course of Rebellion against him. And
therefore he now resolves, through the grace of God assisting him from the time
forward, to bid an everlasting farewell to his beloved sin, he now fully
resolves to continue no longer in his sinful course of life, he is ready to cry
out with St. Augustine: How long shall I say to morrow to morrow, why shall not
this day be the day of my Convertion. He therefore without delay sets about the
Work of Convertion, he now begins to beg labor and strive to work out his
Salvation. Thus a Christians Resolution is (...) Present Resolution.

Thirdly, and lastly, a Christians resolution is a Settle and Deliberate
Resolution.

He does not, as many do, take up a sudden and inconsiderate resolution, to
follow Christ. But he diligently considers, first, what it may cost him to be a
through Christian; the death of his beloved Sin that he knows it must cost him,
he knows he must part with every sin; even with his most flesh-pleasing sin for
Christ, or else he cannot be no true Christian. But he considers that it may
cost him the loss of his Credit and Good-name, the loss of his liberty, nay the
loss of his life. Now a Penitent Sinner considers diligently of all these
things before he enters upon his Christian course, lest aftar he has gone far
with Christ, Persecution comes, and he Apostatize and falls away, and so his
latter end be worse than is beginning. What man, says our Savior, intending
to build a Tower, settech not down first, and counts the cost, whether he
have sufficient to finish it, lest happily after he has laid the Foundation and
is not able to finish it, all that behold him begin to mock him, Luke 14.28.29.
So whosoever, says he, forsakes not all that he has cannot be my Desciples,
verse. 33. Many have gone far with Christ. So far their intrest lay with the
intrest of Christ, but when the intrest of Christ, and their own Intrest crossed,
then they have Apostatized and fell away. But on the contrary, a wise
Christian, before he enters upon a new Life, he first sets down and counts the
cost, he considers upon Peter, how sadly he fest when Christ had left him unto
himself, notwithstanding his strong Resolution saying, If all should deny thee
yet wist not I, therefore he dares not purpose and resolve in his own strength,
for he knows himself to be very weak, and cannot move one step toward Heaven
without Divine Assistance, therefore he is night and day in earnest prayer to
God for strength from Heaven, and so in the strength of Christ he is resolved
to take him for better and for worse, he is resolved to run all hazards with
him, he is resolved to venture all for him, to venture the loss of a good name,
the loss of liberty, and the loss of life it self, as he expects to Reign with
Christ, so he resolves to choose him with all his Offices, as a Prophet to
instruct him, as a King to Reign over him, and Rule in him, as a Savior to
save him from sin as well as from punishment, he is resolved to often with his
Right Hand sins, and out with his Right-Eye sins, he is resolved to spare no
sin, but to strive against it, watch against it; and fight against it with all
his might. He is resolved to take Christ as he is offered upon self denying
terms, he is resolved to give up himself body and soul to Christ to walk with
him, to suffer with him, and to dye with him, if he be called thereunto, he is
resolved to forsake all for him that stands in competion with him, and so to
live by faith, and rest fully and wholly upon his word and promise for Eternal
Salvation, he is resolved to follow Christ through all difficulties and dangers,
through sufferings and perfrentions through life and death, until he comes to
Reign with Christ in Glory.

Thus have I done with the first thing considerable, what the Resolution of a
Christian is, I must be very brief in what follows.

Secondly, the reason of the necessity of this Resolution. Now for a Christian
to make a settle firm Resolution is very necessary.

First, Because that until a man sets a firm and full Resolution to turn to
God. He is in a ready way to fall by every temptation, he is and to put off and
delay his repentance from time to time, he is still liable to give himself more
and more liberty to all kind of Wickedness, to let the Bridle loose to his
Lust; nay, until a man comes unto a full and settle resolution, he lies in the
read road to open Profaneness, and to the Neglect of God and Holy Duties. And
when he performs Duties, it is with such Coldness and Formality, as if he cared
not whether he performed them or no. But when a man comes to a resolved Point,
when the whole frame and bent of his heart is set toward Christ and Holiness,
then there will appear earnest endeavors after the Thing resolved upon, when
once a Sinner comes to be fully resolved, then he delays no longer, but
immediately sets about the Work of Conversion, then he is upon his Watch, and
puts on the Whole Armor of God, and strive and sight against Sin and Spiritual
Wickedness. This was the Resolution of Job, Job 31.1. I made a Covenant with
mine Eyes, why then should I think upon a Maid, as if he had said, I have
Resolved and made a Covenant with my self, as much as in me lies, to avoid all
temptation to sin, why then should I run my self into temptation. This also was
the Resolution of David, Psalm 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways that I
sin not with my tongue, I will keep my mouth with a Bridle. And this is the
Resolution of every true Christian, a settle, firm and sincere Resolution is a
great Enemy to Sin and Satan.

Secondly, This Settle and firm Resolution is necessary to Repentance, because
it is the first step to Repentance. A man may do many things in order to a work
of Conversion, yet if be hade not a settle and firm Resolution to turn to God,
he were as good do nothing. But when once a man comes to set up a Settle, Firm,
and Sincere Hearty Resolution, to cleave fully and wholly to the Lord, and to
resi^e up all the faculties of his soul to him, then the work is more than half
done. All the other Duties of Christianity will seem easy and pleasant. David
he resolved and swore, and therefore he would perform: I have sworn, says he,
and therefore will perform, that I will keep thy Statures, Psalm 119.106.

Thus much for the Doctrinal Part, I shall be very short in the Application.

There is but one Use that I shall make of this point, and that shall be a Use
of Exhortation. Is it so that whatever the People of Israel did, Joshua was
resolved that he and his House will serve the Lord; why, Beloved Friends, let
me Exhort you, nay let me entreat you all to enter upon a full, stem, present,
and settle deliberate Resolution, that you and your Family will serve the Lord.
In the first place make a Firm resolution to give up your own selves to the
Lord and his Service, let the Men of this World do what they please, if they
will not be reformed let them take their Course, if they are so in love with
Hell and Tamnation, so that they will run headlong thither, let them take
their course But my Dear Friends, into whose hands this little Book shall come,
do you sincerely resolve to give up your selves to the Lord, and his service,
if others will be for Hell, do you resolve to be for Heaven, whatever it do
you, resolve to cleave close to the Lord, in opposition to the Malice of the
Devil, the Inticements of the Flesh, and the Temptations of this Wicked World.
If wicked Men should entice and seek to draw you into Sin with them, do not
yield, but rather answer them as Joseph did his Mistress, How can I do this
great Wickedness and sin against God, ^en. 39.9. If at any time any of your old
sinful Companions do entice, persuade, and intrude you to go with them to
Drinking, Gaming or any other Vile Exercise, resolve with your selves, never to
yield to none of their persuading Arguments, labor to obey the Counsel of
Solomon, Prove. My Son, if sinners entice thee consent thou not Friends, be
Exhorted now to make a firm and strong resolution against all difficulties and
dangers, and oppositions, dedicate your selves soul and body to the Lord, let
others choose what they will, do you choose the Lord for your Portion, in all
his Personal Relations, and in all his Essential Perfections, resolve to take
him as a holy God, as a sin-hating God, and labor to be holy, even as he is
holy, 1 Per. 1.16. And resolve to choose the Laws of Christ as your rule and
pattern, I have, says David, stuck to thy testimonies, I have inclined my
heart unto thy Statutes always, even to the end, psalm 119.31. Resolve to take
Christ in all his Offices, in all his Inconveniences, resolve to run all
hazards with him, be Exhorted now without delay, to bid an Everlasting farewell
to all your sins and from henceforth make a firm Covenant with the Body and
Soul to be his, saying, Lord I do here lament and am heartily grieved that I
have spent so much of my time in Rebellion against thee, and in chasing the
ways of sin; but I do here from this time forward, firmly resolve to bid an
utter defiance to all sin, and through thy grace enabling me, now Covenant with
thee to be thine, and to forsake all that is near and dear unto me in this
world for thy sake, I am resolved never more to yield my self a Servant to Sin
and Satan but to watch against all Temptation, whether of prosperity or
adversity, but I do resolve to take thee for my Portion and Happiness,
promising and vowing to serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the days
of my Life, and, I do here fully resolve to choose Jesus Christ as the way to
the Father, and to take my Lot with him, and to run all Hazards with him,
resting upon him alone, in his way for Salvation.

Secondly, Resolve not only to give up your selves to the Lord, but resolve to
use your utmost endeavors, that all under your charge may likewise serve the
Lord, as Joshua here did, not only resolve to serve the Lord himself, but he
resolved both he and his house should serve the Lord, so my Friends, you that
are Householders and Governors of Families, let me exhort you to labor to set
up the Worship of God in your Familys, though you cannot inspire grace into
your Children and Servants, yet you may Labor to convince them of their Sin
and Misery by Nature, you may Reprove them, and Instruct and teach them in the
principles of Religion, and join with them in Prayer and Holy Exercises. O it
to dreadful to consider, that there should be (...) many thousand Familys in
the world that are Ungodly and Profane Familye, many Governors of Familys ^an
take care that their Servants rise early in the morning, and go about their
work, they ca^^ take (...) that they be diligent about their Business, but they
take no care about the concer^ o^ their souls, they can take notice how they do
their work and are ready to he outrageous with them for exery fault, but yet
can hear them curse and swear, and see them Pront one the Lord's day, and see
them live loose and profane Lives, and live in open Rebestian against the
Lord, and yet take little or no notice of all this, they searce ever call upon
their Servants to Read nor Read themselves unto them, nor yet do they Pray with
them, except it be now and then upon a Lords day. For my part, I have been in
many familys but I never med but with here and there one, where the worship of
God, and Religious Exercises has been set up among them, I may speak it with
shame enough. Most familys regard their Servants no better than they do, their
very best they mind them no otherwise than to provoin for them Meat and Drink
and Wages, and to see that they do their work, but never regard what becomes of
their poor immortal souls. Truly friends, I am apt to think that there being
such a multitude of Profane Irreligious familys among us in England, that it
is a forerunner of some sad judgment approaching, for if the Scripture be the
true Word of God, so indeed we must expect some sad Calamity to befall us e're
long, if there be not a speedy Reformation in houses and families, see what a
threatening there lies in the word of God against such, Jer. 10.25. That the
Lord will pour out his fury upon the Heathen that know him not, and upon the
Nations that call not upon his Name. The Heathen here is meant all Ungodly
Irreligious familys. Let us, the People of this Land, have a care that this
Sentance be not pronounced against us, many of late have complained of the
badness of the Times, that Trading is dead, Money is scarce and every thing is
dear. But friends let there but be a thought of Reformation in houses and
familys, and then you will as soon see as peaceable and happy Times as ever was
known since England has been Inhabited. But if People will still remain to be
Irreligious and Profane in their familys, I am afraid that some sadder Judgment
will befall us than ever yet we have seen, how can we expect deliverance from
our Enemies and happy times, whilst the worship of God is so much neglected and
family Duties never regarded.

To Conclude, you that are Parents, Masters, and Householders, if ever you
desire your own Good, and a blessing upon your familys and Undertakings, and
the good of this Nation, be entreated now to suffer the word of Exhortation, be
exhorted now no longer to neglect the Worship and Service of God in your
familys, but as often as you see your Servants and Children sin against God
reprove them where you see them ignorant instruct them Let me Counsel you to do
this fit and convenient opportunity, to Catechize your Children and Servants,
at least once every Week, and instruct them in the Principles of Religion every
Lords day in the morning call them up (...) yet then you do on other days, and
as soon as they have done their necessary Business, before you go with them to
the public worship of God dead to them some part of Gods wood, and then give
them some private instruction concerning what they have read, and call upon
them to read some of God's word, and then join with them in Prayer, and after
Public Worship, call every out of them to an Account concerning the (...) they
heard, and rub up their Memorys with it and edify them as much as you can with
these good Instructions which the Preather has delivered out of the would of
God, and then instruct them in the principles of Religion. And conclude the
Evening of the Lords day in reading godly Conferences, and singing of Psalms
and Prayer. And every morning in the Week call your children and servants
together, and pray with them, before they and you go about the works of your
Calling. And let godly conferrence and prayer, be every Evenings Exercise
before you go to Rest, and make a set, firm and strong Resolution as Joshua did
here, that let others choose whom they will serve, let every one of you make
this Resolution, saying: As for me and my House we will Serve the Lord.

Now for your Help, I will set you a short form of Prayer for a Family.

A short Prayer for a Family.
O Most gra^^^^s, most glorious, and ever blessed Lord God, who art perfect in
Holiness, and infinite in all thy perfections, look down from Heaven, we
beseech thee, with in eye of pity and compassion upon thine unworthy Servants,
sinful (...) and ashes, who desires at this time, with all Reverence and
Humility, at this time to address our selves unto thee, to offer up unto thee
our Petitions and requests in thy Sons Name. But Lord, we do humbly acknowledge
and confess, that our transgresions are so many, and so grievous, that we are
ashamed to lift up our eyes to Heaven, or to take thy holy Name into our
poluted lips, for Lord we confess that we are conceived and born in sin, we
brought into this world a stock of Original Corruption, which we have derived
from our first Parents, actual transgression, and if that were not enough to
make us miserable for ever, we have gone on all our lives in a course of Actual
Rebellion against thee, we are naturaly prone to all manner of Evil, but we are
backward and averse to any thing that is good so that we are born children of
wrath, and Heirs of Hell and Damnation, and yet if we are not miserable enough
by Nature, we have done what (...) us lies to make our selves more miserable.
Lord we confess as we have grown in years, so we have increased in all manner
of sin and ungodliness, so than we have abused thy goodness, which should have
led us to Repentance, we have run wilfully into Sin, against the light of our
knowledge, against the contritions of our own conscience, we have grieved thy
Spirit, wearied thy Patience, and turned a dead ear to thy heavenly calls, and
slighted thy offers of Grace and Mercy through Jesus Christ. Ah vile Wretches
that we are, we have lived as if thou did send us into this world for nothing
but to gratify the flesh, and please our Sensual Appetites, but we have forgot
those hye and holy ends which thou have made us for, which is to live to thy
praise and glory, how often have thou stood knocking at the door of our hard
hearts for entrance, but we have bared them up against thee by Impenitency and
Unbelief. If thou Lord should deal with us according to our departs, what can
we expect at thy hands but wrath and our Everlasting Condemnation, but Lord, as
thou have one of thine unspeakable love toward mankind, sent thy dear Son into
the world, to be a proditiation for our sins, and by his sufferings and death
to take away the sins of the world, We humbly pray the for has sake, and for
that bitter death and bloody passions sake, which we belie be that he has
suffered for us, that thou would pardon and forgive us all our sins, blot
them, we beseech thee, out of the book of thy Remembrance, nail them to his
cross and bury them in his grace, that they may never rise ^p against us, to
shame and consound us in this world. or to condemn us forever in the World to
come, and to this end, Lord, we humbly pray thee that thou would give us a true
and lively faith in his merits. and Lord let it not be a dead and fruitless
faith, but let it be a lively and active faith that we may bring forth the
feuits of it in our lives and conversations, let us no longer live by sense,
but let us live by faith in the Son of God, O let this be an Agrivation of our
condemnation, that we have had a Savior offered us, but we have wilfully
rejected him; but grant Lord that we may heartily and thankfully accept of that
Redemption which he has purchased for us, grant that we may Receive and Embrace
him upon such terms as he is offered to us in the Gospel. O let Christ be most
precious in our eyes, yea more precious than thousands of Gold and silver, and
grant that we may esteem all the Riches, and all the Prosits of this world to
be but as dross and dung in comparison of Christ, for what shall it profit us
if we should gain all the Riches and all the pleasures of this world, and at
last loose Christ and our Immortal Souls, and how miserable will our condition
be if we should dye in a Christless estate, Lord we proy thee Unite us to
Christ by says that we may be one with Christ, and Christ with us, and wean
our hearts, we beseech thee, from the love of all earthly things, and
continually live and converse with thee abode, while we walk and act hers upon
(...) Lord we humbly beg of thee that thou (...) work in us a godly sorrow for
all our sin past (...) heartily Repent us that ever we should be so (...) to
Offend so good and gracious a God as then (...), grant Lord that we may have
sin with a perfect hatred, let it be most vile in our eyes, grant Lord that we
may put the knife of Mortification to the threat of our beloved Lust, grant
that we may learn to cut off our right hand sins, and pluck out our right eye
sins. O that thou would be pleased to give us a new Nature, and make holiness
be Natural course, even as sin has been Natural to us, molify we beseech thee,
our hard hearts, and write thy laws upon them, change, we beseech thee, our
natures and renew our Wills, and confirm them to thy holy and heavenly will,
and grant us the guidance and assistance of thy holy Spirit, that we may yield
hearty and sincere obedience to thy will, let us not any longer allow our
selves in the commition of any known sin, nor in the (...) of any known duty,
and grant that we may hence forth so fight against Sin, and resist all
temptations of the Devil, the Flesh, and the World that sin more and more dying
and delaying in us, grace and holiness, may more and more, grow, and increase
in us, that going on from one degree of grace to another grace at last may he
perfect and completed in glory, And Lord we humbly pray thee that thou would
look with an eye of pity and compassion upon this sinful Nation unto which we
belong, we must confess that we have been a disobedient and gainsaying people,
thy mercys would neither win us, nor yet thy Judgment awaken us, nor none of
thy Acts of Providence would any ways work upon us, but we have gone on
obstinately in our Rebelli(...) against thee, so that thou might long ^^re
this (...) have firstly delivered us up as a pray to our Enemies, and seeing
thou have yet spared us, turn us we beseech thee from the evil of our ways,
that thou may turn away from the fearceness of thy wrath that we perish not,
sit and prepare us for merrys, and then bestow them on thus Bless we beseech
thee the Kings Majesty both at home and abroad, give him Victory and Success
over all his Enemies, bring to naught we beseech thee those Plots and
Conspiraces, which are continued against him, bless him in his Royal Confort
Queen Mary, make them both eminent instruments of thy honor and glory, and the
good of thy Church, give them we pray thee a long and prosperous Reign over us
here on earth, and at last to Crown them with Everlasting Glory in the life to
come. Consider, we beseech thee all such as suffer any kind of affliction,
whether of Body or Mind, sanctify, we beseech thee, afflictions unto them, that
they may work for them a far more exceeding and eternal wait of Glory. And as
thou have hitheres preserved us from our Infancy unto this present day and
hour, so we beseech thee continue thy care over us, watch over us by thy divine
providence, and command thy holy Angels to pitch their tents round about us for
our Defense and Safety, bless us, we beseech thee, both in our going out and
coming in, both in our lying down and rising up, that whether we sleep or wake,
live or dye, we may be always thine, and Lord we pray thee make us so wise as
that we may know and consider in this our day of Visitation, these things which
concern our everlasting peace, before way are hid from our eyes, O let it be
enough and too much that we have spent so much of our time in gratifying the
flesh, in living to our selves, and in serving of Sin and Satan, and grant that
we may spend the remainder of our days in thy Service, in working out our
Salvation, and laboring by all diligence to make sure of Everlasting life, and
grant that we may live every day as if it were our last day, and so Order our
thoughts, words and actions, so that we may give up our accounts at last with
joy, and inherit everlasting life, these blessings and what ever else thou
know requisite and necessary for us, we humbly beg and crave at thy hands
upon the account, and through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord and only
Savior, in whose name and words we further call upon thee, as he himself has
taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

