RVSSEL'S Sermon Of the Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, Or, The Sin
unto Death.

Wherein is declared, a plain Description of it, both Negatively what it is
not, and also Positively what it is; and a plain Reason why it is Unpardonable.
With a Word of Comfort, and also of Counsel, how to avoid it.

By R. Russel, in Sussex.

Hebr. 10.26. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.

Licensed according to Order.

(...) HINC LVCEM ALMA MATTER (...)

Printed for the Author, and Sold by I. Blare, at the Looking-Glass on
London Bridge. 1692.

The Preface to the READER.
THE Reason of this following Treatise is, because some People have desired
satisfaction from me what the Sin against the Holy Ghost is, but I could not
make a full description of it in short: Therefore it came in my mind to enlarge
upon it in a Small Book, wherein they may receive full satisfaction about it.
And this I have done, not from the Opinions of others, but from the true and
written word of God. This Sin can be committed but by few, and yet sometimes
steals into the hearts of them that commit it, when they discern it not. But
the Lord of his Mercy keep us all, both from that Sin, and also from the reign
and dominion of every Sin: Which that we may do, is the Prayer of

Your dear Friend, R. RUSSEL.

ADVERTISEMENT.
These four Books, lately Written by Robert Russel, are sold by J. Blare
Bookseller, at the Looking-Glass, on London Bridge.

1. THe accepted Time and Day of Salvation; showing the goodness of God toward
Mankind in putting an opportunity of Grace into our hands. 2. The end of Time
and beginning of Eternity; showing that this golden opportunity of Grace will
soon have an end, and then will follow a long Eternity; With Exhortations to
Redeem Time. 3. The Glory of the Saints in Heaven with Jesus Christ, and the
Eternal Torments of the Damned in Hell. 4. A little Book for Children and
Youth; exhorting them to resist the temptations of the Devil whilst young. With
Nine Lessons of Directions how they shall merit Eternal Life. 5. The Wedding
Garment or The Honorable state of Matrimony: Delivered in a Wedding-Sermon.
OF THE Unpardonable SIN Against the Holy Ghost.
1. John 5. part of Ver. 16. There is a Sin unto Death.


THis Sin which St. John calls here the Sin unto Death, is the unpardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost, described by our blessed Savior, Matthew. 12.32. that
whosoever commits it, has no forgiveness, neither in this World, nor in the
World to come; for, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Men;
but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven unto Men: And
^e that speaks a word against the Son, it shall be forgiven him; but
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven, neither in
this World, nor in the World to come. This Sin against the Holy Ghost, this is
that sin which St. John calls here the Sin unto Death: Not because that sin
deserves Death, for so does all sin deserve Death, both Temporal and Eternal;
for the wages of Sin (even all) is Death, Romans 6. But this sin against the Holy
Ghost is called, The Sin unto Death; because it binds a man over to Eternal
Death, without any possibility of recovery. Now some there are, that go on from
one degree of sin to another, they heighten and aggravate their sins more and
more, until they are brought to that height at last, as to commit that sin, for
which there is no forgiveness.

There is no mere Man since the fall, that can live without sin, for all are
sinners; but yet there are degrees of sin; some sins in their own nature are
small, others are more great and heinous. Many sins there are that are great,
yet pardonable, and one sin there is unpardonable, and whosoever commits that
one sin, shall have no forgiveness, but must for ever bear the weight and
punishment, both of that and all of his other sins. There is such a sin as St.
John speaks of here in my Text, that is, a Sin unto Death.

And now I come to the Explication of the words; from whence I shall raise this
point of Doctrine.

Doct. That amongst other Sins committed by fallen Mankind, there is only one
Sin that is a Sin unto Death, and whosoever commits that, he has no
forgiveness, neither in this World, nor in the World to come.

Now for my further proceeding on the Subject, I shall lay open to you, First,
What the Sin unto Death is. Secondly, That all other Sins, how great and
heinous soever, may be forgiven. Thirdly That this Sin alone, shall never be
forgiven. Fourthly, The reason why that Sin alone is Unpardonable: And then
Lastly, I shall conclude all with a few words of Application.


I shall begin first with the Description of this unpardonable sin; where I
shall endeavor to make as plain a Description of it as possible I can; and in
doing of it, I shall First show you Negatively what is not this Sin: Secondly,
I shall show you Positively what it is.

First, I shall show you Negatively, what is not this Sin unto Death, or in
what degree a man may sin, and yet not commit that unpardonable Sin against the
Holy Ghost.

First: It is not every quenching of the motions of the Spirit that is that
Sin: It is true, when the Holy Ghost comes with a still voice, and knocks at
the doors of sinners hearts for entrance, he often comes and strives with them,
and secretly wooes and beseeches them to leave their Sins, and be Converted,
yet they quench and stifle all his motions, and bare up their hearts against
him, and will not be obedient to his Heavenly Calls; now such sin grievously
against the Holy Ghost: But yet this alone is not the unpardonable sin against
the Holy Ghost; for many who have stood it out a long time, and have often
quenched and grieved the Holy Spirit, yet at last they have been wrought upon
unto sincere Conversion.

Secondly, A man may commit many heinous and crying Sins, and yet not be guilty
of the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. A man may be an Idolator, a
Whoremonger, a Fornicator, a Murderer, and work Witchcraft, and Sin with a
very high hand, nay, he may live in all manner of filthiness and lewdness, and
yet not be under the guilt of the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. Thus
we read, 2 Chronicles. 33. that Manasses sinned with a very high hand; he was an
Idolator, an Inchanter, and worked Witchcraft, and dealt with Familiar
Spirits, and wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord: And Mary Magdalen had
seven Devils cast out of her, Luke 8.2. and yet both were pardoned.

Thirdly; A man may Sin presumptuously against great Light and Knowledge, and
yet not commit this Sin unto Death: for Peter when he denied Christ, he did it
against great knowledge of Christ; he knew Christ to be his Lord and Savior,
he was one of Christ's beloved Disciples, and for all that, how strongly he
denied Christ, and that with an Cath too; and yet for all that, Christ looked
upon him with a merciful eye, and he Repented, and was forgiven.

Fourthly; It is not every malicious Sin that is the unpardonable Sin against
the Holy Ghost; for St. Paul certainly had great malice in his heart, when he
went on so furiously to persecute the Church of God; and yet he was Converted,
and became a Preacher of the Gospel of Christ, which before he persecuted.

Fifthly and Lastly; It is not final Unbelief, nor final Impenitence, that is
the unpardoable Sin against the Holy Ghost, though some be of opinion, that it
is because that Sin is Unpardonable; and Christ himself has said Matthew. Chap.
12. Ver. 32. That all manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Man,
except it be the Sin against the Holy Ghost. But you are to take the words of
our Savior in their true sense and meaning; it is all manner of Sin and
Blasphemy committed within the compass of a Man's life, that shall be forgiven,
except the Sin against the Holy Ghost; for the Sin of final Impenitency and
final Unbelief, is not completed until the very moment of a Man's Death, and
then you all know, that there is no Repentance, and consequently no Pardon
after Death, for Christ says, He that Sins against the Holy Ghost, has no
forgiveness, neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Now why should
Christ say in this World, if there be no space to be forgiven in this World?
but a Man may commit the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, even many
years before his death. Besides, there are many Thousands that dye in
Impenitency and Unbelief, and are Damned, and yet never committed the
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. Thus I have showed you Negatively what
is not this unpardonable Sin, none of these Sins in particular, is that Sin.

Secondly: I come now to show you Positively what this Sin unto Death is, and
wherein this unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost does consist. Now there
are several Opinions in the World about it; some hold one thing, some another;
but I have not time nor room to dispute concerning others Opinions about it;
but I will endeavor, through Gods help, to lead you to the plain sight of it,
by the light of the Holy Scripture.

Now in the first place you must know, that there are two sorts of People that
cannot commit this Unpardonable Sin. First, the True Believers cannot commit
it, though many times, for their Trial, God suffers them to fall foully into
many grievous Sins; yet they being Rooted in Christ, they are upheld by free
Grace and Mercy, that they cannot fall into this Unpardonable Sin. Secondly,
the grossly ignorant cannot commit it because it is a Sin against great Light
and Knowledge: Indeed, the greatest part of the World shall be Damned; yet
among that greatest part, there is but few of them that can commit that
Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Some have both Light and Grace, these shall not commit this Unpardonable Sin.
Again, Some have neither Light nor Grace, these cannot commit it: But there are
some again that have Light and no Grace; these are they that are liable to
commit the Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. Now there must be two
Ingredients to make up this Unpardonable Sin; that is, Light in the Head, and
Malice in the Heart, without these two the Sin against the Holy Ghost cannot be
committed. For to Sin against great Light and Knowledge, is not that Sin alone;
nor yet to Sin Ignorantly out of that Malice, is not that Sin; but they must
join both together to make up this Unpardonable Sin. This we see plain by the
Example of St. Peter and St. Paul: Peter he denied Christ, and forswore himself
too, and that grievously against great Light and Knowledge; for he knew Christ
to be the only begotten Son of God, and he knew God in him: he was one of
Christ's Disciples, and one of his beloved Disciples too; he was taught of
Christ, and had experimental knowledge of his love and favor, and yet he
wickedly with an Oath denied him. Now if Peter had done this out of Malice and
Spite, then he had committed that Sin unto Death, for which there is no
forgiveness. But Peter had no Malice in his heart all this while, even at that
time when he denied Christ, as you may see Matthew. 29. when Christ told him,
Before the Cock Crow thou shall deny me thrice: He answered, If I should dye
with thee, I will not deny thee. And then denying him through infirmity and
weakness of the flesh, when he had considered what he had done, he went out and
wept bitterly, ver. 75. And Paul he had great Malice and Spite against the
ways and People of God, as you may see, Acts 9.1. Paul breathed out threatenings
and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, and desired of them Letters to
Damascus, to the Synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether Men or
Women, that he should bring them bound to Jerusalem. Now here was great Rage
and Malice in Saul, against the ways and People of God; but doing it
Ignorantly, he at last hearing of a voice, saying, Saul, Saul, why Persecutest
thou me? and receiving of a Light from Heaven, that it was Jesus that he
Persecuted, he was pricked at the heart, and trembling and astonished, said,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Now by these two places of Scripture, you
may plainly see that Peter Sinned against great Light, and Paul out of great
Malice, yet none of them both committed the Unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost. But whenever Light and Malice meets together in one Man, then there is
the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Now as all other Sins, so this Sin against the
Holy Ghost may be committed in Thought, Word, or Action.

First, In Thought; that is, when a wicked Man, against his clear light and
knowledge, does but conceive a malicious Thought or Purpose toward persecuting
the Gospel of Christ, or of the Saints of Christ, to hinder the work of the
Holy Ghost in them.

This Sin, is to be thought, was the Sin of the lost Angels, for which cause
they were lost without all hopes of Pardon. Now some dispute whether their Sin
was a Sin of the Thought; but I say, with all likelihood it was; for the Angels
being only Spirits without Bodies, and so have no use of bodily Tongues, it
could not be committed in Word, nor yet could they commit it in Action, because
they were cast out of Heaven before they could bring it into practice,
therefore it must be a Sin of the Thought.

Now their Sin was this, their habitation being in the highest Heavens, next
under God himself, they had exceeding great Light and Knowledge, they had more
Knowledge than all the Men in the World ever had, and were happy above all
other Creatures; but then not being contented with this Estate, they thought to
be as high as God himself; therefore maliciously sought to make War against the
Son of God, and put him out of his Throne, for which cause they were
immediately thrust out of Heaven, never more to see the face of Mercy; and thus
from the beginning they have been counted malicious and revengeful, a raging
Beast, and a roaring Lion; thus their Sin being of the same nature with the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, they were excluded all hopes of pardon.

But the Sin of our first Parents was not the unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost, is clear; for though they sinned against great light, yet they obeyed, and
complied with the will of God, even when the Tempter came, until at last they
were enticed and overcome; but they did not fall maliciously, and so were not
excluded a possibility of mercy.

Secondly, This Sin may be committed in Word too; that is, when a man speaks
blasphemously and maliciously of Christ and his holy way; this was the Sin of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Mark 3.22. There were certain Scribes came and said,
this Fellow has Beelzebub, and casleth out Devils by the Prince of the Devils:
Therefore says Christ to them, ver. 28.29. Verily I say unto you, all Sins
shall be forgiven unto the Sons of men, and Blasphemies, wherewith soever they
shall blaspheme; but whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has
never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal Damnation.

Now the reason of this speech of our blessed Savior, is showed in verse 20.
because they said, he has an unclean Spirit; which plainly shows, that these
Scribes had spoken Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. These Scribes were great
Learned Men, they could know no other, but that Christ was the Son of God, and
they knew that he cast out Devils by the Spirit of God; and yet they out of
spite to Christ, maliciously and blasphemously said, that he cast out Devils by
Beelzebub the chief of Devils: Thus these Scribes committed the unpardonable
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and that in Word.

Thirdly; This Sin may be committed in Action too; that is, when a man being
once thoroughly enlightened, and entered upon a holy course of Life, and tasted
the comforts of Gods Spirit, and had some foretaste of the joys of Heaven, and
not only makes profession of the Gospel, but teaches it to others; he at last
takes a dislike of these holy courses, and through spite and malice, utterly
forsakes, opposes, and persecutes those good ways of God, which he before
professed and taught: But to sum up this point; this unpardonable Sin against the
Holy Ghost, is fully described by the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10.26, 27,
28. For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation; how much sorer punishment shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of
the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and have done
despite to the Spirit of Grace. Likewise, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. For it is impossible
for those who when once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and
were partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the World to come, if they fall away to renew them again to
Repentance, seeing they Crucify afresh to themselves the Son of God, and put
him to open shame.

Now the Sin against the Holy Ghost is briefly this; It is a wilful and
malicious opposing of the known truth, joined with final Apostasy.

I shall a little explain these words, and then proceed.

First, This Sin unto Death is an opposing Sin; now to oppose a thing, is to
contradict it, or gainsay it; when a man says a thing is so and so, he denies
it, and says it is not so; when a man says a thing must be done, he says again,
it must not nor shall not be done; such an opposition is in the heart of him
that commits this unpardonable Sin; but a man may be an opposing man, and yet
cannot commit this Sin; therefore,

Secondly, It is the Truth that he must oppose; that is, he must utterly oppose
and reject Christ, who said, I am the Truth, Joh. 14.6. He opposes all his
threatenings, and will not believe his promises, and counts him to be a Seducer
of the people, and counts the blood of the Covenant to be any unholy thing;
nay, he also opposes the Spirit of Christ, who is the Spirit of Truth; so that
he will not obey his motions, and will not be led nor guided by him; but a man
may oppose the Truth, and yet do it ignorant; therefore,

Thirdly; It must be the known truth that he opposes; he must be once
enlightened: But you must know, that it is not only a notional knowledge, for a
man may have great knowledge, and humane Learning, he may know much of God, and
of his will in the Letter of the word, and yet not be capable of committing
this unpardonable Sin: But he must be so far enlightened, as to see the evil
that is in Sin, and the excellency of Christ; he must taste of the Heavenly
gift, and be made partaker of the Holy Ghost, and taste of the good word of
God, and the powers of the World to come; and by the blood of the Covenant,
which he counts as an unholy thing, he is in part sanctified and cleansed from
many Sins, he must have sweet communion with God in his word and Sacraments; he
must have some taste of the love and favor of God, and comforts of his Spirit,
and be refreshed by it, and taste of the joys of Heaven, and have some
fore-taste of the happiness of the World to come.

This is that light and knowledge that lays a Man open to the committing of
that Unpardonable sin: But yet a Man may sin against all this light and
experiamental knowledge, and yet do it through the weakness of the flesh, or
through some violent temptation, as Peter did when he denied Christ; therefore,

Fourthly, He must oppose the known truth wilfully; he must wilfully fall
away, after he has received the knowledge of the truth; other sins are
committed through infirmity, but this sin is willful; the will is the chief
actor in it; and to complete and make up this Unpardonable sin, there is,

Fifthly, Malice in the heart; without this, this sin cannot be committed; it
must be a malicious opposing of the known truth; that is, when a Man being once
enlightened, and tasted of the Heavenly gift, and the good word of God, and have
been made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have had some sweet relish and
foretaste of Heaven, he come at last to take a dislike, and to hate the Holy
ways of God, and maliciously oppose and persecute them, and to do despite to
the Spirit of Grace, Crucifying afresh the Son of God, and putting him to open
shame.

Now a Man having gone thus far, he comes in the last place to be an Apostate;
for thus to oppose, thus wilfully and maliciously to oppose the known truth,
is always joined with final and total Apostasy; for he that is so far
enlightened, as to see the evil of sin, and the excellency of Christ and
Holiness, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, of his Graces and
Comforts, and tastes of Gods love and favor in Jesus Christ, and has some
fore-taste of the Joys of the World to come; now for such a one Wilfully,
Spitefully, and Maliciously to fall away, he so falls, as never to rise more:
It is true, the Children of God fall, and that often, and yet rise again; but
when they fall through weakness of infirmity, and not wilfully and
maliciously; but these wicked wretches fall wilfully and maliciously, and so
fall finally. Against such the door of mercy is for ever shut; concerning such
St. Peter says, It had been better for them not to have known the way of
Righteousness, then after they have known, to turn from the Holy Commandment
delivered unto them: But it happened unto them according to the true Proverb,
The Dog is turned to his vomit again; and the Sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the Mire, 2. Pet. 2.21, 22. There is such another dreadful place
of Scripture against these kind of Apostates; that is, Heb. 10.26. For if we
sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains
no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation. Thus I have given you five steps, as so many links in a Chain, all
which makes up the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost. It is a Willful and
Malicious oppoling of the known truth, joined with final Apostasy. Thus I have
showed you as Plain as I can, what this sin unto death is: Now to proceed:

Secondly, The next thing to be considered, is, that all other Sins or
Blasphemies whatsoever, may be forgiven, be our sins never so great and many;
though we be the vilest wretches that ever lived, yet there is hopes of pardon
upon Repentance: Manasses was the vilest Sinner that ever we read of, yet he
Repented and was pardoned: also Mary Magdalen, was the Chief of sinners, for
out of her came seven Devils, yet because she loved much, much was forgiven
her. A Man may be a Whoremonger, an Adulterer, and work Witchcraft, and deal
with Familiar Spirits, and yet at last he may Repent and be saved; and yet I
have heard talk of some that are so foolish, as to take the sin of. Fornication
to be a sin Unpardonable; for from Gods own words in the fourth Commandment, I
the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the Sins of the Fathers, unto the
third and fourth generation: From whence they say, that Children that are base
born are not saved, unto the third and fourth generation. But this is a most
erroneous Interpretation of Gods Word, it is them that hate him, and continue
hating of him, that he will visit their Iniquities upon, for Fornicators and
Adulterers themselves, may repent and be saved, much more the Children, who
knew nothing, nor could help nothing: For Christ with his own Mouth tells the
Scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 21.13. that the Publicans and Harlots shall enter
into the Kingdom of God before them; for there is no Sin but is pardonable,
except the sin against the Holy Ghost. But

Thirdly; The sin against the Holy Ghost is alone the sin unto Death, that is,
a sin Unpardonable, never to be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in the
World to come: Not because the Merits of Christ is not sufficient to pardon it,
for this sin, as well as for all other sins, are but Finite; whereas the Merits
of Christ are Infinite.

Object. But what is the reason then that this sin cannot be forgiven?

Answer. This Question brings me to the fourth thing considerable; do but mind
me a little, and I will as plain and as clear as I can, tell you what the
Reason is.

The Reason arises from the Nature of this sin; for this sin, by whomsoever it
is committed burdens the heart, and sears the Conscience, so that there is no
place for Repentance to be wrought, neither for that nor for any other sin.
This Sin is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost; not because it is a Sin
against the Person of the Holy Ghost, for so is all Sin against his Person; but
it is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost, because it is against the Office
and Work of the Holy Ghost. Now every one of the three Persons have their
particular Work: the Work of the Father is to Create, the Work of the Son is to
Redeem lost Sinners; and the work of the Holy Ghost is, to enlighten, Convince,
Sanctify, and Convert them: Now a Man committing this Unpardonable sin against
the Holy Ghost, Rejects all this work of the Spirit. Now for a Man to be
thoroughly enlightnell by the Holy Ghost, that he comes to know the evil of sin
and of his lost and undone condition without Christ, and that none but the
Merits of Christ can save him, then for him wilfully and maliciously to oppose
him and the work of his Spirit, and will not be beholding to him for Salvation,
now for such a one to be forgiven, is utterly impossible.

Object. But why is it Impossible? nothing is Impossible with God.

Answer. Nothing is Impossible with God that does not employ a Contradiction;
but for God to Forgive the sin committed against the Holy Ghost imploys a
Contradiction: for how can he have Pardon given him, that utterly rejects it?
As for instance: A Man through Ignorance may deny Christ, and maliciously fall
from the profession of the truth, into all kind of wickedness, as did Saint
Paul, and the Jews that Crucified Christ: and yet not falling against Light and
Knowledge, there is room for the Holy Ghost to work upon him to enlighten him,
and to convince him of his Folly, and so makes way for Conversion. And besides,
a Man, after he has been enlightened, and ^et falls back, through infirmity and
the weakness of the flesh, as Peter did, and does not fall wilfully, and
maliciously, then the Holy Ghost may work upon him, and renew him again, and
work in him a deep sorrow for abusing so much love and mercy, and so carry on
his good work unto Salvation. But for a Man when he is once enlightened by the
Holy Ghost, and has had some taste of Gods Love and Favor, and some foretaste
of the joys of Heaven, and then at last utterly opposing this illuminating work
of the Spirit, and wilfully and maliciously to fall away, and so to reject the
Spirits renewing work: Alas! then the Holy Ghost has done; he has nothing more
that he can work in him; for this wretched creature has utterly rejected him;
his enlightening work, his convincing work, his Sanctifing work, he has utterly
rejected Christ's pardon, Heaven and all. Now this poor wretch is past all hopes
of Mercy, all hopes of Pardon, nay, for such a one we are forbidden to Pray, as
you see in the verse whereof my Text is a part. Now Christ prayed for them that
maliciously Crucified him, Luke 23.34. saying, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. Alas! they knew not what they were doing; for had they
knew it, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, 1. Corinthians. 2.8. But
if they had known, and yet Crucified him, Christ would not have spent his
breath to pray for them; for it would have been utterly in vain; for when a Man
has committed this Unpardonable sin, all the prayers of Heaven, nor Earth, can
do him no good, for as the Text says, There is a Sin unto Death.

I shall conclude all with a few words of Application, and I will be as short
as possible, because this Discourse will be to large for so small a Book. Here
is first, a word of Comfort; Secondly, a word of Counsel.

First, A word of Comfort. It may be with reading and hearing of this terrible
Discourse, your hearts begin to ache with fear that you have committed this
Unpardonable sin. But I think I have sufficiently proved to you what it is; and
I tell you again, that there are but few that can commit it, nay, there are
millions that are tormented in Hell, yet never committed this Sin: Nay,
further, an ignorant Protestant may through weakeness, and out of a slavish
fear, turn Papist, and renounce his profession, and yet not commit this
Unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost: for doing it out of ignorance and
infirmity, there may be matter left for the Holy Ghost to work upon, whereby he
may yet be Converted and Saved. Consider this also^ if you are afraid that you
have committed (...) with that you had not committed it if it were to do again,
(...) is a ^^de sig^ that you have not committed ^^.

Secondly, I must conclude also with a word of Counsel; First, watch very
deligently against all sin; but above all take especial heed of those sins that
come near to the sin against the Holy Ghost, and they are these, Hypocrisy,
taking only the outward profession of Religion, and so dissembling, and mocking
of God, sinning wilfully against Conviction of Conscience, and against great
Light and Knowledge; sinning presumptuously, and with an high hand: these sins,
though none of them are the direct sin against the Holy Ghost, yet they will come
very near to it; therefore take especial need of them, least they in time
should bring you to the committing of that Uunpardonable Sin.

And Lastly, Labor to be Sincere in Religion, and by a true Faith, ingraft
your selves into Christ; for they that be with Christ can never commit this
Unpardonable Sin; For know this, that amongst all the Sins committed by fallen
Mankind, there is one Sin, that is a Sin unto Death, which is the Unpardonable
Sin against the Holy Ghost; which whosoever commits it, has no forgiveness,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you Understanding.

FINIS.

