A LETTER SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable
House of COMMONS: Concerning Sir Thomas Fairfax's ROVTING Of the Enemy in the
West, near BODMAN, March 8. 1645.

Together with the Lord Hoptons Answer to Sir Thomas Fairfax's Summons.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. March 12. 1645.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House OF COMMONS.
SIR,
BY the last Messenger, the Packet from Ireland taken in the Vessel at Padstow,
was sent unto you, which I hope came safe to your hands; by which original
Letters under the hand of the Earl of Glamorgan, you will perceive how (as yet)
he is employed for the bringing over of an Army, and what private
correspondency there is between him, the Prince, the Lord Hopton, and other
persons of Note (notwithstanding, he is under the cloud of being accused of
High Treason) his being at liberty, and acting the Kings Commands in bringing
over an Army of natural Irish Rebels, and his correspondency with the Prince,
Hopton, etc. is enough to satisfy the World, by whose Command he manages that
Affair. I also acquainted you with a Summons sent to the Lord Hopton (or rather
honorable conditions) if he would instantly lay down Arms, and disband the
Forces in the West, which being sent unto him upon Thursday last, and no Answer
returned on Friday: On Saturday the Army advanced toward St. Cullumb, and
being drawn to a Rendezvous four miles from Bodman; the Weather proved so
extreme Wet, that it was not held fit to advance on any further that day; and
so the Foot were appointed to Quarters in Villages thereabouts, and a mile or
two forwards: The Horse being likewise at the Rendezvous, returned to their
Quarters; but some went to Quarter nearer the Enemy, and to the Guards, except
a very good party of about eight hundred Horse and Dragoons, commanded by Col.
Rich, who was sent away with the same, with Orders to fall upon the Enemies
Guards or Quarters, as he should see it most fit for the service; and
accordingly within two hours of Evening, fell upon their Out-guards near St.
Cullumb, beat them to their Main guard: Being then drawn up in a Body, ours
likewise drew into three Divisions; one commanded by Colonel Rich, another by
Major Fincher, and the third by Major Scroop: The Enemy seeing no way but to
fight, the Van of them gave a very good charge: Major General Pert breaking
through one Division himself: But they were instantly put to the Rout, and we
had the pursuit of them for three or four Miles, killing many, took about an
hundred prisoners, whereof Major General Pert was one, and betwixt two hundred
and three hundred Horse. This so Alarmed the Enemy, that it made them desert
the Head-quarter for a mile, and caused them to draw all their Horse to a
Rendezvous at eleven of the Clock that night on Michel Down, and so continued
in the Wet in a great Rain till the next morning, thinking the whole Army had
been advanced. Our party returned to St. Cullumb, and this morning brought the
prisoners to Town. This party of the Enemies were of the Princes own Regiment,
most of them Reformadoes Officers; they confess their Soldiers are very
weary, and that if it were published among them, they might have Passes to go
home, it was not in the Officers power to keep them together: They likewise
say, that most of their Officers, if they knew they might be accepted into the
protection of the Parliament, they would desert the Service.

Being asked, if they had heard any Propositions were sent unto them from the
General, offering honorable conditions both to Officers and Soldiers, they
answered they never heard of any; so by that we perceive the Lord Hopt on with
some few of his Council keeps the propositions from being published: There are
some others come from thence, who say that the French are mighty inquisitive to
know whether they might be so far received into savor as to have leave to go
beyond seas: Laying all these together we are of opinion, that it will not be
in Hoptons power to hinder a good effect to the propositions sent him; so soon
as the same is published amongst them, which before this, we hope by some means
that has been used is effectually done: This day the Generals Trumpeter that
went with the summons, is returned with a brief answer from the Lord Hopton to
this purpose: That he had taken the letter from the General into consideration,
but the sudden advance of our forces gave an interruption to mention at this
time any particulars, but by a Trumpeter of his own he would send a particular
answer: The Trumpeter was courteously used and much respected, This evening the
Lord Hoptons Trumpeter is come with a letter in answer to the Generals
propositions, which indeed implies a willingness to end the business of the
West without more blood shed, but yet desires to be satisfied whether the King
and Parliament be not near a conclusion of a Peace; for being entrusted by the
King, it concerns him to support his honor as long as he can; and yet withal
inclines to have some Country Gentleman come unto him to satisfy him of the
state of affairs: Taking altogether, it argues a coming to us, though it seems
yet a distance, or else a way to get time (which I rather believe, because he
invites a cessation) until some Irish do land, which is the thing rumoured
abroad in their Army, and expected to be there within eight and forty hours;
and indeed a duplicate of that Packet we intercepted at Padstow, is since
arrived with the enemy, whereby its probable they hasten ships unto them, for
the bringing over those Irish that were intended for Chester into these parts:
What ever his intention is, the General will not lose a minute of time: All the
Regiments this day advanced to and beyond Cullomb, within three miles of Truro
with a great part of the horse; the headquarter is at Bodman with one Regiment
there, which we leave to secure the pass.

To morrow the General and Lieutenant General advance after the Army, and I
believe will quarter at Truro to morrow at night: This advance as it is like to
further a good effect upon the Propositions (if God incline their hearts unto
it) so it will I hope dispatch the business before such time as any Irish can
land: If there be a Treaty it must not be such a one as shall take up above one
days time: therefore a few days will decide that business, and I hope (with
Gods blessing) much to your advantage and the peace and welfare of this
Kingdom. Major General Pert is run through the body, and shot in the body yet
not mortal: There was found in his Pocket a Copy of a Letter to the Lords,
about the Prince, either sent, or to be sent by him, advising them, That now
was a good time to Trear, before our Forces advanced further; declaring, That
they feared else their Condition would be desperate.

The Country is very forward to assist in the Barrocadoing up of all Lanes and
Passes, where probably the Enemy (if they intend to break through) may attempt
to pass by. This being all I have to trouble you with, I rest,

Your most faithful And Humble Servant, I. R.
Bodman, March 8. 1645. Past 12 at Night.
FINIS.

