A SURVEY OF THE SURVEY of that SUM OF Church Discipline Penned by Mr. Thomas
Hooker, Late Pastor of the Church at HARTFORD upon Connecticot in New England.
WHEREIN The Way of the Churches of N. England is now re-examined; Arguments in
favor thereof winnowed; The Principles of that Way discussed; and the Reasons
of most seeming strength and nerves, removed. By SAMUEL RUTHERFURD, Professor
of Divinity in the University of S. Andrews in Scotland.

Revel. 21. 9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the
seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come
hither, I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife.

V. 10. And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and
showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from
God.

Ezekiel. 48. 35. And it was round about eighteen thousand (measures,) and the
name of the City from that day (shall be) The LORD is there. LONDON, Printed by
I. G. for Andr. Crook, at the Green Dragon in St Paul's Churchyard. M. DC. LV
III.

Christian READER,
IT were good there were more believing and less disputing in the world; and
that all, especially the Ambassadors of the Prince of Peace, would listen to
that 1 Timothy 4. 4. not to give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which
minister questions, rather then godly edifying which is in faith: as also to
consider, that the holy Ghost states an opposition betwixt questions of
perverse disputers, and godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5.

In this Piece, which the violence of requests in some, the importunity of
chiding in others, and the less modest triumphing in not a few has extorted,
rather than willingly brought forth, the question of the preference of humble
believing above all factious disputing, even though the subject were the form,
the going out and the coming of the house of the Lord, is with me, and (which
is of infinite more weight) with the truly godly soon determined: for, Blessed
is the servant whom the Master when he comes shall find watching, praying,
believing, not tossing and raising the dust of debating and multiplied Replies
and Duplies, since the peace and joy of believing, that we may abound in hope
through the power of the holy Ghost, is of great price with those in whom the
meekness and gentleness of Christ has place. For it were desirable, not to be
in bondage to either Engine or Pen; and it would appear that there is less of
Christ and more of Self in our sickness of over-loving these truths, which
suffer most bruising and grinding (might I be licensed so to speak) between the
Milstones of Sides, Opinions and Contradictions of Parties, as if that were the
choicest verity which the man's own engine has taken out of an Adversaries hand
(in a manner) with his bow and his sword. But O how more precious were it, if
the holy Ghost had persuaded the man of the sweetness of it from the fountain
of holy Scripture! for it is beyond doubting, that syllogisms, and happily thirty
two or forty Arguments have not such leading and captivating influences upon
the heart, as the convincing light of the Spirit acting upon the supernatural
instinct of the new birth, to bring the thoughts captive to the obedience of
Christ. For when the head is filled with topics, and none of the flamings of
Christ's love in the heart, how dry are all disputes? for too often, servou^of
dispute in the head weakens love in the heart. And what can our Paper-industry
add to the spotless truth of our Lord Jesus? O that Opinions were down, and
the Gospel up; and Sides and Parties might fall, and Christ stand; and that all
Names, Sects and Ways were low, and the Lord alone exalted! and that we could
both dispute for Jehovah, and in the same act worship Jehovah! There is too
much fire stricken out of the letter in our debates: it were good that the
Spirit with fire from heaven did animate and inliven the letter and word of our
Polemicks; it were good that the Ministers of the Gospel in the Isle of Britain
were well studied and read in that celebrious and noble Text, Jesus Christ and
him crucified, that we might contend for his high interests, and had the Key of
David to open Christ, to commend him in all his loveliness, and people would
come and see, and wonder; then should we know how choiser it were to act in our
selves the love of Christ, being warmed and inflamed therewith, than to write
the letters of his love in ink and paper, and to declaim of it to others.

Neither is this spoken to deny but many precious and savoury truths, as Christ
himself, have endured contradiction of sinners; but the witnesses both sealed
these truths with their blood, and were in their debatings shined upon by the
out-lettings and emanations of the Spirit of Christ.

It were safer to lie in the dust and be humbled before the Lord for the breach
of Covenant, the vast toleration of false Religions, our vanity of apparel,
when we busk and adorn our selves in filks, even in our state of captivity; for
intemperance, execrable swearing, lying, mocking and persecuting of godliness,
lothing and hating the godly, covetousness, the barrenness of our profession;
and which is the root of all, Atheism, gross ignorance of God and of Jesus
Christ, the abounding of many other iniquities, as if we would make it appear,
that three Englands are scarce sufficient to humble one Scotland. Which is not
spoken to justify the Author, or a party from deep accession to these sins, or
to clear and acquit the members of our Church from the charge put on them by
Mr. Hooker. Its true, we judge it not warrantable to say, that the servants are
to call and invite none to the marriage-banquet, but such as they look on as
regenerate, and clothed with the wedding garment; nor to teach, that the Lord
of Hosts shall make a feast of fat things, a seast of wine on the lees, of fat
things full of marrow, unto, and for a visible society, of which Magus the
Sorcerer, Judas the Traitor are privileged members; and that the Lord in them
shall destroy the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread
over all nations; Isa. 15. 6, 7.
and that in the members of that Church-frame of which we now dispute, its
verified which the Prophet says, Isa. 30. 26. Moreover, the light of the moon
shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven^old,
as the ^^ght of seven days, as Mr. H. cited: for without the salvo and ^enitive
of a figure, the part for the whole, his Congregational visible Church can
never stand under the weight of such glorious Prophesies as are fulfilled in
the only really gracious and chosen of God, visible or invisible.

Yet should the desire of our soul be, that there be upon the bells of the
horses Holiness unto the Lord, and the pots in the Lords house may be like
bowls before the altar; yea, that every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah may be
holiness to the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 20. 21. We pray for the coming of his
Kingdom, and praise him that the number of those that seek the Lord in Scotland
are not diminished, but grow even under evil shepherds and lazy feeders; which
is the lilly among the thorns, though we go under the name of Protesters,
Separatists, hypocrites, unpeaceable, implacable spirits, are made as the filth
of the world, and the off-scourings of all things: yea, troubled on every side
(in the streets, Pulpits, in diverse Synods, Presbyteries, etc. more then under
prelacy) yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. We desire to believe our cry shall come
up before the Lord, though we be afflicted and helpless; and look on the right
hand, and behold now man knows us, refuge falls us. Its wonder if there be a
power now on earth, who says in reality as Job did, when the secret of God was
on his Tabernacle, Job 29. 11. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and
when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me; because I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him: the blessing of
him that was ready to perish came upon me; and I caused the widows heart to
sing for joy; I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was as a
Robe and a Diadem; I was as eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame; I
was a father to the poor, and the cause that I knew not I searched out, etc.
And now to other snares this is added:

That our Brethren have framed and defend one engagement which every Intrant to
the Ministry must take and subscribe, otherwise there is no maintenance for
him, that he is resolved to live peaceably, and unoffensively under the present
government; and how far we are from siding with any seditious, unpeaceable,
treacherous, and malignant way, and from raising tumults, is well known; but we
dare not deceive our souls, and deal doubly with the Lord, and with the present
powers, to make a difference betwixt a resolution to do a duty, and a promise
or engagement to do a duty, as our brethren do, when the resolution is declared
and subscribed. 2. When it is judicially declared to understanding, and wise
men, who cannot take the sense to be, he is resolved for the present, but has
power to alter his resolution to morrow, and judges in conscience he may alter
without equivocating. For when the resolution is declared. 2. Judicially
infor^, declared. 3. When it is declared ad modum compacti, by way of covenant:
if the present powers shall give order for his enjoying the stipend, he is
resolved to do such a duty. Let any say whether he does not covenant and
promise; and if he speak sincerely as a Minister of Christ, he may not swear
the same. This we disown, as no lawful act of a Presbytery, though it be said
to be done by a surreptitious meeting of Correspondents from the Synods of this
Church, without the knowledge and consent of some and of hundreds of godly
Ministers.

2. As we desire not Presbyterial government to be reproched for such judging,
so neither are Prelatical acts of Synods for debarring from the holy ministry
men of an holy and unblamable conversation, and for the grace of God in them,
and their knowledge and utterance, able and fit to preach the Gospel, upon this
account, because they are unpeaceable, and hold up debates, that is, because
they will not be satisfied with the public resolutions for taking in to places
in the Church, Parliament, Army, Committee of Estates, all the malignant party
in the land, or will not promise silence in their matters.

3. Nor does it belong to the essence of Presbyterial Government, that all
members of this Church, and inferior Judicatures, should so submit to the
superior respective Judicatures, that if they be grieved with the sentence,
they ought to acquiesce thereunto, and not to contra-act, but only appeal,
until there shall be a general assembly to determine the matter. This never
was, and I trust, nor shall ever be their mind who are for Presbyterial
government; nor do our brethren justly father it upon the general Assembly,
(...) 1648. Sess. 30. For our Church acknowledges no subjection nor
subordination of inferior Judicatures unto superiors, but in the Lord, and so
to submit to any sentence, and to forbear a duty of preaching the Gospel,
praying, visiting, exhorting, catechizing pastorally in families, to abstain
from the Lords Supper, and from acts of due censure necessary for the flock
upon the known unjust sentence of a Synod, until a general Assembly (which
possibly cannot be convened in an age to determine) is to 1. obey men unjustly
forbidding a called Minister of Christ to preach in season, and out of season,
rather then God; for they unjustly forbid, and the Lord justly commands;
therefore the called Minister must act and contra-act to their unjust sentence,
and not forbear for an hour, as the Scripture clears, 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. Act. 20.
31. 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 9. 16. Isa. 58. 1. Ier. 1. 17. Ezekiel. 2. 3, 4, 5. and 3.
10, 17. Act. 5. 28, 29. and so this is unjust. 2. It is to make Synods and
Ecclesiastical Judicatures Lords of our faith, which the Reformed Churches
detest in popish Councels; for all men and Councels most lawful can challenge
only limited obedience and submission in the Lord to their determinations, if
they speak and command according to the Law and the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20.
otherwise there is no sight in them. And so it is popish. 3. We conceive in
performing acts of that government which Christ owns in his Word, we do not
sin; for no authority of a Judicature can make that to be the word of God, and
obedience to God, which was not, as to the matter, obedience to God before that
authority, nor on the contrary. Now to abstain from preaching, praying, eating
and drinking as the Lords Supper in a called minister, and in a visible
professor, duly called and fitted, is sin; then cannot the authority of the
Church, fat less their known unjust sen^ence make it lawful. 4. Suppose the
general Assembly should ratify and confirm the unjust sentence of the
inferior Judicature, or annull their just sentence, the people of God are not
obliged to stand to either the one or the other. So we disown the point which
our Brethren delivered to us in their papers for union sought by us, as nothing
belonging to the essence of Presbyterial government, but reject it as unsound,
tyrannical and popish.

4. As we desire to be humbled for our accession to the sins of the Land, so
its no part of Presbyterial government owned by us, that many unsufficient,
ignorant and wickedly weak, not a few, yea, too many scandalous, malignant, and
profane Ministers and Elders are in office; and oh if they had not lu^ked and
strengthened themselves in the shadow of such as carry on the public
resolutions, and how a purging of the Church is possible (except to him to whom
nothing is impossible) is hard to divine, when the body of the Ministry, of
whom many are malignant, were prelatical, Arminian (and diverted into us for
the (...)) are ignorant of God, la^y, such as extrude out of their sessions,
out of their hearts, godly praying Elders, and call into their place scandalous
men, and persecute the godly. When such, I say, are incorporate with the chief
leading men of the public Resolutions, and that in opinion, judgment, way,
and common counsels and actings, for furnishing Commissions, public Messages
to Court, and carrying on the course of desection, and their followers expect
they shall not be deserted by their Patrons; and the body of people in
congregations are ignorant, profane, and loose, and yet have suffrages in the
election of Ministers and Elders, contrary to the word of God, and acts of our
Church; and when its now as it was in the prelatical times, the people love to
have it so; and when our Brethren and other opposers have that Catholic
advantage known in all ages, to wit, the multitude for them, and against us;
and Pulpits have sounded against us in the prelatical language, casting into
our bosom that Isa. 65. 5. stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am
holier then thou.

5. Nor look we on the receiving to Church Fellowship men known enemies to the
covenant and cause of God, who again and again had broken their engagement, and
of many like unto them, any otherwise then as a taking of the name of God in
vain, and as an heinous abuse of the ordinance of Church-pardoning and
readmitting of penitents.

6. The admitting of many known unsufficient, and unqualified, and scandalous
Ministers and Elders to office in the house of God, and the polluting of the
ordinance of the Lords Supper, by admitting thereunto many ignorant and
scandalous persons, is to us no part of this Government. Since we earnestly
desire the laudable way of the provincial Synod at London for promoving of
godliness, and examining of such as are to be admitted to the Lords Supper, and
wait to see what the Lord will do for the help of a suffering people, for the
gathering of the dispersed of Zion, and building among us the old waste places;
nor do we so faint, but we look toward such refreshing words, Isa. 27. 2. In
that day sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine; I the Lord do keep it, I
will water it every moment, lest any hurt it. What is spoken to the whole, the
faith of an afflicted part may own it. Isa. 60. 18. Violence shall no more be
heard in thy land, wasting, nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shall
call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise. Isa. 62. 12. And they shall
call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord; and thou shall be called,
Sought out, a City not forsaken. Isa. 66. 13. As one whom his mother
comfort, so will I comsort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem, and
when ye see this your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall stourish like
an herb. Isa. 58. 11. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy
thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered
garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. It were not the
wisdom of any to disoblige Christ, by either neglecting, or hurting of such as
desire to be owned by the Lord Jesus, as his own hidden ones. The Lord was not
in the debt of Cyrus for his favor toward his people. He can be angry at all
who will not kiss the Son; and better heaven in the length and latitude of it
were turned in a mass or web of fiery anger (so it were but creature-wrath) and
I were folded in that web, then that I should lie under the Gospel-indignation
and anger of the Son of God. But no matter of a despicable handful of such as
we are; we are not the godly in Scotland, nor did we ever say we was the only,
or all the godly in Scotland; but sure we was either looked on as of the same
way, An. 1648. With all that owned Christ, and the godly in the Isle of
Britain, or then some did much dissemble with us, though some with whom we took
sweet counsel then, do now say we was in an error, An. 1648.

As I intend to darken the reputation of no man, so far less to undervalue the
authority and name of the servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Thomas Hooker, yea, the
Commandment of God lays laws on me to give testimony to his Learning, his
dexterous Eloquence and Accuracy in Disputes, and as Christian report bears, to
judge him one who walked with God, and preached Christ not with the enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Yet,
as I hugely differ from his esteem of these against whom he disputes, in
putting them all to the worth of a straw, and every Pen to a nihil dicit, he
says nothing; and ranking us among the opposers of Christ's Kingdom, Cerinthus,
Ebion, Gnostics, Valentinians, whom godly Fathers did oppose, and with
Boniface, Hildebrand, Papists, against whom the Waldenses, Wicliff, Hush, Ierom
of Prague did witness; and with Prelates, Primates, Metropolitans, as if we
were the Prelates successors, who would keep a dominion in the hands of Elders,
so in the particulars in the following disputes; I have apprel ensions far
contrary to this man, whose name is savoury in the Churches, concerning the
government of Christ's visible Kingdom: and should desire that holiness may
shine more eminently in the Churches of Christ; for the first declining of
Churches has its beginning from a loose and profane walk of officers; nor can
Assemblies have any other issue then that of which Nazianzene complains, when
Pastors are ungodly, then the Sun at noon day goes down upon the Prophets, and
Stars fall from Heaven, and the glory of the Lord departs from the Temple. And
were our practice more concentrick with, and suitable unto our rule, the
question of the constitution of visible Churches should be a huge deal
narrower. The God of power lead us in all truth.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, SAMUEL RUTHERFURD.

LIB. I. CAP. I.
A Survey of the Survey of the Reverend and Godly Servant of GOD, Mr. THOMAS
HOOKER.
The company of Believers without Rulers is no Politic Church; having power of
Ordination: What Local Habitation does to make Church Members.

Passing what this Learned and Godly man has said, Chap. 1 Part 1. (in which
some things may be noted as Escapes) I come to Chap. 2.

CHAP. 2. PART 1. c. 11.

M. Hook. THe visible Church is the adequate subject of our Inquiry.

Answ. The principal subject is Mr. Hooker his visible Church, yea it is too
narrow: the adequate it is not, for the The adequate subject of Church
discipline is not the visible Church, as M. H. take (...) it.
visible kingdom of Christ in concre^^, as ruled by Christ, includes the elect
and true Believers, for whose sake are all, officers, word; seals, 1 Cor. 3.
21. 22. 2 Cor. (...) 15. Ephesians. 1. 22.

M. H. The Church in her constitution is considered two ways: 1. as totum
essentiale or homogeneum, or as totum integrale.

In the former notion, The Church as a City without a Mayor, has right to
choose its officers, and becomes totum organicum, when officers are in it.
Ames. Medu. lib. 1. cap. 33. 18.

Ans. 1. The argument must so run, A Church without officers may not do what
a civil corporation without rulers may do.


What ever a City without a Mayor may do, that may a company of Believers so
combined without officers do^.

Ans. Nothing more false: but of this hereaster. A civil free Corporation may
appoint this or that Government, 2. May limit the Mayor to one year to so much
power, no more: but M Hooker his new Church cannot do any of these. Amesius
there says not a company of Believers without Officers is a Politic Church.
The Scripture in Old or New Testament never said it.

M. H. As for the manner: Parish precincts, or dwelling within the bounds of a
parish cannot make an ecclesiastic right to Churchmembership: Page 13, 14.
For 1. it is but a Civil right that a man has to his What influence
habitation has to make Churchmembers.
house; 2. Excommunication cutteth a man off from the Church, as if he were an
heathen, but not from his house, which is his by birth or purchase: 3. Yea so
Papists, Turks, Dogs, should be Church members, to whom Christ has denied all
right. Revel. 21. 27.

Ans. We grant Parish dwelling simply in a Professor gives not right to be a
member of the City of God, but Parish dwelling tali modo is a necessary
condition, without which they cannot be fixed members of that congragation, to
meet in one house, suppone after supper, as Act 207. 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21, 22. and
therefore we condemnn our brethren, who failing on the other extreme, will have
persons residing in Old England to be married members to one only Cong^on
v^ble in New England, and to no other visible Church^ (...), and deny all
Church Communion of the Catholic (...) (...) to all visible Professors, who
are sojourners, (...) (...) ^^^range excommunicating of visible Professors, 2.
(...) (...) residence; for shall they watch over one another, as they are
obliged, by a Church oath, suppose their Church be beyond the Line, and they on
this side of it? 3. This full well shall gratify Anabaptists, who will have it
no mercy, that infants are born in Zion, or in any Believers house, as the
Scripture says it is, Genesis 17. 12. Psalm 87. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Romans 11. 16. the
reasons are not so sure, for birth does it not, but to be born of such Parents
at Corinth, makes over to the Infants of Believers, a to be born in Zion, to be
born in believing Abraham's house, Genesis 17. 12. Psalm. 87. 7. a right to be
members of that Church, else upon what right shall they be baptized? As for the
place, Rev. 21. 27. Pignetus; Pareus, Piscator, Diodati, English Annotators,
Bullinger Nepar, expone the place of the Church in heaven: Marlorat and many
others of the invisible Church, and the Text excludes all from that Church but
such as are written in the book of life, and so to me it is unpertinent to the
purpose, and not concludent.

CHAP. II.
Of visible Saints. 2. M. H. reasons to prove that his visible Saints are only
members of the visible Church, are discussed.

MAster Hooker first states the question, then brings reasons Survey p. 1. c.
2. page 14, 15.
to prove such visible Saints to be the only matter of the visible Church.
Saints in charity are such in practice and profession (if we look at them in
course, by experience or report) as they savor so much, as they had been with
Jesus. From all which so much as rational charity directed by rule from ^k^
Word, a man cannot but conclude, but there may be some seeds of some spiritual
work of God in the soul.

Answ. If any one word of God were given to prove what M. H. his visible Saints
are not the only fit matter of the visible Church, nor is it proved but by
conjectures.
must be proven, it were good: 1. That Magus, all the three thousand, Act. 2.
all the multitude baptized by John, Mat 3. Mark 1. 5. Luk 4. were to Philip, to
the Church of Sa^aria, to godly John Bap^ist, to the twelve Apostles, such in
practice and profession, as they savoured so much as they had been with Jesus;
so heavenly a savourinesse is not, in one jot, holden out in the Word, the
Baptist looks on them as v^pers, and was it fit to omit the styles of Saints,
justified, sanct^fied? 2. The Tryers most have experience of their practice and
profession: this shall take days and months to eat (as they say) much salt
with them, the Apostles, that same day in few hours time, baptized them, Act.
2. Who can believe that the huge multitude lived on Locusts and Wild Honey in
the Wilderness, until John should experimentally find a generation of vipers
molded into a new frame to savor of the things of the spirit? 3. There is
nothing here of 1. Tryers and Judges: 2. Nothing of a Judica^ure: 3. Nothing of
Letters, Witnesses, Testimonies from the Churches: 4. Nothing of the rule of
the Word compared with their habitual conversation (which must take a tract of
days) 5. Nothing of a sentence admitting some for their spiritual
savourinesse, rejecting others for that bad smell, and denying them
Church Fellowship until they be better tried: all conjectures.

1. The conclusion is not any thing but (a may be) and that may bear a (may
not be) and if it were proven by the Word, that Professors right to the
Covenant of God, to the Word, Promises, Seals, depended upon men's rational
judgment of Charity, it might quiet the conscience: But a^ shall not the Lord
be a God to a people, except the people themselves judge in the judgment of
charity, that the people so consederate, savor all of them, as if they had
been with Jesus? and except they from experience can conclude, there may be
some seeds of some spiritual work of God in the souls of all these people? Ah,
the Lord then cannot say to a nation and a society, I am your God, while first
he asks the Churches leave.

M H. 1. Reason. The members of Christ's Body are fit alore to be members of a
true Church, because that is the body of Christ. Page 15. M. H. 1. Arg.
1 Cor. 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

But only visible Saints, who according to the rules of reasonable charity may
be conceived to have some special good in them, are only members of Christ's
Body:

For to have a member, which neither does, nor ever did receive any power or
virtuall impression, in the kind of it, from the head is not only against
reason but against that reference and correspondence, which the members have to
the head. Now visible Saints only, according to the former explication can be
said, by the rules of reasonable charity, to have some virtuall influence of
some spiritual operation from Christ as a head: therefore such only are
members of a Church.

Answ. No man seems more to study to darken the matter, then the reverend
arguer. 1. He omits all along the word (visible) which is mainly in question.
2. He himself is forced to distinguish a two fold headship of Christ; for
Christ is head Christ is two ways a head by M. H. his way.
to the visible Church, either politic, according to the politic government
and guidance he lends to it, or according to the influence of saving grace and
life: the members of Christ's body according to the politic external government
are fit alone to be members of a true Church visible, or truly visible; such as
Magus, Or where Christ is in Scripture called the head of Magus, M. R. desires
to know.
Demas, and many gifted men are, the proposition is true and granted. But only
visible Saints, who according to the rules of reasonable charity may be
conceived to have some special good, or which is all one, to be real
believers, are only members of Christ's body, according to politic and
external government, the assumption is false, and never proved; a mere begging
of the question, for not only such as are conceived in charity to to be real
converts, such as Magus, Judas, etc. but also Peter, John, and such as prosess
subjection to the Gospel; and withal do really believe, (...) members of the
true visible Church, and the Lords visible confederates, whether they be Men
are the confederate people of God visibly, without any man's passing his
judgment thereupon.
conceived to have some special good of conversion, and saving grace in them;
or not; nor does the formality of a visible member, or a visible confederate
depend upon the judgment of men: And it is most false (which is said in the
probation) that only conceived and so judged visible Saints have the politic
influence of some spiritual operation from Christ the head; for godly
professors, whether they be conceived and judged, or not conceived or judged
godly professors, have both real and internal in foro Dei, and also external
and ecclesiastic right to the ord^ces of Christ, should all the world say the
contrary. And by our brethrens nay, workers of iniquity, and these that are
never known nor chosen of God, but are exactly g^lded hypocrites, and never
receive any power or trial at all in their kind, from their head Christ; as may
be proved from Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Matthew. 22. 11, 1^. Matthew. 13. 47. 48. Matthew.
25. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 3. are visible Saints, not because they are so, but because
they are falsely so esteemed by men to be such. Hence 1. our brethrens way
makes not a whit a cleaner visible Church then our way. 2. The politic
influence of Christ the head upon such painted tombs, can be none at all before
their membership. How then can they have virtual influence of some spiritual
operation from the head? supposed influence is no influence at all. And not any
of these tex^s say that the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and Ethes. 4. 12, 13. is not
the body of Christ visible, except men conceive it to be his visible body; such
new divinity is unknown to Scripture: If the other part of the distinction be
applied to the argument, both the propositions shall be false; so the members
of Christ's body by the influence of saving grace are fit alone to be members of
the true visible Church: nothing is more false, for then the true visible
Church should be made up of only true and real converts; glad shall Anabaptists
and Familists be of this doctrine, and except the propositions be so taken, M.
H. but paints us a false Church.

3. The places, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13 speak nothing of Mr Hookers
single congregation, but of the Catholic visible Church, which shall meet all
in the unity of faith, and in which the Lord has set Apostles, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
and 4. 14, 15. and that is not a single congregation.

4. Though the places speak of the visible Church, yet do not these places say
that the visible Church as visible, but as the real mystical body of Christ,
which shall be glorified with Christ, is called Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. (...)
Cor. 12. 12, 13. and the body of Christ, by the influence of saving grace.

CHAP. III.
Other arguments of M. Hookers for the constitution of the Church of his
visible Saints.

MAster Hookers two reasons.

These are ^is to be members of Christ's Church that are M. H. his Second Arg.
part. 1. page 16, 17.
subjects of Christ's kingdom.

The Church is the visible kingdom, in which Christ reigns by the scepter of
his word, ordinances and discipine: he is our king, he is our Lawgiver; they,
who are in professed rebellion, are traitors, not subjects, the members of the
body are under the motion and guidance of the head; Wolves are contrary to it.
But visible Saints, as formerly described, are only subjects of this kingdom.
Christ is the king of Saints, not of D^unkards, Atheists, they alone Saints)
proclaim subjection in their practice.

Answ. The term (only) is wanting in the proposition, which is in the
assumption and conclusion, contrary to right Logic.

2. These are fit to be members of Christ's Church visible) that are subjects
(by an influence of grace, to wit, from their head and king calling
effectually, Acts 15. 14, 15. Isai. 55. 4. 5. and giving them repentance and
forgiveness of sins, Acts 5. 31.) of the kingdom of Christ, visible or
invisible; the proposition is true, but that such visible Saints as Magus and
Judas the traitor (which are the visible Saints M. H. defines M. H. 2. Arg.
That real Saints only are members and subjects of the visible Church and of
Christ's visible kingdom, the place Isai. 33. 22. does not prove that M. H. his
visible Saints are the only matter of the visible Church. Marlorat. comment.
in Isai. c. 3^. 20. tentorium firmum) adeo ut ne portae inferorum adversus eam
praevaleant, Matthew. 16. 18. Joan. Piscator. v. 20. adhuc alloquitur pios
Iudaeos. Calvin. in Locum. quin dominus in medio ejus, ideo non commovetur.
Muscul. 16. oves meas nemo rapiet e manu mea. Calv. in verse. 22. notandum hic
quae vera sit ecclesia Dei scil. (Deum) logislatorem and regem agnoscit.
Bullinger. in locum, ita instruct a gratia Dei ut malis nec cedat nec
frangatur, sed semper permaneat firma.
in terminis, part. 1. cap. 2. page 15. conclus. 2.) are subjects and only
subjects of this kingdom, as his assumption says in express terms, is most
false; now that the argument must mean of the subjects of Christ's kingdom
real, and of members by the influence of saving grace from Christ their head
and king, I prove from the argument that M. H. brings from Isa^. 33 22. for M.
H. his visible Saints Magus and Judas cannot. (...) Say, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our king and he will save us; if
Sorcerers and Traitors should say so they should lie. Isaiah speaks of real
converts and the true Sion, whose stakes and cords shall never be removed, so
as the gates of hell (says Marlorat on the place) shall not prevail against
them. He speaks (as yet says Piscator) to the godly Jews; so that (says
Calvin) God is in the miast of her; therefore she shall not be moved: for
(says Musculus) my sheep shall no man pluck out of my hand. 2. He speaks of
these (not of such as Judas and Magus) who shall be protected and saved by the
Lord, verse. 21, 22. he speaks of the true Church which acknowledges God her Law
giver and King so Calvin; the Church (says Bullinger) is so armed with the
grace of God, that she yields not to evils, nor is broken, but remains ever
sure. 3. He speaks of that kingdom and people, whose inhabitants shall not
say, I am sick, the people that dwell Calvin. verse. 24. notat^ dignum est, quod
soli ecclesiae cives hoc privilegio (remissionis) ornantur. Gualter in loc. ad
solam ergo ecclesiam and ^ujus cives illa pertinent. Lutherus in loc. quia
habet pius populus propitium Deum, condonabuntur ejus peccata.
therein, their iniquity shall be forgiven them, verse. 24. only the citizens
of the Church (says Calvin) are adorned with this privilege, pardon of sins;
and it pertaines (says Gualter) to the Church only and her citizens; because
(says Luther) the g^dly people has a God gracious, therefore their sins are
forgiven. So Bu^inger, Oecolampadius, Diodati, English Divine, Zwinglius, and
the popish interpreters, Carthusianus, Vatablus, Arias, Montanur, Corn. a
Lipide, Gasp. San^lius, Lyranus, never man before pious M. Hooker, expoun^d the
place of such visible Saints, as have room in this house, to wit, Witches and
Traitors. 2. To Si^n a single congregation, as if the gates of hell could not
prevail against such cyp^ers: And 3. he must not be King and Lawgiver (by this
way) to godly visible believers, when their congregation is broken, dissipated
by persecution, death of officers, O poor comfort!

But these are fit to be members in Christ's Church that are subjects in Christ's
kingd me, by influence of politic guidance and common gifts; the proposition
in that sense is neither proved by Isaiah 33. 22. or any reason, but the just
contrary conclusion, to wit, that believing and really pardoned Sion, verse 22.
23, 24. must be the persons that make up the kingdom of Christ: nor does it
conclude any thing but contrary to M. H. and the way of the congregation, to
wit, Ergo only such as are visible Saints, according to the politic influence
and common gifts, are fit to be members of the visible Church; which is a most
false conclusion, for also true believers sincerely professing the faith, and
who are subjects of Christ according to the influence of saving grace,
remission and pardon, v. 22, 23, 24. are fi^ to be, and really are members of
the visible Church, except the argument conclude that only hypocrites
appearing to be believers real, are fit to be members of the visible Church,
which is most false by the grant of adversaries, and by the truth it self.

3. M. H. suppresseth the conclusion, and proves the proposition, that real
believers are fit to be members of the mystical and true Church, which neither
we, nor he deny; and the term in rational charity directed by the word, which
should be in both propositions, is neither mentioned in the Argument, not in
the Scriptures and Proofs, an unknown way of arguing: and for the assumption,

But visible Saints (that is, Saints in the judgment of charity ruled by the
word) are only subjects of his kingdom.

M. H. never so much as touches, nor labors to prove, nor is there a Scripture
in old or new Testament to prove that men cannot be the subjects of Christ's
visible Kingdom, except Apostles, or some visible society declare and pass a
judicial sentence that they are subjects of his visible kingdom. So the
Donatists. Augustine. contra Epist. Parme. l. 11. c. 3. manua nim vestrae
sanguine coinquinatae sunt. ^mo loquitur ju^^a, etc Respo. Austin. Quos isto
loco Scriptura describit, ubicunque fuorint inter bonos, non obsunt bon^; sic
ut non obest palca frumentis, etc.


4. The probation is fan toto coelo from the conclusion to be proven. They
(says he) who carry themselves in professed rebellion, they are traitors, not
subjects -- and Christ is the King of Saints, not of drunkards, Atheists, etc.
Its true, he is no visible king to visible Pagans, nor are they as visible
professed Atheists, subjects of his visible kingdom. And who teaches any such
thing, and against whom does M. Hooker dispute? if there be any such members in
our Church, not censured, and if obstinate, not casten out, it is the sinful
and abused practice of men, and we profess we desire to be humbled before the
Lord that our Ministers and assemblies received into our Church, men guilty of
perjury drunkenness, shedding of the blood of the people of God in the defense
of the cause and sworn reformation, and that our Ministers and Elders, (ah to
many of them) are scandalous, baters and mockers of piety, though our Church
was in as fair way of purging the house of God, but now by the present stroke,
we are deprived of liberty so to do, but that is nothing concludent Sec
Augustine. de unitat. Eccles.
against the right government of Christ, Christ is not the head and king of
professed rebels; true, nor is he head and king, in a saving way, of latent
rebels, or of your visible Saints, such as Magus and Judas, ergo he is head
and king to none as visible members, but to men only judged in charity, led by
the word to be real converts, no logic can prove the consequence. But our
mind is that Christ is visible head by influence of gifts, ordinances, and
external guidance to all to whom he says, I will be your God, and who
profess subjection to him, whether the Church shall judge them real converts,
or not judge them so. M. H. arg. 3. page 17. If visible Saints be not members,
Then non-visible Saints may be members.


The latter is absurd, then these who in the judgment of charity are members
of the devil, may be conceived members of Christ in the same judgment of
charity: charity then must pluck out her M. H. his contradiction of visible
Saints membere and non-visible Saints members is naught.
eyes. Answ. 1. here is as good a contradiction, if any goodness there be in
these. If such as are only visibly Saints, Magus, Judas, be no members, but
rotten ones:

Then such as are non-visibly Saints, such as Peter, Paul, who are really
justified and chosen, are fit visible members.



Let M. H. choose him, by his own contradiction which (he says) divides the
breadth of being (though this phancied contradiction divide neither the breadth
nor the sixteenth part thereof)

If only visibly justified and chosen Saints, who are such really, are not
visible members:

Then none visibly justified and chosen Saints are fit members visible.

The antecedent is true, and Simon Magus is not a visible member to M. Hooker,
by this account; and the latter is contradicent to M. Hookers way: for then one
who is to the eye of charity visibly justified and chosen, and that really by
M. H. metaphysick, which so divides the breadth of being, as Peter visibly
believing, and thereby really blessed, Matthew. 16. 16, 17. shall be to the same
eye of charity not visibly justified and chosen, but in the miscarrying
judgment of charity, shall be no visible member, according to the reality
thereof, as Simon Magus; and therefore the definition of a visible member
cannot agree both to Peter visibly believing, and to Magus visibly believing;
for there is a real contradiction between Peter his believing real, and Magus
his believing real, as good Logic demonstrates: but the latter is absurd, for
both Peter and Magus are visible Saints. Let any man help M. H. in his
metaphysick here.

2. Aristotle long ago taught us that there is no contradiction, (...). l. 1.
Aristot. de reprehens. Sophist. (...). The Church passes no judgment upon
Magus when he is a member admitted and baptized, that either he is a real
chosen, or a real conv^, (...) real non-chosen or a real non. convert, but
their judgment abstracteth from both.
when the contradiction is not (...): now there is a mids betwixt a visible
Saint, as M. Hooker means, and a no visible Saint; for his visible Saint is,
one who by the Church is judged a real convert and his no visible Saint is one
who is judged no real convert, example of the former is Peter, or Magus, an
example of the latter is an unbaptized Pagan so judged: now the mids to us
Simon Magus when he is baptized, and we teach that Philip and the Church of
Samaria neither passed any judicial sentence of Magus as a real convert, nor
yet as any non-reall convert, and therefore to the eyes of reason and charity
(which need not to be plucked out, but have their own use) Magus, when he is
admitted a visible member, is neither a real member of the devil, nor a real
member of Christ, but a professor, and the judgment of the Church is
abstracted both from the eternal election and the eternal reprobation of
Magus, and from the real conversion or the real nonconversion of Magus. And
we desire one jot or word of Scripture where the servants Matthew. 22. are thus
limited as M. H. supposes, invite none to come to the wedding of the Kings
son but such only as you judge to be really converted and clothed with the
wedding garment: the parable says no such thing, but the contrary, verse 9. as
many as ye find bid to the marriage; yea v. 14. says, the inviters have
nothing to do to judge whether they be chosen or effectually called, or not
chosen or non-effectually called, though one of them in themselves they must
be. And when the Maids of wisdom Prove. 9. are sent out, reads M. H. of such a
limited commission, see you call in and admit none within the doors of
wisdoms house but only such as you judge to be the spiritual new born
children of wisdom: yea the Maids expressly call in the fools and the simple
ones to be made wise, v. 4 whereas M. H sup^oses, they have eaten the dainties
of wisdom, before ever they come in a^ wisdoms door. And so against common
sense in lieu of an argument, he beggs the question; so

If M. Hookers visible Saints only be not members, prove that there are such
visible Saints first: otherwise the Papists may say,

If our visible Bishop be not the visible head of the Church, Then our
non-visible Bishop may be head.

We grant all, and then M. H. bids us yield to what he says without probation,
and tells us it is absurd that his non-visible Saints be members, and so his
visible Saints are men in the moon to us, and in reality of truth no such
thing.

CHAP. IIII.
The place Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to do to declare my statutes, is
discussed, and says nothing for M. H. his visible members.

MAster Hooker his fourth reason. The same in an other dress, the Donatists
object to Augustine contra Epist. Parmenian l. c. 2. 9. objiciunt, ut quid
exponis justificationes meas, etc. Its a naughty consequence, hypocrites are
sinfully unfit to be members without the Churches knowledge, ergo the Church
sins in admitting of them.


These who are excluded from his covenant, and meddling with that as unfit, they
are not fit to have Communion with the Church; for to that all the holy things
of God do in a special manner appertain. Its Gods house, and there all his
treasure lies, the keys of the kingdom are given to them, to them all the
oracles, ordinances, and privileges ^o belong.

But these who hate to be reformed, and cast away his command, they have
nothing to do to take his covenant in their mouth. Psalm. 50. 16.

Answer,

It is to be observed, 1. that M. H. leaves the conclusion to the reader, and
sets down a proposition and an assumption all along, such as they are: 2. he
never concludes what is denied, ergo, only such visible Saints are members of
the visible Church: 3. he speaks most ambiguously, such hypocrites are not fit
to have communion with the Church. What Church? he knows the question is of
the visible Church only, for he grants part. 1. c. 2. conclus ^3. page 27. 28.
that such as are found to be corrupted and gross hypocrites being now received
members, though they were not so when first admitted, are so far fit to have
communion with the Church visible, as they must be tolerated and remain
members, until they be judicially examined, convinced, and censunes applied
for reformation: 4, it is one thing to prove that open hypocrites should not be
admitted members of the visible Church, but it is the sin of the so knowing
admitters, for which M. R. now disputes; and a far other thing which M. H.
proves, to wit, it is not fit that hypocrites have communion with the Church:
what a lax disputing is this? they that eat and drink unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.
28. 29. and eat things sacrificed to idols, 1 Cor. 10. 21. should not have
communion with the Church in the holy ordinances, would Paul therefore infer
such, though converts, are not to be admitted members of the visible Church? it
is not fit, yea it is sin, that either professed non-converts, or latent
non-converts have communion with the Church, for their very profession of the
name of Christ, when there is no reality in the thing, is a most sinful
unfitness in Magus, in Judas, will it follow Ergo the Church sins in
admitting Magus and Judas? 5. the state of the question is overturned, for the
scope of Psalm. 50. 16, 17. as Calvin, Musculus, Marlorat, Diodati, English
Divines observe well, is to press a sincere reality in profession, and to
condemn outward sacrificing and crying, we are in covenant with God, not only
without repentance and praying and praising in faith, 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. but
when the so professing hypocrites were compartners with thieves, adulterers,
etc. v. 18. 19. 20. but the place speaks not one jot that the Church ought
not to have admitted such to be members of the visible Church: 6. Let it be
remembered that M. H. here makes the Jewish Church a sampler of the visible
single congregations under the new Testament: 7. and since all the holy things
of God were committed to the Church of the Jews, Romans 31. 2. Romans 9. 4, 15
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. If the M. H. must make all Israel savoury
professors and real converts in the judgment one of another, before ever the
Lord of free grace called them to be his people.
Lord called them not, nor planted them into a Church-frame, nor admitted them
members, until first they were contrary to these hypocrites Psalm. 50 16. 17.
and until there was not only a professed willingness to receive the gospel,
(I speak the language of M. H. 16 page 28.) but a practical reformation in
their profession (Survey part. 1. cap. page 14. 15.) that they savoured so
much, as they had been with Jesus, and if so be they must have been the true
Israel in men's esteem, before the Lord called and choosed them to be his
people, it must follow that God choosed not Israel to be his Church of free M.
Can necessity of Separat. Sect. 3. 176 177. an. 1642. objected the same, and M.
H. does but an. 1648. repeat the same, and M. Ball answers it page 30. 71. The
wicked are forbidden to meddle with the covenant of God: does David say, they
are fobidden only at their first admission to be members to b^eak the third
commandment in taking the covenant in their mouth while as they are wicked,
and if so, Iezabel continuing a member is not forbidden to meddle with the
covenant; yea the scandalous m^mbers which (as M. H.) must be tolerated for a
time a^e fit members, and may take the covenant in their mouth.
grace and love, but when they were now professors and practically reformed,
and a people calling upon God in the day of trouble, offering thanksgiving,
paying vows, loving instruction, contrary to these hypocrites Psalm. 50, 14, 15
16, 17, 18. which is gross Pelagianisme, and contrary to the word of God, 2 Chronicles. 2. 11. Deuteronomy. 7, 6, 7, 8. Psalm, 47 4. Psalm. 78, 68.

8. Nor is it true that all oracles, ordinances, and privileges de belong to
the visible Church, as visible in M. H. sense, i. e. to every single
congregation: for there is, there may be a single congregation which there is
not one chosen of God, but all made up of such stuff as Magus and Judas, yea
and the promises of an everlasting covenant, and the privileges of election,
effectual calling, perseverance, glorification, are not made to single
Churches or kingdoms, provinces, since the famous Churches of Rome, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, of Asia are horribly fallen, these previledges belong firstly and
principally to the Catholic visible Church as Mystical and invisible both
subjective and finaliter, or objectively, especially as they are Gods treasures.

M. H. page 18. M. R. yields the causes while he grants the wicked are
forbidden, what to be Church members? no, but to take the covenant of God in
their mouth, for if they come to see their sin, reform their evil ways, they
are non-visible Saints, therefore while they remain haters of reformation, they
are not visible Saints, and have no title to be Church Members.

Answ. The cause is never a whit the more yielded, because of M. H. his mistake
in proving one thing for another: the Lord, Psalm. 50. 16, forbids hypocrites
remaining hypocrites to take the Lords covenant in their mouth, but I said not,
therefore he forbids the Church to take in any as members but these only to
come to see their sin and to reform their evil way, as M H. says (which is
indeed to yield the cause) for if they who leave the ways of P^ganisme,
Iudaisme, Popery, and the ways of sin, profess they are willing to be the
disciples of Christ if the profession be not grossly and knownly
hypocritical, and their coming in be not for by-ends and to betray the cause,
but morally ingenuous and negatively sincere, the Church is to receive such,
and is not forbidden to admit them as members, whether to the knowledge of the
Church they be real converts or not real converts. I grant it is another
thing, if they refuse to come and to be baptized, Luke 7. 29, 30. Luke 14. 17,
18. sure no man can be a Churchmember against his will. 2. The Lord may well
rebuke Magus and Judas while they are Church Members, the same way that he
rebukes the hypocrites, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. and say what have you to do to
declare my statutes, etc. for I know your hearts, how you hate instruction,
etc. and yet the Church sins not in admitting them.

3. M. H. confounds these two, to wit, the seeing of sin, and reforming of
their evil way, which is real and sincere repentance, if it be a saving sight
of sin, they sincerely repent, if it be counterfeit, to wit, the giving
evidence of godly sorrow and repentance, the Church may see the latter, and yet
Magus and Judas remain under the same reproof, for they may in their heart
hate instruction, and act these sins of partaking with thieves secretly, and
be secret adulterers, and the word may reprove them, and yet there is no blame
in the Church in either admitting them, or in bestowing Churchpriviledges upon
them.

CHAP. V.
Of the call of God to make a Church, 2. there may be a true visible Church,
and members thereof, before there be any seals in that Church. Whether the
preaching of the word be an essential mark of the Church.

MAster Hooker page 18.

M. Rutherfurd: such as internally hate to be reformed may be ordinary hearers
and so members.

M. H. if ordinary hearing made a member, then excommunicate persons should be
members for they are ordinary hearers. Ans. If M. R. make every ordinary
hearing to make a member of the Church ordinary and entire, he says something.
2. This twitcheth the question whether the preaching of the Gospel be an
essential note and mark of the visible Church. Before I speak how far persons
excommunicate are members or not members of the visible Church, hence 1. Any
sort of profession, How ehe preaching of the Gospel is a note of the visible
Church, and how not.
whether by an avowing of that Gospel to one another, or suffering for it, even
when the sheepheards are smitten and the flock scattered is a practical and
very speaking mark, that such a company is a true Church. 2. A pastoral
publishing of the word is a special mark and an great-half of a note of a
Ministerial, Politic, Church. Though the administration of the seals to those
capable of them added thereunto make a more complete mark of a more complete
Ministerial Church. 3. The active call of God by the preached word may be
transient and occasional to mocking Athenians, Act. 17. and yet intended to
save some, and to be a seed to some Church, v. 34. certain be leed, this is the
seed of some Church, like some corns of wheat scatteredly fallen in a field
that may have an harvest, 4. This active call may be refused, and the refusers
never be the Church, Luke 14 16, 17. not visible members, they visibly refusing
the call and counsel of God and neglecting obstinately to be baptized, Luke 7^
30. 5. But we mean, beside this active call some passive professing and
receiving of, and yiel^g to the offered Gospel. So as they came to the
marriage-supper, whether they have, or want a wedding garment. Mat. 22. and
receive the seed, whether they be thorny, rockie, or a way-side ground, or they
be good soil, and may yield some external obedience; in this consideration,
Pagans and Turks are not passively There may be a Church and Church Members
before there be any Seals.
the called of God, nor members of the visible Church, though they be hearers;
but that they be ordinary fixed hearers, and yet in no sort external
professors, but remain without, and be Pagans, is not conceiveable, except they
professedly hear for curiosity, or to mock, or to undermine the Gospel and
Church, and so they are not to be admitted to be hearers or Church members,
except by violence they thrust themselves in among hearers. 1. Abraham called
with his house to leave idolatry obeys the calling, builds an altar to the
Lord, Genesis 12. 1, 2, etc. 18. Professes and teaches as a Prophet, the
doctrine of the covenant, and God appearing reveals the Gospel to him, Genes.
12. v. 2, 3 Genis. 15. 4, 5, 6, 7. and he believes, and so he, and his house
is a visible Church, when, not while many years after, and until he was
ninety years and nine, the seal of circumcision was ordained, and given to him
and his house. Genes. 17. 1, 2, 3. and the Church is a true visible Church in
the wilderness, in which was the Angel, of the covenant who spoke to Moses in
mount Sina. Act. 7. 38. (which is a note and mark of a true visible Church.
Revel. 1. 20. Rev. 2. 1.) which yet wanted circumcision and the passover,
forty years in the wilderness. Josh. 5. 5, 6, 7. this proves that there is a
true visible Church, where Christ is, and yet wants the ordinary seals,
Baptism and the Lords supper. 2. When the Apostles first planted Churches, we
have no ground, that they An hearing and Churchprofession may be in persons and
societies before they be baptized.
preached to Ephesus, to Galathia, to Philippi, to Corinth, where God had much
people (as the Lord before had told Paul) Act. 16. 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13. Act.
18. 7, 8, 9, 10. and that they framed them not into Churches, until, to the
satisfaction of the judgment of charity of the Apostles, they were converts,
and so to them all chosen to eternal life, and until they did, first, being a
number of visible converts, choose Paul and other planters of the Churches, for
their Pastors, whereas they preached to them for their conversion, as no
pastors at all; before that choosing, but as gifted men, for that has not the
least shadow of truth in the word: so also they did first hear the Gospel as
Disciples and visible Professors, before they could be baptized or received to
the other seal, as is evident, by the Eunuchs professed reading and asking
the meaning of that which he read. Isai. 53. Act. 8. 29, 30, 31. and his
professed seeking to be baptized, and the Iaylors professed hearing, and asking
what he should do to be saved. A^^. 16. 30, 31, 32. and by the hearing and
pofessing of all his house, before they were baptized, and the Corinthians,
hearing and believing. Act. 18. 8. And Lydia, and her houses hearing. Act. 16
14, 15. and the Gentiles reverent professed hearing the word. Act. 10. 33, 44,
45, 46. and the three thousand, Act. 52. hearing and saying, (which was a fair
visible profession) men and brethren, what shall we do? before any of them were
baptized. Act. 2. v. 37, 41, 42, 43. which proves, that both active preaching
of the Gospel, and a professed receiving thereof go before men be inchurched.
And yet if these may be, to wit, hearing and professed receiving, here is an
essential mark by which persons, before they receive the seals, are made
members visible and disciples, and societies visible, and Churches essentially
differenced, 1. From all the false Churches visible on earth, who have not the
sound of the word preached, and professedly heard, and visibly received, and 2.
from all civil societies, 3. from all Pagan, and Heathen societies on earth.
Ergo they were a distinct Christian society, differenced essentially, and if
they should all dye before they had been baptized, or had received the seals,
they had been true visible Church Members; and if killed for the truth, they
had dyed visible professing Martyrs, and the called Church of Christ.

3. The visible Church is a thing, whose being is in succession The visible
Church is a society daily more and more inchurched.
and daily growing, and is a society daily more stated (as it were) in a
Church Way, according as the active calling on the Lords part, and his peoples
yielding thereunto in a daily profession go on, as Isai 65. 2. the Lord all the
day long calls, and (to speak so) inchurcheth daily people by the preached
word. Math. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered you? Jer. 7. 25. he sends
his Prophets, early in the morning, and late at night to call. Hence if that
which is the essential mark of the Church visible, to wit, the preaching of
the Gospel, be the only instrument, and the draw-net of pulling out and
calling of men into fellowship with Christ, by the word preached: And if the
seal do only confirm converts, as discipline keeps the visible kingdom
clean from visible scandals, then are these who professedly in that society
partake and receive that essential mark, and yield externally thereunto,
members of the visible Church, and a society made up of such a true visible
Church, though they receive not yet all the ordinances, and are as the outer
court, which is a part of the temple. But the active calling of God by the
preached word, and the peoples professed yielding thereunto, and their ordinary
professed hearing, is such a mark, both by the word of God, and all our
Protestant Divines, Calvin, Beza. B^l. P. Martyr, Bucanus, Tilenus, Piscator,
Musculus, Gualter, Iunius, Pareus, Zanchius, Professors of Leideu, Willet,
Jewel, Reynald, Trelcatius, Sadeel, Polanus, etc. Fathers, Councels old and
late, and our brethren cannot build their new Churches, but by loosing the
foundation-stones laid by these worthy builders, and the Scripture makes
feeding of the flocks and setting up the sheepheards tents. Cant. 1. 7, 8.
Ier. 3. 15. Feeding of the flock, and the feed flock. Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 6. 1.
The golden candlestick in the preached word, and these in the house to whom it
gives light, the only mark of a true visible Church, so is it prophesied it
shall be under the new Testament. Isai. 2. 3. Many people and nations shall go,
and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lords house: how shall
the visible mountain be known? and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths, for out of Sion (the visible Church) shall go Our brethren and
the Soci^i^^^ give us a very uncertain way of knowing the Church. Remonst in
apolog. c. 22 doctrinae praedicatio est anterius quid Ecclesia quid absurdius?
Erge id quod aliquando prius est ecclesia, eadem posterius erit: nota enim
notate suo posterior est. Idci^o qui^ p aedicati^ est aliquande instrume^um
ecclesiae collig^, non po^sse cert^ atque infell thi^^s nota e^ oll^. vide fol
241. 2^2.
forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, so Isai. 62. 6. The
visible city is known. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which
shall never hold their peace, (but preach and pray) day nor night, Psalm. 147.
19. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments to Israel.
And that proves them to be a Church differenced from other societies, v. 20.
He has not dealt so with any nation. I grant statutes and judgments include
seals, sacrifices as all the privileges. Romans 6. 4, 5. to whom pertained the
adoption and the glory, and the covenants and the giving of the Law. Yet by the
word soundly preached is faith begotten, Romans 10. 14, 15 And the flock fed, and
the disciples made. Matthew 28. 19, 20 It is taught, that sacraments do but
confirm faith, now a Ministerial begetting of children is (to speak so) more
essential to the visible Church, then to confirm them. 2. that doctrine is not
to be holden, which teaches us no way of certain knowing by faith what is the
true visible Church to which we may adjoyne our selves, and what not, but
teaches us a conjecturall way only of finding the true visible Church, as
Socinians, and Arminians, who tell us the notes of the true Church are not
necessary to be known. 2. There is no certain way of knowing the true visible
Church, now our way that makes the profession of the sound doctrine of the
Gospel a note of the true Church, holds out a way of knowing by certainty, by
faith which is the true Church; as we know which is the true doctrine. But
Sociniant Socinianus Voshelius de vera religione lib. 6. c. 16. primo igitur ad
salutem consequendam simpliciter necessarium esse non videtur, ubi Christ^
Ecclesia sit perquirere. Minime consequens est ut quia Christus ecclesiam adire
and audire jubet, ^deirco ubi existat ea, inquirendum nobis omnino sitz
loquitur iis qui jam ecclesiam agnoverunt. Ait ibidem ad salutem aeternam nihil
aliud requiri quam sidem, pe^ sidem in Deo per Christum collatam, cujus
spiritus atque animaest obedientia. How excommunicated persons are members of
the Church, how not.
say two or three fundamentals are all, and they give us a Church so wide as
takes in all Churches, Papists, Socinians, Libertines, etc. and Anabaptists,
and those that are for toleration of all religions, yea, and for all errors not
fundamentals (since they know not well, what be fundamentals, what not) shall
give but conjectures, for the knowledge of the sound Church. And M H. referres
all to the judgment of charity, which is a mere doubting uncertain way of
finding the true Church.

As to the argument, if preaching of the word were a true mark of the Church,
then were excommunicate persons members of the Church, for they hear the word.
I answer, 1. such as are excommunicate for apostasy from the truth* 2. such as
are stricken with the great excommunication, Anothema Maranatha 1 Cor. 16. 22.
are not to be ordinary hearers of the word, and so the argument holds not of
them, for they are simply rotten members.

But for such as are excommunicated, because of some particular scandal, as
incest, or a particular heresy, and yet profess the truth, as to all other
points, they are members cut off, and yet not cut off, in so far as they retain
a profession, yea and to the knowledge of the Church, are visible converts,
though in one particular scandal, they lie without and give, not such evidences
of repentance, as the Church can pardon them, as may be proven from the 2 Cor.
2. 6, 7, 8, 9. they are ordinary hearers of the word, as such as must be
reclaimed by the preached word, as sick children, under the medicinal cure of
excommunication, and the preached word that the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5. but they are not ordinary hearers as visible professors,
nor are they members complete of the Church in the inner court; admitted to the
seals, 2. 2 Th^ss 3. 14, 15. They are cut off members, yet not counted as
enemies, but to be admonish^d as breth^en. Ergo though they be (...), as
heathens and Publicans, Matthew. 18. Yet are they The place 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
mistaken by M. R. and our brethren.
not simply to be counted Pagans, nor occasional hearers, as Pagans, but
brethren: and though Mr. Robinson, and some say the place 2 Thessalonians. 3. is not
meant of excommunicated persons, beside that it is against the text, against
the current of sound interpreters, yet it proves our point, that even such as
walk disorderly, (...), verse 11. and obey not the doctrine of the Gospel, and
with whom we should not keep company, v. 14. and so ought to be excommunicate,
by M. Hookers doctrine, yet remain brethren, and are to be counted so by
members of the Church, and are to hear the word of admonition, and so are
visible professors, and so not utterly cast out of the visible Church, and M. H
does no more refute our Protestants, then the Scripture who calls such as are
fed, and the hearers of the Lords testimonies, the Israel of God, and the sheep
of his pasture, his flock, inheritance, his vineyard his garath of red vine,
his spouse, and what is this but the Church visible, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Hosh. 8
11. What? because the excommunicated who thus hear ordinarily are not members
of the Church, because they are not whole and entire members, it is no more
consequently spoken, then if he would say a wounded soldier, because he is
wounded, and under cure, is not a member of the army and sworn to the colors,
because he cannot march and fight as other soldiers. M. H. c. 2. part. 1. page
18. 19. and page 33. 34. Suppose a minister should preach many years to a
company of Infidells in one place, and a Lecturer to many people of diverse
congregations in the same auditory, shall it follow that I^fidels are members
of the visible Church and that these make a visible Church? though there be
here settled preaching, yet it is not an essential and How preaching many years
to infidels is a note of the Church, how not.
differencing property of the visible Church, but a commune adjunct or
separable accident, as the sensitive faculty is not a proper mark of a man,
though it be in man, for so might one and the same man be a member of four such
visible Churches, if they meet ordinarily, at several hours, to their several
lectures.

Answ. We mean by settled preaching preaching as opposed to transient and
occasional preaching, as when Paul in passing on a journey preaches to
mocking Athenians we grant that will not conclude that the sc^ who occasionally
so What sort of preaching of the word is a note of the visible Church.
hear, are members of the visible Church, not think our divines preaching so
to be an essential mark of the visible Church, but by settled preaching, which
we make such a mark, we mean 1. the active calling of God, by Gods warrant and
command to preach to such, for Ministers may not at random set up a light
among Infidels upon their own private choice and spirit, but if God so dispose
that they have a faculty of speaking in their own tongue to Pagans, 2. if
providence open a door for a call, that there be any passive call or accepting
of him for these diverse years upon the part of these Infidels, and 3. if the
Lord gift the man and stir up his spirit to preach diverse years to these
Infidels in one place. I shall say there the Lord has said to that man, go and
bid these Infidels and fools come to the wedding, as Mat. 12. 9. and come to
wisdoms table, as Prove. 9. 4. and there is a visible Church there: if these
heathen hear and mock, and lyingl^are, and still profess and practice the
worshipping of their dumb Idols, we shall say preachers have no warrant one
year, let alone many years so to preach, and the man preaches to them without
warrant from God, and where there is no professed yielding in some measure, the
supposition is without the state of our question. 2. the contret of a lecturer
that What is to be thought of a lecturer that preaches constantly to many of
diverse congregations. See for these lecturers in prelaticall times M. Can his
ilgrounded challenge of lecturers Necess. of Separat. page 49. 50. and learned
M. Bulls answer to M. Can c. 5. Sect. 1. page 84, 85, 86.
preaches the word to diverse professors from sundry Churches, if 1. he have
no warrant to administer the seals, or to exercise discipline over them; he
seems to me some Catholic Doctor I read not of in scripture, not unlike the
Popish and Prelaticall Deacon, who may preach and baptize (as a midwife to them
in case of necessity may baptize) but not to administer the other seal. 2. if
he be a lawfully called Pastor, I shall say, the meeting is a true visible
Church of visible members met from sundry Churches, and is not a fixed, but a
transient Church, and it is no more absur^d to say these are members of four
visible Churches, to wit, transient members, then to say they are members of
the whole Catholic visible Church, and baptized. Whether Jews or Gentiles,
all, by one spirit, unto one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. being all one body, having
one spirit, one faith, one Lord, one baptism. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. though they
belong to diverse particular Churches: and this argument beggeth what is in
question, that all sound professors are not members of the Catholic visible
Church.

3 This way settled preaching is no commune adjunct or separable accident of a
visible Church, but an essential note thereof.

CHAP. VI.
M. Hookers 2. Argument to prove that preaching of the sound Doctrine of the
Gospel is no mark of the visible Church.

MAster Hooker adds, par. 1. chap. 2. page 34.

If you say that settled preaching as established and remaining in the Church
is a mark of the Church, so you make the Church a mark of it self, this plea is
too narrow.

Answ. It is not narrow, nor a plea either to say, that seeing That settled
preaching is a note of the visible Church.
eyes as fixed in a living creature we call animal, and hearing ears, etc. are
an essential note of a living creature, whereas the eyes and ears not fixed in
a living creature, but separated from it; should be a narrow plea indeed, to be
called the essential mark of a living creature; and yet none can say that a
living creature is made a mark of it self. They speak not feebly, but
rationally, who say that rational discoursing as fixed in a man is an
essential mark of a man.

M. H. par. 1. c. 2. page 19.

M. Rutherfurd said, the argument is nothing against us, such adulterers. Psalm.
50. as are not to take the Law in their mouth, are to be cast out, but the
question is whether, if they be not cast out, the Church for that be no true
Church. M. H. Answer, the first part yields the cause again, for if they
should be cast out, there is no reason they should be received, or taken in,
nor have they any right thereunto, nor be they fit matter.

Answ. M. Rutherfurd is not such a yielder of truth as so; for Though
scandalous men, as adulterers, ought to be cast out, yet M. H. loosly inferres,
ergo they had never right to be admitted members.
M. Hookers argument yields more thus, these who are worthy to be casten out,
had never right to be received in, as Church members, so M. H. But adulterers
who take the law in their mouth, known adulterers (so M. Rutherfurd yields
and no otherwise) are worthy to be casten out: ergo adulterers; who take the
law in their mouth, had never right to be received in as Church Members. 1. M.
Hookers proposition is most false, for thousands, as Magus, and others worthy
to be casten out, had right (Church right, of that only we speak) such as
pastors can give them, to be admitted members, so the Scripture, so M. H. part
1. chap. 2. conclus. 3. page 27 When then both the proposition and assumption
are taught in Scripture, granted by M H see now who yields the cause. 2. to
say if they should be casten out, ergo they had never right to come in; is, as
if he wou^d say, such a woman has committed harlotry with many men beside her
husband, ergo she had never right to be a married wife, and was never lawfully
married; and so has neither committed adultery, nor deserves a bill of
divorce.

3 No more can follow from this, that adulterers once admitted to membership,
falling into scandals ought to be casten out, ergo if they had been under the
same scandal visibly, they ought not to have been taken in, but this supposes
a begging of the question, that there is in Scripture a gathering of Churches
of visible converts out of Churches of men and women born and baptized in their
infancy within the visible Church, which yet I say was never dreamed of by the
Apostles, and though it were so, whether we speak of such a gathering, or of
gathering of Churches out of Pagans, persons not capable of Gospelscandals,
before their admission, which may hold them out, as they are guilty of
Gospel-scandals, after they profess the Gospel. For then an unmarried woman
might be capable of adultery with her own husband, before she be married upon
him. 2. as to that which M. Rutherfurd said, that supposed they were not cast
out, the question is whether the Church for that be no Church. M. H. says,
that wholly misseth the mark again, for the question is twitching the
constitution of the Church, of what matter it should be made, it is not
twitching separation from the Church. To which I answer, because I dispute
against both these of the congregation, and the Separatists our brethren,
having no arguments but such M R yields not the cause because he gives two
answers to the same argument; one to the rigid Separatists, another to our
brethren.
as Separatists and Anabaptists have, and with more vigor prosecuted then
they, because I conclude against separation as well as against them, having to
do with two adversaries, and giving one answer to the one, (which yet is not
taken off) and another answer to the other, it is not equal dealing to say the
answer to the Separatists wholly misseth the mark, because it is not the same
with the answer to the congregational way.

2. M. H. declineth an answer to that which I said against the separation, that
if any were not casten out, it follows not that the Church leaves off to be
a Church, and must be separated from. But our brethrens practice in New England
is, if any Church do not cast out such as deserved to be cast out, to
noncommunion them, and declare them to be no Churches of Christ, and so they
must be separated from; which can be upon no ground, but because they maintain
a Church to be no true Church consisting of false matter, and visibly
unregenerate; False matter makes a Church to be no Church by our brethrens way.
M. Can. Necess. of Separ. Sect. 3. page 176. 177. that which destroys a
Church, and makes it either become a false Church, or no Church at all, cannot
be a true Church, nor true member of the Church.
and would M. H. have Church Communion kept with such? yea his arguments first
and second, which are both but one, (though he find out four, where there are
scarce three) prove them to be no visible Church, for he must stand by this as
his own.

These to whom Christ is head and king by the influence of politic guidance,
and motion of the head as liege subjects, are the only fit matter of the
visible Church, and the only true visible Church.

But such as deserve to be casten out, and are not casten out, yea are owned
still as Church Members, are not such to whom Christ is head and king. Ergo
such leave off to be members and are not a visible Church; the proposition and
assumption both are M. Hookers. I confess when an answer cannot be taken away,
it is a compendious way, to say not one word to it, but simply, the answer does
wholly miss the mark. M. H. must say a Church of false matter is no Church,
or then with us, a society professing the pure doctrine of Christ, though the
members be wicked, is a true Church.

CHAP. VII.
M. Hookers reason why he passes in silence the arguments of his own book of
discipline of the Churches of New England, for the constitution of a visible
Church, and defends them not: a scanning of these arguments.

MAster Hooker part. 1. chapter 2. page 19. passes in silence the arguments of the
way of the Churches of New England, Way of the Churches of New England chap. 3.
sect. 3. page 56, 17, 58. printed London. ann. 1645.
except a gentle hint he has at the first, but he omitteth the nerves thereof,
only he brings four arguments of his own, in my apprehension, inferior, not
a little, to the arguments of learned M. Cotton, it was wisdom so to do; only
in the place page 15. he gives us a short list of his visible Saints, we are
(says he) from rational charity, to say and hope, and so are bound to
conceive they are Saints, (converts and internally justified) so Judas, Magus,
Ananias, etc. (though hidden hypocrites) were such; and therefore our Savior
proceeds with such, not as God who knows the heart, but in a Church way as
these who Judge M. H. his conjecture of visible Saints.
the tree by the fruit; the Church cannot judge of bid things, nor censure them.

Answ. 1. Then the Saints, faithful, brethren, temples of the holy Ghost, at
Rome, Ephesus must be proven to be visible Saints from the Scripture, from such
a visible Saintship, as our Savior and the Apostles saw in these goodly
ungodly Saints, Judas, Magus, etc. for if these titles conclude that they were
internally converted, and chosen to grace and glory, etc. as Ephs. 1. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 3. 16. as they do, then must all and
every visible member of these Churches be visible elects, and predestinate to
glory, which if our brethren say of all the members of all these visible
Churches, suppose Magus and Judas had been among them, it is easy for any to
prove the contrary. 2. but if so be that these titles prove they were all
internally converted, and that our visible Church must be such, or else they
are falsely constituted, then how shall Demas, Magus, find room in the visible
Church, as true members since they were not such? if it be said that the
argument which proves that they weremore, may well prove the less, and that
they had all the visible Saintship that Magus, Judas had, we shall grant that;
but then you must stand by this argument.

Such as were the members of the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, etc. by these places cited by the discipline-book of new England,
chap. 3. sect. 3. page 56. 57. 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ephs. 2. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. 2
Cor. 11. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Galat. 1. 2. Math. 16. 16. to 19. such ought the
members of our Church visible to be, or then they are constituted of false
matter. The argument, such as were the members of the Church of Rome, Corinth,
such should the members of our Church visible be, scanned and foundfaulty. M H
contradicts the book of discipline of new England. Hookers survey par. 1. c.
2. The places cited by our brethren for visible membership prove that they were
read converts and predestinate to glory who are right members visible.


But the members of these Churches by these places were really and internally
converted and justified. Ergo our Churches visible must also consist of these
that are really and internally converted and justified, or then they are
constituted of false matter; but the conclusion is false and absurd, for so
Christ and the Apostles erred even proceeding in a Church way in admitting
Judas, Magus, to be members; for sure they were not internally and really
converted and justified: and yet M H. makes them true members, and his visible
Saints, it was wisdom therefore to M. H. to bury these arguments, and to
contradict his own book of discipline, which page 57 says, that Christ taxes
the pastors, by whose connivencei the man wanting the wedling garment came in,
friend how came thou hither? M. H. says, nay they were not taxed, that man
conveyed it so cunningly that only the master of the feast pe ^^ived it,
others did not discover it, page 29. but all depends on the making good the
assumption, that these places prove that they were inwardly and really
converted, which I make good by these reasons, 1. the Holy Ghost expressly
says, they were the habitation of God through the spirit. temples of the holy
Ghost, espoused to Christ as a chaste virgin; ergo they were really such: to say
that Paul speaks according to the judgment of charity only, and in a Church
way, is to beg the question, there is not a word of any such judgment of
charity in the Scripture and our brethren have no law to add to the Scripture,
to help their own cause. 2. If you adhere to this argument, you must say with
M. H. that Christ hoped and was bound to conceive by the fruits of Judas his
life, that Judas was a Saint, and might have some seeds of some spiritual,
Christ dealt not with Judas in a Church Way, it is a dream void of the word.
work of God in his soul, and yet Christ says, have not I chosen you twelve,
and one of you has a devil? and this he knew from the beginning, John 13. 11,
18. because Jesus not as God, but in a Church Way dealt with Judas and such: I
remit it to any man, if Christ failed against charity, except he believed Judas
to be a convert, before he betrayed his hypocrisy; what warrant in the
Scripture for this? 3. What ground that the Apostles in charity believed and
said that Demas, Magus, were converts, temples of the holy Ghost, chosen to
life, as the Ephesians? 1. 3. and Thessalonians 2 Th^s. 2. 13. or then they had
sinned in admitting them to the visible Church, and baptizing them. 4. Whereas
he says the Church judges not of things hid; whether the Churches of New
England do not judge and heavily censure (though they will not give it that
name) all the baptized in their Church, whom they exclude from
Church Membership and the Lords supper, all their life, as if they were Pagans,
because they have not so much charity as to believe them to be visible
converts; judge reader. But (say they) this will not prove that they were
internally and really converted, because Paul says so of them; to which I say,
then upon the same account must we expone these places Ephesians. 2. 4. God rich in
mercy has loved us, and when we (Paul and converted Jews and Gentiles) were
dead in sins has quickened us together in Christ, in the judgment of
charity and in a Church way only. 6. and has raised us up together, and has
made us fit together in heavenly places in a Church Way. verse 10 we are his
workmanship created unto good works, and we who verse 12. were sometimes
without Christ, strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, 13. are now made
near in the blood of Christ: and verse 18. we who were strangers, have
access, by Christ, through one spirit unto the Father, only in a Church Way,
by politic guidance of our head Christ: and the like must be said of all the
real internal work of the spirit upon the hearts of all the Saints at
Ephesus, Colosse, Corinth, Thessalonica, etc. so they were by this reason light
in the Lord quickened, had Christ dwelling in them by faith, were sealed,
translated from death to life, etc. in a Church way, and from none of these
places can we conclude that they were really and internally converted, for all
these places and real works of grace must agree to Judas, Magus, and to all
such visible Saints, because all Churches visible rightly constitute must be
made up, by this argument, of such visible Saints, else they are false in the
matter, and not according to the pattern of Apostolic Churches.

3. The assumption is made out also thus, as the Apostle calls them the body
of Christ, the habitation of God, temples of the holy ghost, so also he
blesses God and renders thanks to him, that had chosen to life the Ephesians,
blessed them with all spiritual blessings in Christ, bestowed on them
adoption, redemption, forgiyenesse This visible Saintship destroves the faith,
hope, joy, thanksgiving of Saints.
of sins, the inheritance of glory, Ephesians. 2. 13, 4. etc. ordained the
Thessalonians not to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. 4. had chosen them to salvation through Sanctification of the
spirit and belief of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. and upon this builds their
comfort and faith, I These. 54. 9, 10. 11. so Coloss. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. now what joy, comfort, faith, thanksgiving can have place, if these
places be not understood of such real internal graces, as election,
conversion, etc. as Judas and Magus neither have nor can have? otherwise all
the hypocrites, as Magus and Judas, have a like lively consolation with all the
chosen of God; and Paul must bless God, because he had chosen, called,
justified, etc. such as Magus and Judas. 4. I wonder the way of the Churches
should chap. 3. Sect. 3. 1 Cor. 3. 16. the place much mistaken.
cite 1 Cor. 3. 16. for visible Saintship which depends on the judgment of
charity, for the place is evidently of real converts, know ye not, that ye are
the temple of God, and that the spirir of God dwells in you? is this I pray
you, the knowledge of charity, which is fallible, and may mistake? nay this,
and the like places 2 Cor. 13. 5. and the 1 John 2. 3. 1 John 3. 14. know ye
Concili. Teldent. sess. 6. c. 6. Bellarmi. Gregori. de v^^^.
not that Christ dwells in you etc. by this we know that we know him, etc.
are brought by our Divines to prove against Papists, that we may be infallibly
persuaded that we are in the state of grace, and know our selves to be temples
of the Holy Ghost, not by the fallible and erring judgment of charity; which
we never extend, but to other then our selves, but by an infallible certainty,
though not of faith, yet of supernatural sense and divine persuasion by which
we know infallibly our selves to be in Christ, 2. as to that argument, such
should our Churches be in their members constituent, as the Church of Rome,
Corinth, Ephesus, were, when Paul writ to them, and after they were now
constituted and grown, it is most false. It is just as if Aristotle would say
and write to some of his disciples that had studied some years Our brethren
argue from a grown up Church, to an unplanted Church; this is a high tall-tree
ergo it was an high tall-tree, when it was first planted.
under him, you are excellently skilled in the knowledge of the first matter,
of motion and time; and another should infer, ergo there be no Academies on
earth rightly constituted, where the Scholars are not excellently skilled in
the knowledge of the first matter, of motion, of t^me, before they be admitted
members of the Academie^ now the argument should be thus;

Such as were the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, etc. as to their members
constituent, before they were admitted to Church membership, such should our
visible Churches be according to their members constituent before the members
be admitted to Church membership; true, but the Churches of Rome, Corinth,
Ephesus, etc. as to their members constituent, were before they were admitted
to Church membership, visible converts in the judgment of charity to the
Apostles, and planters, it is most false and can never be proven.

And to argue from grown and planted Churches, after Paul had begotten the
Corinthians as a father, 1 Cor. 4. 15. to prove that our Churches should be
such in their constitution, is to say, such is a tall-tree now, ergo also
before it was sown it was not a seed, but a tall-tree: so the adversaries
would not be content we should argue thus, such as was the Church of Sardis in
its constitution, after it is now falling, such should ours be in its members
constituent, before they be admitted members of the visible Church: but the
Church of Sardis, for the most part, consisted of such members as had a name
they lived, and were dead, and had visibly defiled their garments, a few only
remaining visible converts, as verse 1. compared with verse 4. ergo our
Churches should be such, as to the members constituent. Such arguing is as good
as that of New Englands, and yet Christ had a golden candlestick in Sardis, and
walked among them, and held them as stars in his right hand, Rev. 1. 20. Now
the conclusion should be against them, and the chief basis of all is, that the
keys are given to such, Mat. 16. 16. to 19. as are blessed and enlightened, as
believing Peter was, who was not blessed for the profession that Christ was the
Son of the living God; for Judas was that way blessed who held out but a
verbal profession.

CHAP. VIII.
Mr. Hookers first inference, that Church Fellowship does presuppose men to be
visible Saints, but does not make them such, discussed.

THat men are first converted visibly before they be Churchmembers is a gross
mistake, it leans on this, That the Church which Christ has in his Gospel
instituted, to which he has committed the keys of his Kingdom, the power of
binding and loosing, the tables and seals, is a company of Saints, a
combination of godly faithful men. So the Church of N. England. From this it
Way of the Churches of N. England, chapter 1. sect. 1.
must follow that there is an instituted visible Church void of Pastors, which
converteth souls before there be pastors, and so there must be Sons and
daughters before there be Fathers and Pastors to beget them to God, as
Ministerial Fathers; and By our brethrens way there must be sons and a fed
flock, before there be fathers and shepherds to feed them.
they must be fed before they have Pastors to feed them, and if they be
converted before they be in Church Fellowship, and Pastors must be
nurse-Fathers to feed and confirm these who were born before their father had
being. The contrary whereof Paul of the formed Church of the Galathians, that
he did travel in birth till Christ be formed in them, Gal. 4. 15. and when he
wrote the Epistle to the Corinthians, they were framed a visible Church, and
many not yet reconciled to God; and yet in that case he says, 1 Cor. 4. 15.
Though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, y^^ have ye not many
fathers, for in Christ Jesus have I begotten you through the Gospel. Now that
he begat them all and every one, and made, them visible converts, before he was
their Church-Father, or they in Churchfellowship, By our Brethrens way none are
converted by a visible ministry and by pastors and teachers.
where is it said or dreamed, by any color of truth? yea 2 Cor. 5. 20, now
then we are ambassadors for Christ, at though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you be reconciled to God, ergo this supposes some state of
non-reconciliation in many Church members, Romans 12. 2. be not conform to this
world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind. Ephesians. 4. 22. that
ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
Coloss. 3. 8. now lay you aside all these. 16. putting on the new man: all
which and the like places directed to visible converts, must all be exponed
without exception, of second conversion and of reiterating of conversion and
reconciliation of these that are already converted and reconciled, which no
Scripture can persuade; and by the like order, the children must be born and
vsibly converted, before they were in the womb of their visible mother who
conceived and bare them, contrary to 1 Cor. 3. 15. nor can the mother be any
thing but a nurse, nor any other in regard of bringing forth, but a 5 Cor. 3.
15.
barren mother, which brings not forth twins, contrary to Cant. 4. 2. Isai.
54. 1, 2, 3.

2. The Scripture holds forth their pastors as pastors are sent to open the
eyes of the blind, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, Act. 26. 18. yea
and the Scripture teaches that we receive the spirit by the hearing of faith
from pastors, as sent and in office, such as were the officed prophets, whose
feet were pleasant upon the mountains, as is clear, Rom, 10. 14, 15. compared
with Isai. 52. 7. Nah. 1. 15.

3. If many be brought in to the visible Church and the house of wisdom, who
are fools and serving the world, as Math. 22. 8, 9. Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
upon Gods revealed intention and the aim and design of pastors, that they may
be converted, and perfected by the work of the ministry, then are they not
supposed to be converted before they be brought in to the visible Church; for
God cannot intend that they be converted and regenerate of new, if their
conversion and regeneration go before any such intention; but the former is
true 1. from the nature of the visible Church, the office-house of wisdom, in
which God intends to make fools wise unto salvation. 2. From the preaching
of the Law and Gospel, the only means of conversion, whereas if all be
presupposed to be converted, before By M. H. his way no pastor as a pastor has
any command of Christ to intend to convert his ^k or any ^ember thereof.
they come into the house of Wisdom, and the supper of the King, they should
from pastors hear no doctrine of Law humiliation to fit them for Christ, but
pastors should speak to them all as to converts, as to broken reeds, and to
sheep that discernt the voice of Christ, as to temples of the Holy Ghost, as to
persons regenerated, justified, predestined to life and to glo^ ry; yea, and
if a pastor preach to any of the flock as known now to be yet in the state of
nature; that preaching is not by any command of God given to him as a pastor.
Nor. 3. from the revealed intention and command of God laid upon the Pastors
and Ministers, whose aim is to endeavor the conversion of all, to espouse
them to Christ, to have them put off the old man, to have them rise from the
dead, and that the Gospel be not hid to them, nor the savor of death unto
death, as it is to many in the visible Church, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 2. 14,
15, 16. Ioh. 12. 37, 38, 39. by M. H. his way.

M. Hookeer par. 1. c. 2, p. 31. Answer the proposition fails. These who are
converts in the Judgment of charity, may yet, in Gods intention, be brought in
to the Church, that they may be truly converted.

Ans. M. Hooker leaves out the chief word, wherein stands M. H leaves out
that word wherein the strength of M. R argument stands, and utterly mistakes
him.
the force of my argument, he speaks nothing of Gods revealed intention and
command to call in fools that they may be made wise, and he frames his
answer, as if I had argued from the bare intention and hidden decree of God.
But I find that M. Hooker utterly mistaketh the distinction of Gods decree, and
of his approving will, and therefore he takes for one and the same, the decree
or intention of God (from which I bring not my argument) and the revealed
intention of God, or his commanding will: the ignorance of which is a stumbling
to Arminians, and Socinians, and to M. Hooker, who, as we shall h^ar, goes on
with them, but I judge it one mistake in judgment in that godly man, but no
heretical spirit, and therefore his defenders and followers would take heed to
it. For I grant all that M. Hooker answers, but it is to no purpose, and
quite beside the mark, and leaves the argument untuitched (which is too
ordinary to that pious man) for no doubt God in his decree and secret intention
may intend, by the Ministry of his servants, the true and real conversion of
many hypocrites, such as are no less unconverted, then Magus and Demas; for he
has mercy, on whom he will, Romans 9. 17. but according to this way, these who
are converts in the judgment of charity (he should say only converts in that
judgment) are not according to Gods revealed inten^ion and approving will or
command taken in by Pastors, that they may be really converted: for God gives,
in no sort, this command to pastors in his revealed intention. See that ye
admit no fools to wisdoms table or within wisdoms house, but such only as
you believe in charity are real converts, and both called and chosen, contrary
to Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. Math. 22. 8, 9, 14. Ergo by my revealed intention and
command you are not to intend their conversion, but to presuppose that they
were already converted: otherwise, if the Lord by his revealed intention and
command will have such hypocrites who are but nominall saints, brought in that
they may be truly converted, there must follow two contradictory intentions
revealed in God: for the Lords command to Pastors is (I command you to preach
to these who are converts in There must be two contrary intentions in God by
our Brethrens way.
the judgment of charity, that upon my intention, they may be truly converted:
And also I command you, my pastors, preach to no Church members, that upon my
intention, they may be converted, because you are not to preach to any as
pastors, but to such as ye know are already converted, according to my revealed
intention and will. M. Hooker seeing this adds.

But if M. Rutherfurd mean that the Church does of purpose M. Hooker] ibid.
receive them into the Church to be converted, then it is cross to his own
tenet, and a person may be received to the seals of the covenant, who does
not notify that he has faith, nay the Church may receive them to the seals,
whom she knows has no right to the seals, for she knows they are not
invisible members, which in M. Rutherfurds judgment only gives them right.

Ans. It is not cross to my tenet, that a person, such as Demas and Magus may
be received to the seals, and yet they do not notify they have saving faith
and internal conversion, for my tenet is that the Church can only judge of
visible walking and profession in point of admission or not admission to
seals, and in that point the Church has nothing to do to judge whether they
have faith saving or not, none can partake savingly of the seals for their
own personal salvation and without sin, but these only who have saving
faith, but the Church may admit without sin multitudes, who eat and drink
their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27. and yet pass no sentence of signs
notifyng faith or no faith, internal conversion or no internal conversion
upon them.

2 M. Hooker knows that M. R. differenceth between being admitted to the
visible Church, and to the seals, and yet be repeateth my tenet, as if I
confounded these, because he confounds them himself. Whereas M. H. says
ergo.

3 The Church may receive to the seals whom she knows has no right
Ecclesiastical to them: it follows not; for upon the Churches part, the
right is good to confer the seals, upon the knowledge of notifying signs,
but of signs in order to conversion or not conversion, that is the place of
the master Christ to Judge, not of servants, in this case before they be
admitted members. But that the Church may admit to the seals whom she knows
not whether they have right internal for their own personal salvation, that
I teach, and can make good from Scripture, Act. 8. 13 Math. 22. 12. 1 Cor. 11.
26, 27, 30. now I say, that its the place of Christ, not of servants to judge
of the conversion or not conversion of members, not because men may, in no
sort, judge of the conversion of or non conversion of others; for in these
cases we may judge of the conversion of others. 1. in order to speak to their
spiritual state, as converts, or not, Act. 17. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 1. (2) in the
cases of duties of love, suppose we err upon the matter, as Math. 10. 42. 1 John 3. 14. (3) these that try intrants to the Ministry are to judge
authoritatively whether they be converts to them or not, 1 Timothy 3. 10. 2 Timothy
2. 2. but to judge so before their admission wants warrant of Scripture:
Pastors as pastors converted none, yea according to the command of Christ are
to intend to convert none at all, by M. H. his way.

4. Where M. R. teaches, that to be invisible members gives only right to
the seals, I know not.

5. I teach indeed that the Church may of purpose receive in to the visible
Church, who are known members of the Catholic visible Church, and manifestly
gracious, upon a purpose, that they may, in a particular congregation, be
confirmed not converted. But that is nothing to our point, but M. Hooker
holds that pastors as pastors are called of God to convert no Church Members,
for they presuppose they were before converted: hence I say.

1. Pastors do either as pastors called of God preach to Church Members, to
convert them? 2. Or then as pastors called of God, they do not preach to
Church Members, to convert them. This contradiction is inevitable.
If the former be said. I gain the point, and M. Hooker must yield the cause.

If the latter be said.

Then must pastors as pastors called of God preach to Church Members, as some
other officers, either as ruling Elders, which confounds the preaching Elder,
and the not preaching Elder, contrary to the 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. or
(2) as Doctors, which again confounds the teaching, and the exhorting Elder;
contrary to Romans 12. 7, 8. Ephesians. 4. 11. or (3) as Deacons, which is popish:
for deacons serve tables, but attend not to word and prayer, Act. 6. 2, 3, 4.
or they preach to them, as private Christians, and unofficed persons, upon an
intention to convert Church Members: for if only they preach as pastors to
confirm them, not to convert them, they do not fulfill their Ministry which
they have received of the Lord, in all poi^ts, as they should, Colos. 4 17.
then they use not the word as pastors, for all uses, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction, for righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. nor do they as
pastors, preach in season and out of season, by reproving, rebuking, exhorting.
(2) Then must all pastoral feeding formally be in confirming only, not in
feeding, nor begetting to Christ, nor in restoring the lost, nor in bringing
again the driven away, nor in all these five points, Ezekiel. 35. 4. which are
ascribed to Christ, who feeds in his sent pastors, ver. 15. 16. Micah 5. ver.
4. nor in delivering the sheep from the Lion and the wild beasts. Now this
distinctions should be proved from the word of truth. 2. Then Pastors as
watchmen give not warning of the sword, and of dying in sin, as Ezech. 3. 16,
17, 18, 19 20. Ezech. 33. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. but as unofficed men,
and private Christians. But that, way all the citizens of the city shall be
made watchmen, which the Prophet Ezechiel and Jeremiah condemn, Ierem. 23.
Ezech. 33. But it may be said, if Pastors as Pastors must instruct gainsayers
of the truth, as 2 Timothy 2. 25. then may gainsayers of the truth be
Church Members; but the latter is absurd.

Answ. It follows not, this only follows, Pastors may instruct gainsayers
and unconverted men, and intend their conversion in a Church Way, by preaching
and otherwise, viz. as pastors, but if these gainsayers were Pagans and
visible opposing Jews, they are not Church Members, nor can they be admitted
while they remain such.

CHAP. IX.
Mr Hookers second Inference.

MIstakes in judgment and practice do not hinder men from being 2. Inference.
visible saints.

Answ. It is too loosely spoken, without further explanation. All heresies that
are works of the flesh, as Socinianisms, etc. are called mistakes in judgment;
and this may infer toleration of all Religions, and that men corrupt in their
judgment may be truly godly; whereas soundness in the faith is a special part of
godliness, nor can a good conscience and a sound faith be separated; see Mr
Gillespie, Miscellanie quest. chap. 12. page 142, 143. and consider whether
then most of the Sectaries of our time may not be members of visible Churches
at least; such a weighty point in one word, should not have been determined,
nor can it be a sound inference.

Third Inference.

The holding of the visible Churches in England to be true Churches (suppose it
were an error, as it is not) does not hinder men See Answer to 32 questions.
answer to sect. 9. q. 10. q. 1. q. 2 See M Baylie vindicat. of disswasive an.
1655. page 1. c. 16. page 38. 39. Answer to 32. Quest. sect. 1. page 7. 8. 9.
page 25. 26. 27. ans. to q. 10. p. 29.
from being fit matter for a visible Church.

Answ. If it be no error, to say that the Churches of England are true
Churches, then is it true; and why is it then unlawful to enter in
Church Fellowship with them; the contrary of which Mr H. proves par. 1. chapter
12. page 32, 33. 2. Why does Mr H. teach that the seals ought not to be gven to
Church Members of old England of approved piety, except they be inchurched
their way: this says that Mr H. holds that all that are not inchurched their
way are no Church Members.

Whether Mr Rutherfurd does unjustly ^mpute to Separatists that they hold that
only such as are effectually called, justified and sanctified, to be the only
matter of a rightly constituted Church.

Mr Hooker par. 1. chapter 2. page 20, 21, 22, etc. complains of Mr Rutherfurd
that he deals not fairly and heartily with the brethren of the separation and
others, and says that they teach that only internally justified ones are the
matter of the true visible Church; and he alleges passages out of Mr
Ainsworth and Mr Robinson, who though they speak in too narrow expressions, yet
mind no such thing; for then they should be all chosen and elected that are
members of the visible Church; which in words they openly deny.

Answ. I am conscious to my self of nothing, but a fair and Christian dealing
with these godly men against whom I writ, and all that Mr H. brings,
citations from Mr Ainsworth and Mr Robinson, I acknowledge in words says the
contrary of what I allege, and I know it to be so; but is it any thing against
pious moderation, that I prove that their arguments contradict their
conclusion? and that one place of M. Robinson contradicts another; is it
against pious moderation that Chamier, Pareus, Iunius, Amesius, object to
Bellarmine and to Papists (though I judge there be some difference in the
matter) contradictions, that they writ things contrary to their own grounds,
and to things which they in open words peremp^orily Both Mr Hoo^^r and M
Robinson and the Sepaparatists teach that there can be none members of the
visible Church but only real converts, and such as are chosen to life; and so
contradict themselves, and this is no calumny which M. H. charge on them.
deny, as Mr Hooker speaks, page 21, I confess if I make these contradictions
not to appear, I wrong them either wilfully, which were in me wickedness; or if
of ignorance, it is much weakness and more.

But 1. as Mr Hooker brings citations from Mr Answorth, Mr Robinson, why does
he not from his own writings bring the So M. Robinson whom M. H. desends,
justification of separation against Mr. R. Rernard, propos. 3. page 112. So
has every true visible Church of Christ direct and immediate interest in
Christ, and title to Christ himself, and the whole N^w Testament. See page 113,
114, 115. Ans. Why says he not the true visible Church has direct and
immediate interest in Christ, etc. in the judgment of charity; which is
sometime Mr Hookers addition, and so he knows that Magus, Judas and such, have
neither direct nor indirect, mediate nor immediate interest in Christ, but are
Ieprous members. See page 95. The Scriptures never ascribe holiness to a people
for some fews sake, if the rest be unholy and profane. Answ. The man has not
read of Israel holy to the Lord, of Sardis with whom Christ was, where there
were a remnant, and some few names only saved. See Robinson, page 96, 97, 98,
253, 258. mistaking the matter the same way.
like? for I allege the same against his own way; for the way of the Churches
of New England S^ct. 3. chapter 3. page 56, 57. faith more then the brethren of the
separation eve^ did say. The Lord Jesus is the head of the Church ev^n the
visible Church, and the visible Church is the body of Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 12.
12. the habitation of God by the Spirit; Ephesians. 2. 22. the members of the
visible. Church are said to be the temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. 16.
espoused to Christ, as a chaste virgin, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Sons and daughters of the
Lord God almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 18. how can they be members of the body, or the
spouse of Christ, etc. ex cept they in charitable disor^tion be ((...) indeed
the holy Ghost describes them to be) Saints by calling? 1 Cor. 1. 2. and
faithful brethren, Gal. 1. 2. and that not by external profession, for these
are too high styles for hypocrites, but in some measure of sincerity and truth.

Let that be answered; These who not only in point of charity, and not only
in external profession, but in some measure of sincerity and truth must be the
habitation of God by the Spirit, the temple of the holy Ghost etc. or then they
cannot be admitted members of the visible Church, must be internally justified,
sanctified, and chosen, before they can be members of Petilianus the Donatist
also did allege the Scriptures due to the really sanctfied members, for their
Churches, of which Simon Magus was a member. Aug. cont. lib. Petilian. l. 2. c.
45. c. 44. c. 45. Psalm. 1. Beatus vir. and 46. Dominus pascit m^, etc. Aug.
resp. Non enim verba ista etiam ad Sim. Magum pertinent, qui tamen eundem
sanctum baptismum suscepit. See l. 4. c. 13. p. 764 See Aug. cont: l. Petil. l.
2. c. 49.
the Church visible; but such must all admitted members be, by these places
cited by the Churches of N. England. M. H. or his defendants choose what they
please, and answer, and I shall be cleared.

2. From this passage, by the way, observe another argument of the Church of N.
England. ibid.

Such should be members admitted to the visible Church, as are exhorted to be
followers of Paul as dear children, Ephesians. 4. 1. so must the arguments be.

I assume; but all visible converts or non converts, all known drunkards,
harlots, Atheists, etc. are exhorted to be followers of Paul, yea that
exhortation obliges all the known enemies of God in the visible Church, to be
renewed in the spirit of their mind, to be converted from dumb idols to serve
the living God, for all are exhorted to obey the whole Gospel, hear it, even
the scoffing Athenians, Act. 17.

2. I argue from the fifth argument These cannot be judged fit matter for the
visible Church, and con^^i^uting and edifying thereof, who are more fit for the
ruin and destruction thereof; such as all hypocrites who will leave their
first love, and destroy the Church.

I assume, but all latent hyp^crites, such as Judas and Magus, as well as open
hypocrites, are more fit for the ruin and destruction of the Church, and will
leave their first love.

If it be said that latent hypocrites appearing to us to be Godly and converts,
may be judged (mistakingly and erroneously) to be fit materials for the
constituting and edifying of the Church, are men (1) made members of Christ's
body, and Christ made the head of Magus Iu as, not by Christ's command so much
as by men's erroneous judgment. (2 Then the visible Church has all its ess^nce
and nature founded upon judgment that may err, and upon no certain* rule of
the word. (3) Then should the Apostles have taken more time, and advised more
maturely, before they made Magus, Ananias members of the visible Church.

3. All the arguments brought by M. Hooker and the way of the Churches of N.
England and Separatists, do conclude they must be really and internally
sanctified, before they can be such members as are in the Church of Rome,
Ephesus, etc. and M. Hooker puts not a finger to them to answer these that I
alleged.

4. Let him answer that which M. Robinson has page 97. all Iustif. of Separat.
the Churches that ever the Lord planted consisted of only good, as the Church
of the Angels in heaven, and of mankind in paradise. God has also the same
ends in creating and restoring his Churches; and if it were the will of God
that persons notoriously wicked should be admitted into the Church, God should
directly cross himself and his own ends, and should receive into the visible
covenant of grace, such as were out of the visible state of grace, and should
plant such in his Church, for the glory of his name, as served for no other use
then to cause his name to be blasphemed, page 98. In planting of the first
Church in the seed of the woman, there were only Saints without any mixture;
now all Churches are of one nature and essential constitution, and the first
is the rule of the rest.

Ans. I now perceive that M. Hooker and his followers in this point defend M.
Robinsin and the Separatists, as M. Hooker chap. 2. page 20, 21. but I must say
these words (thus we have cleared the expressions of our brethren of the
separation) must be an owning of their cause. M. Robinson and his maintain that
the visible Church, as touching its essential constitution, should consist of
only real converts, as the Church in Paradise: and M. Hooker defends them in
this.


Ans. But M. Hooker should also clear M. Hooker and his own from
contradictions, as well as M. Robinson: for M. Robinsons argument must be thus,
or nothing.

Such as is the essential constitution of the first Church in paradise, in
Adam and Evah not yet fallen in sin, and the Church of the Angels in heaven,
before their fall, such must be the constitution of all our visible Churches
now, for all Churches are of one nature and essential constitution, says he.
I assume.

But the Church in paradise, and of Angels before either of them fell,
consisted of only such as were inwardly and effectually sanctified.

Ergo such must be the constitution of all our visible Churches now, to wit,
they must consist of only inwardly and effectually sanctified, and free of all
sin.

But the conclusion is absurd, for if so, our visible Churches must be as clean
from sin, as the Church of Angels and of our first parents were, when they
were first created, and yet M. Robinson says page 112. for we doubt not but
the purest Church upon earth may consist of good and bad in Gods eye, of such
as are truly sanctified and faithful, and of such who only for a time, put on
the outside and vizard of sanctity; so M. Robinson: the wit of man shall not
clear these expressions from contradictions.

2. If it be not the approving and commanding will of God (for of that will
given to men who planteth Churches, he must speak, or he speaks nothing) that
the wicked be admitted into the Church, then it is not Gods will that Magus,
Demas be admitted into the Church: but this latter is absurd, and contrary to
both Mr. Robinson Iustif. of Separat. page 12. and to Mr. Hookers Survey, par.
1. chapter 2. page 23, 24. and contrary to the Scripture, Act. 2. 38, 39, 41, 42,
43, 44, 45, 46. compared with Act. 5. 1, 2. Act. 8. 12, 13, 14. Mat. 22. 8, 9,
10, 12. How is Mr. Robinson now cleared if it be said ay? but Mr. Robinson
said, it is not Gods will that persons notoriously (or visibly wicked, should
be admitted into the Church. He said not as you repeat his words, leaving out
notoriously) It is not Gods will that persons See Mr. Ca^ weakly objecting the
very same, Neces. of Separ. page 174. and learned M. Ball Ans. sect. 2. p. 51,
52. when you speak of visible Churches, and visible and external holiness, so
far as men judge, its to small purpose to mention the Church of Angels, etc.
wicked should be admitted into the Church. I answer it, but this he must say,
or he says nothing at all. For 1. if it were Gods will that wicked persons
should be admitted to the Church, then should he cross himself and his own
end, because wicked persons do no less cross God and his end, the glory of
his name, then the notoriously (and visibly) wicked; for both cause his name to
be blasphemed, and the force of his argument cannot lie in the notoriety or
visibility of crossing of Gods end, but in the very crossing of it in it self,
see Mr. Ball.

3 Gods creating of the first visible Church of Angels and men without sin,
is not a binding and commanding rule to pastors and to the Church to admit none
to the visible Church, but such as God created members of the first visible
Church free of all sin, or because there is a standing obliging rule to
Pastors and the Church, such as this (admit not in the Church of Christ
professed Pagans as members thereof) but to God there was no rule but his free
will by which he created the first visible Church of only saints, without any
mixture.

Mr. Robinson and Mr. Hooker both do wildly misconceive (to say no more) the
distinction of the Lord his discerning will M. Robinson and M. Hooker wildly
mistake the decreeing and approving will of God. So Armin. Antiperken. p. 60.
Corvinus ex. ad Wallach. p. 19. Remonst. in Scrip. Synod ar. 2 p. 256. Remonst.
apol. c. 9. fol. 109. Soci^ contra Puttin. cap. 10. sol. 325.
or his eternal purpose, and his commanding and revealed will, if they suppose
(as their reasoning does necessarily argue their mind to the judicious Reader)
with Socinians and Arminians that every sin is a crossing of the Lords end
and purpose; and that; 2. God decrceth and intends many things that shall
never be; 3. that God may be frustrated of his ends and purposes, and miss the
mark in his decrees, though they, I judge, be innocent of any such heresy.

4. If by the will of God be here understood, the commanding will of God which
forbids sin, and enjoyneth what is right, as Mr. Hooker and his, who
approve of this constitution of the Separatists with Mr. Robinson, must do,
then must the Lord in commanding his pastors and Church to receive Judas,
Magus, as fit materials of the visible Church, as Mr. Hocker teaches page 23.
expressly command sin, which is blasphemy, because the holy Lord must
command to receive into the visible covenant of grace, such as were out of the
visible-state of grace; and such to be planted in his Church, for the glory of
his name, as served for no other use then to cause his name to be blasphemed.

CHAP. X.
What Mr Hooker fartherbringeth to prove that visible Churches consist of
visible Saints.

MAster Hooker, page 20. The pinch of the difference lies in this, whether
such as walk in a way of profaneness, or remain pertinaciously obstinate in
some wickedness, though otherways professing and practicing the things of the
Gospel, have any allowance from Christ, or may be accounted fit matter
according to the terms of the Gospel to constitute a Church, this is that
which is controverted.

Answ: This is a disorderly stating the Question after battl The same also
Petilian the Donatist objected to the Catholics, that they owned all as just
and Church Members, who knew some words of Scripture, though they lived as
Satan. Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 49. Sic enim conatus es ostendere
Diabolum legisperitum, quasi nos dicamus omnes, qui verb^ legis noverant justos
esse. Sect. 51. 1. 52. Sect. 53.
given. 2. This pinch of a difference of men walking in pagan profaneness (for
of such the question must be) whether they should be counted fit matter to
constitute a visible Church, though otherwise they profess and practice the
things of the Gospel, comes to this, whether walkers professedly after their
Idol-Gods, and yet professing and practicing the Gospel, should be counted fit
matter of the visible Church: We answer; Such are not the fit matter of the
visible Church; and yet are not to be suddenly and wholly debarred from being
ordinary hearers, so they profess their willingness to hear. 2. If the question
be of such as are baptized and live within the Church as ordinary hearers, who
practice and profess the things of the Gospel, we say these are already within
the Church by their baptism and profession, and in regard they remain
pertinaciously wicked, though baptized and so professing, they should be
unchurched and cast out.

3. That any such as obstinately remain wicked have allowance from Christ, that
is, a command to constitute a visible Church as members, is all one as to say,
whether commands Christ men to be members of the Church, and to be also
pertinaciously wicked: which is no plous question, for it is whether does
Christ allow men to be hypocrites? Or if by allowance from Christ Mr Hooker
mean, whether does Christ allow and command the Pastors to own obstinate wicked
men, as members, because they profess and practice the things of the Gospel? We
answer, they ought not to admit or baptize Pagans of that sort, and if they be
baptized, and so wickedly they profess, they ought to cast them out.

CHAP. XI.
Other arguments of Mr Hooker for the constitution of a Church of only visible
Saints.

MAster Hooker, par. 1. chapter 2. page 25, 26. Whether fitness to be baptized be
the visible conversion: regenerati^^ which M. H. requires.
Q. What is required of a man of years to fit him in the judgment of the
Church, for baptism, that and so much is required to make him a member.

But visible holiness is required to fit a man of years to be baptized.

The consequence admits no denial, because to be baptized, and to be
admitted a member, infer each other.

The assumption is proved by the constant practice of John Baptist, Matthew. 3.
5, 6. where Jerusalem, Judea, Scribes, people and soldiers came to be baptized
of him, they confessed their sins, it was a confession that amounted to
repentance; so John verse 7. bring forth fruits worthy of repentance and
amendment of life.

Luke 3. 6. What shall we do? the Apostle answers, Acts 2. 38. repent and be
baptized; the works of repentance and the aim of baptism do import as much;
remission of sins calls for such competent knowledge of Christ, as may make
way for the sight of the need of a Savior, and also of a going to him.

Answ. This argument may pass current with these that deny Whether they were
all to John real converts, whom John baptized. See M. Can. Separa. p. 174. and
the Ans. of M. Ball, sect. 2. p. 56, 57.
Infant Baptism, which Mr H. and his do not; but if to be baptized say that
the baptized is a member of the Church, must not either the infants of
Church Members be not baptized with them, and so no members of the Church,
which is strange? or may I not argue thus with Anabaptists against Mr Hooker?
What is required of a man of years to fit him for baptism in the judgment of
the Church, is also required to make him one within the covenant of grace. But
only to be born of believing parents makes a man of years in the judgment of
the Church, to be within the covenant of grace.

Ergo, only to be born of visible parents makes a man of years fit to be
baptized.

The assumption is clear, because that God be our God and the God of our seed,
Genesis 17. makes both parents and children within the covenant, yea also within
the visible Church, as the Church of New England truly teaches, and gives
them right Answer to the 32 quest. p. 20.
to baptism; and when Egypt shall be the people of God, as is foretold, Isai.
19. 25. Egypt is the Church visible, and all their seed, when they so profess,
except these two be different, to be professedly Gods people, and to be a
visible Church, which cannot be said; and therefore the argument presupposes a
falsehood, and beggeth the question: that there is one thing required of a man
of years born within the visible Church, to fit him in the judgment of the
Church for baptism and Church Membership, and another to fit an infant for
baptism and Church-member-ship, when an infant born within the visible Church,
by his birth is fitted both for Church Membership in the judgment of charity,
and for baptism; and so the argument proves that the children of believing
parents must have some new qualification before they can be received members of
the Church visible; and yet it is granted their birth made them members of the
Church visible; so they are members and not M. H. ascribes to all whom John
baptized, and who are to be admitted visible members a confession of sins,
such as amounted to the real Repentance which John commanded Mat. 3. See
Anton. Wall. to. 2. de Baptis. Infan. p. 491. Daniel Chamiez Loc. Com. l. 7. o.
13. p. 210.
members.

2. If to be baptized and to be admitteed members, infer each other, to Mr
Hooker says, ergo, all that are baptized are members of the visible Church,
and all members of the visible Church must be baptized. How then does the
Churches of New England refuse multitudes whom they know to be baptized, and
came from England to be Church Members? 3. See how Mr Hooker makes out the
assumption; to wit, from the constant course and practice of John Baptist,
Math. 3. 5, 6. in which he lays this as a ground, that in all Judea and
Jerusalem (for John baptized them all, Mark 10. 5.) there was no visible
Church, no visible Saints, no converts till John made them such by baptism. I
hold that Christ was born in the visible Church, and that Simon, Anna,
Zachariah, Elizabeth, and many others were visible Church Members before John
baptized them, and that the Church of the Jews and of baptized Christians were
both the same visible Church, the one believing professedly in him who was to
come, the other in him who was already come.

2. He presumes that by John's baptizing these were framed up in particular
Independent congregations, by a Churchcovenant, for this is brought to prove
the frame of visible Churches of New England by Mr Hooker: but how the text
speaks this, who can see, except Mr Hooker himself? for all Judea and
Jerusalem were baptized, Mark 1. 5.

4: How proves he that all the baptized were visible converts that came to
John?

Those that confessed their sins, by such a confession as John required, to
wit, which amounted to repentance, and bringing forth fruits worthy of
amendment, these were visible converts, before they were baptized.

Yea say I, if the confession amounted so high in the practice of all Judea, as
the precept and command of John required, then all the land of Judea,
Jerusalem, and all the region round about Jerusalem, who were all baptized,
Matthew. 3. 5, 6. Mark 1. 4, 5. all the people, Luke 4. 21. were not only visible
saints, but did all really repent and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of
life: for Mr. Hooker his argument is not from the peoples practice, but from
John's command. Bring forth fruits etc. so Mr. Hooker. They confessed their
sins, v. 6. it was such a confession as amounted to repentance; that I
confess is a sea of Charity to all the visible saints. Now hear how M. Hooker
exponeth their practiced confession, The Baptist so interprets is, bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance and amendment of life. Now sure John commanded
never such a confession, as Magus the witch made Act. 8. nor a visible
repentance such as makes a visible saint, but he commanded a real internal
repentance, otherwise says he, if ye bring not forth good fruit, Matthew. 3.
ver. 10. see your doom, every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn
down and cast into the fire.

And therefore if the argument stand thus, such a confession (...) John Baptist
commands Matthew. 3. 6, 7. such must be in all before John Baptist and the
Church can lawfully baptize them, or admit them to the visible Church,
otherwise they sin who baptize and receive into the visible Church visible
hypocrites.

But John Baptist requires real and internal repentance, without which the
baptized should be cast into hell fire, Mat. 3. 10.

But the conclusion is so gross, that Mr. Hooker could not dream of it.

But the truth is, the precept of Repentance is not given to the Jews, so as
obedience thereunto must be necessarily required before John Baptist can
lawfully and without sin admit them to baptism, and into the Christian
visible Church, but for their either more personal and fruitful receiving of
the Sacrament, or far rather, that they may be saved from the wrath to come,
Matthew. 3. 10. Luke 3. 7, 8.

5. And as to that Act. 2. 38. what shall we do? if it conclude any thing it
must have this meaning, men and Brethren what shall we do, before ye can own
us as visible saints, and baptize us without your hazard of casting pearls
before swine? This is to do violence to the word of God.

But these words (what shall we do?) must be all one with the like of Saul,
Act. 9. 6. and of the Jailer, Act. 16. 30. what shall we do to be saved and to
obtain life everlasting, and a due room in the visible Church of grace here,
and at length of glory? and it is clear that repentance which the Apostles
command is the course of repentance all their life to be performed, both before
and after baptism, ver. 40. and with many other words did he testify and
exhort, saying, save your selves from this untoward generation, which is, walk
not in the way of this people: and does Peter advise no repentance, but such
visible repentance as was to go before their baptism? certain he advises
repentance, new obedience and perseverance therein to their lives end after
they should be baptized.

6. As to the aim of baptism, which is for remission of sins, it imports a
confession such as amounts to repentance real and true, yea constant and
enduring to the end, Ergo they were None are to be baptized by M. H. his
arguing, while they die, and consummate their course of Repentance.
justified and effectually redeemed in Christ, and persevered therein to the
end, before John could baptize them without sin: how weak are these? and so
these huge multitudes were never baptized until they all died real converts,
and that was never at all; for the Baptist so requires, before they were
baptized.

7. Who shall believe that when John baptized, Mark 5. all the land of Judea,
and all Jerusalem and Matthew. 3 5. all Judea, It is clear that John Baptist had
no such judgment of charity that all the multitude which he baptized were
real converts. Way of the Church of N. E. cap. 3. Sect. 3. p. 58. The Text is
not clear Mat. 3. Mark 1. Luke 3. that John repelled from his Baptism Saduces
and Pharisees. Calvin. com. hoc modo omnes ad interius conscientiae examen
citat ut se penitus exentiant. M. H. complyeth with Papists for a particular
confession, Mat. 3. Beza in Mat. 3. Hinc igitur apparet Iohannem non alios
admisisse ad suum baptismum quam qui gratuitae remissionis doctrinam (...)
serio amplecti testarentur. Pareus ^n loc. Nec ad baptismum indignos admisit.
Piscat. Mat. 3. Docu. 6 ex. v. 6. baptismus nulli adulto conferendus est, nisi
prius ediderit confessionem peccatorum ac propterea promissionem sanctae vitae
ex v. 6. Piscator in Mark 1. v. 5. Imo nequi quam probabile est Ioannem ex
gisse confessionem publicam (talem enim edebant scelerum ocultorum Belarm. de
sacra. poenitent. l. 3. c. 3. Rhemists on Mat. 3. v. 6. Annot. 3. Iac. Canteri
Iesuita. in Tabul. Chronograph. sacr. ad an. 100. p. 133. Sect. 11.
and all the region round about Jordan: and Luke 4. 21. and all the people;
that they were all in John Baptist his judgment of charity, sound believers,
and that all these brought forth fruits worthy of amendment of life? and that
all these were pardoned and justified in Christ, and that they were the
habitation of God through the spirit, as Ephesians. 2. 22. when John preaches to
them, even to the multitude that came forth to be baptized, Luke 3. 7. and to
many of the Pharisees and Sadduces as to a generation of vipers, Matthew. 3. 7.
2. as to hypocrites that gloried they were Abraham's sons, and would think they
were more then Gods sons, when they were now washen by baptism, the new seal
of the New Testament? 3. as to fruitless trees ready to be burnt in hell fire,
ver. 10. 4. as to these washen with water by a man, not inwardly baptized by
Christ ver. 11. 5. to a visible company in which there were wheat and chaff?
certainly John should break the bruised reed, if he preached not to them as to
real sons of Abraham, inwardly baptized, fruitful trees, and wheat into the
Lords barn. 8. Nor is there any warrant to think that they all asked, what
shall we do? and did all bring forth fruit worthy amendment, and that the
Pharisees and Sadduces who came to be baptized, Matthew. 3. 7. did bring forth
such fruits, before John could baptize them, Act. 2. they were baptized the
same day: neither must that pass, which our brethren say, that John repelled
not only the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 3. 7. but also the profane people
from baptism, as those who were a generation of vipers, and had not yet brought
forth fruits meet for repentance, ver. 7, 8.

Ans. Let the Text speak, Mark 1. 5. And there went out unto him all the land
of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and they (...) were all baptized. Matthew
says chap. 3. v. 7. And seeing many of the Pharisees and Sadduoes come to his
baptism, he said, Generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from
the wrath to come? which argues rather that he admitted them; but as Calvin
well says, he cites them before the inner tribunal of their consci nce, that
they may severely examine themselves, Luke 3. 7. he said the same to all the
multitude that came to be baptized, but especially to he Pharisees, but that
John refused to baptize them, there is not one word in the Text, but the
contrary, Mark 1. 5. Luk 3. 2. Matthew. 3. 3. I deny not, but Beza, Pareus,
Piscator, on Matthew. 4. say that John admitted none to baptism but such as they
judged worthy; but that such worthiness was real regeneration in the
judgment of John, no Divine says. But withal Piscator says on Mark, That
Bellarmine has no ground for auricular confession. It is not probable that
John sought a public confession of secret sins. Now it is known, Mr. Hooker
the book of Discipline of N. England requires far beyond auricular
confession. The Rhemists speak just almost in the language of M. H. confessing
their sins, not acknowledging themselves in general to be sinners, but also
uttering every man his sins, M. H. They confessed their sins. ver. 6. it
was such a confession as amounted to repentance. And their own words evidence
as much. Luke 3. 5, 6. What shall we do? if it was such a repentance as John
commanded; and such it was (says M. H.) Then it was real and constant,
enduring to the end. And this is more charity bestowed upon Judea, then the
Jesuits of Rhemes give them; for they are content to stay within a precept (M.
H. says all Judea repented) He preaches repentance (say they) by doing
worthy fruits or works of penance. Now M. H. must make this confession, if it
amounted to repentance, most particular of all and every one of them, which D.
Fulke says was impossible; and Cartwright, that it was common not full, and
proves it by many arguments: and sure, that multitude must have lived upon
locusts and wild honey, that John might have been satisfied with their
spiritual good estate as lively stones, as our brethren speak, our brethrens
confession must have as long a space, to wit, seven years, as D. Fulke says
anricular confession would have taken.

Some bring the place Luke 7. 29. to prove that John refused Annot. 4. D. Fulks
ans. to to the Rhemists Mat. 3. 6. If general confession was not sufficient,
but every man must utter all his sins in particular, John had shriving work
enough for seven years to hear the confession of Jerusalem and all Jury and
all the country about Jerusalem. O Papists blush! Cartwright against Rhemists
on the place page 13. Way of the Churches of N. E. chapter 1. Sect. 2. part. 7.
Ans. to the 32. questions quest. 8. part. 23. The place for baptizing Luke 7.
27. and Act. 8. cleared, of the Pharisees and of the Eunuch.
to admit the Pharisees to baptism.

But that place says it was their sin who would not be baptized, and so
despised the counsel of God, whereas the Publicans glorified God, being
baptized with the baptism of John, ver. 29, 30. as Calvin well observes,
comparing the Publicans and Pharisees together. See Diod^ti and the English
Divines; for it is not holden forth as their punishment, that John debarred
them as unworthy. Yea all that came to be baptized, Mat. 3. Mark 1. Luke 3.
were baptized. Nor is it of weight, that Philip says, Act. 8. Thou may be,
(...), be baptized, if thou will, so the word notes, Matthew. 12. 24. ver. 10.
12. Matthew. 14. 4. Matthew. 19. Matthew. 20. 15. Matthew. 22. 17. Matthew. 27. 6. Mark.
2. 24. ver. 26. Luke 6. 2. Ioh. 6. 9. (...). Ioh. 5. 10. Ioh. 18 31. There is
no shadow, in the Text, that the lawfulness is referred to Philip his act of
baptizing, as if Philip might without sin baptize; as if I should say, I
Philip cannot lawfully baptize thee except them believe with all the heart; but
it is clearly referred to the Eunuchs believing. For 1. Philip had more ground
of the soundness of the Eunuchs profession so as he might lawfully have
baptized him, then he had to baptize Magus; finding the holy Ghost had directed
Philip to go to him, Act. 8. 29, 30. 2. He found him reading Scripture, and
desirous to know the meaning of it, 36. and destrous to be baptized (3.) There
is no shadow of reason in the Text, that it was a case of conscience to the
Ennuch, whether it was Philips sin to baptize him, except he knew he had true
faith; but clearly he himself doubted whether he might be baptized, or not, 3.
Philip requires of the Eunuch real believing with all the heart; but visible
believing as Magus had, was sufficient for Philip to baptize without sin in
the baptizer.

Quest. What ignorance exoludeth from Church membership?

M. H. That ignorance which makes persons to be no Church, Par. 1. p. 26.
that will hinder a person from being a member. But there is a simple ignorance
of points fundamental, that makes Papists that never heard the Gospel, and
so have not wilfully rejected it (says M. R.) to be no members of the Church.

A^s^, M. H. To be admitted a member and to be baptized (says What ignorance
excludes from Church Membership.
he page 20.) infers each one another. But all the members of the Church of
Rome (says he par. 1. c. 5. page 59) have received true Baptism. Let M. H.
answer M. H. 2. That ignorance that hinders persons to be no Church visibly
professing, will hinder persons to be true members of the visible professing
Church. The proposition is denied; for infants (says Calvin) baptized are so
ignorant, and they are admitted members (say our brethren) in and with Calvin.
Com. Act. 8. Ans. to 32 quest. q. 20.
their parents, 3. M. R. speaks of the visible Church, of which Papists
ignorant of fundamentalls, are not members.

CHAP. XII.
How profession does notify conversion.

Mr. H. That profession which must notify to the Church, that a person is a
true believer, that must notify that he has Par. 1. page 26527.
true grace. But the profession that M. R requires, must notify to the Church
that he is a true believer, page 196. Faith gives right to the seals;
profession, to speak acu^ately, does only notify to the Church that the man
has right to the seals. So M. R.

Ans. What is in question to M. R. it is one thing to be a M. R. never said
that profession must notify to the Church the person is a true believer before
he can be admitted a Churchmember, as M. H. would impute to him.
Churchmember, as infants and fixed hearers are; and another thing to be by
profession, capable of both the seals: the latter are such determinate
Church Members, or Church Members in special, but all members are not capable
of both seals.

2. The profession that M. R. requires does notify, M. R. said not, Faith
must notify to the Church that a person is a true believer, before he can be
admitted a member of the Church by the Church. And that is the question now.
Not what profession does notify simply; but what it must notify to the Church
before the Church can lawfully admit them to be members. M. R. never said that;
nor says M. R. That not every profession, but that which is apparently true
does notify so much, and that which is only savoury to the godly. 2. As also
M. H. adds to my words, the adjective, True, which is not in my words; yea I
teach that the profession of Demas, Magus, does not notify that they are true
believers: And though visible profession should notify true faith, it is not
necessary that it must offer to judicious charity such overweighing evidences
as the Church cannot lawfully admit Magus a member, but they must first
positively judge him a real convert; and the like John must judge of all Jury
whom he baptized. 3. Since M. H speaks of admission to the seals in the
plural number, he must mean both the seals; Hence let this quaere be answered
by our brethren, whether they think that profession does notify to a
charitable M. H. must be to near to that all infants born of their visible
Saints must be real converts.
judgment that all infants of Church Members, because born of Church Members,
are real converts. If so, birth must give conversion, and David must give to
Absalom conversion by birth. 2. All infants so born must be regenerate; but
experience and Scriptures teach that many so born turn Apostates, and prove
sons of perdition. How our brethren shall free themselves of some baptismall
regeneration, and of the apostasy of the justified and truly sanctified, let
them consider, and the sound Reader judge; for our brethren tell us, it is not
lawful to put the seal upon a blank.

CHAP. XIII.
Of degenerate members of the Church.

A Church constituted of fit matter may be corrupted by their breaking forth
into scandals, as is clear in Corinth, Galatia, Sardis, and the Church of the
Jews, to whom the Lord threatens Part. 1. c. 2. p. 27.
a bill of divorce, Hos. 22. and there is a necessity of toleration until by a
judicial proceeding the evil be tried, the party convinced, or out off.

Ergo the corrupting of a Church constitute gives no allowance to bring in
corrupt members: but by the contrary, if a pentinaclo^^ member should be
removed, then such a member should not be admitted.

Ans. 1. This is the argument of Mr. Robinson, and most are borrowed from
Separatists and Anabaptists in this theme, if such as are known to be no
visible members must be tolerated, until censures be applied and they
convinced or cut off, in that intervall the Church must either give the seals
to them, and their seed, or not. If the former be said, then must the Church
knowingly profane the holy things of God. And so visible members as visible
saints, and under that formal reduplication as visible converts, are not
admitted to the Church, but as tolerated scandalous persons, upon whom the
Church bestows Church-admission and seals, until it be seen they are
converts visible, which destroys a principal pillar of the brethrens way. If
the latter be said, that the seals are to be denied to them and to their seed,
in the intervall, then the visible Saintship so judged is not the formal
reason of membership and Church Priviledges, Our brethren cannot admit visible
converts upon these formal reasons as visible converts.
to wit, of seals; for hence seals are denied to such members as are seen to
be scandalous, but not casten out, which again destroys the same principle.
2. The argument presupposes that none are excommunicate, but under the formal
reason of visible non-converts. Ergo David, Peter, and such are undoubtedly
visible converts, cannot be excommunicate for adultery or murder, though
visible they remain as to all other things (save in the matter of Uriah, and
the one particular scandal for which they are excommunicate, sound and savoury
saints) but the Church must judge David, Peter, and all such Our brethren must
say that none are to be casten out of the Church, but as visible non-converts.
whom they excommunicate, non-converts and unchosen to glory; which is against
the brethrens way also: for if none be admitted Church Members, but such as
according to the command and revealed will of God are judged converts visible;
Ergo all casten out are no members, and so non-converts, and should not have
been admitted but holden out, though in other things they be visible converts.
3. M. H. cannot produce any argument of M. R. wherein he argues simply from
corrupted and degenerate members, such as the Jews were, Act. 13. who
blaspheme, contradict and openly put away the Gospel, that such may be admitted
and planted in Churches. But Sardis, for the few names therein, is one of the
seven visible Churches and golden Candlesticks among which Christ walks, Rev.
3. and M. Hooker yields the seals were due to these members and their feed,
though they had a name of living members and were dead, so they were not
visibly scandalous; but M. R. his argument is not brought, but a new one, for
M. R. says that God made a covenant, Deu. 29. with the body of the people for
the elects sake, said to be hard, blind, D^^. 29. 3. stiff-necked, Deu. 31. 27.
a^ that time but professed repentance, Deu. 29.

3. Our Saviors aim and decree or intention of saving (which is hidden from
us) and the Lords deep dispensation in long bearing with the Church of the
Jews, and calling them Lo-ammi, not my people, Hos. 2. (for that he cites) is
no rule to us, but the revealed will; nor is the Church to forbear to Gods
intention or dispensation is not the Churches rule of dispensing consures, but
the will of God revealed in his word.
censure so long as God punishes not; yea then should the Priests have
admitted into the Temple the worshippers of Baal, such as offered in the high
places to other strange Gods; for God cast not the people of the Jews nor such
Idolaters utterly off at that time, but he sent Prophets to them. And there is
a far other consideration of a whole Church, and of Iezabel a single person.
He will not remove his candlestick from Sardis, but he offends that Iezabel is
not casten out.

CHAP. XIIII.
The answers of Mr. Hooker to the arguments of Mr. Rutherfurd are discussed and
disapproven. The places Acts 2. 37, 38. etc. And Magus his admission, Act. 8.
15. considered.

FIrst Argument. In the first receiving of members by the Apostles, there was
but a professed willingness to receive the Gospel howbeit seem received it not
from the heart.

M. H. answers; There was not only a professed willingness, but a practical
reformation, that in the judgment of charity gives grounds of hope that there
is something real, before the contrary appear; Therefore Peter who received
Magus upon his approbation of the truth, and outward conformity thereunto in
the course of his life, rejected him as one in the gall of bitterness, who had
no share in Christ, and therefore certainly would not suffer him in the
privileges of communion, so persisting without repentance.

Ans. 1. Not professed willingness, but also practical reformation is
required. But is not professed willingness in murderers What M. H. requires
in members before they be admitted.
of Christ, who said, What shall we do to be saved, some practical
reformation? There is nothing but conjectures, that the Apostles did not admit
all and every one of the three thousand, until they had experience of their
state of grace. and judicially determined M. H. neither proves, nor can prove
that the Apostles had habitual experience in so few hours, all and every one
of the 3000. Act. 2. gave evidence of real conversion to the Apostles.
so of them all. 2. This practical reformation was not an experience of their
practice of savoury walking, required by M. H. p. 1. cap. 2. page 14, 15. in
visible saints before admission, except some four or five hours time may
create an habitual experience, for the same very day they were baptized, Acts
2. 41. (3) M. H. should prove that the Apostles found this practical
reformation in all, Ananias, Saphira, and the whole 3000; and that the Apostles
tried and smelled the savourinesse of saving grace in all; in Saphira, the Text
gives not the least jot of this, we mu^ take it upon the naked assertion of M.
H. 4) That this practical reformation gave to the Apostles judgment of
charity ground of hope, that there was something real, that is, the whole
number about three thousand (none excepted, for all were made Church-saints
visible) gave grounds of hope that they were all really (otherwise their
speaking and hearing the word was real, that is, not imaginary) internally and
effectually called, and born over again of the spirit, and so chosen to life
eternal from eternity, before the Apostles durst without the offending of God
admit them to Church Fellowship and visible communion; those (I say) must be
proven. If I durst, I am not far from judging the godly and judicious in cold
blood, free of heat of dispute, dare not so judge of the Text, Acts 2. or Acts
8. (5) There is no shadow Acts 8. that Peter (M. H. should say Philip) admitted
No grounds there are to say that Philip and the Church of Samaria smelled the
savourinesse of saving grace in Magus before he was admitted a member.
not Magus while he saw such grounds of the sorcerers real conversion and
real predestination to glory (6) Peter said that Magus had no share in Christ.
True, but said he that he was an unbaptized man who had no share in the visible
Church? No. (7) But he would not suffer Magus to share in the privileges of
communion, he persisting without repentance.

True, but it is no answer to the argument from the manner of receiving in,
this is something to the casting out, (8) that Peter reproves him in the gall
of bitterness. 2. Exhorts him to repent, to pray for pardon, were great
privileges of Church Communion Three considerable cases in framing of visible
Churches.
bestowed upon Magus.

The practice of the Apostolic Church is to be considered in three cases. The
1. Case is.

1. When Churches are gathered out of Churches, for example, out of Galatia,
Ephesus, where infants are born and baptized quest. 5, 6. p. 20.
Church Members within the visible Church, hence we seek a warrant, why these
who were once members of the visible Our brethren cast out of the Church these
who were baptized in their infancy, and members thereof, because visibly
non-regenerated. What warrant for this censure?
Church and baptized, as the answer to the 32 says, and so clean and holy, 1
Cor. 7. 14. Romans 11. 16. (2) In covenant with God, Acts 2. 38, 39. Act. 15. 14,
15. Genesis 17. 7. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18. etc. (3) And so redeemed by the blood of
Christ and baptized into his body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. even unto Christ, Gal. 3. 17.
Act. 2. 38, 39. when they come to age, are for no scandal unchurched, and
because they cannot give evidence of real conversion, yet for 60. or 80.
years, and to their dying day, are no more Church Members then Pagans?

2. How could ye baptize Pagans? They are so straited with this, that many
among them call for Bishopping or confirmation again. 3. How is it that you
once baptized them Church Members and within the Covenant, and so baptized them
but for the foresaid want? How is it now (1) You teach, exhort, rebuke, comfort
them, and you have no Pastoral call to them more then to Pagans? (2) How, or
what calling, or what sort of officers are your Pastors to them? or who called
you to take care and watch for their souls who are without, and to you as
Pagans? (3) How can you offer Christ all the day long to Pagans? 4. If they
refuse to hear the Gospel, you cannot judge them, for they are without, 1 Cor.
5. 12. to you; and Christian These are groundless conjectures; When the
Apostles first preached to the heathen that 1. they preached not as Pastors: 2.
that they waited until, in the Apostles judgment, and the judgment of one
another, they were real converts: 3. then the Apostles and themselves
judicially inchurch^ them. Way of the Churches of Christ in N. E. chapter 1. Sect.
2. page 7. Mr. Tho. Hooker survey of discipline, part (...). c. 2. p. 14, 15.
Magistrates cannot compel them that are without to the means of grace by your
way.

The second Case is.

When the Apostles came with the Gospel to the Gentiles, Act. 14. 47, 48. to
Lystra and Derbe, Act. 14. 6, 7. to Philippi, Act. 16. 12. to Corinth, Act. 18.
6, 7, 8, 9. to Ephesus, Act. 19. 9, 10. etc. our brethren must prove, 1. That
the Apostles first teached to them as no officers, having no Pastoral care of
their souls, until they were in the judgment of charity real converts, and
then they preached to them as Church Members: (2) And until they were
satisfied in conscience of the good spiritual estate one of another, as lively
stones to be laid upon the spiritual building, as their way teaches; And
until they in their practice and profession (if we look says M. Hooker) in
their course according to what we see by experience, or receive by report and
testimony from others. Or lastly, look we at their expressions, favor so much
as though they had been with Jesus. And 3. The Apostles knew not any such thing
in visible ^converts, as that they should form themselves from an intrinsecall
power in themselves into an organicall body and ordain their own Elders; for
to draw this out of any thing we find in Scripture is done with as great
difficulty, as to extract water out of a stone; all we find the Apostles did
was to preach Christ to them, and an interval of time, as is clear after Act.
13. 14 they had preached the Gospel, Act. 14. 6. ver. 21. they returned to
Lystra, and to Upon profession of faith presently follows baptizing.
Iconium, and to Antioch; and ver. 23. and ordained Elders in every Church: all
which times it appears they were visible Churches without seals, and when
they preached the Gospel to the aged, and it was received by a profession of
faith sincere, whether really or supposed only, presently without delay (as is
well observed by M. R. Baxter in his accurate treatise) they baptize Magus,
Act. 8. 12. 13. such as hear the word, among Mr. Rich. Baxter for infantbaptism.
whom were Ananias and Saphira, who were baptized members, Act. 2. 41, 45.
compared with Act. 4. 33, 34. and Act. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. they baptize
Cornilius and his house, Act. 10. 44, 47, 48. When the Corinthians and Crispus
and his house believed, they were baptized, and the Jayler and his house, Act.
16. 30, 31, 32, 33. Lydia and her house, ver. 14. 15. And the Eunuch having
heard the word and believing was baptized, Act. 8. 35, 37, 38. when the
multitude hear John and confess their sins they are baptized, Mark 1. 5. and
that without any such conjectures of the congregationall way of trying members,
as is above said.

The third Case is,

When the Christian Church is framed out of the visible Church; and in this I
propound these considerations (1) Act. 2. There is no such process as M. H.
talks of, page 14. 15. (2) No hint of a covenant to a single Congregation,
except ye speak of a baptismall Covenant. (3) The Apostles shall not act as
Apostles, It is not like that the Apostles de facto erred in putting in chalk
stones in the first samplar of the visible Church, more then in the first
samplar of Synods, Act. 15.
but in an erring way, choosing Ananias and Saphira reprobate metal in this
first Temple, and say, that they acted as Pastors ordinary in a Church way and
fallibly, it is not to be supposed, that they more de fact actually erred, and
that they thrust in chalk stone, and rotten timber, apt to destroy the whole
building, such as were Ananias and Saphira, in the first samplar, then they
erred in making heterodox and erroneous acts, Act. 15. in their first samplar
of Synods, and yet we prove they acted not as infallible Apostles in that
Synod, but by a fallible and ordinary gift, yet so that de facto actually they
erred not. (4) Any man judge of M. Hookers words page 30. that Peter required
of these 3000. to repent and be baptized, according to the like call of Christ,
and that Philip saw the like in Magus, ere he baptized him, and that the
Apostles had a large measure of spiritual discerning; But if their discerning
was put out in admitting none but such as they judged to be real converts, it
failed in this, and they laid hands suddenly in few hours space upon Ananias
and Saphira: and so did John Baptist upon an huge multitude, Matthew. 3 Mark. 1.
Luke 4. nay their admitting of such, whereas their eminency of discerning could
have framed the first samplar of Church-constitution without one hypocrite,
says to me. That it is the revealed will and intent of the Lord, that men
usurp not the chairs of Christ to pass a sentence upon the inward state of
Church Members, before they be admitted into his workhouse of conversion. Yea
it is destructive to the Lords end to close the gates upon many heirs of glory,
and lock fast the doors of Christ's office-house, his vineyard, his kingdom,
his house, upon multitudes to be saved and wrought upon and espoused to Christ,
after they are unchurched, until they be visible converts, 2 Cor. 11. 1, 2, 3,
4. Gal. 4. 19. (5) The Apostles are accurate in trying of some Church Members,
to wit, of Elders and Deacons, and bid receive some, and reject others, Act. 6.
13. Act. 13. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. 10, 11, 12. Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 22. But show us rule, Canon, precept, practice of
Apostles, for judicial electing of Church Members; yea to me it is one act of
the Lords deep providence in the execution of his decrees of election and
reprobation; for when the Lord sends the word of his kingdom to a Nation, and
calls them, and they profess to hear, there has the Lord a visible kingdom,
and the Lord builds his house, not Moses, not Paul. (6) The place Act. 2.
pleads more for a real and internal repentance, and continued The place Act.
2. pleads for real repentance of all the 3000. before they were inchurched, as
M. H. expounds it.
and prorogated all their life, ver. 46, 47. they abiding in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship steadfastly, 42. then for a visible repentance in the
judgment of charity, though we exclude not visible repenting of some, but in
our brethrens sense, visible repenting, i. e. real and sincere, so far as
the judgment of charity can reach. 2. Real and sincere repenting of all and
every one. 3. Antecedently and before admission to Churchmembership, we ever
exclude, and we say there is not one Jot^ in the word, that the Apostles had
such a judgment of Ananias, Magus; and our brethren cannot prove it. The
believing of Magus and his a^dent continuing with Philip, Act. 8. 13. with
eagerness, as dogs in hunting to follow the prey, (...) Magus was no such a
visible convert before he was baptized.
Beza cites Mar. 3. 9. Budaeus to stick to any as an assiduous convey, proves
not what M. Lock ^r says; for Luke inspired by the holy Ghost, who needs
not borrow the judgment of charity, but sees the heart, testifies of Magus
that he believed in his way. All our Divines, Calvin, Gualther, Piscator, Caly.
Inter fidem and meram simulationem est aliquid medium: Epicurei and Lucrani se
credere profiletur, quum tamen intus rideant, quum illis fabulosa sit spes
vitae aeternae. Bez. an. Credidit fide, scilicet historica. Diodat. He
believed, he made outward profession of the faith. Piscat. Credidit, i. e.
professus est fidem.
Marlorat, Beza, Brentius, Bullingerus, Pomeranus, Sarc^rius, Diodati, English
Divines, say, it was but an historical and temporary faith; if the holy Ghosts
meaning were that Magus did savingly believe, we shall not eschew the Apostasy
of true believers. The Text says not that Magus savingly believed to the
judgment of Philip, and the Church of Samaria; they saw his faith as they saw
his wondering in his cleaving to Philip, and yet this our brethren must prove.
Now they saw only such a faith, in the effects, as the Text speaks of; but the
Text speaks of a temporary faith: but that they believed the sorcerers
temporary faith to be saving faith, and would not otherwise have baptized him,
that M. Hooker and M. Lockyer conjecture; but in the Text, there is no shadow
of such a thing; had there been praying with liberty, and in the holy Ghosts
strong persuasion, much labor of glorying in tribulation, rejoicing with joy
unspeakable, by selling all and following the Gospel, something had been said,
and if the Church had refused without these to baptize him. (7) I retort the
argument thus.

Such should be the members of the visible Church before they be admitted, as
Peter requires the thousands to be before they were admitted members: But
Peter requires of the 3000. real repentance; Repent and be baptized, etc. Yea
such repentance What real characters of saving faith were in these 3000.
as thereby their anxious conscience might be satisfied, who asked, Men and
brethren what shall we do? Ah, we slew the Lord of glory. Ergo, The members of
our Church must have real, not visible repentance only, before the Church can
admit them. But the conclusion is absurd even to the Anabaptists. The
proposition is M. Hookers and our brethrens in terminis; the assumption is the
holy Ghosts, Act. 2. Yea and the characters of real conversion, Act. 2. are
spoken by Luke inspired of God, not in relation to the fallible discerning of
Apostles. There are not only visible signs, but 1. hearing, 2. saying, Men and
brethren what shall we do? 3. joining in ordinances with the Apostles, 4. Some
expressing of joy in hearing the word, possibly in their countenance. The rest
were real, 1. They were pricked in heart, not visibly, but really, so Calvin,
Bez^, Gualther, Calvin in loc. Hec paenitentiae initium, malorum nostrorum
sensu vulnerari. G^alth. Atque hoc factu necessarium, si non tantum ex verbo
docemus, sed and electorum exemplis, ut interim nullus nobis de impuris and
poenitere nesciis hujus seculi filiis (quales fu^re Ananias and Saphira) sermo
sit.
Sarcerius, Brentius, Bullingerus; as also before them, Chrysostom,
Hieronymus, Cyrillus, Hierosolomytanus; this cannot but be real.

(2) They were added unto the Church. M. H. grants, that the holy Ghost in
Luke spoke this. Now the Apostles acting as ordinary Pastors in a fallible way
(as our brethren say they acted here) could not see this internal adding made
by the Lord, ver. 47. The Lord added to the Church, etc. he added not Ananias
and Saphira thus; and their receiving the word with gladness of heart, ver.
47. must be real and internal gladness of heart, as their eating of bread
with gladness and singleness of heart; all which as they were not visible to
the Apostles, so being real must be ascribed by an ordinary figure, to the
greatest part. Now that Ananias and Saphira were such real members pricked in
heart, or received the word with joy, Luke says not. But M. H says it
without warrant of the word.

CHAP. XV.
Other arguments of M. H. and his answers are considered; as of the draw-net.

Mr. H. page 28, 29. to arg. 2. If the visible Church be a draw-net, where are
fish and filth; a house where are vessels par. 1. p. 28. 29.
of gold, and baser vessels of wood and brass; then a rightly constituted
Church there may be where are believers and hypocrites.

Ans. The argument is wholly yielded, and the cause not touched, much less
concluded, as may appear by the state of the question in a right meaning.

Ans. 1. This argument may be wholely yielded, but is not my Paul's Presbytery,
c. 9. arg. 2. page 101, 102.
argument; I refer the Reader to the place of my book where this is first
propounded. The argument is much mistaken, and is not drawn from visible
Churches, as they are de facto, and through abuse, though I speak to that also,
which I am willing M. R. his argument from the draw-net, wronged by M. H. is
vindicated.
to dispute with any who will defend M. H. in his survey. My argument is from
visible Churches as they were at first planted and constituted lawfully, and to
all that read with any considerable attention, planted according, not to the
permissive decree of God, according to which I tell M. Barrow, many hypocrites
are de facto in the visible Church lawfully constitute; but according to Barrow
disc. of false Church, page 20.
the revealed will of precept. Hence take the argument according to my mind; if
the visible kingdom and Church of Christ at both its first planting in fieri,
and its after constitution in facto esse, consist not according to the decree,
but even according to the revealed and approving and commanding will of God, of
good fish and of bad, and filth; and of vessels of honor and of dishonor:
then the visible Church consists not of such Saints only as must be real
converts in the judgment of charity. But the former is true, M. H. might have
known that I of purpose closed up this mouse-hole, non semel, not once, but
Calvin in Evang. Matthew. in ^^c.
twenty times; the proposition is from the scope of the Parable, which, as
worthy Calvin says, that nikil novum etc. that our Savior teaches no new
thing, but by a new similitude, the same which he taught in the parable of the
tares, only as Mr. Dickson has judiciously observed. That hence the visible
Dicks. Mat. 13
Church in the way of gathering members, and manner of constitution thereof is
like a draw-net, taking in a I who profess subjection to Christ in his
ordinances good and bad. To which as for the purpose, it is also most false,
that the Lord tacitly commands such Pastors as cast out the net of the preached
Gospel, to fish no souls in a Pastoral Church Way, but these Pareus. Non
restricte, non hoc modo quo vos vultis, immoderato rigore cum laesione tritici;
non prohibet quin Magistratus and Ecclesia faciat officium eradicandis suo loco
zizaniis.
who in their judgment of charity, savor of being with Jesus (as says M. H.
survey par. 1. c. 2. page 14, 15) and so are good fish and real converts.
Whereas the Lord commands Pastors not to look whether they be converted or not
in their judgment; leave that to God, and call in as many as ye find, Matthew.
22. 9. Luke 14. 17, 18, 23. Call in fools and simple ones, Prove. 9. 4. which
indeed to M. Hooker is a sin and a profaning of the holy things of God. O
says M. H. Beware ye Pastorally call any, or preach to any Pastorally but such
as in charity you judge converts; and these only and none other, says M.
L^ckyer. As for the Parable of the tares, Let them grow until harvest. Par^us
Aug. con. Don. c. 10. Sub fluctibus quid cepe^nt retia nesciunt Piscatores,
neque palea quae in area est ^ermixta frum^ntis; etiam ipsa sub fluctibus
latet, quae sic omnium oculis est conspicua, etc.
(most judiciously) he forbids not to use discipline simply, but use it not so,
with such rigor, or imprudently, when the wheat is in hazard to be plucked up,
but use it not when the wheat may be hurted and rooted out. 2. The conceit of
degenerated members to be tolerated for a while, will not help the matter; for
the draw-net of the preached Gospel is to be cast out at the first admission of
members, before the members be degenerated. 3. How shall our brethren make it
out that the bad notes the latent hypocrites only, that are not seen, because
they are under the water? but the bad notes as well the open hypocrites: and so
did the Donatists answer Augustine, as our brethren do; but Augustine replied
that the Church is the barne-floore where the Aug. con. Don. N^que enim and
ipse sicut piscis sub fluctibus erat, and sic ab invitatoribus quomodo a
piscatoribus videri^n poterat.
wheat is hid and the chafe seen. But, sure, the preachers are not to be led
by their own judgment, who are really good, or really non converts and bad:
for it is the command of Christ, that the bad, that is the non-converted be
brought in, that they may be converted and kept in (except the whole lump be
in danger to be infected) that they may be made good.

Mr. H. p. 29. The like may be said to the man who came without the wedding
garment, he carried it so cunningly that none perceived Of the man Mat. 22.
without the wedding garment. Way of the Churches of N. E. c. 3. sect. 3. page
57. Does not the expostulation intimate a taxing of these by whose connivance
he came in? Friend, how ca^^st thou in hither? See Aug. contr. Epist. Parmeni.
l. 1. c. 14. Quapropter zizani^ vel paleam Catholica segetis nobiscum
copiosissime accusent, sed nobiscum serre patientissime non recusent; noluit
enim Dominus ante temp^^ eradicare zizania, and a ^rumentorum permixtione
separare.
it but the Master.

Ans. Mr. H. must say, The servants judged him once to have a wedding garment,
else they should not have invited him to come. Says the Text that, or Mr. H.
only? If the former, then they sin who invite, and call externally any but
such as have a wedding garment: So the Donatists said. 2. Mr. H. contradicts
his own Book of Discipline expressly. The rest of my arguments are above
vindicated.

Mr. H. p. 31. The examples of Solomon tolerating Idolatry, Solomon and Asa are
Chur. members.
of Asa breaking out into persecution, hurt Mr. R. cause, for then the openly
scandalous may be received in.

Ans. These Kings obstinately persisting in such evils, are neither to be
admitted, nor kept in: how far Solomon strayed is hard to determine. Amesius,
after P. Martyr, teaches, That Amos. in antisydalibus de Pers. c. 7. p. 325.
P. Mart. Com. in 1 Reg. 11. 1, 2, 3, etc. p. 86, 87. August. de civ. Dei, l.
14. c. 11.
he neither worshipped Images, nor believed them to be God, nor brought them to
the Temple. Augustine excuses him, that he fell as Adam, to please his wives.
Asa at his worst was fitter to be admitted a Member, than Magus at his best;
nor can the time of Asa his continuing obstinately in these evils, be well
known.

M. H. M. Ruthurfurd maintain^, That such as are admitted must 1. Not be
scandalous: 2. Must be baptized after the order of Christ: 3. They must, by
their profession, notify that they are true believers.

Ans. How they are not scandalous, how baptized in Christ's order, and so must
repent for their own personal comfort and salvation, is to be tried: Ergo, They
must be to us real converts before they be admitted, is a feeble consequence.
The third I never require before they be admitted Members: M. cannot read that
in my writings, but forged it of his own, as is answered by me.

Mr. H. p. 32, 33. If I must not enter willingly into any unnecessary civil
society, with such as have a show of godliness, and M. H. would prove we should
enter into no Church where any sc^ndalous person is.
deny the power thereof, and such as are named brethren, but are idolatrous;
far less should I enter into a spiritual society of faith with them.

Ans. What this reasoning means, I know not. But 1. it is unlawful to you to
enter your self a visible married Member of that Church, where one is to be
admitted who is known to So P^tilian. Quae enim participatio justitiae cum
iniquitate? R. sp. Aug. cont. ^i^. Petil. lib. 2. c. 40. Quis nostrum dicit
esse participationem talem si Judas and Petrus pariter Sacramentum communicent?
So the Donatists.
be a scandalous hypocrite, as he is described 2 Timothy 3 1, 2, 3. Yea, suppose
in all Churches you find some scandalous, you are to join to some visible
Church on earth.

But this is 1. Unlawful: for say that one would refuse to Aug. cont.
Parm^nian. l. 2. c. 18 Why h^lyst thou the wicked? So Petilion. Not unlike
this, Aug. cont. liter. Petil. lib. 2. c. 46. Beatus vir qui non abiit in
Concilio impiorum. August. R^sp. Sed vos maledicti crimina etia^ sacramentis
objicitis. See Aug. cont. Epist. Parmen. lib. 3. c. 4. Objicit Parmenianus
illud, Isa. 52. Recedite, recedite -- Resp. Sed cur ipse in ipso populo
immunditiam, quam graviter arguebat, in una cum iis congregatione tangebat? So
Parmenian ib. Object. 5. Psa. 26. Non sedi cum Concilio vanitatis. Resp. Ang.
cont. Epist. Parm. lib. 3. c. 4. in his quicunque dilexerit speciem domus Dei,
and locum tabernaculi claritatis ejus, tolerat ca quae sunt in contumelia, nec
propter hoc relinquit domum, ne fiat ipse non vas in contumeliam, quod tamen in
domo toleratur, sed stercus quod de domo projicitur. The Donatists, Aug. cont.
Parm. l. (...). c. 1. Put that evil man out from among you.
marry any at all, because no woman on earth could satisfy his mind, hardly
could that single life be lawful, if God give not the gift of continency. But
say it were lawful to live single, and to marry none, because of such humorous
impediments, yet it cannot be lawful to live out of all Church Fellowship,
without all Church-ordinances, suppose you were in an Island where one only
Church is. 2. Suppose one be married, and fixedly joined to such a
Congregation, and diverse Members turn like the Members of the Church of Sardis,
diverse become such as are 2 Timothy 3. 2. Lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, etc. the Apostle says,
We are to turn away from such: now the Elders and Flock refuse to c^ them out.
If that turning away 2 Timothy 3. be meant of separating from the Church, we must
not turn away from them, except the Church to which we were married give us
leave, which were strange. And it is like this is not Mr. Hookers sense; for he
makes it less free to turn away from a Church to which you are married, than
not to join to it; as it is less free to the man to leave the wise to whom he
is once married, than not to marry: and so he makes the Church a Prison.

As for the place 1 Cor. 5. he forbids entire conversing with the
Excommunicate; Bullinger, he forbids intimate fellowship The place 1 Cor. 5.
not to eat with a sonicator, misexpounded by Mr. H. Bulling. Contubernium and
interiorem convictum prohibet. Beza in 1 Cor 5 Ne samiliariter iis uter^mini.
Beza in 1 Cor. 5 P. Martyr. cibus cum iis non capiatur, non dicatur
(excommunicatis) Ave. August. cont. Donat. cap. 6. Cypr. l. 3. Epist. 3. Nam et
si videntur in Ecclesia zizania, non tamen impedire debet aut fides aut
charitas nostra, ut quoniam z^zania in Ecclesia cernimus, de Ecclesia
recedamus. August. cont. Epistol. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. Erat ne Ecclesia
Carthaginensis Ecclesia, an non erat? si erat, quero qu^madmodum (i. e. quo
pact^?) Cypr. Et caeteri -- implebant quod praecepit Apostolus, 1 Cor. 5.
siquis frater nominatur, and est fornicator, and avarus -- quando cum iis
avaris and rapacibus -- multiplicantibus faenus -- panem Domini manducabant,
and calicem bib^bant.
with them. Mayer says, it is the arguing of Anabaptists (which yet pious Mr.
H. here follows) We should not eat with them: Ergo, we should not join in
Church duties with them. But Augustine cites Cyprian, Because we see tares in
the Church, yet let us not separate from the Church; for, says Augustine, When
the godly and the wicked partake of the same Sacrament, neither the cause nor
the person is hurt. Entering in Church Fellowship, some one or other, though
there be some scandalous persons tolerated and desended in all the Churches, is
not voluntary, as to marry or not to marry, but a necessary Ordinance of God:
for he lives as a heathen, in a condition of sinning, who is a Member of no
visible Church.

Mr. H. These are not sufficient requisites in one to be a Member, which may be
in a drunkard, who is not to be a Member, but to be cast out; Ergo, to be kept
out. But these three assigned by Mr. R. 1. To profess the Faith. 2. Eagerly to
desire the Seals. 3. To desire Church Fellowship, counting it a disparagement
not to be born again, if not admitted to the Sacraments, may agree to a
drunkard.

Ans. For the ordinary drunkard, he is either born and baptized in the Church,
or he is a Pagan and an ordinary drunkard having these three. If the former be
said, he is born a Member of the Church, and so the question is concerning his
casting out, not concerning his receiving in. I confess, I know not how Mr. H.
could answer the question himself, concerning children born in their Church of
Parents, Father, Mother, that are Church Members, though such live 60 or 70
years never baptized, and have these three requisites, and be free of gross
scandals, they could not admit such to the Lords Supper. The Ministers should
have some extraordinary call of God to preach to such, as Paul had to go to
preach in Macedonia, Act. 16. for by our Brethrens way they have no right, by
way of Covenant, from the parents, but only a providential right to preach the
Gospel, which requires an extraordinary Apostolic cast.

As for the other, if the man be a born heathen, and shall come to get these
three requisites, and profess as Magus did, he is to be received a Member: but
if he has not these three requisites, for he lives in Sorcery, as Magus and
Elymas, and opposes the Gospel, the openly lying profession is scandalous;
such a profession Mr. R. faith is not his requisites: If he be a Pagan, and
continue in habitual drunkenness, he may be holden out while he gives evidences
to others of amendment, and then he may be admitted to the outer court, as a
heater; though a profession of faith, if not belied with worshipping of false
gods, can hardly consist with Paganism.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the principal and prime subject of all the Privileges of special note
bestowed in the Mediator Christ upon the Church.

Mr. H. p. 1. cap. 3. page 23.

1. WHether the invisible Church be the principal, prime; and only subject of
the Seals of the Covenant, pa. 3.

Ans. It is not such a subject by any argument that Mr. R. brings: But Mr. H.
frames a question of straw, as if I had moved it, and disputes against Mr. R.

My words are: The invisible, not the visible Church, is the Due Right of
Presbyt. par. 1. page 244, 248.
principal, prime, and only subject with whom the Covenant of Grace is made,
to whom all the Promises do belong, and to whom all titles, styles, properties
and privileges of special note in the Mediator de belong, p. 248. The Promises
are preached to the whole visible Church, but for the Elects sake; yet they
belong, in Gods intention and gracious purpose, only to the Elect of God, and
his redeemed ones, to that invisible Body, Spouse, Sister, whereof Christ alone
is Lord, He^d, Husband. I wonder then, if Mr. H. did read my book, when he
will dispute such a Question with me.

1. Whether the invisible Church, and the El^ct, be the prime subject of the
Seals? A question that has no sense, nor any favor The question whether the
elect and invisible Church be the prime subject of the Seals, sens^ss; and the
affirmative never imagined by Mr. R. The only visible and first external
subject of the ^xternal seals, is the visible Church.
from Mr. R. For can the Elect, of which, some are not born, eat and drink at
the Lords Supper, or be washed with water? 2. The Lord has ordained the Seals
in an orderly way, and in an Ecclesiastic and Church right to the visible
Church, as to the first, prime, and only subject external, visible, in foro
Ecclesiae, and according to the command of God to Pastors, they are to be
dispensed to all Members of the visible Church, to Magus as to Peter, whether
the dispensers or Church repute them real Converts, or not. 3. Here the Seals,
Ministers, Word, Promises, are considered only in the sign, letter, external
administration by the dispensers, who see not the heart. Now Mr. H. proceeds
against me, Arg. 1. page 41. to prove that, to wit, That bare and naked Seals,
as Circumcision, are bestowed upon graceless men, Ishmael and Esau: which is to
set up an adversary of hay; for I am not the man who either dreamed or wrote,
that the invisible Church is the principal, prime, and only subject of the
naked Signs bestowed upon Ishmael and Magus: This will be found the mind of
Mr. Hock^r; for I spoke expressly of the privileges of special note in the
Mediator, page 144. But the bare and empty Seals, the Promises as in the The
external seals and promises preached etc. are not privileges of special note
given in the Mediator Christ.
letter preached, and as precisely considered and separated from the grace
promised and signed, are not privileges of special note given in the Mediator,
for they are privileges bestowed upon Cain and Magus, as upon real believers,
Peter and John, the very same way. 4. But the Lord has ordained Promises,
Sealt, and the like, including the inward grace, Christ, Righteousness, Pardon,
Perseverance, Eternal life, in his gracious purpose, as I say, page 244. to the
invisible and effectually called Church, as to the principal, prime, native,
internal subject, a right not only Ecclesiastic in foro Ecclesiae, which they
have also, professing the sound faith, but also with a real and internal right
in foro Dei, Upon these Arguments, never touched nor answered by Mr. Hooker.

1. These are the first and proper subject of all Promises. Properties,
Privileges, Seals of special note in the Mediator That the invisible and
really believing Church is the prime, proper and principal and only subject of
all the Privileges of special note in the Mediator Christ, is proved by 5
arguments, never answered by Mr. H.
(taking the Privileges and Sea's as they include Christ, and the graces
promised and sealed) to whom the Covenant, and special promises of a new heart,
the Law engraven, perseverance are only promised, and to none other, But
these, A new heart, Perseverance, etc. are only promised to Elect Believers,
Ierem. 31. 33, 35. and 32. 39, 43. Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. and 36. 25, 26, 27. Isa.
59. 19, 20, 21. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, etc. If these be promised to
Cain, Magus, then either absolutely, and so all shall have a new heart,
contrary to Scripture and Experience; if conditionally, show the condition to
be performed by the Elect, which being done, they shall be therewith gifted:
Such a condition is not in the Word; for the condition should be either of
Nature, or Common Grace, and both must be Pelagianism: for if of Grace, the
question must recurte, What shall be the condition again?

2. These for whom, and for whose salvation God intends the sweet Marrow of the
Ministry, and other Ordinance^, the meeting in the Unity of faith, and the
knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. to whom they all belong, 1
Cor. 3. 21. and for whose sake all are, 2 Cor. 4. 15. and for whose salvation
only Christ came and died, Matthew. 20. 28. Luke 19, 10. 1 Timothy 1. 15. 1 Pet. 3.
18. Ioh. 15. 13. must be the prime and only subject of all these privileges
in their marrow and substance.

3. These to whom Christ is given only, and with him all other things, must be
the prime and only subject, to whom all privileges of special note in the
Mediator are given; or then the visible Church, or some other than the Elect
and ransomed of the Lord, must be the principal and only subject: But he has
given us Christ, and with him all other things, Romans 8. 32. And Mr. H. cannot
say, that to that visible body, as visible, in which Magus, Cain, are joint
Members, having as good Ecclesiastical right as the Apostle Peter, by Mr. H.
way, are given all things, Christ, saving grace out of his fullness, etc. as to
the first and prime subject.

4. Christ is Head by the influence of saving grace, King, Husband, Savior,
Ransomer, Surety, High Priest of the really believing Church: If he give any
privileges, then who shall be the first, prime and only subject of graces
flowing from him, but his Liege-people, Spouse, Ransomed ones?

5. The Elect justified, are only the Sons of the Promises, Romans 9. 8, 9. and
are internally, and not externally only, as Magus, in Covenant with God, and
internally called.

Mr. H. The Catholic Church invisible is not the prime and only subject of
the Seals, as the meaning of (...) is to Mr. R. though the exposition of the
Rule be neither safe nor sound, quod convenit (...), convenit (...).

Ans. Taking the Seals for bare and naked signs bestowed upon Magus, which is
Mr. H. mind, he disputes against himself, not against me.

2. The axiom, what agrees essentially, and per se, in secundo modo per se,
(as aptitude to discourse, or also to laugh, agrees to man) does both agree
universally to all men, and reciprocally; for every man is apt to laugh, and
every thing apt to laugh is a man: So the invisible Church is that Company to
whom all saving privileges belong, Effectual Calling, Redemption,
Justification, the promises of a new heart, of Perseverance, the Seals
including Covenant-grace; and reciprocally the same Company to whom all these
privileges belong, is the invisible, mystical, Living Church, and not the
Company visible of which Magus is a Member. Is this axiom neither safe not
sound? Mr. H. should show wherein it is The Rule quod (what agrees to any)
convenit, as such, agrees to it universally and reciprocally, is a safe Rule in
Logic.
faulty, and not pass with disdain the Rule as neither safe nor sound. It is
defended as a truth of Aristotle by Christian Philosophers. What agrees in any
thing (...) and (...), (which Aristotle says are the same in secundo modo per
se) agrees to all, and to every one, and to such only. So the first modus per
se is when the Praedicate belongs to the Essence of the subject; so Aristotle
taught me long ago. Aristot. poster. A^t. l. 1. c. 4. (...). Aristot. ibid.
(...), per se autem (in secundo modo) and qua tale idem sunt. Aristot. Analyt.
1. cap. 4. (...). Ant. Ruvio, Colleg. Conimbr. Murcia de L^llana poster.
Analyt. l. 1. c. 4. Primus modus per se est quando praedicatum pertinet ad
essentiam subjecti, quia vel est definitio ejus, vel pars definitionis, unde
istae propositiones sunt in primo modo per se, homo est animal, homo est
rationalis. Ruvio. Colleg. Conimbr. Toletus, Masius. Secundus modus per se, est
quando subjectum pertinet ad definitionem praedicati, ut homo est admirativus,
homo est ri sibilis. Ibid. in textu. Convenire ^utem praedicatum subjecto
secundum quod ipsum idem est, ^c convenire illi in quantum tale; hoc est, non
secundum rationem commu^^m sed propriam, and hoc est, reciproce.
So Collegium Conimb^icense, Ant: Ruvio, Murcia de Lallana, Smyglezius,
Toletus, and many; yea, all who Comment upon Aristotle. And the secundo modo
per se, is when the subject belongs to the definition of the Attribute; as a
man is apt to laugh, to weep, to admire, and reciprocally; yea, and what agrees
to any, according to its specific nature, and last essential difference,
agrees reciprocally: and to this old Logic I stand, it is not new.

Mr. H. pa. 37. Mr. R. proves, That the visible Church, as such, has not
right to the Seals, but the invisible. These only who are within the Covenant
have right to the Seals; so Peter proves Infant Baptism, Acts 2. 38. but only
the invisible Church has right to the Covenant.

Ans. Peter, Acts 2. speaks of persons externally within the Covenant, who by
profession engage themselves to walk in the ways of God, though they have not,
for the present, the sound work of faith in their hearts, and it may be shall
never have it. Now that the visible and intelligible being in Covenant, must be
understood Acts 2. is clear, else the counsel of Peter to be baptized, had been
null; for invisible Christians only have right to the Seals, (they might
reply) but whether we be such, we for the present do not know, and it is
certain, and you can neither see nor know the invisible work of grace: it is
believed by faith, not known.

Ans. An error in the first concoction spoileth all: I speak of an internal
right in foro D^i, and this way only real and invisible believers have
internal right to the Covenant and Seals, including the blessings and graces
rem significatam; otherwise, naked Seals, of which Mr. H. speaks, are not
special privileges in the Mediator, for they are (himself granting) bestowed
upon base hypocrites: so the right internal to the seals, and Christ in them,
and to the Covenant and new heart, is the privilege of special note, whith
only the invisible and really believing Church has; Mr. Hookers Saints, Magus
and Judas have no such privileges.

2. The answer of Peter, Acts 2. is indeed of a being in Covenant How the
converts, Acts 2. were in Covenant: for Peter renders to the Chosen a healing
answer, You are inter nally in covenant; and to the rest an answer to guard
against despair, The promise is preached to you.
visibly, and that being is not excluded, but it is rather and more principally
to be expounded of real and internal being in covenant, Repent, and be baptized
every one of you, for the promise is made to you and to your children; that is,
ye are within the Covenant. Now Peter's answer is a strengthening and comforting
answer: for the doubt of their cast-down conscience is, Ah! We murdered the
Lord of Life, then must we be rejected of God, we know not what to do! Peter
had returned but a comfortless answer, to say, But be of good cheer, the
promise is only to you and to your children; that is, ye are only visibly in
Covenant: They might say, So is Magus. I grant it is a ground of comfort, Psalm.
147. 19, 20. Exodus 20. 2. Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 2, 3. but it was not so healing an answer
to their question, which was not, Men and brethren; what shall we do to get in
to be Members of the visible Church? What better had they been in a place where
Ananias and Magus had as deep a share of the comfort as they; and which having,
they might eternally perish? But their question was, Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved eternally, and to be Members of the invisible Church?
Peter answers, There is a Covenant made in the holy mind of God really with
you Jews, and your children, and to all that are afar off, with the seed of
Jews and Gentiles; and so he must have among you a company ordained to life,
and internally in Covenant: So Calvin, Gualther, Bullinger, Marlorat, Beza,
Brentius. His meaning is not that they were all the same way within the
Covenant, and the Promise made one and the same way; some were actually and
really, and so invisible in it; some visible, and in profession; some as
fathers, some as children and parts of their fathers. (2.) He cannot speak
only of the visible Covenant, but of their being invisible in it; he bids them
repent really, not visibly only, as Magus did, and heals their anxious
conscience, by this repenting really, for that end that their doubting may be
removed; not that the holy Ghost bid^ any within the visible Church repent
only professedly, and only externally, but the command of repenting, as born
in upon the chosen, carries with it the Lords intention often, and his decree
to save, and their being internally in Covenant, as here it does.

3. I shall desire Mr. Hooker to be true to his own distinction. If being
externally in Covenant make a Churchmember, as he expounds Acts 2. Then all to
whom the Lord says, I am your God, and to whom the Covenant is externally
preached, and If these be real Converts one to another who are called the
people of God, then all Israel, all the Gentiles must be real converts in the
charity of all the Prophets, and of one another.
they by silence hear and accept of it, are to Mr. H. Church Members; then all
Israel whom Moses preached to be blind, hardened, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. rebellious and
stiff-necked, Deuteronomy. 31. 27. who had tempted him in the Wilderness forty years,
and when they had entered in a Church. Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 29. 10. as our
Brethren expound it, they were to Moses, to Joshua, and to all the godly, and
to one another, real converts, savouring as if they had been with Christ, and
practically reformed. O what strange charity, when Moses and the Prophets
preached, they confess, the world knew their life declare the contrary.

2. Why should Mr. H* deny but the three thousand who heard with gladness,
received the Word with joy, were real converts, The 3000, Act. 2. are pricked
at the heart, and converts by a figure, that is, many or most of them were
such, but not all, and every one, as Mr. H. says.
by a frequent figure, the part for the whole, because the most part were real
converts? Yea. Mr. H. will have Ananias, Sapphira, and all of them in the
judgment of charity to be real Saints: But when the Scripture calls Israel
these whom Saul and David were to feed and rule, 1 Samuel 9. 16. 2 Kings 3. 18. 2 Chronicles. 7. 13. even all the murmurers and ^^bels whom the Lord brought out of
Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 2. Exodus 6. 4. his covenanted people, Will not Mr. H. give us
the favor of a figurative speech, a part for the whole?

3. Or then (which is strange) all Egypt, Assyria, Isa. 19. 25. all Nations,
Isa. 2. 1, 2. All the kindreds of the earth, Psalm. 22. 27. Of the world, Rev.
11. 15. must be in the judgment of charity to one another real Converts.

4. Could not the Lord call them, and make a Church of them, and say, I am your
God, and they, We are thy people, while first the Pastors and the Church passed
their judgment of charity upon their real conversion?

5. Mr. H. passes over all the Texts cited by me, which conclude only the
invisible Church to be really within the Covenant; see them above: and
contendeth, That the visible Church only, which is of these who never had, and
it may be shall never have any sound work of faith in their hearts, page 37.
the only prime subject of those special privileges in Christ.

6. So the Reason is null, if this be the only visible being in Covenant,
which is Act. 2. 38. it concludes not: Mr. R. said the contrary, both visible
and invisible being in Covenant, must be understood Act. 2. as also invisible
grace is believed in it self, therefore it is not known in its effects; it
follows not, the invisible and really believing Church, is not visible in the
effects to men: Isa. 61. 9. Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and
their offspring among the people; all that see them shall acknowledge them,
that they are the seed that the Lord has blessed. Isa. 62. 12. And they shall
call them the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord, and thou shall be called,
Sought out, A City not forsaken.

Mr. H. p. 37. That only the invisible Church has right to the Seals, draws
many absurdities: The adversaries of grace will hardly be gained.

Ans. True: if you mean external signs and Ecclesiastic right; if all Israel
be in the judgment of charity within the Idolaters and scandalous persons
visibly must be visible converts, by M. H. his way.
Covenant, we must indeed believe visible Murmurers, Idolaters, Fornicators,
Backsliders, Worshippers of Heathen gods, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. Exodus 16. 1, 2.
Psalm. 78. 17, 18, 19, 20. such as slew their sons and their daughters to
Molech, openly under every green tree, Psalm. 106. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Ier. 7.
30, 31. Hos 4. 13. Ier. 3. 2, 3. Isa. 57. 8, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 16. 31, 32, 33, 34.
to be real converts, and all and many other absurdities follow.

2. We must believe, That all the visible Church have saving grace; Ergo, we
must believe that God has chosen to life all the Independent Churches on earth.

3. That God intends salvation, and pardon, and perseverance to all and every
one of them of the visible Israel, and that to be false, Romans 9. 6. They are
not all Israel which are of Israel.

Mr. H. p. 38. Mr. R. compasses us about with a crowd of accusations of the
grossest Arminian, Popish, Socinian Doctrines.

Ans. Why did ye not clear your selves of conspiring with Papists, in denying
the preaching of the Word to be an essential note of the visible Church, and in
other points also? 2. Of conspiring with Socinians, in setting up Independent
Congregations. 3. Denying the Power of Synods. 4. The necessity of Ordination
by Laying on of the Hands of the Elders, etc. to such you say not any thing, in
leaving the Reformed Churches, and joining with these enemies of the truth; but
of this hereafter: you have yet place to dismiss the crowd.

Mr. H. p. 38. Let Mr. R. help us to answer the Anabaptists upon his grounds.

Mr. H. Those that I cannot know have any right to the Seals, to them I cannot
give the Seals in any faith: But I cannot know that Infants are of the
invisible Church, which only gives them right to the Seals. If Mr. R. grant
the proposition, that they give the Seals to such whom they know not to have
any right, they triumph.

Ans. No Anabaptist can object to me. That to be of the invisible M. R.
disclaims that which M. H. chargethupon him, that to be of the invisible Church
only gives right Ecclesiastic to the seals.
Church only gives right Ecclesiastic to the outward Seals, which Magus
receives, Mr. H. calls the dispensing of the outward Seals a special
privilege, but such as Magus has no special or saving Privilege.

2. It passes the wit of man to defend Independents against Anabaptists: for
1. The Anabaptists and Independents both agree in the same constitution of
visible Churches, that they must be real converts, as far as we can judge: but
that we can judge of no Infants born of believing Parents, except we pluck out
the eyes of charity, and believe that Cain, Ishmael, Esa^, and all and every
one born within the visible Church, are born converts, is impossible. Hence Mr.
H. Those that I cannot know have any right to the Seals, to these I cannot give
the Seals of the Covenant in faith, as the Apostle calls faith. So Mr. H. But I
cannot know that all the Infants of Believers have right to the Seals, because
their parents are visible Saints, some of them Elect, some of them Reprobate:
Except I 1. Put the Seal of God upon a blank, contrary to our Brethrens
Doctrine. 2. Except I profane the holy things of God, and admit heathens to the
Church of visible Saints. Let Mr. H. answer the Anabaptists.

Mr. H. Mr. R. helps the Minor with a distinction So, faith Par. 1. p 38, 39
in Christ truly gives right to the Seals of the Covenant, and that in Gods
intention and decree, called Voluntas beneplaciti, but the orderly way of the
Churches giving the Seals, is, Because such a society is a professing and
visible Church, and the orderly giving of the Seals according to Gods approving
Will, called Voluntas signi and revelata, belongs to the visible Church. Mr. H.
answers, This salve is too narrow for the sore, for the distinction will either
make God order the giving of the Seals to such who have no right, and so
impeach his wisdom, to appoint the giving of the Seals to such to whom he gives
no right to receive them: Or else it does involve a contradiction and the
several expressions contain apparent contradictions; for this voluntas signi
which allows the visible Church to give the Seals, it tither gives another
right, besides that which the invisible Members have, or else it gives no
right: If it give another right, then the invisible Church has not only
right, which is here affirmed; if it give no right, then the visible Church
does give the Seals orderly to such who have no right to them. I confess, such
is my feebleness, that I see not how this can be avoided. How have hypocritical
Professors right to the Seals? Not as Members visible: For Mr. R. says, p.
249. The visible Church, as the visible Church, has no right unto the Seals;
as invisible they can give none, for they have none to give.

Ans. Were it not conscience to the truth, I would be silent of the infirmity
of this pious man.

1. It is a good salve: for it becomes not Mr. H. with Arminians and Socinians
to impeach the wisdom of the Holy One, because he appoints the giving of the
Seals, Baptism to Judas and to Magus, who have no right true and real in foro
Dei, in the Decree of God, and in his holy intention, as I spoke p. 248, 249.
to the Seals, and the grace sealed; nor to the engraven Law, and Gods teaching
of the heart, and to perseverance; and I Due Right of Presbyt. par. 1. Iac.
Gualterius Iesuita in Tabula Chronographica prim. secu^. ad an. 100. page 91.
sect. 17. probat liberum arb. contra Cal^inianos Quint. Classis repugnantiam
continens quae saepe inter voluntatem nostram and divinam intercedit. Bellar.
de amiss. g^at. l. 11. cap. 16. Mr. H. sides with Arminians, Socinians, and
Papists, in saying that the Reformed Churches ascribe to God two contrary
Wills. Armin. Antip. page 668. edit. Bertiana, at aio, id quod Deus in mandatis
and prom^ssionibus dicit tale esse ut Deus citra contradictionem dici nequeat,
decreto aliquo suo contrarium ejus vellet statuere. 665. insinuat Deum
hypocriseos. Cor^. advers. Molinaeum. c. 4. sect. 6. 7. Piscator and alii
voluntatem signi and beneplaciti ut opposita considerant, ut Deum non semper
serio velle, quod mandato se velle significat est voluntas in Deum contumeliosa
quae simulationem and hypo^ri sin in Deo ponit. Remonst. in Script. Synodalibus
Dordracen. ar. 1. de Praedestinat. pa. 245. Is qui intrinsece and serio ad
poenitentiam vocat reprobos; quos tamen intrinsece arcano and immutabili
decreto ab aeterno absolute ad damnationem, and damnationis causas destin^vit,
is stmul it benevolentiam erga eos, and mel in ore, ut dicitur, ostentat, and
^^l in cord ^^vet. Doctrina haec pa. 246. Deo duplicitatem animi and
simulationem cum deceptione conjunctam attribuit, Deo hypocrisin, mendacium. p.
247. Collocutores Hagienses in appendice de reprobatione. p. 129. Nam ea est
simulatio aliquem ad fidem and salutem vocre qui jam ante p^r reprobation is
decretum ab utraque est absolute segregatus. Conrad. Vorst. Amor. duplic. ad
Piscatorem, p. 13. par. 1. page: 293. Esse sic vocationem Dei illusorium. p.
391. Deum ^ubere ut credant mendacio. But the Arminians in their Apology all
along, especially cap. 6. where this matter is handled; and cap. 20. where they
speak of Reprobation, are as dumb as a fish of all these vain Objections, which
otherwise seem to serve their end not a little, now as before. But it is like
they were convinced in Conscience they did proceed from a false and erroneous
Exposition of the Lords will of Pleasure and of Precept, and therefore I doubt
not but Mr. H. did not a little sail against the truth, in carping at this
distinction acknowledged by all our Divines.
cite page 249. Ier. 32. 38, 39. and 31. 33. and page 244, 245. par. 1. Psalm.
89 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Isa. 54. 10. All which places Mr. H never looked on the
face, but suppressed them all. Then let Mr. H. clear the wisdom of God in
appointing a Ministerial and Pastoral offer of Covenant-mercies, Christ,
Pardon, the Anointing, the new heart, Life eternal, to be made to such as
Magus, and Judas the traitor.

2. Whereas he says, The distinction of voluntas beneplaciti, and voluntas
approbans, contains apparent contradictions. It seems he never heard of this
distinction allowed by the Reformed Churches; and that he joins with the
Arminians, who teach, That this distinction places in God two contrary Wills;
and that he wills and decrees one thing from eternity, and commands and
approves the contrary to his creatures: Hence there must be guile and
dissimulation, and no serious dealing in the Lords commands, says Arminius,
Corvinus, and the Arminians at the Conference at Hague, and the Synod of Dort.

3. Hence it is, that Mr. H. will have the same very right given by the
approved Will of God to Members, that is given by the Decree. Just as Vorstius
will have the promises and threatenings every way conform to the Decree: and he
and all the Arminians say, We may make them often contrary to the Decree, and
make the Holy Lord to deal doubly, and to will one thing within himself, and
command the contrary. So Mr. H. says, we make Gods command to give one right
external to the Seals, and his Decree the contrary, or no right at all to some
hypocrites.

But we answer to both: God by his Decree ordains what shall come to pass or
not come to pass, or what shall fall out or A clearing of that distinction of
the Lords will of purpose or decree, and of his commanding or approving Will
against Arminians, and against Mr. H. his siding with them in that, though
innocently, as Mr. R. in charity judges.
not fall out, be it good in his effective Decree, or be it evil in his
permissive Decree: For all things were written in his book, when as yet they
were not, even all David's Members, Ps. 139. 16. Ephesians. 1. 11. But God by his
approving Will does not decree what shall come to pass or not come to pass, but
only commands what is good, and promises rewards accordingly, and forbids what
is evil, and threatens punishment, whether the good or the evil come to pass,
or never come to pass; he commands Judas to believe, and Cain, and Pharaoh,
that is, he approves of their faith as good obedience, and agreeable to his
Law, and yet their obedience never falls out, nor did the Lord ever decree they
should obey: for what God decree^ shall be, must be; but what he commands does
not ever fall out: So the Lord forbids the killing of Christ, Exodus 20. 13.
that is, he declares that he nilleth, disapproveth, and hates the slaying of
the Lord of Life; and yet the killing of Christ falls out, and was decreed to
come to pass by the permission of God, Acts 2. 23. and 4. 27 28. Here The
decree and the approving will of God are the same.
is no shadow of contradiction here. Again, God gives a right to the Seals to
hypocrites; that is, he commands the Church to give the Seals to Magus,
whether such really or hypocritically believe, this is a right not properly
inherent in visible Members, for their Profession, yea, or their supposed
Conversion. 1. Because all saving and real right to Ordinances is relative to
Election to glory, and flows from the Merit of Christ's death; but visible
Professors, as such, of whose society Magus and Judas are, have not any saving
and real right, as chosen and redeemed in Christ, by grant of our Brethren. 2.
A right flowing only from an external profession, and from composed hypocrisy
in Magus, is no true right; a lie cannot give a true right, I offend that Mr.
H. so anxiously contends for a Charter to such Bastards as Magus. 3. It is a
favor to Of the right that real visible Professors have to the Seals; and that
that right which Magus and other painted Members have, is no true right. The
command to be baptized as a simple command gives no right Ecclesiastical, no
right internal to Magus to be baptized except he believe. Yet does the Church
without sin invite and baptize Professors, without passing a sentence upon
their real conversion, or hypoctitical. Visible Professors that are sincere,
have both right internal and external to the seals and the marrow of the seals.
hear the Gospel, and partake of the Seals; and Ius activum, an active right
the Church and Ministers have to call and admit to the Seals all who profess as
Magus, that the Elect in the visible Church may be converted, but it is not a
right proprie dictum ne quidem Ecclesiasticum, that they have who are such
hypocrites as Judas and Magus; for the command and revealed Will of God most
unproperly is said to give M^gus a right to the Seals: Except Mr. H. never
Divine so spoke; the command reveals the right, but gives none. As also the
right of visible Professors is Ius passivum, and a conditional and passive
right; for Magus and Judas have no right to be visible Members, or to partake
of the Seals, yea or to profess the Covenant and Name of God, Psalm. 50. 16. but
upon condition of faith: for God cannot command sin and an hypocritical
profession: yea, he forbids treading in his Courts, Isa. 1. 12, 13. except they
repent and believe, ver. 16, 17. therefore Magus sins in professing, and in
being baptized, he remaining rotten: But the Church sins not, but does the
command of Christ in calling, inviting all that profess, whether they be
really, or in the judgment of charity, Converts or no. Which distinction not
being observed, our Brethren and Mr. H. mistake the nature of an Ecclesiastical
right; for the Lord in the command gives to all visible professors, such as
Peter, who really believe, both the Ecclesiastic and external right to the
Seals which he decreed to give them, and the same internal and real right which
they have by faith, and no other than according to his eternal decree, they
have given them in time by real believing. But for hypocrites, as Magus, they
have no right Ecclesiastic to the Seals, but a sort of active and permissive
right, by which they claim room in the visible Church, and the Seals from the
Church. Therefore taking the Church visible as only visible, as
contra-distinguished from the invisible and really believing: and as visibility
is common to both Peter and Magus, and their external profession obvious to the
eye of man, so the visible Church has no right that is true and real to the
Seals: So I retort the Argument upon Mr. H.

True real believers, as Peter, and hypocrites, as Magus, have Peter and Magus
have not the same right to the seals. M. H. his argument is retorted upon
h^mself.
either one and the same Church-right to Membership and Seals, or another, and
diverse. The same right they cannot have;

1. Because the right of truly and really believing ones, is according to the
Decree of Election, such as the Lord ordained to be purchased to them by the
Merits of Christ, and also according to the Lords revealed Will. He who
believes has right to eat of the Tree of Life, and to Membership and Seals:
But this right Magus and hypocrites have not, for they have no part in Christ.

2. The right that believers, as Peter and John, have, is by fulfilling of the
condition. He who believes, and loves to be The right of hypocrites to Church
privileges and seals, which is only Ecclesiastic and external, is no right
real and true.
reformed, has right to the Covenant, Promises, to Perseverance, to the
anointing that teaches all things. These are promised and decreed to them,
Ier. 31. 33, 34. and 32 38, 39, 40. Isa. 54. 10, 11. and 59. 20, 21. compared
with Acts 13. 47, 48. Ioh. 6. 44, 45, 46. and 6. 37. and 10. 26, 27. and to
them only, not to Magus and to Reprobates.

3. Magus, and such like wooden and tree-legs, might claim the same life,
living Membership, lively and vital operations, and to have the anointing, and
to be kept through faith unto salvation by the power of God, 1 Pet. 1. 4. and
to have the fear of God put in their hearts, that they should not depart from
God, as Ier. 31. 39, 40. if they have the same right to Membership and the
Seals in their substance and grace signified with sound believers. And this is
most absurd.

If hypocritical Professors have another external and Ecclesiastical right then
real believers upon these grounds, it must be a false and a bastard Charter,
founded upon an hypocritical profession. Let Mr. H. show how the right of
visible professors who are real believers, and the right of painted and rotten
Professors, such as Magus and the like have, is one univocally, and in nature
the same right; and yet Mr. H. (which darkeneth the Reader) puts them all in
one, and would have Christ the same way to be King, Head, (survey page 16.)
Redeemer, who has bought with his blood the Elect, page 39, 40. and such
rotten ones, as Magus and Judas. 2. How a false and a true right can come from
the same command of God, let Mr. H. judge.

Lastly, it is poor to say, How come hypocritical Professors to have right to
the Seals? As visible Members they have none, as invisible Members they have
none, for such they are not.

Ans. True, they are not; but Mr. H. gives them the same right with invisible
Members: quo jure let him show. Ergo, the Church must give them no Seals, or
give them Seals, when she cannot know they have any right, for indeed they have
none that is true and real.

Ans. The Church does obey Christ in giving them Seals; and it well follows,
Ergo, The Church gives them Seals, when she cannot know they have any right,
to wit, internal and real, which is a saving privilege of special note in the
Mediator, to the Seals including signs and the grace signified: for so only
they do belong in the Lords intention and eternal decree to real believers, not
to Magus and Judas, except Mr. H. will stand for Arminian Universal Grace, and
say that God intends the same saving grace in Ordinances and Seals to Peter and
John, and likewise to Pharaoh and Magus.

CHAP. XVII.
Whether the visible Church, as visible, can bear these styles of the Body of
Christ, of the Redeemed of God, the Spouse of Christ, etc.

Mr. H. says, These things may well be given to the visible Par. 1. page 40.
Church.

Those over whom Officers are set, to feed them by Doctrine and Discipline,
must needs be the visible Church: But these are the Church, Act. 20. 28. Feed
the flock, not of the Elect only, but of the whole visible Church; Take heed
to the whole flock of God, else if they were set over the Elect only, they
might reply, Lord, we cannot search into thy secrets, who are the Elect and
invisible Saints, only to feed them: where as the current and common sense of
the Scripture, is, taking Redeemed and Sanctified as visible, though not really
such, the stream of the Text runs pleasantly, Feed all visibly redeemed. Elect
and Reprobate: So they be redeemed in the judgment of Charity.

Ans. 1. The Church visible is taken two ways. 1. In the latitude, The Church
is two ways visible.
as comprehending all Professors, sound, as Peter, or rotten, as Magus; all
which have a sort of right to the Seals, but diverse ways, as is said.

2. More restricted, as a Church so and so visible, as the soundest part of
real believers, comprehending in Corinth only such as are really justified,
sanctified, etc. In the latter ^ense, the Church visible and professing is one
in the matter, all one with the Church invisible, and soundly and sincerely
professing, and Peter is both a real believer, and visible and soundly
professing believer. In the former sense, Paul writing to Corinth, to Ephesus,
1 Cor 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. Romans 1. 7. to the Romans, calls all the Church visible
there justified, or not justified, the Church, to wit, the Church visible. In
the latter sense only the so and so visible professors, sanctified, justified,
are the only really, soundly professing visible Church, and the whole is named
from the sounder part. In the latter sense, Christ is head and Husband How
Christ is the Head of the visible Church.
of the visible Church, consisting of only real, sound, visible Professors,
and that not only by the influence of politic guidance, but also by the
influence of saving grace. But of this visible Church Mr. H. moves not the
question, and therefore his Arguments speed the worse. The place Act. 20. 28
Feed the flack, etc. is answered by M. H. the same way that the Arminians
answer to it.


2. The Argument of the same strain is formed by the Arminians, so, As many as
are the really redeemed Church (say the Arminians) and, As many as are the
Church of God redeemed in the judgment of Charity (says Mr. H.) the Elders
were to feed. But the Elders were to feed the whole flock, Elect and Reprobate,
real believers and hypocrites. But the Proposition is denied, and how either
the Arminians or Mr. H. prove the Proposition, Collo. Hagienses in confor.
These. 2. p. 183. ad Acts 20. 28. Si hic per Eccle siam Christi Redemp^am soli
Electi sunt intelligendi, Presbyteris Ephesiis ergo soli electi suerin^ in
Ecclesia commendati; sed hoc est absurdu^, quia 1. Ecclesia Eph^ siorum, cujus
cura illis mandatur, erat ecclesia visibilis, in qud etiam sunt qui non
credunt. 2. Presbyteri non poterant Electos noesse; Ergo, hic non intelliguntur
soli Electi. See the answer of Amesius in Coron. art. 2. de Redemptione, page
145. As Arminians say, the Church, Acts 20. is the visible Church of the really
Redeemed Elect and Reprobate: So that Church (says Mr. H. is the really
Redeemed Elect and Reprobate, in the judgment of Paul, and the really
believing Church, Rev. 2. 4, 5. It is false, that as many as were bought with
the blood of Christ in the judgment of charity, as were to be fed with Word,
Seals and Censures.
we see not: For Redemption to be bought with the blood of God; yea, to be
chosen to life before the foundation of the world, which are proper to the
invisible Church only, are attributed to the visible Church of Ephesus, Ephesians.
1. 4. Was it Paul's mind that thanks should be given to God, because God has
chosen us all, and every one of the visible Church (here is Universal
Predestination) of Ephesus before the foundation of the world to be really holy
(for of that holiness he speaks) because from eternity God had in the judgment
of charity chosen to life and holiness such as Magus and Judas, and the
grievous Wolves in that Church? So must Paul say, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. We are bound
to give thanks to God for you, all whom we feed, all to whom we write, real
converts or hypocrites, that God has, in the judgment of charity, chosen you
all salvation through sanctification of the Spirit, and bilief in the truth.

2. The Proposition is false, That as many as in the judgment of charity were
bought with the blood of God, as were to be fed with Doctrine and Discipline,
and so with Excommunication; Then were they to esteem all the grievous Wolves
that spared not the flock, but preached perverse things, Acts 20. 28, 29. and
all that had in such a manner fallen from their first love, and first works,
yea all the Apostates in the judgment of charity to be bought with the blood
of God, and eternally chosen to life, and saved: for the Officers were to feed
all these with Exhortations, Threatenings, Censures. Now the latter is unsound.

But 3. They were all recommended to the care of Pastors, as dear bought. True:
but not as if all were dear bought, the Text says not that. Mr. H. no doubt,
sinned with the Arminians, in adding that to the Text; for a father departing
may recommend his family of children and servants to a Steward, because (says
the father) they are dear to me; it will not follow that they are all dear to
him as children.

4. Feed the Redeemed flock, not as known to you to be Redeemed or
Predestined to life, but as professors among whom are my ransomed ones. M. H.
his interpretation of the bought Church, Act. 20. to be all and every one of
that Church to be bought, redeemed and sanctified in the judgment of charity
must also make the world, Joh. 1. 29. the whole world of Jews and Gentiles, 1 John 2. 1, 2. to be in the judgment of charity the redeemed and sanctified
world. How the visible Church is Christ's body.


5. The Text runs in its stream most muddily, not pleasantly; if the world, and
the whole world, Ioh. 1. 29. and 3. 16. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. and the All, that
Christ died for, be the Church of converts in charities judgment, behold, Mr.
H. turns the world, all the world, all the world for whom Christ died, before
they were born, and had being, into visible Saints; and when the Lord says,
Ephraim is his dear son, Jer. 31. and Israel a holy priesthood, a chosen
generation, the current and pleasant sense must be, All and every one in the
ten Tribes, and all Israel are the Lords dear children, and Priests sanctified
to offer themselves an holy living sacrifice to God, in the judgment each one
of another, though there be to their knowledge many thousand visible Idolaters,
Murderers, etc. that are detestable to God, not dear to God, as every where
the Scripture teaches.

Mr. H. p. 40. The visible Church is called The Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
28.

Ans. The visible Church in the sense of Mr. H. as including Magus, Judas, as
such, is not Christ's body. 2. Nothing is proved, except it be made out, that
all and every one in Corinth were lively Members under the Head Christ, in the
judgment of charity, otherwise it is a sinful addition to the Text.

Mr. H. A Church may be visibly in Covenant, which has not an infallible
assistance, may err in fundamentals, fall away, and not endure as the days of
heaven, and so are his first and fifth arguments answered.

Ans. It is, I consess, soon done, if well.

Ans. It is true, if men entertain such things as they call truths, when they
are but lies of Arminians, it will be easy to If a Church Congregational, the
only visible Church may fall away, as M. H. grants, then is not such a
Church visible the first and principal subject of perseverance, and of the like
privileges of special note in the Mediator, as M. H. says.
wipe away all with a dry Negoconclusionem. My first argument to prove that the
invisible, and not the visible single Congregation, is the principal, prime and
only proper subject of all the privileges of special note given in the
Mediator Christ, is Par. 1. page 244, 245. because that is such a subject of
all these privileges, to which only and principally the Promises belong, that
they are a seed enduring as the days of heaven, Psa. 89. and can no more cease
to be in Gods Covenant favor, than the Ordinances of heaven can cease to be,
Jer. 31. 35, 36. then the Mountains can depart, Isa. 54. 10, etc. But the
visible Church of a Congregation is not such, etc. Judge Reader of the answer.

The fifth Argument, Because the invisible Church of the Elect is such as
cannot err in fundamentals, cannot fall from the Rock, and not the visible
Church of the Congregation, whereof seven may be a Church, and six of them such
materials as Magus; nor can such a Congregation bear as the first, only, and
prime subject, these styles (say I, page 250.) that are proper only to the
Elect, Redeemed, and really sanctified Church, the styles of Christ's Sister,
Love, Dove, Spouse, Mystical Body of Christ.

Mr. H. answers by yielding the Assumption, A Church may The single
congregation may fall away, Ergo it cannot b^ either the subject or the first
subject of a new heart, perseverance in grace, etc.
be visibly in Covenant, may err in fundamentals, may fall away. And this is
Mr. R. first and fifth Arguments. Hence if perseverance and never falling away,
be a special privilege given in the Mediator Christ, and it agree not to the
Congregational, the only visible Church, and if it agree not to all visible
Congregations, then is not the visible Church the only principal subject of
such privileges; since the world was, no Logic can say that a property can be
denied of its first and only subject, That is a man, and yet is not apt to
laugh.

2. To be visibly in Covenant, is not a privilege of special note, that is, a
saving privilege, such as Perseverance, to have the anointing, and a new
heart: Of which saving privileges I spoke all along, page 244, 245, 246, 247,
248, 249, 250, 251, etc. for to be visibly in Covenant, agrees to Magus, and to
all rotten Members; but these saving privileges of perseverance agree not to
Mr. H. his visible Church, which may, and does fall away, says Mr. H. Judge
then, if these two Arguments be wiped away with a wet finger, as says Mr.
Hooker.

Mr. H. p. 40, 41. A Church may be visibly red^emed by the blood of God, be
called the Body of Christ, the Sons and Daughters of God, and yet not be really
and inwardly such, which is his second Argument. The third is answered already.

Ans. This is with a hop and a skip to take away Arguments. 1. Mr. H. should
have done so much as repea^ed the Argument. But to be really redeemed, to be
the Body of Christ, to be really, to be, I say, in veritate rei, the Sons and
Daughters of God, and not to be called so only (a generation of Vipers call
themselves, Matthew. 3. the holy seed) are privileges of special note in the
Mediator Christ, as I spoke page 244. and these privileges agree not to the
visible and nominal Church, of which Magus is a Citizen, as to the principal,
prime and only subject, as Mr. H. yields; and so yields the Argument.

2. A Church may be both visibly the Redeemed of God, and called, and be really
the Body of Christ, and invisibly, be also the Redeemed of God, by a figure, as
touching the sound and real visible Saints among them, but that destroys Mr. H.
his cause, who will have all and every one in the judgment of charity
redeemed, even so many as are fed with Word and Censures.

3. Mr. H. should have applied his answer to the Arguments, but he saw it would
not frame. I have done it. Let the second thoughts of some help here. M. H.
must expound all the precious Promises of the Lords giving the engraven Law in
the heart, of Christ's bearing our sins on the tree, with the like, according to
the judgment of charity. Yea, and the Lord does not, by this interpretation,
really commend his Church, but only in the judgment of charity; as Cant. 2.
14. Thy voice (in prayer) is sweet, in the judgment of charity; and Cant. 4.
7. Thou art all fair, my love, in the judgment of charity; and v. 9, 10, 11,
12. must bear the like sense.


For Mr. H. must apply his answers to the cited places: so Ier. 31. 33. I will
put my law in their inward parts, according to the judgment of charity; and
Ier. 32. I will put my fear in their hearts, according to the judgment of
charity. And when the Lord says, I was a husband to Israel, that is, in the
judgment of charity. Isa. 53. He was stricken for the transgression of my
people, that is, visible Saints, and for Magus, for my confederate people, in
the judgment of charity. Ah! ^ee not men dare to add their afterbirth
inventions to the truth of God.

Therefore Mr. H. adds, page 40 They who hold that a visible Church is
redeemed externally, cannot say by any good inference, that Christ died for all
such in Gods intention, or that all such are chosen to glory, or that God
intends to save all such.

Ars. This is said, not proved. If Christ die for the whole If Christ die for
all the world in the judgment of charity, he must intend in the same judgment
to die for them, and must in the same judgment c^e them to glory.
world in the judgment of charity, he must intend and decree in the same
judgment of charity to save them by his death, else he is conceived to die for
them upon no intention at all. I judge Christ's dying for us essentially
includes his intention to save, to deliver from the present evil world, Gal. 1.
4. If therefore this charitable judgment of Mr. H believed Christ died for all
the Members of the Church of Ephesus (suppose Magus to be a baptized Member) he
must in the same judgment believe that God intended to save Magus: yea, and
Mr. H. must believe in charity, by his death he intends to save all and every
one in the visible Church, all the earth over, and so did choose to glorify
all the visible Saints, and consequently all nations; Isa. 2. 1, 2. all Egypt,
all Assyria, Isa. 19. 25. all the Gentiles, Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3, etc. all the
Kingdoms of the world, Rev. 11. 15. for they are all the visible Kingdoms and
Churches of Christ; and charity shall forbid to believe, that there be one
reprobate in the visible Churches, and shall necessitate Mr. H. to believe that
God intends salvation, and so chose to salvation every man and woman of them.
But I shall not undertake to reconcile our Brethrens charity and their faith,
when the Lord shall fulfill the Prophesies, Isa. 2. and 19, etc. And what reason
is there, I pray you, to say, People are visibly redeemed, but not Redemption
how it is not properly visible.
visibly chosen to glory? for the act of redeeming is not Christ's visibly dying
on the Cross, for that Redemption material was visibly to no generations before
that crucifying of Christ, or to us; but it is the laying down of the ransom of
that noble life for such a certain number of Elect, not one more, not one fewer
than are written in the Lambs Book of Life (I am of that opinion, I hope, with
our Brethren) and this is as much hid and invisible to man, until their godly
walk make their redemption in its effects to be visible, as their eternal
Election to glory; therefore I much wonder of Mr. Lockyers asserting from Acts
15. (but I hope my Reverend Brother Mr. James Wood has by this silenced him:
for we look for only silence from him, except some other lewd brotherly help)
that the proper and allowed matter of a visible Church now in the days of the
Gospel, is persons truly converted, such as God who knows Little Stone, page
7.
the hearts of all men can bear witness of, as indeed sealed by his holy
Spirit; I say, This is the matter that we ought now to take to raise again the
Tabernacle of David, and none other, no not in a whole Church, as for that, so
far as very spiritual men can judge. Its a dreadful addition to the Word.

CHAP. XVIII.
Answer to Mr. Hookers Arguments, That the invisible Church is not the first
subject of the Seals.

Me. H. Ar. 1. If those who were graceless, and had no Par. 1. page 41, 42.
interest in Christ, had yet a command from Christ to receive the Seals, had
warrant from his Word to require them; then they had a right (outward and
visible in foro Ecclesiae) to partake of them: for there is no better right
than Gods Command to enjoin, and his Word to warrant us to challenge any
privilege. But many graceless, who were no invisible members, Ishmael, Esau,
and all the males were enjoined to be circumcised, and all the houses of Israel
to eat the Passover.

Ans. 1. What is in question is not proved, to wit, That the privileges of
special note in the Mediator Christ, i. e. saving privileges, as Mr. R. often
teaches, page 244, 245. belong Hypocrites have not any Ecclesiastical right
to the seals from the command of God, as a command, but from the command as it
includes the fulfilling of the condition.
not to the invisible Church as to the proper and first subject. But Mr. H.
proves, That external signs, and external right to the Seals, in foro
Ecclesiae, are bestowed upon rotten Members, Magus and others.

2. He ought to prove the visible Church is the only principal subject of the
seals, as he elsewhere asserts. But this Argument proves it not.

3. He frames the Argument of Infants, who have right to be circumcised, who
have no command of Christ (for Infants are not capable of commands or
threatenings) and brings not instances of these come to age under the New
Testament.

4. A graceless man, as Magus, has thus far right to demand the Seals, that he
may say to the Church, You sin in withholding the Seals, and therefore I
require you baptize me, as Christ has commanded you: but he cannot say, I have
right even external to receive Baptism, and I sin not in receiving it. And Mr.
H. Argument to prove it is naught: Why, says he, Graceless men have the
command of God to challenge the Seals; Magus has the command of God to
challenge, and to receive the Lords Supper. A command absolute he has none:
show me such a command, Magus, Judas, eat and drink at the Lords Supper,
challenge, claim and receive Baptism; All Israel eat the Passover, be ye real
believers or hypocrites, be ye self-triers, and prepared or not, be ye clean or
unclean: I confess there were no better right to challenge the Seals, than such
a command, if any such were; but if Mr. H. or any of his read such a command,
I pray I may see, and read also. But Magus has only a conditional command,
which gives him no true and real right, save only conditionally, to wit,
Magus, receive the Seals and the Lords Supper, so thou believe, and examine thy
self; if not, thou have no right to the seals, but eatest and drinkest thine
own damnation: And because these graceless men fulfill not the condition, and
believe not, Mr. H. his Argument is wa^^ry; They have right from the command of
God, which is the b^ right: that is, they have no right at all from a
conditional command, they not fulfilling the condition, but such right as
Robbers have to the Travelers purse; yea, they have no command of God, but the
contrary a severe discharge, Isa. 1. 13. Bring no more vain oblations. Matthew.
22. 12. Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? He
that eats and drinks unworthily, Job had right to the seals. Aug. de Civ.
Dei l. 12. c. 47. Nec ipsos Iudaeos existimo audere contendere, neminem
pe^tinuisse ad Deum praeter Israelitas -- Job nec indigena, nec proselyta, id
est, Adven^ populi Israel fuit, sed ex gente Idum^a genus ducens; ibi ortus,
ibidem mortuus est.
eats and drinks damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

Mr. H. p. 42. Job and his godly friends were invisible Members, but being
strangers they are forbidden to eat the Passover: Ergo, the seals belong not to
invisible Members.

Ans. 1. The thing denied is not concluded. Job and his godly friends had the
marrow of the Seals, and wanted some external signs, which are not saving
privileges, as I allege page 244. That Job was not circumcised, possibly is
said, not proved by Mr. H.

2. My mind is not to deny that the visible acts of eating, drinking, being
washed in Baptism, belong not to visible believers as visible, taking visible
as coincident with real believers; for invisible men can no more visibly
partake of Ordinances, than Spirits can be baptized, and eat the Lords Supper.

3. Job and his godly friends were not forbidden to be circumcised, Genebrard.
in Chron. an. Mun. 1239. tempore Patriarcharum vixisse ejus tempore plerosque
Ch^nanaeo^um, ad Ecclesiam Catholicam perti^uisse existimat. Pineda in Job cap.
1. ver. 1. Nu. 75. c. 4. Ecce docuisti multos fuisse regem and publicum
doctorem populi sibi subjecti; When Job lived even before the Law, and before
Moses. See Theodoret Epitom. Divinorum decretorum, l. 5. de creatione. Origin.
Homil. 4. super Ezekiel. Eusebius. l. 1. Demonst. Evang. cap. 3. Moses videtur
septimus ab Abrahamo, Job quintus.
nor to sacrifice; Job sacrificed warrantably, Job 1. c. 42. Job professes he
was visibly in Covenant, Job 13. 16. and 19. 25. I know that my Redeemer
lives. And so they were neither invisible Members only, nor debarred from the
seals. Nay, Proselytes were admitted to the seals.

Mr. H. (...). 41. If the invisible Church be the first subject of the seals,
the invisible Church must have the seals firstly, and the visible Church
secondarily; as heat is first in the element of fire, and secondarily in things
hot by participation, as iron.

Ans. It is no Logic: If the invisible and real believer, for example, Peter,
be the first subject of the seals, including Christ signified in them, then to
receive the seals worthily, agree first to Peter and to invisible real
believers, and secondarily to these same invisible believers, as they do
visibly declare by their savoury conversation, that they are really believers:
but there is no real transmigration of accidents out of one subject to another;
The visible Church as visible, is not the first and principal subject of the
seals, according to their substance of the new heart, perseverance, etc.
that is cold Logic: but such real and internal right to the seals, and to
Christ and his grace signified by the seals, do neither firstly nor secondarily
belong to such visible Saints as Magus and Judas, yea neither per se, nor per
participationem; as the Sun and Stars are neither hot nor cold, either firstly
or secondarily, for they are, Aristotle says, Corpora quintae essentiae,
bodies of a fifth essence, different from the elements and all mixed bodies.

Mr. H. p. 42, 43. The Olive tree is the prime subject of the fatness that
issues from it, and appertains to it, and of all the Ordinances. But the
visible Church, Romans 11. is the Olive, the seals and other privileges are part
of the fatness which pertains thereunto: Therefore the visible Church is the
prime subject of them. That the Olive is the visible Church, see Beza, Pareus,
Willet.

Ans. 1. Will Mr. H. bide by this Conclusion, That the visible Church,
including rotten Magus, traiterous Judas, is the prime subject of all saving
privileges, of the new heart, The olive tree Romans 16. 15. not the visible
Congregation as visible, but as it includes the Elect; and the fatness is not
the outward signs only, of which Magus partaketh.
Gods inward heart-teaching, perseverance, etc? Then by his own argument,
Magus, and the visible body whereof he is a graceless member, as visible, must
be first qualified inherently with all these saving privileges, as heat is
firstly (says he) in the fire; and then Justification, Perseverance in grace,
must be transferred from such an ugly body as Magus, Judas, etc. to real and
invisible believers.

2. The Assumption is false: Read again Calvin, Beza, Pareus; add Pet.
Martyr, The English Notes, Diodati, they expound not the Olive of the visible
Church only as contradistinguished from the invisible, as Mr. H. takes the
visible Church in this dispute, as it includes the whole visible Israel, even
Idolaters, who slew the Prophets and the Heir: But the Church visible including
the Election, Romans 11. 7. and also the invisible and really justified, and by
fatness, they mean not only external privileges, which the rotten hypocrites
wanted not, but the juice and sap of saving grace, by which, says Pet. Martyr,
They that are far off are made nigh, Ephesians. 2. 12, 14. and were engrafted in
the Head and Body, says Pareus; yea, Willet cites Gorham, and Lyra, who
expound the fatness of habitual grace.

Mr. H. Let Mr. R. remember he said, lib. 2. page 260. None Page 45.
are to be cast out for non-regeneration known to be such. But if ye give them
the seals (says Mr. H.) the Church shall give the seals to such whom she knows
have no right to them.

Ans. Mr. H. himself is alike burdened with this as I am: A Ch 2. p. 27.
Non-regeneration excludes not men from Church-right to the seals, as M. H.
imagines.
toleration there must be of some, until the scandals be examined, and Censures
applied, and the Church knows men to be unregenerated, many days before they
can know it juridice. Let Mr. H. then answer, whether they should be debarred
from the seals or not.

2. If such were admitted being free of scandal, it follows not (its a poor
begging of the question) that the Church should admit to the seals such as she
knows has no right. Why? because they are not in the judgment of charity real
converts; that is, non causa pro causa, no cause.

Mr. H. Mr. R. puts the formalis ratio, the essential reason of Offices and
Officers in another subject, besides the visible Church, in the invisible
Catholic Church, convertibly, or reciprocally and universally. Whatsoever has
these privileges, to wit, Offices, Officers, Seals, right to the Seals, etc.
is the invisible Catholic Church. And only the invisible Catholic Church
(Ergo, not the visible) has all these privileges. If Mr. R. rid his hands,
etc. its good.

Ans. Mr. H. has two pages near by of this, of which whether Mr. R. places not
the formal reason of offices, officers, seals in the visible Church, as Mr. H.
says.
I have rid my hands, let the judicious Reader determine. Know, Reader, that
Mr. H. will have all privileges, external Offices, Officers, Seals, and right
Ecclesiastic (which is formally a painted bastard right) in the visible
Church, only as its first subject: I rid my hands of this, by granting it;
take the visible Church in a good sense, as including good and bad, nor said I
ever any thing to the contrary. But these are not the saving privileges of
special note, such as to be taught of God, to persevere in saving grace, etc.
as I often say, p. 244, 245, etc. And though Mr. H. his privileges, to be an
Apostle, or another Officer, to have right external to the seals (a bastard
right) agree to the visible Church, yea to Judas and Magus, they being gratiae
gratis datae: yet saving privileges, the anointing; the new heart,
Justification, Perseverance; the styles of Spouse, Sister, Love, Dove, etc. are
such as I desire Mr. H. to rid his hands, and to clear the coasts to us, by his
answer to my words. Due right, par. 1. page 244, 245. diverse pages; how these
agree reciprocally to his visible Church. I take but some few. The single
Congregatinn of such as Magus and Peter, etc. is the first and reciprocal, and
proper subject of the anointing, of justification, and perseverance.

And convertibly, All that have the anointing, are justified, persevere, are
only the single independent Congregation of such as Magus and Peter, etc.

What then will Mr H. do with his own, that are both visibly and invisibly
justified, regenerate, who by persecution or pestilence are broken from the
Independent Church? Shall they not share of the anointing, because they are not
Members of the single Congregation? This is hard measure to the godly, and bad
Divinity. This is not good Logic, that therefore Mr. R. must show some other
essential causes of Offices and Officers besides the invisible Church: He must
mean the visible Church of which Magus is a Member. I know in Logic, that the
subject is an essential cause of an accident; Subjectum sumitur in d^finitione
per additamentum, I learned long ago.

And for the close, the society, the saving privileges, of the new heart,
perseverance, is the invisible Church; and all that have these, the anointing,
perseverance, etc. is the invisible mystical true Church. I own this
reciprocation, as new Logic; though let not the Reader mistake, I take
invisible as opposed to visible in its latitude, as it takes in both believing
Peter, and the hypocrite Magus; yet so, as the visible Church is so named, to
wit, a true visible Church, from the choicest part, but not as invisible is
opposed to visible, tali modo, both visible and sincere: for the Catholic
Church invisible, is also the Catholic Church visible, to wit, tali modo, in a
sincere profession visible.

CHAP. XIX.
Mr. H. his formal cause of a Church visible, or Church confederating, is
considered.

Mr. H. We have done with the material cause: Now we Survey, par. 1. c. 4. p
45, 46.
come to the formal cause of the visible Church. The faithful, whether they be
seemingly or sincerely such, scattered up and down the earth, are like stones
in the streets, or timber in the field, they may have a communion by faith, by
which they are an invisible Body Mystical, but until they meet together in one
place, and have See Mr. Robinson his error in this. Justific. of Separat. pa.
297.
right to all the Ordinances there, and be confederate by a Church Covenant,
which gives the formality to these Churches, they are not visible Church
members.

Ans. If the faithful scattered in sundry Congregations have an invisible
communion only by faith, and so make up an invisible communion, and an
invisible Mystical Body; then two These of sundry Congregations have as visible
a communion, and so make up as visible a body as th^se of the same Congregation
that meet within the same walls.
Sister-Churches that cannot meet in one place, though they may do all the
duties of Church-gaining one another, as Mat. 18. yet are not a visible body,
no^ their acts, acts of Churchprofession, not are they visible members of the
same Body of Christ, because they partake no^ of the Ordinances within the same
walls, as do members of the same single Congregation: so there is no visible
communion, but within the walls of one Church; which is absurd, and repugnant
to common sense.

2. It is uncharitable, and against the Word, to teach, That when a Church is
dissolved, by no sin and scandal visible, but by persecution or pestilence,
that the dissolved members, though both real and visible converts, have no
right to the Ordinances: for if the formal cause, to wit, their confederacy
into one visible body, as Mr. H. says, be removed, their visible and external
right is removed. The like is to be said of visible professors, and of members
of another Congregation, and known godly sojourners; these Mr. H.
excommunicates for no scandal visible and invisible: for impossible it is that
they can meet together in one place with their own Church, with which only
they are incorporate by this confederacy.

Mr. H. This confederating implies two.

1. The act of mutual engaging, which passes away, arising from the act of
obligation, the state of membership. The nature of incorporating members to
mutual duties will constrain to yield to this.

Ans. 1. An Oath or Covenant is no passing away thing, as Mr. H. says, but
leaves the person under the tie.

2. The state of trying these persons and their seed to be baptized only into
the single Body, is a dream, even to Mr. Robinson, Marrying of Members to one
Congregation only, is a Scriptureless conceit. Mr. Robinson, Justificat. of
Separ. p. 317.
and the engagement that gives them right to Ordinances only with that single
Congregation, and in one place, and with no society else to partake of one
Bread, and of one Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16 17. is a Scriptureless imagination: for
1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. We are baptized all, Jews and Gentiles, by one Spirit into
one Body, (Catholic, not a single Congregation only) and are all made to
drink into one Spirit, in the Lords Supper, even all; not of one single
Congregation only, but of several Congregations, whether they be engaged Mr.
H^. way or not.

Mr. H. The judgment must be of persons free (in regard of humane constraint)
for they may join, or not join to this Congregation, to receive them or not
receive them. 2. It gives power to each over another, to watch over one another.

Answ. Mr. H. makes three properties of this engagement; but he is
sharp-sighted, who can difference the third from the first.

2. Freedom from humane constraint i^ dubious: If from the It is not free to
professors to refuse to be membersof the Congregation in which they were borne
of believing Parents, and baptized, and must reside in a convenient nearness to
the Assembly of Saints.
Christian Magistrate compelling to Elicite acts of the will; Never man, I
think, dreamed of such constraint, as may be laid upon men to believing,
loving, fearing. If it be freedom from compelling the external man to Imperate
acts; our Divines say, The Magistrate may civilly in his way compel to the
means of Salvation, the baptized ones especially, both to hear, and to eat and
drink at the Lords Table in some true Church. If it be freedom from a Law of
God, or the Church constraint, as this it must be, or then nothing is said.

1. God has commanded all to come to the house, Pro. 1. ^0. Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3.
Matthew. 22. 3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 14. 16. And that is a Prophecy to be fulfilled
under the New Testament, Zach. 14. 17. And it shall be that who so will not
come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem, to worship the King,
the Lord of hosts, even upon them there shall be no rain. The English notes
say, it figures the Elects gathering together into a particular Church, to
which every one must reduce himself to partake of the communion of Saints. And
they are also the words of Diodati, and Calvin, Iunius, Piscator, Danaeus, say
the same in sense. It is true, preaching to a particular Church should be
voluntary, but not by such a Covenant, and so all worship should be; and it
were not enough to say, Lord, thou command us to get us to the shepherds
tents, Cant. 1. 7. And to come into Wisdoms house; but we have freedom to enter
Members to this or this, or all the Churches on earth.

2. And it is in all the Churches on earths power to receive us, or not; which
is also false. One is born, baptized, comes to be a visible professor in the
Church of Boston; is not that providential necessity a ground to the Magistrate
to command him to do his duty, and for the Church to constrain him by
Ob^estations, Censures, being born a member, to partake of the Ordinances, as
his duty is. O but he is not satisfied with the Ministry of Boston, but he
has freedom to enter a Member of a Church a hundred miles distant by a new
Church-oath: show a warrant why he ought not to worship the Lord there where
his Calling and Trade is; he must confess Christ before men in all places, it
is not arbitrary then.

3. Not one word of God is alleged, that this engagement Church-duties of
warning, teaching, comforting, rebuking, are by no word of Christ restricted to
one single congregation.
gives power to watch over one another in this Congregation only, and not in
all Congregations where Providence shall dispose he shall be; as if all these
Church-duties to Members of Christ, of warning one another, comforting,
watching over one another, taking care for one another, mourning with those
that mourn, Col. 3. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5, 11, 14. 1 Cor. 12. 26, 27. Heb. 10. 24,
25. and 3. 13. Romans 12. 15. were forbidden as contrary to the Rule of the
Gospel, in order to all precious Churchmembes of other Congregations of which
we are not Members.

Mr. H. There is good cause why visible Saints (u^ supra) who are thus to
engage to watch over one another, should be acquainted Page 47.
with each others fitness, etc. and because the work is weighty, it would be
done with fasting and praying, which is not requisite, when one single Member
is admitted.

Ans. That the thousands baptized of John Baptist, and the three thousand, Acts
2. who were to engage themselves, that is, before they were admitted, could
have acquaintance and Experimental knowledge of the spiritual fitness one of
another before the erecting of a Congregation is warranted by no word of God,
whatever Mr. H. say on the contrary. Page 47, 48.
knowledge of the spiritual fitness one of another, is impossible; and not
only wants the authority of the Word, but is expressly against it; for it was
impossible in some few hours to be done.

2. Ten neighboring sister Churches lying together are obliged to watch over
one another, then they ought, by the Rule of the Gospel, to come under the same
engagement.

Mr. H. An implicit covenanting may be sufficient: as suppose a Congregation
consist of the children of Parents expressly confederate, but vocal and express
confederation comes nearest to the Rule. Mr. R. his bitter clamours, that we
make all other Churches save our own, no Church, will be past.

Ans. The Popish and Lutheran Churches in which there is valid Baptism, in
which a Vow is made to walk in Church-wayes, as observing one another, shall
have the formal cause of true visible Churches, and so must be true visible
Churches; for they have this Covenant implicitly and virtually.

2. How shall we be made from the Scriptures to see that the Baptist, Mar. 1.
5. the Disciples of Christ, who baptized more disciple than John, Jo^ 5. 4. did
tie by Oath one way or another, (and the Covenant being their complete Rule
must be vocal and express) are they so inchurched to engage to these
Church-duties within their own Congregations? the word hints at no such thing.

3. There is a necessity of vocal Covenant always, if it come nerest to the
rule; but where is the rule?

4. What making of matter and form as so described, and what reciding from the
Rule of these Churches in the essentials, is so well known to all, as they must
be most false Churches that are not made of visible converts, which is the
constitution of the Anabaptist Churches: for bitter clamours and unworthy
aspersions, I wish Mr. H. had expressed them, that the Reader might judge. I
judge that the Church of Christ in N. E. makes true the prophecy, That the
wilderness and the desert do there rejoice and blossom as a Rose, Isa. 35.

5. Judicious Mr. Cawdrey cites Dr. Holmes making an explicit Mr. Cawdreys
Review, c. 3. p. 104. Page 48, 49, 50
Covenant necessary.

Mr. H. Cohabitation, which is necessary for our Churches, is such as is fit
for the end, for the dispensing of Ordinances and C^nsures where they may
conveniently meet, Acts 14 27. 1 Cor. 11. 26. and 14. 23. it suffers some
exceptions. The Church may send No Covenant in the N. Testament ties any to
Christian duties in one only Congregation, otherwise than as providential
co^versing with them affords, which is in sister-Churches also.
out some to begi^ ^antations where they want able guides, until they attain to
a Church State. States may be compelled to send men to Sea for traffic and
for war, and yet no prejudice is done to the Rule of Christ, they are said to
cohabit where the place of their abode is in the issue.

Ans. If cohabitation be necessary for the attaining the end; then, as the
Pastor cannot be a non-resident, by necessity of a calling in Trading, neither
can ten godly Merchants be three years absent, as Mr. H. says Solomon's
Merchants were, but they must be non-residents, and neglect Church watching,
and break Covenant, if it be said (as it must be) it should be the Ministers
only calling to reside and watch, but the Merchant has an extraordinary
calling to trade beside.

Ans. This confirms us not a little; no godly visible professors can tie
themselves by Covenant or Oath to exercise the common Christian acts of a
Church member only to such a society, but in an occasional and providential
way: for it is as unlawful to tie Church-worship to one society or place under
How D. Bilson abuses the place. Mat. 18. See Bilson the perfect government of
Christ's Church, c. 4 p. 18, 19, etc. he mistaketh both our conclusion, and our
arguments.
the New Testament, as it was to tie it of old to Bethel and Gilgal, Hos. 4.
15. and 9. 14. and 12. 11. Amos 44. which is a demonstration that a godly
professor carries about a Soul with him stands in need of Church-feeding by
the Lords Supper, and other Church Ordinances in all the Christian world, and
that he is to warn, admonish, comfort all Church members, and to labor to gain
a trespassing brother, not of the single Congregation only whereof he is a
Member, Matthew. 18. and neither Scriptures, nor sound Divinity, nor the Law of
Nature (which is not destroyed by the Gospel) will warrant to limit the word,
Brother, as Mr. H. does, and his Brethren, Matthew. 18. 15 If It is against our
Saviors purpose to limi^ the gaining of a trespassing brother, Mat. 28. to the
only one Congregation of which the offended brother is a member fixedly.
thy brother trespass, if he hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; to a
brother only of the Congregation of which the offended brother is a member; as
if Christ had not set down a rule, Mat. 18. of gaining all brethren within the
single Congregation, or about it; for the word, Brother, is of this latitude,
that it comprehends

1. All that may offend a Brother, that is, one not only within a single
Congregation only, of which the brother offended is a member, but also one of
another Congregation. Now Mr. H. says, ye have no Church power over one of
a^^ther Congregation.

2. He is a Brother whom ye are obliged to admonish, Go tell him.

3. He is a Brother whom thou must labor to gain; Thou have gained thy brother.

4. He is a Brother who is obliged to hear the Church: He will not hear the
Church.

5. He is a Brother who may be cast out, Let him be to thee as a heathen.

6. He is one whose sins ^ay be bound in Heaven, Verse 16, 17.

7. He is a Brother, who if gained, may pray and meet with others in a
Church Way in the name of Christ.

8. He is a Brother, who if he be gained, Christ grants his desire and prayer,
Verse 19, 20.

9. He is a Brother, who is to be pardoned, If he sin against Peter seventy
times seven times, Verse 21, 22.

10. He is a Brother, who ought to forgive his fellow-Brother, as he would have
God to forgive him, Verse 14, 25, 35.

Now it were a foul straitning of the word of Christ, to say these ten agree
only to a Brother in order to another Brother of the same single Congregation,
as if we did owe by Christ's Doctrine in that notable Sermon, Compassion,
Forgiveness, Teaching, Gaining etc. to no Brethren, but to those of the same
Congregation, where of we our selves are members.

2. This Doctrine deprives godly travelers, so journers, savoury The
un^di^ying and cruel inconvenience that come to the souls of believing
merchants, sojourners who are visible Saints, by the Church engagement to one
only single Congregation.
professors, of the Lords Supper, for three, for six years, of the Ordinance of
the Lords Supper, of Church-teaching, Rebuking, Prayer, Church comforts, of all
Church-manifestations, and of all Church communion with Christ, the Head of the
visible Church, of all Church-presence of him that walks in the midst of the
golden Candlesticks, of all Church-influences, of all Sanctuary-beauty, for no
scandal or sin, but only for going about a lawful duty in all the visible
Churches on earth, as is clear Cant. 1. 7. and 2. 1, 2, 3 4. Psalm. 27. 4. and
73. 16, 17. and 84. 4, and 42. 1, 2, 3, 4. Hib. 2. 12. Psalm. 22. 22. and 40, 9,
10. for it cannot take off the Argument to say, The godly professor may have
the same comforts, but in an invisible way, which he has in his own Church, in
his native abode in a visible and Church Way: for, 1. This is to beg the
question, for h^s professed hearing, praying with a foreign Church is as
visible as at home. 2. If Christ no where have deprived a man of the comfort of
the Lords Supper, whithersoever he come and profess himself a visible Saint, no
men on earth can deprive him; but there is no more warrant why a visible Saint
should not every where remember the Lords day by eating, as he may pray every
where in faith holding up pure hands: for as he takes Gods Name in vain, if he
hate to be reformed; so also to banquet with Christ, not discerning the Lords
body.

3. If these foreign Churches, of which he is no member (as Mr. H. says) may
and do as well discern Mr. H. his Marks of a visible Saint, as his own Church,
to wit, after trading among them diverse years, to them he savours as if he had
been with Jesus, p. 14, 15. he abstains from all known sins, p 24. then have
they as good right to tender the Lords Supper to him as his own Church, and he
may have a desire, and the same right both real and visible, that he has to
the Ordinances in his own Congregation; then, as the Eunuch said, Here is
water, so, here is a ^able, and Christ in eating, what should hinder him to
eat? Is not Christ walking beside the golden Candlesticks here as at home?

4. If Providence necessitate him, as he is chased by persecution to one City,
and is banished out of that, that he must fly to another, and from that to
another, and from that to a third, and is providentially necessitated to have
no certain dwelling, as was Abraham, and the Saints case, Heb. 11. 37, 38. 1
Cor. 4. 11. so was Christ's case, Matthew. 8. 20. he must either live by the Rule
of the Gospel, all his life, without Church-Ordinances, or as he comes to ten
sundry Churches visible, he must be ten times, twenty times married unto, and
divorced from the Church, have and lose Church-right to a communion with Christ
in his body and blood, and to the Head Christ, and to all the edifying comforts
of Church-Ordinances.

CHAP. XX.
The Arguments of Mr. H. for a Church Covenant considered and removed.

MR. H. Every spiritual and Ecclesiastical incorporation receives Part 1. C. 4.
Page 50.
its being from a spiritual Combination. So Cities and Towns have their Charter
granted them from King and State, to meet for such ends; it is the Sement that
sodders all. 2. Polished hewn stones give not being to a house, except they be
conjoined, etc. But every particular Church is a City, Heb. 12. 22. A house, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13, 14. 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28. And all
these are particular visible Churches where Pastors and Teachers are set, and
Members k^it together. So Mr. R. Lib. 2. page 302. A Church in an Island is a
little City, a little Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Answ. Mr. H. in the title says, 3. The reasons of the Covenant, and concludes
nothing for a Covenant, but only tells us Saints are the Matter, like scattered
stones, union makes the form; but Union is the result, the Covenant goes
before; The proposition is, Every Corporation receives its being from
Combination: This shall prove no more, but the Congregation is a Congregation
from Union of Members; (this is no conclusion debated by us) and proves as well
that a National Church, a larger Kingdom of Christ, as Rev. 11. 15. Isa. 2. 2.
Egypt and Assyria are made the Lords people visibly considerated, Isa. 19. 25.
and that by one Union, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, The reason for this
Church Covenant from the Privileges of a City is naught, and much against this
Will worship.
by the Covenant of Grace so professed; yea, the invisible Catholic Body, the
Bride the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21. is a spiritual corporation by such an Union.

2. The thing in question is never proved, to wit, that every single
Congregation is made a visible Body within it self, by such a Covenant as the
Members are engaged to watch over only one another of that society, have a
Church right to Ordinanc^s, Word, Seals, censures, only with the Members of
that one society that meet within the walls in one house, and with no other all
the earth over.

3. The comparison of a City to a State holds not; See Mr. Cawdry. Cities, 1.
have different Charters and Privileges in Cawdery review. c. 104. Page 106,
107.
measures, trading, selling. 2. Different public Rents, Burrough-Lands. 3.
Different Governments, some by Major and Aldermen, as royal Burghs: some far
otherwise. And so 4. Free Citizens in London, not free Citizens in York, and
here is some specifical difference (as it were) in Laws and Freedom^. But it is
a poor begging of the question without probation to say, that single
Congregations have these four differences; for all Congregations visible have
1. The same Charter, the Covenant of Grace, one Faith and Doctrine of the
Gospel. 2 One inheritance and hope of glory, Ephesians. 4. 3. One and the same
visible Head Christ. 4. The same Baptism, and are all visible brethren and
members, having the same right to the Seals all the world over, without any new
Church Covenant. Phoebe, Iustus, Epaphroditus, Romans 15. 1. Col. 4. 10. Ephesians. 6.
21. Are brethren (visible professors, the distinction of saluting brethren, and
of Church-brethren must not be taken up on our brethrens word) having right by
Letters of Recommendation to Seals, as Rutherfurd due right of Pres. par. 2.
page 328, 329. Mr. John Cotton his judicious tractate of the keys. chapter 3. page
17. The way of the Churches of N. E. chapter 6. sect. 1. page 103 and sect. 2. 16.
Mr. Hooker Survey par. 3. c. 2. p. 10.
Mr. Cotton teaches: now Letters of Recommendation, as I prove, (and Mr. H.
never lets on him that he did read it) yea, nor do men or Angels give, but only
declare right, that brethren Pastors had before in all Churches to Baptism, to
partake of the Seals, otherwise they cannot eat the Lords Supper in another
congregation, contrary to both the truth and Mr. Cotton, and the way of the
Churches of N. E. except they swear or engage themselves members to all the
Churches about where they should and ought occasionally to receive the Seals,
and partake of Church-comforts. But this Mr. H. flatly contradicts; let them
agree among themselves: now such an engaging being a binding of themselves to
impossibilities, that they shall discharge duties of watching over all, as over
their door-neighbours of the same flock, is unpossible, and so unlawful; no
authority on earth can take says, or the holy and blameless visible profession
thereof from a visible professor; and to whatever Table of the Lord he comes,
or ordinances of ministerially preached promises, they are his by his faith
visibly professed; Mr. H. must show one inhibition of Christ to debar any
visible son from the fathers bread; if then the argument be drawn from civil
Corporations (as they cry out against this argument in us for Provincial and
National Churches) it must be this, as every incomplete Corporation or Lane in
London consenting to receive such a man an Inhabitant and Member of that Lane,
does not make the man so received a free Citizen of London, for that he was
before they received him, when he was a member of another Lane: and every City
admitting a man to be a free Citizen of London, does not make him a subject of
the Kingdom of England, for that he was before he was a Citizen: so neither
does every single Church receiving a member, make him for that a member of the
visible Church: for 1. he was before (we suppose) baptized, and both a real and
a visible Saint, and had Church right to partake Chapter 6. Sect. 1. Page 103. The
texts that call the Church a City, are nothing for the Congregational
engagement; The Apostle notes, Ephesians. 4. the Catholic Elect Church: as also
Heb. 12. The way of the Churches of N. E. C. III. sect. 1. page 53. Ibid. chapter
4. sect. 6. page 82. Mr. H. Survey par. 1. c. 2. page 15. Theodoret. electos;
Occumenius, fideles quorum nomina scripta sunt in libro vitae. Calvin.
Marlorat. C^^lestem ergo Jerusalem intelligit quae per totum mundum extruenda
erat quemadmodum Angelus f^niculum ejus ab Orient usque in Occidentem
exte^dit. Piscat. Qui electi sunt ad vitam aeternam, Luke 10. English
Annotations, Diodati The Universal Church. Pareus Com. Est igitur Ecclesia
invisibilis electorum quam sanctam Catholica^ credimus in symbol. Sed an omnes
Hebraei erant primogeniti, electi, hoc non dicit, sed ad eos accessisse.
Cajetan. Ecclesia^ Apostolorum and Discipulorum immediatorum Christi, qui
conscripti sunt in libro divinae praedestinationis. Estius. Filios Dei per
adoptionem, qui sunt Electi.
of the Lord Jesus, and the bread, not as a seal of our communion with the
Member^ of his own church only, but of all the Churches of the Saints, says
the Church of N. E. The argument is not unlike this: Whatever constitutes
Socrates a single person, does also constitute him a man, which is most false.
2. The Texts in the assumption are widely mistaken, Heb. 12. 22, 23. But you
are come to Mount Ziou, that is, to a single Independent Congregation; nay read
more, v. 23. To the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven; that is, to a company of visible saints, of which seven may
be a Church (says the way of the Churches of N. E.) and these sometimes (say
they and M. H.) hypocrites, such as Judas and Magus: If so, then these must be
called the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the general Assembly
of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven. It may grieve the godly,
that the word of God should be so perverted: Oecumenius, and Thtophylact and
Galvin, Piscator, Marlor^^, English Divines, Diedati, Pare^s, as also
Cajetanus, Esthius, call them the universal church of the elect.

The place 1 Timothy 3. 15. is not to be limited to the Church Beza in locum.
Ecclesi^m corpori comparat, cujus anima est Christus. Calv. Particula
universalis (omnes) non sic ut omnes homines in Christum credant, hoc eni^^
Synecdochice de praedestinatis duntaxat a Paulo dicitur, ^i namque soli in
unitatem fidei perueviunt, qui ab aeterno electi sunt, Romans 8. 30.
of Ephesus, Pareus loquitur de columna ministeriali, of a ministerial Church
that preaches the Gospel, and so its nothing to this purpose; Calvin, Beza,
Cr^^iger, he means the Church indefinitely whithersoever Timothy should come,
let it be a particular Congregation, it is made up of preaching Pastors, who
bear up the truth, by the preached Gospel, as the pillars (say Piscator and
Pareus) bear up the house.

The place Ephesians. 4. 13, 16. is meant not of a visible Congregation, whose
members are Magus and Judas; for Christ leading captivity captive, and
ascending, gave not Apostles and Teachers finaliter, for the saving and
perfecting of the visible body as visible in Mr. H. his way (which must be
said, if any thing be proved against us) but of the body which is visible, but
not as visible, but as he saved the Church, inlived by Christ, says Beza: He
speaks, says Calvin, of the end of the Ministry, Until we all meet in the
unity of faith; not that all men shall believe in Christ, but he speaks by a
Syn^cdoche (says he) of the pr^destinate only; for they only come to the unity
of faith who are chosen to glory. Zanchius and grave and learned D. Bodius of
Zanch. in loc. Constat (oorpus hoc) ex E^ectis tanquam membris coagmentatis
Christo per fidem. Nostras To. Bodi^^ a Trocheregia vir nobili genere na^us
Com. and Praelection. in Ephesians. 4. v. 12, 13. page 511. 512. Haec p^rro Sanctorum
compactio sive coagmentatio bifariam promovetur. Primo, cum nova subinde membra
ad corporis hujus compagem adsciscuntur, fide donantur, and Christo capiti per
fidem inseruntur. Deinde, quando jam vocati and Christo ins^^i in fide and
charitate magis magisque proficiunt. Siquidem utroque hoc modo corpus hoc
mysticum ad suam perfectionem tendit. page 513. Donec omnia membra (ergo
Catholicam Eccle^^^^ militante^ intelligit) non modo ad corporis hujus mystici
compagam and communionem vocata su^^int, ver^m etiam debitum spiritualis illius
staturae complementum acceperint. Pareus Com. in Loc. Minus videtur fieri posse
ut tam divers^ sortis, nationis, conditionis homines in un^ corpus coeant.
Trochrigge in his learned Commentary, as also Piscator, Bullinger, Sarcerius,
Marloratus, Rollocus, Diodati, English Divines, with the Text expound the place
of the true mystical body.

For 1. Christ ascended for that body, and sent Apostles not for Magus, and
such of Mr. Hookers visible saints.

2. He intends the perfecting and edifying of that body, verse 12. and Apostles
and Pastors are theirs, and for their salvation, 1 Cor. 4. 21. 2 Cor. 4. 15.

3. Christ is the saving head only of that body, and the visible Church is
never called his body in Scripture, because visible, but by a figure, because
of the lively members among them, drawing life from the head Christ, Ephesians. 1.
22, 23. Ephesians. 4. 16. Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18.

4. He speaks of that body which shall come with all the saints to the unity of
faith.

5. Which grows up into a perfect man, etc. which is a living body, from which
I excommunicate Magus and Judas. And for the place 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. It Is not a
single Congregation The visible Church, because visible is never in scripture
called the body of Christ. The body, 1 Cor. 12. is the Catholic Church, and
how. Mr. Cotton Keys, c. 3. 17. Way of the Churches chapter 6. sect. 1. page 103.
visible; show in all the Scripture where a single Congregation, yea, and every
single Congregation never so few (for were it but of seven, or ten, or twenty,
it is an instituted politic Church (though wanting Pastors to our brethren) is
called Christ's, the body of Christ, as this Church. So Calvin, Beza, Martyr,
N^^ parvae consolatio hac; it is no small comfort, that the Church is called
Christ's, because it is his body: for as Cyrillus says, Christ, assumed the
nature common to all. 2. All the members of the body being many are one body,
so also is Christ: yea, th^se many are men of diverse cases, diverse nations
(says P^rous) yea Jews and Gentile^, verse 13. And therefore this is the
Catholic visible body. 3. It is the body, that have been all made to drink
into one spirit, in the Lords Supper; but this must be the many members of
diverse Congregations, 1 Cor. 10. 16. as our brethren confess. 4. It is the body
that lives by the spirit of Christ, (...). 12. For when Christians are said to
make one body, it is not understood of a politic body only, but (says Martyr)
of the spiritual and secret body of Christ which aims at life eternal, and
Martyr in Loc. Cum Christiani dicantur ^num corpus efficere, (...) tantum
politicum Christi corpus intelligitur, sed spirituale and ar^anum Christi
corpus quod ad vitam aeternamtendit, habetque communia hac omnia, Dium,
Christum, Spiritum Sanctum, (...) Dei, gratiam, sacramenta, ex quibus liquet
(...) posse in corpore Christi membra arida and mortua esse.
has all th^se common, God, Christ, the Holy Ghost, the word of God, Grace,
the Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, the Lords Supper, called by a Synecdoche, a
drinking of the Wine in the Supper; into one spirit, which excludes not the
eating of the bread, v^ 13. and so sometimes he speaks of his body in regard of
its parts, to wit, of single congregations where the sacraments are
administrate, and where there are Prophets, Watchmen, Pastors, Ruling Elders,
as eyes and ears, yet not fixed and married by a Church-Oath to one only single
congregation, and all along as of the Catholic visible body. And it is true
which Mr. R: grants, that a Church in an Island is a little City; but so as it
is a member of the Catholic visible body, that has no charters and
privileges spiritual different from these of the whole.

Mr. H. Arg. 2. They who have mutual power each over other to command and
constrain in cases whereas they were free before, must by mutual engagement be
made partakers of that power. But such are the Church of believers. Ergo. Part
1. page 51, 52, 53.


The second part of the Assumption is clear by Matthew. 18. where a legal order
is set, by which brethren only of the same Church ought to exercise power one
over another, not over infidels, nor yet with other Christians; for I rebuke a
Christian of another Church, I cannot call the Church; he departs the place and
refuses to come; but I may in a legal way convince and bind Archippus, for he
is a brother; and Mr. R. says, if the classis will not censure him, the
congregation may reject him. Learned Whitaker says, That each of the
congregation or counsel has power over the Apostle Peter, as a brother to
censure him; so says Mr. R.

Ans. The conclusion denied is not proved, but this, Ergo They must by mutual
engagement be made partakers of this power. The question is, whether this
Church Covenant be the formal As Mr. H. seldom proves what is denied; so not
any of his arguments conclude that we are of no members made visible members of
the Church only by this Church Covenant.
cause of membership visible to and in this only Congregation, and no other
visible Church on earth.

2. The proposition is false; for before that engagement so monopolized and
restricted to that one only Congregation (which were Will Worship) these
brethren being born of believing Parents, and also solemnly by their covenant
in baptism were engaged visible members of all the visible Church on earth, and
of this of Boston, and these round about (where by providence they dwell) they
visibly professing the Gospel. I deny not but it is lawful for a sojourning
godly professor, to promise to watch over these of the Congregation where he
sojourns: but not in in all cases expedient that he multiply twenty
engagements, and it may be twenty oaths, or solemn promises in twenty sundry
congregations; so may he engage for a Family, Camp, College, Ship. And it is
false to say,

1. You only are my Church brethren, Matthew. 18. The Churchcovenant destroys
all Church Communion.


2. It is false to say, I have Church Power to the Seals here only.

3. I am made, by this engagement, a Member of Christ visible, whereas I was
not so before.

4. It is false, that when I remove to another Church from this, that I los^
all Church-right to seals, all Church Power to gain brethren to Christ there.

And 5. it is false, that when I leave this Church, I am unchurched, no
fellow-citizen with the Saints, no Churchmember, and yet I was never
excommunicate.

3. The Assumption is most false, That by Matthew. 18. a brother Vid. Chamier. l.
6. c. 6. loc. com. p. 280.
is to gain only a brother of that congregation whereof he is a Member: Mr. H.
aims not to prove that, If thy brother trespass, etc. that our Savior means
only of that independent What power one member or one Church has over another.
congregation, whereof the brother is a Member engaged to that only
congregation, where the gaining and offended brother is a Member. I have
alleged ten Reasons on the contrary. Mr. H. his Reason is against himself and
the Text, as well as against us. You (says he) rebuke one of another
congregation, he will not hear you; tell the other Church, he departs the
place. What then? his Church he leaves should proceed to censure him by Matthew.
18. And may not a brother of the same Church refuse to hear also, and depart
the place? and the place of Matthew. 18. (say we) proves that both are to be
censured by their own respective Churches, as obstinate offenders.

4. Mr. R. says indeed, That one Congregation has no power of Jurisdiction
over another, but each may complain of another to a Presbytery, or to a Church
above both, else the remedy of Christ to remove scandals between Church and
Church, is too narrow, and very nothing; and sister-Churches offending each
against others, are not to rebuke, and labor (by Mr. H. his way) to gain one
another to Christ; and nothing can be more contrary to love and edification,
th^n this, and more contrary to our Saviors intent, Mat. 18.

5. What is the formal binding and loosing which one Congregation has over
another, or one Member has over another of the same, or of diverse
Congregations, the Scripture is silent: The Churches of diverse Congregations
lay on burdens and bind other Churches under them, Act. 15. 28. and command
and enjoin the things to be believed and done: So Mr. Mr. Cotton the keys of
the kingdom. chapter 6. p. 25.
Cotton. But that one Churchmember may bind and loose, is unknown to the
Scripture: for you may say so, one Subject may bind and loose, forgive debts
and bloodshed, because he may complain, or forbear to complain to the
Magistrate, and so one Church may bind or loose another Church, and one For
one member or one Church to complain of another, is no binding or loosing, such
as is Mat. 18. as Mr. H. says.
Member may bind or loose a whole Church, and many Churches, by complaining or
not complaining to sound Neighbour-Churches, whose it is to unchurch by
non-communion, or to forbear.

6. Mr. H. proves not that Members have not power over each other by this
engagement, because before the engagement they are free, and none can compel
them to be Church Members, or to be baptized, Luke 7. True, but if they reside
and refuse to join to the true Church, and so deny Christ before men, and being
professors, if they refuse to join to the true Church of Christ, they are to be
esteemed as Heathens or Publicans; as the Lawyers who refused to be baptized,
despised the counsel of God, Luke 7. 30. and the Gospel-threatnings for
refusing to come to Wisdoms banquet, Prove. 1. 20, 24. and 9. 3, 4. Luke 14.
18. are no less bindings and constrainings in their kind, than Church-rebukes
of one to another, and Excommunication. Of this before. It is probable and
more, That a godly Christian conqueror may hinder conquered Heathen to
blaspheme Christ, and adore Idols, and compel them to hear the Gospel.

7. It a wonder that Mr. H. should cite Whitaker, or any of our Divines, who
are all for the power of Presbyteries, Synods, yea of an Oecumenick Council,
from Mat. 18. which he himself disclaims as an invention of men.

Mr. H. Arg. 3. Voluntary combination makes a man a Member Par. 1. page 53, 54.
of a Presbyterian Church, as Mr. R. Lib. 2. page 320. th^n must voluntary
combining make one a Member of a Congregation.

Answ. Still the point in question is never touched. Will this prove that
voluntary engagement is the formal cause of a visible Church? so Mr. H. tells
us, chapter 4. page 45. Of the formal Presbyterial and congregational churches in
general, are of divine institution, and yet according to their locality, number
of members, etc. are only things of order, etc.
cause of a visible Church: Nor does voluntary combining make any so a Member
of this Presbyterial Church; as he is not also a Member of the whole visible
Church, or as he has no Church right by divine institution to Ordinances and
Seals in another Presbyterial and Congregational Church, as this way of Mr. H.
teaches: for, as I say in that place, Presbyterial Churches and Congregational
in their being are of divine institution, but in their local bounds, and
determitate number of Members, they are things of convenience, of order, and
providential necessity, not of divine institution; and the consequence is poor
and nothing; for that is a huge mistake of Mr. H. An implicit Covenant Par. 1.
p. 47. The implicit Church Covenant is but an imagination.
is, when professors in practice do that whereby they make themselves to walk
in such a society without any verbal profession; for then a sojourning believer
partaking in forty Churches of the Seals in some few years, occasionally does
enter forty implicit covenants, does forty times unchurch himself, and lose
and take up of new his Burges-ticket and Church-right, and lose it again: For
Mr. Cotton, and the Way of the Churches of N. E. teach, That such a man an
hundred times The way of the churches of Christ in N. E. chapter 6. sect. 1. p.
203. and sect. 203. Mr. Cotton keys, ch 4. page 17.
partakes of the Seals in some few years, and may lawfully do it, as a son
coming occasionally to ten sundry Tables in ten cities or ten families, which
do equally belong to his rich and potent father, as he providentially comes
along; yet is he not ten times for that made a son and member of his fathers
great family; for his one and the same numerical sonship gives him right to all
the ten tables: So one and the same visibly professed sonship gives to a
sojourning believer the same Church-right to be fed at all the Tables, to all
Church ordinances in ten hundred visible Churches all the earth over; Letters
of recommendation do declare, but not create his Church-right to Christ and ten
hundred Lords Suppers; and it is a dream, that the practicing and partaking of
the Lords Supper gives ten hundred new combinations and fancied formalities of
Membership to all the Churches, whether Congregational or Presbyterial. Say one
be necessitated to dwell in his fathers heritage, and must be a Member of that
Church; What Scripture does loose him from the same occasional duties he owes
to the Church from whence he departed, as now being no fixed Member thereof?

Mr. H. 4 Arg. That society of men who may enjoy such privileges spiritual
into which none are admitted without the approbation of the whole, that society
must be in a special combination; for such an act argues a combined power,
which the whole has, and not any Member alone; and that they cannot have but
by their agreement. But the Congregation is such. They who have power to
choose, have power to reject their Officers, who offer themselves to be Members.

Ans. If none may be admitted without the approbation of the whole
Congregation, then may no visible Saints, Members of sister visible Churches,
be admitted to Church-ordinances Pastoral, hearing, seals, rebukes, comforts,
prayers in a Churchway, but by some Covenant one or other made between the
Church and these strangers that come to partake: Let Scripture speak, if
communion of Saints be not here enough.

2. This fell from a sleeping pen, and what the conclusion is who can tell?
It Is far from the question: for the conclusion is, Ergo, the Members of the
Congregation are combined. Why not? Valeat totum. And the whole Church must
admit the communicants the many thousands; then ten or twelve thousand of
Jerusalem must all be acquainted with the visible Saintship of each other; yea,
women who have taken the Church Covenant as well as men: then can none hear,
nor partake of Churchprayers and seals in another Congregation, without the
privity, and conscience and consent of all the Members, suppose they be ten
thousand, and without the consent of the whole: now women are confederate
Members as well as men.

Mr. H. Arg. 5. Christian affection makes not the Church; for it is in such as
never saw other.

Ans. It proves nothing: they may be Members of the visible Catholic Church,
who never saw one another in the face, It is unpossible that the whole Church
can be acquainted with the Church-hearing of every stranger visible Saint, who
comes to join from the Neighbour-churches. See Jam. 2. 2. 1 Cor. 10. 23, 24.
Luke 4. 16. Act. 13. 14, 15.
Prove. 11. 15. Isa. 2. 1, 2. and 19. 25. Psa. 22. 27, etc.

2. Cohabitation (says Mr. H.) and meeting in one place, Page 54, 55.
makes not a Church; for Turks may meet to hear the Word, 1 Cor. 14. Ergo,
covenanting must be the formal of a Church.

Ans. 1. Diverse other things are required to the essence of a visible Church,
as we shall hear.

2. All is beside the question, we dispute not now the essence of a
Congregation.

CHAP. XXI.
Whether Mr. Hooker does prove this Conclusion (which Mr. R. never said, nor
wrote, nor thought) That Baptism gives formality, or makes a Member of a
visible Church.

Mr. H. If there be a Church, and so Members before Baptism, Mr. H. Survey,
par. 1. ch, 19. p. 55.
then Baptism cannot give formality; for forma is causal, and before formatum.
But the Church now considered as totum essentiale, is before Baptism. For
Ministers are before Baptism, else Baptism may be administered lawfully before
by such as are not Rulers nor Pastors, which is denied by Orthodox Divines, and
none can give a call to Ministers, but only a Church of believers. Mr. H.
without any ground ascribes to Mr. R. that he makes Baptism the formal cause
of visible membership.


Ans. Its a conclusion not ingenuously forged, as if I made Baptism the
specific form of Membership visible; he ought to have cited my words. By
Baptism (I say) we are received solemnly into the visible Church; and Baptism
is a seal of our entry into Christ's visible Body, as swearing to the colors
enters a Soldier a member to the Army; and, we teach not that Baptism
constituteth the Church visible simply as the Church, its a seal of a visible
profession.

I distinguish the simple being of a visible Member actu primo; such are
Infants born within the covenant visibly made to parents, the promise is made
to Church Members, Genesis 17. 7. Acts 2. 39. from the solemn entry and admission
into the visible Church.

2. I distinguish between simple being of a Member, and actual solemn communion
or visible profession: So speaks the renowned Due Right of Presbyt. par. 2. q.
2. page 210. and 211. and 218. Synod at Westminst. of Great Brit. Conf. c. ^8:
p. 58. Ib. Catech. larger p. 137. Calvin advers. Anabaptist. art. 2. Homo in
communionem Ecclesiae per baptismum cooptatur. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 15.
sect. 15. Est Confessionis nostrae symbolum -- ^otestamur nos in Ecclesiam Dei
ingredi, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Bucan. loc. 47. q. 53. In unum corpus (^o) baptizati
sumus, 1 Cor. 12. Tilen. Syntag. disp. 59. th. 4. In familiam patris coelestis
cooptati per baptismum. Synops. purior. Theol. disp. 44. th. 34. In Ecclesiam
visibilem and particularem insertio. Beza lib. quest. p. 150. Christianos tum a
reliquis hominibus sejungit, tum inter se quasi unum sub eodem capite corpus
consociat, ut Apost. 1 Cor. 12. 12. Pareus in catech. q. 69. ar. 2. page 387.
Tertius finis, ut sit symbolum ingressus and receptionis in Ecclesiam, quia
Deus omnes Ecclesiae suae cives vult hoc modo recipi. Pet. Mart. com. in Romans
6. Inferi autem nos visibili Sacramento (Baptismi) in Christum and Ecclesiam
declaratur hoc loco.
Assembly, so Calvin, Bucan, Tilen, Professors of Leyden, Beza, Ursine,
Tr^l^atius, Pet. Martyr, Iunius, Pareus, Waleus: its a seal for our solemn
admission, and solemn ingraffing and adopting into the visible Church, 1 Cor.
12. 13. For by one spirit we are baptized into one body, etc.

1. The conclusion is fancied, and nothing against me, who teach, That Baptism
is the door, way and means of our solemn installing into actual communion with
the visible teaching Ministerial Church, (which Arminians and Socinians deny)
Ergo, must Baptism be before the Ministers?

2. This fancied homogeneous Church visible of only believers, can be no
politic Church, and that in ordinary to Christ's second coming, which calls
Ministers, for Ministers did baptize this Church; then must the effect, to wit,
called Ministers, be before, and that ordinarily the creating cause, to wit,
the Church of believers who made them Ministers, a dream: If this homogeneous
Church be a number of unbaptized believers, (and such Pagans they must be, for
Mr. H. says, They are a born Church, before their fathers Baptizers) then must
unbaptized children (a strange Church) call and give Ministerial being, and
that ordinarily, to their fathers, and choose out of their own unbaptized body
their own Pastors not yet baptized: and who baptized these unbaptized? not the
unbaptized Church, nor themselves. Mr. H. I judge would deny both.

3. As to that, Whether the Church or the Ministry be first, it is sure, Adam
and Evah, as men, were before the Word: if The ministry must be before the
church of believers.
any say, They being created according to the Image of God, were created a
Church; yet some priority there is of the subject, before the concreated Law:
but sure they were not created a visibly professing Church, and therefore the
Word, as preached in Paradise by the Lord the first Minister, Genesis 3. 15, 16.
must be before Adam and Evah as a visibly professing Church. For, the seed is
before the tree, the means before the end, the father before the child, and so
some Ministry, ordinary or extraordinary begetting, there must be, before the
Church begotten. Who baptized John Baptist? or if he was at all baptized, is
not much. But that the Church in the ordinary way of Christ is before the
baptizing and begetting Ministry, is wild Divinity.

Mr. H. If Baptism cannot be before a Ministerial Church, nor Par. 1. p. 55, 56
a Ministerial Church before a Congregational Church, which only can call them
to be Ministers; then such a Church is much more before Baptism. For before the
coming of some godly zealous Christian and Scholar into a country where there
are a company of Pagans converted, they may join in Church Fellowship, and call
this man lawfully according to God, to be their Minister, therefore there is a
Church before a Minister, and so before Baptism.

Ans. 1. Mr. H. gives an extraordinary instance of his own devising, without
Scripture; and of this he frames a fixed ordinary Rule, May not converted
Pagans, which only (says he) can call Ministers, call this Christian Scholar
to be their Minister according to God? No, say we,

1. God never did it, nor is there any Scripture Proof for it.

2. Why does Mr. H. frame a new instance of his own, and pass by the Lords way?
For God sends not private men, or Christian unofficed Scholars (or if he do,
their extraordinary Mr. H. his calling of a Christian scholar to be an
unbaptized minister by unbaptized Pagans conve^ted; a supposition that proves
nothing.
sending makes them public Pastors and Prophets, not the people) but he sent
Philip an Evangelist, and after Peter and John to Samaria, Act. 8. Paul to
Macedonia, Act. 16. and his own Ministers, Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22.
Paul and Barnabas, men in office, some more than zealous Christians and
Scholars to the Gentiles, Act. 13. Jonah to Niniveh, Ananias to baptize Paul,
Jon. 3. Act. 9.

3. Does not Mr. H. dress up a providence of a Christian Scholar sent to
converted Pagans, and must they be made the ordinary and only Church who can
call Ministers? and this Scholar being unbaptized himself, must as the married
Pastor in the ordinary way of Christ baptize to his dying day others, and his
calling must be null (say our Brethren) except that only Answer to 32
questions, q. 20. p. 67.
Church call him; and according to the ordinary Rule of Christ, he must be all
his life unbaptized (which must be a reputing of Baptism, with the Famil^st, a
thing indifferent) rather than he own a foreign jurisdiction (as Mr. Lockier
speaks) so as to be baptized by a Pastor of another Church.

Mr. H. If Baptism give the form to visible Membership, then Page 56.
while that remains valid, as it does in excommunicated persons, and when the
Church is dissolved, visible Membership must remain; for where the form is, the
formatum, the thing having such a form must be also: for, Relata se mutuo
ponunt and t^llunt.

Ans. The conclusion is fancied, and nothing against me. 2. There be two things
in baptized Members.

1. God is their God, of Egypt and Assyria, fathers and sons under the New
Testament, as the Prophecy is, Isa. 2. 1, 2. and 19. 25. and 60. 1, 2, 3. Rev.
11. 15. 2. Infants are holy as the root, 1 Cor. 7. 13, 14. Romans 11. 16. and it
must be cruel divinity to say, That fathers and feed broken off an Independent
Church through persecution, and no sin in them, are by the Lord cast out of
visible covenanting with God, and from Membership and Church right to the
Seals: nor is Baptism any ways removed.

2. There is the solemnity of admission by Baptism in the excommunicate; this
is hurt: but its no more to me the formal cause of Membership, than the
ceremony of Coronation, or the delivery of a Sword, is the specific form of a
King, and of a Major: and therefore all is granted, and Mr. H. proves nothing.

M. H. Baptism is but a separable accident to the covenant, its Surv^y part. 1.
c 7. page 74.
efficacy may be hindered by the unworthy receiver, and yet it remains in its
own nature to the excommunicate and dissolved member, for the form can never be
removed from the thing formed. If to be the eldest son be the formal cause of
possession, it could never have been taken away. But to be a well-deserving
heir, is that which gives formality of possession.

Ans. 1. It is a wonder that M. H. cannot find valid arguments to bear a free
conclusion. For to me Baptism is not a means of a Church Membership simply, but
of a Churchmember tali modo, that is, of a member conspicuously and solemnly
differenced from a Pagan.

2. It is bad Divinity to join the nocent excommunicate man with the innocent
dissolved member.

3. It is a naughty argument to prove that Baptism is a separable accident of
the covenant: why? because its efficacy may be hindered by unbelief: for the
efficacy of any thing is the actus secundus, the operation of it, not its
essence; so he may prove that Christ the essential subject of the Gospel is a
separable accident How Baptism is hurt in the excommunicate.
of the Gospel and covenant of Grace, because both the efficacy of the Gospel
and of the Redeemer, by men's unworthiness and unbelief is hindered.

4. He concludes not so much as his own fansied conclusion; to wit, this only,
ergo the efficacy of baptism is not the specified form of visible membership;
valeat totum: what Dreamer said any such thing? it is sure baptism in fieri, as
it is administrate and professed, is the means of the excommunicate man's solemn
installing and engaging to be a follower of Christ: and by the scandal that
brings on excommunication baptism as professed and as binding is so far hurt as
the Covenant-Baptismal is violated: and if the man be excommunicate for
Apostasy, then it is disputable whether Baptism be not quite undone.

5. It is weak moral Philosophy which Mr. H. adds, that well deserving in an
heir gives formality to possession. Well deserving gives just and Law-right to
possession in the heir: But he is a weak Lawyer who would so plead; the
innocent Traveller believing in God has due deserving to his own purse, which
yet is in the bloody Robbers pocket. Why Mr. H. says he has well deserving,
which (says he) is the formal cause of possession, and so he must have
possession, for the formal cause cannot be separated from formatum. And so
godly David unjustly expelled from his Kingdom for many years, yet deserving
well, must have right both to possess his Kingdom, and not possess it, for if
he have the formal cause of possession, he must have possession when he is
expelled. Of the Church of Rome. 3. Arg. page 59 Iunius lib. de Eccles. c. 17.
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 2. sect. 1. Baptismum Deus primo illic conservavit
faederis testimonium. -- Sect. 12. Cum ergo Ecclesiae titulum non simpliciter
volumus concedere Papistis, non ideo Eccles^a: apud eos esse inficiamur.
Whitaker Controv. 2. q. 3. c. 2. Rivetus to. 3. tract. 2. q. 7. In corpore agro
peste insecto adhuc aliqua obscura Ecclesiae vestigia observamus, Scriptural
cet sulummodo occultata ibi rem insit, itemque Baptismus, quamvis variis
additionibus corruptus, ita ut si aliquid Ecclesiae ibi residuum sit, id fiat
ideo quod aliquid de notis nostris ibi supersit.


Mr. H. It shall follow that the Church of Rome is a true Church, for all the
members of that Church have true baptism, which is the formal cause of a true
Church: but that is false, that that Church is a true Church.

Ans. The conclusion of the connex proposition is nothing against me, who deny
Baptism to be the formal cause of Membership.

2. Such a Baptism that is valid, as touching the substance of the seal, as is
in Rome, such a Church according to the Metaphysick entity and being of a
Church, is Rome a Ministerial Church, teaching necessary fundamentals, though
darkning and contradicting all; but it is not morally a true Church, but
leprose and unclean. See what Iunius, Whitaker, Calvin and Rivetus say
hereupon: Mr. H. is far from their sound expressions; if this be true, then to
Iezabel and seducing Teachers, who are under the Church Covenant, the formal
cause of membership must appertain, and they must be Church Members, and must
be tolerate, till they be judicially tried, and censures applied, so Mr. H.
Survey. par. 1. c. 2. page 29, 30.
and Church privileges bestowed on them at the command of Christ. So also Mr.
H. Par. 3. c. 3. page 11, 12.
So visible non-converts, and swine adorned with Pearls, contrary to Christ's
command, Matthew. 7. 6. and yet keeping the essential form of visible Saints,
must be visible Converts. Which is a contradiction.

Mr. H. The seal of our incorporation, which is latter and posterior to the
incorporation cannot be the form of it; for the Sacrament is not appointed to
make a thing that was not, but to confirm that was; or it does not give, but
confirm grace. But such is Baptism.

Ans. The conclusion is not against me.

2. Observe that Mr. H. sides with Arminians and Socinians, Mr. H. makes
Sacraments mere and naked signs.
who deny the seals to be exhibitive signs, and make them mere signs: but seals
used in faith, both confirm the former grace, and add increase of grace.
Baptism seals that union with the visible Church, which was actu primo in
Infants, being born federally holy, Romans 11. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 14. and is a way and
means of one more solemn installing in the visible Church; as the receiving of
the Keys of a Castle, both confirms the covenant of the Princes giving of the
Castle to the receiver, and does more solemnly authorize the man as Captain of
the Castle. The like may be said of the press-money received by the soldier,
who before had given up his name to the Captain, and that by covenant.

Mr. H. The Church was visible, when there was no seal, neither Arg. 5.
Circumcision nor Baptism; therefore these do not constitute it, nor any member
thereof, Genesis 17 10, 11.

Ans. 1. These five Arguments Mr. H. borrowed from the Answ. to 32. Quest. Q.
4. page 12, 13, 14. Baptism is a seal of grace and privileges which were
before Baptism was.
brethren, but weakened them by an unjust conclusion, which I own not, nor any
of our brethren. This argument also is apt to destroy all the seals; for there
was a Church of visible regenerate persons, and of such as by faith saw Christ's
day in Abraham's house, Genesis 12. and as yet neither was there Circumcision, nor
Passover, nor Baptism: will it hence follow, that Baptism is essentially no
seal of regeneration, nor of any covenant or covenant-Grace, because covenant,
covenant-grace, visible membership, and all these were before either
circumcision or baptism? but sacred signs are seals of graces and privileges
going before these signs, both in time and nature.

Circumcision so shall essentially be no seal of the covenant, nor of the
righteousness of faith, contrary to Genesis 17. 7. Romans 3. 11. For there was a
people visibly in covenant, and Abraham was righteous before that circumcision
was instituted. But nothing follows, but only baptism does not seal our union
with Christ, and solemn entry into his Church-visible, until the Lord institute
water and sprinkling therewith, and stamp them by his Divine Authority, to
seal these graces and privileges.

CHAP. XXII.
Whether profession makes a member of the Church visible. So Mr. H. page 60.

FOr the better understanding of the question, Church-right to membership, and
to Ordinances and Seals must be considered.

1. As it is in, and referred to the professor himself; and then A necessary
discourse how profession gives right to membership, how not.
the question is upon what ground may the man himself challenge a room in the
visible house, and the seals: now profession, as profession is not a ground,
for then a man should be formally made a visible member, and be fed as one of
the flock, and be externally called (which are finaliter, and in themselves
saving mercies) because he professes his desire to be fed, and to have the
Gospel sent unto him.

But 1. there is no such word nor promise: (do this, and profess so and so, and
you shall be made a visible member.)

2. To have right true and real to Membership and to Ordinances, is to be
called of God in a Church Way, from sin to grace and glory. So (...) and (...),
the Church-visible, Profession as profession gives no pro^ right to (...) and
mem^.
and the visibly called, are the same almost. Now no man has right, true and
real to membership and seals, and to be called of a God in a Church Way by the
preached Gospel, because he professes that he desires to be called; but the
whole right and ground here is the Lords free grace, sending the Gospel to whom
he will, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. Deuteronomy. 10. 14, 15. Psalm. 147. 10, 29. Acts 16. 6, 9, 10.
Acts 18. 6, 7, 8 9. Nor has it a shadow of right in Scripture, that Macedonia
and Corinth has Church-right to the Gospel, and to be a Church, and to be the
called of God, rather then other people, Bythinia especially, at this time,
because so Corinth shall profess the Gospel, before ever they hear the Gospel;
but here the Lord has mercy upon whom he will.

But 3. when the Gospel is come to a people, if the question be, what gives to
this man, not to this man true real right to Membership, and Ordinances, and
Seals, so as he may claim them before God and not sin: The meritorious right is
Christ's death, the condition upon his part is faith; hence visible profession
as such cannot give right: for then might Magus say, I have right to a room in
the visible Church, and to baptism, because I am a visible Saint: for that is
an untruth.

1. If God forbid hypocrisy, and taking a room in the visible Church, and
taking the covenant in the mouth, and receiving the seals, when the party hates
to be reformed, and eats and drinks unworthily, then cannot profession as
profession give a man right true and real to room in the Church, and to the
seals: but the former is true, Ps. 50. 16, 17, 18. Isa. 1. 12, 13. Matthew, 22.
12. Matthew. 13. 7.

2. Profession is in order to the Rulers and Members of the Profession in order
to the Rulers, gives a sort of right in professors to membership and ordinances
without sin, which professors cannot receive without sin, except they believe.
Church, which have hand according to their place, either formal or tacit
consent, to receive in members, here especially to be considered. And here our
brethren mistake the question; for when the question is, what profession is
required in such as the Rulers may without sin admit to membership and
ordinances; we say a profession morally true, not real conversion judged to be
real by men. Now this confession or profession does not make a Churchmember,
but declare a Churchmember, and it only declares him to the conscience of the
Rulers, that they sin not in admitting such: but declares him neither to have
right before God nor to his own conscience. Yea, for all this profession Magus
sinned in being baptized, Magus usurped, and has no true and real right, no
not Ecclesiastic, except in a most unproper sense; the Church has right and
command to receive him to membership and seals, but he sins in occupying room
in the house, and receiving seals, having no true right to membership and
seals: it is scarce excusable (but it is among that godly man's errors) that Mr.
H. says, graceless men, as Ishmael and Esau, have the best Right that can be
to Ordinances, to wit, the command of God. But ah! Magus and such Comedians
have no command to receive the seals, but conditional commands, If they
believe; which they never do. I return to Mr. H.

Mr. H. Profession most frequently is a public acknowledgement to the truth
delivered in the Word, and our resolution to persist in the maintenance
thereof, so it is used by distinction from practice; for an excommunicate
person may so profess, yet it gives no formality to Membersh^p. 2. Profession
is larger, and includes a suitable-carriage void of scandalous courses. 3. As
it must not be too narrow, so it must not be too b^^ad; though one hold some
errors out of infirmity, as Justification by passive obed^ence only -- This
hinders not, but he may profess the faith savingly.

Ans. Here be three notations of the word, no Scripture for Three acceptions of
the word Profession, scarce warranted by the Word, are brought by Mr. H.
any one of them. The first is most frequent (says he) and includes a
resolution to maintain: But resolution, as such, is a secret heart purpose; and
profession must be visible.

2. Profession (says he) is yet larger, and includes a suitable carriage of
life. Say stricter, The species is not larger than the genus, or that which is
as genus; man is not larger than animal a living creature.

3. Profession with some errors, should have been more warily delivered, left
it set up toleration, the ruin of the one true Religion.

1. Profession, in Scripture, is rarely distinguished from Practice; when it is
differenced from it, then its condemned, 1 Tit. 1. 16. They profess they know
God, but in works they deny (...). Par. c. 2. p. 20.
him. Jam. 2. 14. What does it profit, if a man say, he has faith, etc? For 1 Timothy 6. 13. and 2. 10. Heb. 3. 1. and 4. 14. and 10 23. Matthew. 16. 17. and 10.
32. it includes a holy practice. Now Mr. H. says, The pinch of the question
is, Whether such as walk in a way of profaneness, though otherwise professing
and practicing the things of the Gospel, have allowance from Christ, or may be
counted fit matter, according to the terms of the Gospel. But sure this is a
pinch of a question made of contradictions, Whether one walking in a way of
profaneness, and yet not walking in a way of profaneness, but professing and
practicing the things The state of the question about visible members is
perverted by Mr. H.
of the Gospel, have allowance to be the fit matter of a visible Church. A
strange pinch!

2. Mr. H. takes allowance from Christ by his command, to be all one with being
accounted fit matter of the visible Church by the Rulers; for the account must
be of men, and the allowance of them as fit matter must be of Christ. But the
truth is, there is no pinch of a question, Who a^e they that are fit matter of
themselves in se and in^^insece, who have due right to Ordinances, Seals? we
say, only sincere real professors. But the question is, Who are fit matter,
having right to Ordinances in the account of Rulers and the Church, whether
they have true right or not?

3. Allowance from Christ is ambiguous: for if it be referred to the Rulers, as
Mr. H. seems to take them both for one; then the question must be, Whether
Christ allow and command Rulers to admit such as walk in a way of profaneness,
that is, visible hypocrites, to be fit matter, having right to the holy things
of God? that was never a question to either side, Whether Christ command to
cast pearls to known swine? or the allowance or command of Christ may be
referred to the so walkers; then the question is as blasphemous, to wit,
Whether does Christ allow and command men to be gross hypocrites, and to take
his Covenant in their mouth; though they hate to be reformed.

Mr. H. Profession conceived according to the compass of the ^^rm^n Page 61.
explication (add a causal power with Baptism too) does make a member of the
visible Church, and a member of all Congregations in all the earth; the
expressions of Mr. R. load me thus to c^nceive his meaning.

As. Then Mr. H. grants, that his own conceptions, not my words (for he ought
to have cited them) lead him.

2. I own no such explication of Mr. H. as I have shown.

Mr. H. Profession lawful of the whole truth hinders Mem Page 92.
bership; as suppose one believe mistakingly, all the Churches on earth are ill
gathered, he dare not be baptized and made a Churchmember: If therefore
profession hinders Membership, as this does, then is cannot constitute
Membership.

Answ. I retort this Argument; forbearing of all known Mr. H. his argument is,
an erroneous profession constitutes not membership, etc. a right profession
does not constitute membership.
sins, and practice of known duties cannot constitute Membership, as Mr. H.
says. For suppose one to be admitted a Chruch member, in a wicked mistake fall
in an act of Adultery, and to cover that in a known act of Murder, then cannot
practice more than profession constitute this visible Saint a member: for, that
which opposes and hinders baptizing, and so kinders the formality of
membership, that does not help forward membership. So Mr. H. But such a
practice blemished with Adultery and Murder, hinders both one to be
baptized, and to be made a member, for this practice will cast a man out; Ergo,
it shall hinder him to be admitted a member. So also Mr. H. ibid. Arg. 2. page
92. So here, an erroneous profession of a Seeker, denying either Baptism,
lawful Ministry, or right Churches to be on earth, until the Apostles arise
again, constitutes not membership, but hinders it. Ergo, a sound profession
gives not formality of membership, it follows not though Mr. H. conclude
nothing against me.

Mr. H. That which gives Membership to a party who had it Arg. 2.
not before, that can restore Membership when he has lost it. But this cannot
restore Membership. Now if Profession and Bap^ism were sufficient to do the
deed, Baptism remaining the same as before his Excommunication, and now his
profession being renewed, there is the whole formality of Membership, which is
false.

Ans. 1. The Argument supposes that I make bare profession separated from a
non-scandalous practice, the formal cause of Membership: but if one renew his
practical profession by Repentance, he is fit to be readmitted a member.

2. There may remain in one excommunicate person,

1. Sound profession.

2. Evidences of Saintship in D^vid excommunicate, except in the matter of
Uriah.

3. A real purpose to adhere to the Church Covenant; yea, and all the three
remain, and holy and blameless walking beside in a dissolved member. Ergo, the
Church Covenant gives not formality to Membership; but the conclusion is
contrary to Mr. H. Therefore the Minor is denied in the sense that Mr. R.
Survey, par. 1. c. 4. P. 45, 46.
holds of real profession, as is before declared.

Mr H. That which gives actual existence to a Member, must Page 92, 93.
give interest to the whole actually existing, and therefore to some particular
Congregation, for only Individuals exist; and since Existentia est tantum
individuorum.
such an individual person is a Member, he must have reference to the whole
that does actually exist: and this the general nature does in the particular
Congregations only.

Ans. What is concluded, is not the present question, but it belongs to what
follows.

2. Individuals only exist firstly, and kindly; but the common Mr. H.
mistakingly all along makes the Cath lick (integral) visible Church to be
genus.
nature of a man exists in Peter, in and with the Individual, and the nature of
a Congregation exists in this or that Congregation: but the nature of the whole
integral Church, of which Peter is a member, as we shall hear, does no more
exist in a Congregation, than the whole organick body existeth in the left
hand: or the whole body of the Element of Water exists in a drop of the River
Euplorates: But the Catholic integral visible Church, existeth in this or that
Catholic integral visible Church. Nor does that which gives actual existence
to be a Member, give the same way ex^stence and interest to a totum, a whole
integral body; the Thumb has one way interest of existence to grow in the
Hand, and another way interest of existence to grow in the body; and in all the
parts of it, it is a member, or part of the hand, and also of the whole body,
but the Thumb has no possible interest of existence to grow in the head, in
the leg. And so is John a near and fixed member of the congregation of Boston,
and a common and remoter member of the whole integral Catholic Churches of
Hartford, of Cambridge, of Norwich, and of all the congregations on earth: but
it follows not, Ergo, John has an interest of ex^stence to be fed and to exist
at one time in all the congregations on earth; as the common nature of man, of
substantia, corpus, viv^ns, animal, homo, exists in all the individuals at
once: It is wild Logic, to put no difference between a whole integral, and
the parts; and whole essential, and the parts subjective; or species and
individuals: so as one integral member may exist at the same place where all
the members exist.

Mr. H. That which equally belongs to all, that can make no Par. 1. p. 63^.
particular appropriation to any out rather than to another: if a woman love
all Christian men with Christian affection, she is not therefore a wife to this
or that man, but this profession is equal and indifferent, as well to one, and
to all, as to another.

Ans. All is granted; for we teach not that profession, as Profession, as such,
does not make one a member married to one congregation only.
profession, makes a man a fixed and a married member of this Independent
Congregation, rather than this: so that it shall be spiritual Adultery to
partake of Church ordinances elsewhere: we detest such a comparison destructive
to Church Communion; for profession, as profession, declares the man to the
Rulers to be a Churchmember in all congregations on earth. It declares (I say
as before) but does not as a formal cause make a Churchmember, and it declares
he has right as a citizen of the visible Church, that Rulers without sin may
admit him to Ordinances: but profession makes him not a member visible of only
this Its not properly of divine institution, that a man be a fixed member of
this, rather than of this congregation.
one congregation; yea, that one be a fixed member of this congregation, is, 1.
An Affirmative command, not binding ad semper. Nor 2. does it tie, but as being
a member of the Catholic Church, which is a confession of Christ before men.
And 3. it is of providential convenience for the more careful feeding, but not
of divine institution or marriage tie.

CHAP. XXIII.
Whether Mr. Hooker does concludently refute this which Mr. R. holds, That he
who is a Member of one Congregation, is also a Member of all Congregations on
earth.

1. LEt it be remembered, in what sense I make profession and Baptism to have
influence in Membership.

2. That I make not Peter a member of this congregation A man is not one and
the same way a member of the Catholic integral visible Church, and of a single
congregation.
only, and of the whole integral Catholic Church, or of all congregations on
earth, one and the same way, for though the right to Christ the Head, to
Ordinances and Seals, be one, yet Peter is a fixed member of this congregation,
a transient member to all other congreg^tions. 2. He is a proper member, and
nearer of this congregation, and a more common and remote member to all; as the
thumb is a nearer and proper part of the hand, and a more common and remote
part of the whole organical body; and Richard a near member of Norwich, and a
more remote and common member of the Kingdom of England.

3. I am constrained to take in some Arguments transposed by Mr. H. that were
in the former Chapter.

Mr. H. To be a member of the Cathol^ck Church firstly to a Par. 1. p 63.
whole, which a man neither did, nor can see nor do any homage to, nor receive
any influence or direction from for Government, is a sublimated imagination.

Ans. This makes the Doctrine of Oecumenick Councels holden by Calvin,
Melancthon, Luther, Whitaker, and all the learned Divines in the Christian
world, to be a sublimated imagination, and Mr. Cotton his associate to be sick
of the same imagination; and the decrees, (...) of the Apostles and Elders,
Acts 16. 4. by which the Churches were established, ver. 5. to have no
influence of Government upon the Churches.

2. It must be a sublimated imagination, That the whole Churches of Jews and
Gentiles, who could not see the faces of all the Apostles, nor do any homage to
them, nor receive any direction (except in their Writings, which yet may be)
from them, should be governed by the Apostles; and it must be an imagination,
That the Apostles were members of the Catholic integral Churches, and never
fixed and married members of the single congregation: and could every one of
the ten thousands of the congregational Church of Jerusalem, as our Brethren
will have it be, be governed by the whole Church, except they had seen the
faces of all the thousands that governed them?

Mr. H. If a man that is a Member of one Congregation, ^e Page 64.
also a Member of all Congregations on earth; then he can perform the duties of
a Member to all: but that is impossible.

Ans. The duties we owe to members of the integral Catholic We may be members
of all congregations on earth, though we cannot discharge all sorts of duties
to all these congregations
Church, are,

1. Common and personal, as Church-praying, Church-praising, Church-fasting for
the evils of sin or judgment, Isa. 62. 6. Psalm. 122. 6. Ephesians. 6. 18. and 3. 14.
Romans 12. 18. 1 Cor. 12 26. they being members of the same body with us, Ephesians. 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and their good or hard condition being known to us, (which say
also they are one visible body with us) these duties are possible and
necessary, if the meaning be, of occasional duties of love, not in word but in
deed, as giving of alms to brethren, There be two sorts of duties common and
personal, which we owe to members of other Churches.
I judge of all congregations beside our own: Iam. (...). If a brother or a
sister be naked, etc. of what ever congregation on earth, where providence cast
your lot to be, 1 Ioh. 3. 17. If, I say, he mean such duties of members to
foreign Church Members, as Church Members, be impossible, I much differ from
Mr. H. it is contrary to 2 Cor. 9. 1, 2, 3. Gal. 6. 10. And the like I say of
duties, of occasional comforting, rebuking, warning one another, even in order
to Church Members, and Church-duties; They are this way impossible, that
physically I cannot be in all places to discharge these duties. But to fetch an
Argument as watery, I might say, A man in Musc^via cannot be to a Scottish-man
a neighbor, whom he is to love as himself. A man in Morpeth cannot be a
fellow-member both with another m^n in Morpeth, and with another English
Subject who dwells four hundred miles from him whom he never saw, not can
see. Why, its impossible he can discharge the duty of neighbour-love to the one
that he never saw, nor possibly can see; or that of a fellow-subject of
England, as toward the other: Yea, by this its impossible one can discharge the
duties of personal watching over five thousand members of the congregation (as
they say) of Jerusalem; for while as he watches over one, he must neglect
fourscore of hundreds, and above.

2. What liberty and power a man has in one particular congregation Mr. H.
Arg. 2. par. 1 p. 64, 65.
as a member, he has the same in all, because he is a member every where: Then
he has power in choosing the Officers, and in maintaining them; and these
Officers must be sought in casting him out.

Ans. What liberty and power a man has jure, habitu, actu primo, by the right
as a visible professor in one congregation as a member; that same moral right
of Saintship (taken in a right sense) he carries about to all congregations on
earth, whithersoever he comes, as is clear by Letters of Recommendation (which
I said, and its never answered, only declare, but give no new right to Church
privileges) which our Brethren give Way of the Churches of N. E. c 6. sect. 6.
p. 103 ibid. sect. 7. M. Cotton keys c. 4. p. 17.
to members, by which they have right to the seals in other congregations. But
it follows not, what liberty and power a man, as a fixed, nearer and proper
member has in his own congregation, that same liberty and power he has actu
secundo, and that he may actually exercise in all congregations; for to the
actual exercise of it, is required the actual knowledge of him, and his right
and qualification, that they with him, and he with How he that is a member of
one congregation, has Church Power (...) habitu and (...) prim^, in all
congregations, and how not.
them, may act in a Church Way, in other congregations and foreign Churches:
And also he cannot act with that power in all congregations, as in his own; not
because he has not the power in habit, and actu primo, but both he cannot
orderly exercise it, and without scandal of usurpation, until he first evidence
he has such power; and also because he cannot physically be in many places at
once: as a Citizen of London has power and liberty to do the duties of a
Subject of England, such as to save the life of a Subject, and to apprehend a
public Robber that waftes the country, in all cities and places in England;
but its impossible that he can be physically present in all places of England,
where his help may be useful for the performing of these duties.

2. Nor will it follow that he should give hire to any but to his own personal
feeders, from whom he receives the benefit of feeding, Gal. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.

3. It is also an untoward consequence, Therefore be cannot be cast out of one
congregation, unless the Officers of all others did cast him out: for that is
physically impossible, God will have the Catholic integral Church to purge it
self in its parts, and its no more necessary nor convenient that the whole
integral Church should, or possibly can pass an actual sentence for the casting
out of every person, than all England can convene in Parliament for the passing
sentence upon every English Subject guilty of Felony, Murder, Sodomy,
Blasphemy, Drunkenness, Swearing, etc. and all guilty of these faults, are both
Members of either Cities, Counties, or Shires, and also Subjects of the
Kingdom of England: and the Argument is as strong in the one as in the other,
even suppose Great Britain were but one Kingdom. Nor

4. Will it follow, that a guilty person can require the convening of the whole
integral Catholic Church to judge his cause: for he can have no moral right,
but such as all in case of scandal have, why he should more decline the
Churches judging, Christ has given no power to unjust appeals that are
physically impossible.
than their feeding by the Word. Now since such a convening of all Officers to
judge every scandal, is physically unpossible, it is not to be thought that
Christ has given a moral liberty to all delinquents without exception, to
appeal to all the Officers on earth; for the infinite wisdom of God gives not
moral power to physical impossibilities, that are physically destructive to
edification.

Mr. H. If he that is the member of one Congregation be a member of all, I
cannot see but of necessity it must follow, that Pa^. 1, page 65^
one particular Congregation must be another, Ephesus must be Smyrna, and
Smyrna must be Thyatira: for where there be the same individual members, there
be the same whole integral body; and the ground is undeniable from received
Rules: Integrum est totum cui parts sunt essentiales. Therefore the same
members carry the same essence to the whole. I assume, there be the same
individual members of all the particular Congregations: For if one particular
professor be a member of every particular Congregation, then all particular
professors must be so; and so all of them members of one particular
Congregation, and so of every one. Hence there being the same members of every
particular Congregation, every particular Congregation is the same: and thence
it will follow, that Ephesus is Smyrna, and Smyrna to be Thyatira. Hence when
Smyrna is destroyed, yet Smyrna remains.

Ans. Its a pity to black paper with such Wind-mills. Where there be the same
individual members, there must be the same individual whole or totum integrale.
All the individual members of a man's body, either similar parts, flesh, and
blood, and bones; or the Organs, eyes, ears, feet, hand, and all the rest taken
together, as united, are the whole organical body of man; and so all the
Congregations on earth, taken together, are, and make up the whole integral
Catholic visible Church, existing in all the Kingdoms and States of the
earth. But what follows? therefore the hand is the foot, where there be the
same proper and nearer fixed members, the thumb and the Mr. H. proves not that
Ephesus is Smyrna, or Smyrna is Ephesus, because the same individual persons
are common members to them both, and to all the Churches on earth, except he
conclude that the little finger is the thumb by the same reason; for the thumb
and the little finger are both nearer members of the hand, and common and
remote members of the whole body.
little finger of the hand, and also the same common and remoter members (the
same thumb and little finger) of the whole organical body, there is the same
individual integral whole, so as the one member is affirmed of another, the
thumb is the little finger, and the little finger is the thumb: for all the
organs are members proper, the eyes, ears, nose, of the head, the fingers of
the hand, the toes of the feet, and all the rest, arms, legs, belly, shoulders,
and all these same members are common and remote members of the whole body:
Just as Peter is a fixed and near member of this Congregation, and also a
common and remoter member of the whole integral Catholic Church. And as all
the Citizens of London are fixed and near members of London, and proper parts
thereof, and yet common and remote members and Subjects of England. Hence by
Mr. H. his own Argument, Where there be the same individual members, thereof
necessity must be the same whole integral: So I assume (says he.) But there be
the same individual members of all the particular Congregations. I assume also,
John, Richard, Thomas, Citizens of London, of York, are all in their very
individual natures, individual Subjects of England. Ergo, London must be York,
and York must be London; and John Citizen of London, must be Richard Citizen of
Yo^k. And contrary. Again I assume, the same individual thumb, and individual
little finger and toes, and individual eyes and ears, are all members of the
hand, or congregation of fingers, of the feet and society of toes, etc. and
they are also common members of the whole organical body. Therefore by Mr. H.
his Logic, the thumb must be the little finger; and when the thumb is cut off,
the thumb remains. Let Mr. H. or any for him, answer Mr. H. his Sophism.

2. Mr. H. makes an Assumption, but could not infer any conclusion, nor frame a
Syllogism. This connection is never proved, There are the same members, common,
remote, of every particular Congregation, or of all the Congregations on earth,
therefore every Congregation is the same, and Ephesus must be Smyrna. Put Mr.
H. or any man for him, to prove the connection, and they must be silenced; These
Congregations must be the same, and the one must be affirmed of the other,
which have the same individual persons to be common members to both. Nothing
more false: and so Mr. H. his received Rules vanish. For Congregations and all
Churches differ not in their essence and last specific nature, as Mr. H. wou^d
make us believe, but only in mere accidents.
say that all Citizens of York were Citizens of London, and Citizens of London
were also Citizens of York, and they had the same common Laws,
City-priviledges, the same Rules, it follows only they differ not in nature,
but in number and accidents; but no Logic can infer, Erg^, York is London, and
London is York; or that the one is affirmed of the other, as Ephesus is said to
be Smyrna. So nothing follows, but only Ephesus and Smyrna are not Churches
different in essence and nature, but only in number, which is that which we
teach.

Mr. H. Mr. R. yields, that one Church has not power over Rage 65, 66. (...)
another; but if one, who is a member of one Congregation, be a member of all,
then the members of this. Province may send messengers to the Synod of another
Province.

Answ. Mr. H. would do well to prove his deductions; for common members as
common members send not Commissioners, nay, nor one Church to another: but as
God is the God of order, so such a Church in an association do send to a larger
Church.

Mr. H. It is folly to seek differences (says Mr. R.) between Congregations,
from a Church covenant, which is common to all Congregations. It is true (says
Mr. H) particular Congregations, and Church covenants differ not in essence and
nature; but there is a real difference from this Church in another Church, in
their specificating, and individual formality. The rule of old was, Genus cum
forma constituit speciem.

Answ. It is great folly to seek differences essential, when all Congregations
agree in the last specific difference: This Congregation and that Church
differ only in accidents, except Mr. H. show us essential and specificating
differences between one Christ the head, one faith, one Baptism, one hope of
Glory, one Lords Supper, one Bread in all Churches, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor.
10. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 13. one power of binding on earth, one and the same body,
Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. Ioh. 20. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. from the same
Christ, the same Faith, the same Baptism, etc. in another Congregation: and
when the Church of the Jews, and the Church of the Gentiles differ only as two
Sisters, Cant. 8. 8. and in regard of age (which is a mere accident) as Mother
and Daughter, Isa. 54. 1, 2. Isa. 49. 20, 21. Cant. 3. 4. It is folly for Mr.
H. to trouble us with new Logic, such as the specificating formality in Peter,
for that is no new degree of essence in Peter which was not in man, but the
same contracted to the individual differences of time, place, figure, etc. Let
Mr. H. show a specific difference between Christ and the seal in this and in
that Congregation.

2. That Genus cum forma constituit speciem, is neither old nor new rule, the
true rules are Genus and differentia constituunt speciem and compositum
Metaphysicum, and materia and forma constituunt compositum se^ corpus Physicum.

3. Whereas Mr. H. says that this and this Congregation and this
Church Covenant differ really ut res and res, and if they differ in accidents,
these must be either common or proper; it is answered.

1. Mr. Cotton and Mr. Hooker are not two new kinds and species Page 66.
Because Congregations differ ut res and res, they do not differ in nature, for
members of the same Congregation differ ut res and res, and the faith,
profession and baptism of Peter differ from the faith, profession and baptism
of John his fellow-member of the same Congregation ut res and res. Then there
must be ten thousand species and kinds of members and faith in the one Church
of Jerusalem.
of Pastors, because officers of diverse Congregations, and John and Peter
members of the same Congregation differ ut res and res; and so in the Church of
Jerusalem there shall be five thousand species and kinds of members, five
thousand kinds of Church-covenants, of Baptisms, of Lords Suppers, of new
species of rights to the Seals in one single Congregation. For they differ
really ut res and res, when as they differ only in number: and it were good
that Mr. H. had expressed to us, what be these proper accidents by which
Congregations differ among themselves. It is true the particular combination
gives distinct being to the Classis; but it gives not a being distinct in
nature and essence, but only in individual properties from the being of other
Classis.

Mr. H. How comes it this Church has power over this person, Page 66, 67.
which another Church has not, but from some special engagement?

Ans. It is from no marriage engagement, but from providential convenience; the
wise Lord seeing it Physically impossible, that the whole Catholic Church so
numerous can be fed in the same field, by the same men, therefore he divided
them in sundry little flocks, over which the shepherds combined, have power not
as married husbands but as mere servants.

Mr. H. The peculiar and individual formalities of engagements difference all
voluntary covenants; should a man say, I am a Master of servants, therefore
thou art my servant: servant-covenant is common to all, there is only a
difference in number and some accidents: a people might say to a Pastor of
another Congregation, The covenant between Pastor and People is common to all,
and makes no difference, but in number and accidents; therefore thou art our
Pastor: that a man should be a general husband to all women, and a woman a
general wife to all men, because marriage-covenant is common, seems folly; we
are content to bear the charge of folly.

Answ. 1. I am far from charging folly on these godly men, but weakness should
appear in the Argument, If Mr. H had framed an Argument thus; if all Covenants
of Master and servant, of husband and wife, agree in essence and nature, and
differ in number and accidents only, then may a Master claim all men on earth
to be his servants, and then may a husband claim all women on earth to be his
married w^ves.

This is most false, and not proved by Mr. H. for the just contradiction is
true.

If covenants between Master and Servant, between Husband The covenants of
master and servant, and marriage covenants be of the same nature, and differ
only in number, it follows not that a master may claim all men on earth to be
his servants, or that a husband may claim all women on earth to be his wives;
but the contrary.
and Wife differ in number; then must a Master make a covenant in number
different with servants; one with this servant, and another covenant different
in number from that, with another; or then he can claim neither the one nor the
other for his servant, because covenants between master and servant, are all of
the same common nature: nor because Abraham married Sarah, and all
marriage-covenants are of the same essence and nature, can Abraham claim Hagar
and another third woman, and a fourth for his wives, and except he have a
marriage covenant with Hagar different in number from the marriage-covenant
with Sarah, and a third marriage-covenant with the third different in number,
he cannot claim any of them for his wives: for Hagar may say, though all
marriage-covenants be of the same essence and nature; yet because Abraham never
made a marriage-covenant with me by name, which is essentially required in all
covenants of that kind, he is not my husband, nor am I his wife. So a people
cannot say to a Pastor of another Congregation, thou art our fixed, proper
Pastor, obliged to reside with us, and to employ thy labors ordinarily upon us
only, except they had particularly chosen him by name; but this will not
hinder, but all elections and covenants with Pastors, as fixed and ordinary
laborers with them, are of the same essence and nature, and differ only in
number and accidents; nor can this hinder but a Pastor of another Congregation
is a Pastor habitu and actu primo, to all Congregations on earth, and no
married husband to that Congregation: though it be physically impossible, and
contrary to reason, to say he can be a fixed, proper chosen Pastor to all the
Congregations of the earth; for fixedness and election of the people is not of
the essence of a Pastor.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Arguments of Mr. R. against the Church Covenant are vindicated.

MR. H. Relation as such is not a foundation of a Covenant, when Twins are
born, or Brethren and Sisters near to other in time. The duties issuing there
from have their rise and power from the Impression of the Rule of nature, such
relations may be multiplied without a covenant.

Answ. This destroys your Church Covenant, for many in sister-Churches, men and
women, are born over again, and made visible members of the body of Christ, and
made fellow Citizens to them that are far off, and near to the whole household
of God, Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 10.
17. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Heb. 12. 22, 23. And the duties The necessity of a
Church Covenant is Scriptureless and dark.
issuing hence rise from no covenant soddering the members together in one
single flock: for they belong to many flocks, but only from the rule of renewed
nature. Therefore Mr. H. is obliged to prove, if there be a necessity of a
voluntary covenant, that visible Saints of two Congregations now agreeing to be
fellow members of a third Congregation, are now more brethren by Mat. ^8. then
before, and have more one Faith, one Baptism, one visible head Christ, one
Hope, do more eat one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. then before; are more, yea, now, and
never till now, by a positive institution and command obliged to Church
covenanting, to Church watching one over another, whereas by this way they were
never visible members, nor visible fellow-Citizens before.

And 2. so Paul has been less accurate then our brethren in the visible
oneness of brethren.

3. There must be no visible brotherhood, nor Church oneness, but by ordinary
meeting within the walls of the same house.

And 4. this covenanting either implicit or explicit must be of as great
necessity as a visible Church on earth.

Mr. H. The covenant once made by mutual agreement of parents, Par. 1. p. 68, 69
may be communicated to the seed, without their consent, Deuteronomy. 29. 10. A
Minister is a Minister to children born of parents, who have elected him to be
their Minister, and they are within the covenant, by virtue of that covenant
which their parents made.

Answ. 1. Nothing then makes children within the covenant Children are not
under the tie of the Church Covenant.
of grace visibly, but your Congregational covenant. But sure Isreal's seed by
Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, etc. and Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. 39. were born in visible
covenant with God, and they knew not any such Congregational watching over one
another.

2. The seed of dissolved members, visible Saints, are then without any sin in
parents and children (to speak comparatively) born Pagans, but the Scripture
teaches us of no losing of covenant-right, but by sin, either of the parties
themselves, or of their parents.

3. How are then children of covenanting parents born Church members; yet, when
come to age, if they cannot evidence their regeneration holden all their life,
for no Church Members are debarred from the Lords Supper, living and dying
Pagans? are Ministers, because of their covenant, Ministers to Pagans?

4. The Scripture teaches that parents oblige the children to the
Gospel Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. Genesis 17. but no Scripture teaches that parents lay
bands of oath and vow of God to be visible members of only (for example) the
Congregation of Boston, of only Hartford; for look what covenant obligation
lies upon the parents which is to that Congregation by name only, the like must
lie upon the children.

Mr. H. Among such who by no impression of nature, no providence, Page 69.
or appointment of God, or reason, have power each one over another, there is a
necessity of a free engagement by consent, as between Prince and people,
husband and wife, master and servant, and the covenant being once made, there
needs no new covenant to the exercise of the duties belonging to that relation.

Ans. The vow in Baptism, and the Gospel Covenant professed The covenant of
grace being so necessary, the Church Covenant is needless.
by me, without any new engagement, obliges me in all Churches I am in, to be
my brothers keeper, and watch for his soul, otherwise I may make this count,
Lord, I was not obliged to any Church-watching over my brother, but my
Congregational brother by Mat. 18.

But 1. was he not thy brother before thou wast inchurched into one
Congregation with him? (shall the Lord say.)

2. Wast thou not to eat the same bread with him before as then? by 1 Cor. 10.
17.

Secondly, there is no need of engagement to watch Congregationally over all
with whom thou eatest the Lords Supper, except thou being so journer enter in
oath to every Congregation, and break it in the morrow.

Thirdly, The covenant of Prince and people, husband and wife has nothing to
do with this, except the nearer visible oneness, brotherhood, etc. of which I
spoke, be cleared from Scripture; and M. H. prove that Peter is tied by oath to
that only Pastor and Flock, as subjects to one only sovereign.

Mr. H. The covenant of grace may be taken in the narrowest acception (believe
and live) so it is inward and invisible between the soul and God. But if you
take it in the breadth, as it includes whatever is warranted by the Gospel, so
it is visible and includes the Church Covenant, and its ordinance of the
Gospel, but not properly the covenant of the Gospel if the Churches be
dissolved through persecution, they are not obliged to the duties of
confederacy.

Ans. (Believe and live) is not the narrowest, nor the invisible covenant, but
the sum of all duties given to all the visible Church, Ioh. 3. 16, 18. Ioh.
5. 24, 40. Ioh. 11. 26, 27. Romans 10. 9.

2. If this be a Gospel ordinance, give us Scripture for it.

3. Dissolved members are never loosed from Church-warning, comforting,
rebuking, otherwise they were not to gain their brethren.

4. Christ by no hint or shadow, lays the duty of gaining a brother upon our
membership with single Congregations, a thing of order and providential
necessity; but upon brotherhood, Mat. 11. If thy brother trespass against thee,
etc. Now he is as near my brother who is of another Congregation, or a
dissolved member, as he who is my Congregational Brother.

5. The enclosed gainable trespassing brethren within the Brother is larger
then a Congregational brother.
pinfold of a single Congregation, seem to make only the Congregation the
visible Kingdom of Christ; the Scripture teaching, Nations, the Kindreds and
Kingdoms of the world to be his, Rev 11. 15. Rev. 2. 1, 2, 3. Ps. 22. 27, 28.
Ps. 72. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ps. 2 8, 9. Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3, etc. It is true, Christ
exercises his Ministerial power as King in Congregations, yea, and in Synods
also, says Mr. Cotton. 2. The oneness of his visible body is larger then a
Congregation, 1 Cor. 10. 17. 1 Cor 12. 12, 13, etc.

Mr. H. That a Minister swear an oath of fidelity (says Mr. R.) Par. 1. 72, 73^
to the flock; a Father, a Master to discharge duties to Children and Servants
is lawful, but to tie the essence of a Minister, Father, Master to this oath,
so that he is no Minister before he thus swear, is to lay b^nds where Christ
has laid none, and will worship.

Ans. The instance of a Father, because it results upon a rule of nature,
without any free consent required, is not to the purpose; the other two cuts
the throat of Mr. R^. cause; can any charge another to be his servant without
mutual engagement? that which makes a man a Pastor to this people, is the free
choice of the people; we do not make the swearing to do our duty, to be our
covenant; a witness ties himself by oath to tell the truth in a Court, here is
no covenant between man and man at all. Those are to be distinguished.

1. An agreement of persons to combine and associate. 2. The doing of these
duties. 3. The swearing they will do them; the first is the form of the
Corproation; the other two may be done after they be combined.
Ans. 1. The instance brought by me is as well of a moral father, The peoples
choosing makes not a Minister.
as a natural father, and his either agreeing by promise or oath to the people,
makes him not a Pastor, (a Pastor to them is another thing) nor does the
election of the people make a Pastor, the ordination of the Elders by prayer
makes him a Pastor, Act. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2.

2. The being a Pastor to the people does not make a Pastor, for it is but
actus secundus, the exercise of his calling, not the essence of the Minister.

3. The man does tender the Lords Supper, which is a specific and proper act
of a Pastor, and that warrantably, to these who are of another Congregation,
and never chused him for their Pastor.

2. The other two hurt not the truth (I desire not to plead mine own cause) a
man is made a servant to a master by mutual The peoples choice of A. B. makes
him not a Pastor, but determines the exercise of his labors (which is latter
then the essence of a Pastor) to them only fix^dly.
agreement, true: Ergo a Minister is made an Ambassador, Pastor, and Servant of
Christ by the election of the people; it follows not: for were he a servant in
relation to the people only, this were something; but the peoples choosing of
him has not any influence at all in the essence of a Pastor.

3. My Argument proves, that swearing, as it includes a free agreement to the
duties of a Father (Moral) or Officer, or Master, or Pastor, does not make the
man a Father, a Master, a Pastor, especially when the man is Father, servant of
Christ, and Pastor habitu, and actu primo, to all the Churches on earth, before
he agree to be Father and Pastor to this Congregation, as I thus illustrate, a
free City appoint four men fearing God to be Rulers, or Bailiffes to them, the
City divides it self into four quarters: the first quarter agrees with such a
man to rule them: The next quarter agrees with the second to rule, and so do
the rest. Now no man can say this first quarter made the man a Magistrate, for
the whole City made all the four of private men to be public Magistrates, and
quarters by agreement did only appropriate their labors to them. So Titio
covenants with a Mason, with a Gardener to build him a House, and plant him a
Vineyard; yet this agreement makes neither the one a Mason, nor the other a
Gardener, for they were such before: nor does the sick man's choosing of such a
Physician to cure him, make the man a Physician. Any man knows that the people
call and choose Epaphroditus, not that they may make him a gracious and an able
Minister, but because they discerned him to be such, therefore they chused him.

4. A Witness who swears to tell the truth, engages covenant-wise to tell the
truth, though the engagement be put upon him by the command of the Judge.

Mr. H. Neither the incestuous Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2. 73, 74. (says Mr. R.) nor
these 3000. Act. 2. nor Samaria, nor any planted Churches of Ephesus, Acts 19.
of Corinth, Acts 18. Berea, Philippi, Thessalonica, Rome, give any hint of a
Church Covenant. Ans. The Churches forgiving and confirming of their love to
the incestuous Corinthian, was a receiving of him of new to covenant; had his
profession at large made him a member, he had been a member whether the Church
received him or not; or had baptism made him a member, that remaining, he
should have been a member; a disfranchised man is so received by Covenant anew
to City-priviledges.

Ans. 1. Nothing is answered to these celebrious Samplar-Churches planted
without this new covenant.

2. One excommunicate for a particular scandal, as the incestuous No
Churchcovenant in the first planted Churches.
Corinthian was, retaining some profession, retains some membership, and is
only deprived of Church-honour, and of some Ordinances.

3. But of Baptism before.

4. The forgiving of that man, may say somewhat to the restoring of him to the
privileges of the Covenant of Grace, but nothing of a Church Covenant.

5. The civil Corporations way of re-admitting disfranchised members, is no
binding Rule to the Church of God.

Mr. H. There is no word of Church Covenant in these places, Acts 2. it follows
not, Ergo, it is not in the word.

Ans. The consequence is not valid from particular Negatives: but if there be
no Covenant in any place, where mention There is no ground in Scripture for a
Church Covenant.
is made of planting of Churches, it holds well. Heb. 7. 14. Moses (who in his
writings speaks of all sorts of Priests) spoke nothing concerning Priesthood in
the Tribe of Judah: Ergo, there is no Priest of that Tribe. And there is no
hint in Scripture, where the sacrifice of Christ is spoken of, that there is
any ungodly sacrifice: Ergo, (say our Divines) the sacrifice of the Mass is a
device of men. So no such Covenant is in Scripture in framing of Churches.

Mr. H. The solemnity of fasting and praying is only required Par. p. 75.
at the first founding of a Church, Acts 2. where there is only an addition of
members, the stroke on the Spirit by the Ministry of the Apostles was so
extraordinary, that they needed no miraculous discerning.

Ans. 1. Mr. H. may make the Reader believe, that I am against fasting and
praying, at either planting of, or addition to The actings required by M. H. in
gathering of churches, are not to be found in the Apostolic Church.
Churches, and therefore divides my Argument: for I argue from the want, not of
fasting and praying only, but

2. No Church Covenant was here; nor

3. Any frequent meeting of the members to be acquainted with the spiritual
state one of another; nor was it possible these things could be in seven hours
space. All which they require in founding Churches, and so there was no day of
fasting kept by the Church baptized.

2. There is an addition, that the Christian Church was also solemnly founded.

Mr. H. The^r steadfast continuing was after they were added: Ergo, (says Mr.
R.) that could not make them members. Ans. Nor lies the Argument there from the
effect to the cause; they continued; Ergo, they took themselves engaged to
continue.

Ans. There is no doubt they took themselves engaged by Their persevering, or
resolution to persevere covenantwise, as is said, could neither of them be
visible before they were admitted members.
Baptism.

2. Did Ananias and Sapphira either continue steadfastly, or take themselves
engaged by Church Covenant? for we now speak of visible actings that agree to
Church members, as such; therefore they took themselves to be engaged members,
and members to that only Church by a solemn Marriage-covenant, is a dream
unwritten.

Mr. H. Where there is a solemn baptizing into a Church, the person is made a
Disciple of Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. So to be a Disciple, is to be ingraffed into
the body of Christ, and to be made a fellow-heir of the same body, Ephesians. 3. 6.
that is, of the visible Church, Joh. 12. 40. though many believed in him, yet
they would not confess him, or be his disciples.

Ans. 1. If confessing, and being a disciple, be one; and if solemn baptizing
make a disciple, as from Matthew. 28. and Ioh. 12. Mr. H. says: Then 1. Must
Infants be actual disciples: 2. Actual confessors: 3. In danger to be
excommunicate; for the Jews made such an act, Ioh. 9. To be ingraffed in the
body, is not to be ingraffed into a single congregation.


2. Ingraffing in the body is to be made a fellow-heir, and of the same body of
Jews and Gentiles, who were partakers of the promise of Christ by the Gospel,
and fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, built upon the
foundation, Ephesians. 3. 8. and 2. 19. and comprehends both the truly believing
visible body, and invisible: And when, and who made Magus and Judas partakers
of the promise of Christ by the Gospel, and fellow-heirs of the same body?

3. Did ever man dream that this body is a single Congregation, and not that
its the great Catholic Body of Jews and Gentiles, Ephesians 3. 5, 6. and 2 15, 16,
19?

Mr. H. The people are said to magnify the Apostles, that is, Page 76, 77.
to approve their doctrine, and the goodness thereof, yet there was more
required to this Church-work, and to b^come a disciple; and therefore its
added, And the believers were added, i. e. they confessed their sins, and
became disciples and followers of that Doctrine, and so covenanted for their
children: Else we cannot reason against the Anabaptists, If the converted
father was baptized, therefore the children. The place thus expounded is not
taken out of our hand.

Ans. The scope of the place is not to show the qualification The Texts, Acts
2. and 5. concerning adding to the Lord and to the Church, are vindicated f^o^
the gloss of M. H. and have no shadow of a Church covenant.
of visible members, but that though Satan had made a ^oul breach in the
Church, by the lying hypocrisy of Ananias and Sapphira, yet the Lord was
mighty in the Apostles, by the miraculous and righteous smiting of the
hypocrites, and other mighty wonders, to the admiration of all, and the terror
of many, Acts 5. 1, 2. -- 11, 12, 13. and that breach by their death was made
up, ver. 14. (...), Believers were the more added, not to the visible Church
only, but (...), to the Lord, which was a real addition of real believers, as
the same phrase is, cap. 2. ver 47. not unlike.

2. The magnifying of Apostles, is spoken of be^ievers who not only approved
their doctrine, but confessed the power of God to be in the Apostles miracles,
and some fear of God, Calv. Gualth. Erant medii homines. Occumenius, Virtus
vere Evangelica idonea erat quae plurimum colla^daretur. Chrysostom Nec
convertentes se ad risum^ non ad ^inas -- sed valde humani erant, and p^ae
aliis soliciti.
as Calvin says: Oecumenius, They praised that Gospel power; Chrysostom, They
do not mock, nor threaten, yet they seem, as our Interpreters, to be medii
homines, not wicked despiser^.

3. He expounds they were added, i. e. they confessed their sins, and became
disciples and followers of that doctrine. But sure, confessing of sins, and
professing of the doctrine, if he mean such a following ^s was in Magus, its a
hungry Exposition of being added to the Lord, since it is in many hypocrites
that are never added to the Lord. 2. If he mean, that they were practical
followers of the Apostles doctrine, (as he must, if he say any thing more than
what he said before) sure, that must be an habitual constant walking with God
all their life, and cannot be before they were added, Acts 2. for they were
believers, and added the same day, cap. 2 and cap. 5. Nor says he any thing
for adding of visible members, cap. 5. but all their life they were added to
the Lord. And is that the meaning of Luke, either cap. 2. or cap. 5? Sure, Luke
sets down the history of men added to the Lord at the sight of these miracles.

4. Its a wonder men are so bold with the Scripture! They were added, i. e.
They became disciples, -- and so engaged themselves, and covenanted also for
their children But did their being added to the Church, and to the Lord, which
certainly, in the sincere part, was real and sound believing, include the
swearing of this Church Covenant to be watching members married to the only
single Congregation of Jerusalem, and to no other visible Church on earth? If
to dictate be to prove, then we have more than enough of this.

5. If Mr. H. judge that Calvin, Pet. Martyr, Beza, Ursin, Pareus, and our
Worthies, cannot reason for Infant baptism M. H. strengthens Anabaptists by his
so reasoning from the place Acts 5.
against Anabaptists, except thus; The fathers are married members by
Church Covenant to one single Congregation; Ergo, Infants must be baptized: Or
thus; The really converted father must be baptized; Ergo, the children; We have
a weak part of it, for this strengthens Anabaptists not a little; for the
common Arguments both of our Brethren and the Anabaptists, are, They must be
real converts that are Church Members, as I have proved. And sure our Brethren
judge it absurd, that the Seal of Baptism should be put into a blank, or Ans.
to 32 qu. 4. p. 12.
to a falsehood. Now since Baptism is the seal of our Regeneration, either must
our Brethren put a blank and a falsehood (which the Church, who knows not the
heart, without sin put upon Judas) or then with monstrous charity they must
believe all baptized Infants are regenerate. But the truth is, the inward state
of none can be said either a falsehood or reality to the Church, following the
Rule of the Word in dispensing of Ordinances; for in the like, neither
regeneration nor non regeneration can be the object of the Churches discerning.
Also this is to be observed, that Christ has made the sounder part of the
visible Church, the Church in the actual exercise of Ordinances. For,

1. Christ never gave a power to err or to sin to his Church visible, or to
any part thereof; as Nature gave not a power to the locomotive faculty to halt,
but to move: therefore he cannot have given a power to a Synod as many, but as
proceeding right; and to Members as choosing discerningly, not as erroneously.

2. Those must be the Church, to whom the Promise is made, they fulfilling the
condition, to wit, he must promise his presence to those that are convined in
his Name. But if the larger part be the Church visible, because larger and more
numerous to whom the Promise is made; then when the major part err^s, and meets
not in his Name, Christ should be obliged to fulfill the promise to them that
fulfill not the condition, and ought not to fulfill the promise to those who meet
in his Name, and fulful the condition of the promise; which is abominable: for
very often the larger part erres, and meets not in Christ's Name, and the lesser
part meets in his Name, and shall those who fulfill the condition be defrauded
of the blessing promised, because they are fewer?

Obj. But so no questions shall be determined in Church meetings, for two may
say they only meet in Christ's Name.

Ans. These are but words: for if they not only say so, but it be a real
truth, and if all the rest err in that act, these two are only the visible
Church, though men judge them turbulent Schismatics.

Hence, by the way, a word of that necessary and judicious question moved by
Calvin, Matthew. 18. 18. What ye bind on Of the binding and loosing on earth and
in heaven, Mar. 18.
earth, etc. Since the Church tolerateth many hypocrites, and absolveth and
loses many who do but counterfeit and fancy Repentance, shall we say that
such are loosed and pardoned in heaven? Some say, by heaven here is meant the
visible Church; and they distinguish between Sin and Scandal: and therefore
that by binding and loosing, here is meant, not forgiveness, or justification,
or absolution from the guilt of sin in heaven, or in the Court of God, or
condemnation for that sin, but only deliverance from scandal, and the removing
of scandal, and admitting of the man into the visible Church as a Member:
suppose his repentance be but hypocritical, yet when the Church proceeds
impartially, according to the Rule of Christ, the sentence is ratifi^d by God,
and the man is loosed from the scandal, though not from the sin; the sin is yet
bound before God, because he has not really repented; otherwise the Church,
who knows not heart-actings, and who really repent, who not, though proceeding
right according to the Rule of Christ, should not have the promise of ratifying
in heaven what they do on earth, fulfilled to them; which cannot be said.

But taking it for a good observation that Calvin has here, that Matthew. 16.
Christ speaks of binding and loosing concional, by the Word preached; but
here, Matthew. 18. he speaks especially of binding and loosing juridical in the
Court of the Church, by Excommunication or Absolution from that Sentence. In
the former consideration the question is easy.

No Pastor in preaching Gospel-promises or threatenings, can bind, but
conditionally: If the party do not believe and repent, the man's sin is bound in
heaven; if he do believe and repent, his sin is loosed in heaven.

As to the other, we find in the Word no such signification of binding and
loosing, in regard of scandal, but they are ever Calv. Resp. Non ad alios
dirigi sermonem, quam qui recte ac sincere Ecclesiae se reconciliant. Mat. 18.
is nota rule for comforting hypocrites, as if their sins were loosed in heaven.
spoken of in regard of sin and the guilt thereof. And therefore.

1. Calvin says well, That the speech of Christ is directed to no other than
to those who duly and sincerely do reconcile themselves with the Church; and
the Lord being willing to comfort trembling consciences, is not setting down a
Rule for comfo^g of ^ypocrites: But by the contrary, because hypocrites Soldly
provoke to the Tribunal of God, when for gross scandals they are justly cast
out; our Savior says, The sentence of Excommunication is ratified in heaven.
The Scripture-rule is for such as obey, and for those who fulfill the condition,
non de obliquis.

As to the doubt, That the Church often absolves such who really repent not,
how then can the hypocrite be loosed in heaven, when the Lord knows he does but
fancy Repentance?

Ans. Two things here are to be distinguished.

1. The Churches proceeding in the external Court, as relating to them, if they
impartially, according to the Rule of Christ, proceed, and be not sudden in
re-admitting, but see the incestuous man near swallowed up (though one man's
measure of visible repentance be not the Rule to all) before they confirm their
love to him, and forgive him, 2 Cor. 2. Suppose his repentance be but
counterfeit, or not saving and real, as was that of Ahab, yet are they to
receive him, and admit him to the Ordinances, and the Lord ratifies what they
do in heaven. As

1. The Lord ratifies Philips baptizing of Magus; and the The Lord ratifies in
heaven what the Church does on earth, though the hypocrite be not pardoned.
Lord approves the Servants inviting to the marriage-supper the man that wanted
the wedding garment: for what the Lord commands, that he must approve and
ratify in heaven.

2. What in charitable judgments is praiseworthy, that God also must ratify
in heaven; yea, it is praiseworthy in the Disciples, when they heard Christ
say, One of you twelve has a Devil, one of you shall betray the Son of Man;
every one suspected and feared himself; none of the eleven suspected Judas, but
gave him charity.

3. Without this God should not approve the gathering of Churches, nor the
casting of the draw-net in the Sea, nor the sowing of seed upon all sort of
grounds, the way side, the thorny, the rocky, the good ground, that the chosen,
who are yet in the state of nature, may be brought in, and effectually called.
But in receiving in Excommunicates, the Church would not be sudden. In the
ancient Church, Sacrificers to Idols Can. Poenir. Council. Ancy^an.
were six years before they were received; they that defiled themselves with
Beasts, were debarred from the Sacrament thirty years; Adulterers, seven; women
who made away their Can. Nic. Council. See Chemnit. exam. de Indul.
Births, ten years; such as uncompelled denied the faith, twelve years. What
other years Burchardus and Gratianus have, may be seen. Something for
edification sure there was here.

2. There is another thing here, which concerns the conscience of him who is
to be received, and when the Church-Court Page 727, 728.
applies the sentence to the conscience for his personal pardon, sure whatever
satisfaction the people have for removing of the scandal, the sentence of
Absolution so relating to him, is concional, not properly juridical; and
conditional, not absolute; and therefore is to be pronounced by the mouth of
P^r in Mat. 18. d^cu. 11. v. 18, 19. Cum (...) ex^ on^^ l^gi^^me peractae rata
sit apud Deum, e^veant ex^ommunicati ne illam contemnant -- recepti firmam
fiduciam gratiae concipiant. Calvin. Ergo quisquis admisso delicto suppliciter
culpam agnoscit -- ab Ecclesia veniam impetret, is absolvitur non tantum ab
hominibus, s^d ab ipso Deo -- si ludibrio habet -- neque illi cum hominibus jam
erit negotium, sed Deus erit vindex. Pareus. Sit tibi] judicium gitur Ecclesiae
adversus contumac^s divinam habebit authoritatem. Quaecunque ligaveritis]
Hilarious. ad terrorem metus maximi. Quaecunque ligaveritis] Hieronymus. quia
poterit Contemptoris fratris haec esse responsio, vel tacita cogitatio, si me
despicis, and ego ^ed spicio, potestatem tribuit Apostolis, ut sciant qui ab
ipsis condemnantur, hominum sententiam divina sententia roborari. Ita Cyprian.
de Un t. Eccles. c. 3. Ita Chrysostomus. Ita Augustinus in loc. What ye shall
bind (Diodati) proceeding in knowledge, uprightness, and wisdom. English
Divines, An. in loc. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind (Ioh. 20 23. 1 Cor. 5. 4.) by
convincing men of sin against God, or of wrong done to you. The sentence of
Absolution to the penitent is concional, and so conditional, to the Church
right proceeding is absolute and juridical. There is not the like measure of
visible Saintship required of one at his first admission and at his readmission
after excommunication.
the Church, the Pastor, thus: Be it unto thee according to thy Faith and
Repentance; and except the man really repent, his sin is not loosed in heaven.
So then, the Churches loosing from the scandal is conditional, upon a seen
condition of outward repentance morally sincere to the Churches apprehension,
but they simply and absolutely make him a Citizen of the Church, and admit him
to Ordinances, according to the command of Christ, both in private and public
Church offenses, (If thy brother who offended, repent, forgive him) but his
loosing from the sin or guilt in heaven, is ever conditional, and never
absolutely to be pronounced by the Pastor, the mouth of the Church, who cannot
certainly know the condition.

Hence 1. the scandal is loosed in earth and heaven; the Church impartially
following the rule of Christ sometime when the sin remains and is bound in
heaven.

2. The Church may say the man is absolutely freed from the scandal, so as the
Church sins not in receiving him in, if they follow the rule; but he sins, and
the scandal is bound in coming in, if he repent not: and also as to the guilt,
he is freed from the sin only conditionally, for the condition of removal of
the scandal is seen, and visible: but the condition of the loosing from sin is
invisible.

3. Sometime the man is both loosed from the scandal, and from the sin, and
every way loosed in heaven and earth, when he both really and visibly repents.

4. The Church should go as near in readmitting a fallen sinner, and loosing
him on earth, as they can discern the Lords loosing in heaven: the Corinthians
seem to exceed in this. 2 Cor. 2. 7. So that contrariwise, ye ought rather to
forgive him.

5. There is more of real Saintship required, to receive in again one who has
been once a member and has fallen, and was cast out, then to admit a member
newly come from Paganism.

1. The larger the means of salvation have been, the greater guiltiness, as the
scandal of a Christian is greater then the sin and scandal of a Sodomite, Mat.
10. 15. Mat. 11. 22. Mat. 12 41, 42. And therefore the repentance of the one
must be more signal and larger then the repentance of the other.

2. There is not such a measure of marriage-love required of a Virgin before
she be married, as after she has been married, and born children to the
husband; nor can any say there is so much knowledge required in a new Intrant
that knows not the first elements of Philosophy, as in one who has studied
seven years.

Hence 6. it is utterly false, that as visible Saintship and real Repentance,
as far as can be, is required of one excommunicate, before he can be received
in again; so real visible Saintship, as far as can be seen, must be required in
members before they be first admitted. But I desire our Brethren, if they judge
the first receiving into the Church a loosing from sin and scandal, as
readmission is, they will teach it me.

Mr. H. If Baptism be the Seal (says Mr. R.) of our entry in Par. 1. p. 77.
Mr. R. 3. Arg.
the Church, then is not this covenant the formal cause of Church Membership.

Ans. If Baptism seal our membership, then it is after membership, and so not
the formal cause of it.

Ans. There is in my argument no word that baptism is the formal cause of our
membership. Baptism is a seal of our solemn installing in the Church; it is a
seal quoadnos, as state and feising in houses or lands is.

Mr. H. Though children do not covenant personally, yet they are included
virtually in their parents, Deuteronomy. 29.

Ans. If Mr. H. mean Children not born, as the place Deuteronomy. 29. does evince,
what is that to the purpose? we have no question with any, whether unborn
children have right to membership, or to baptism, non entis nulla sunt
accidentia; if he mean Mr. H. makes Infants to be no actual covenanters.
born infants are but virtual, or potential covenanters, as the seed is a tree
in potentia, and no tree actu, so must Infants be no actual covenanters, but in
potentia only. Anabaptists shall thank Mr. H. for this, for then they are not
actually holy, Romans 11. 16. nor actually to be baptized, nor is God actually
the God of Infants; but some act is required of them, to lay hold on the
covenant.

2. The Kingdom of Heaven then is not due to them, nay not a half salvation
but in potentia. But our Savior pronounced them actually blessed, and said, of
such is the kingdom of God, Mat. 18. 14 Mat. 19. 14. Mark 10. 14, 15. Yea, as
Christ cannot bless unborn Infants, not can he say, of such is the kingdom of
God, if they be covenanters only in potentia, and be such only.

Mr. H. This covenant is either the covenant of grace, or different M. R. Arg.
4. Par. 1. p. 78, 79
from it.

Ans. The new covenant is either considered according to the benefit of saving
grace given in it, and so this is not the covenant. Or 2. according to the
means of grace offered, and so the Church Covenant is contained within the
covenant of grace, and so the consequence is null. A man may be in the covenant
of grace, who is not a Churchmember, and a man may be a Churchmember, who is
not within the covenant of grace, as Magus.

Ans. It is a doubt to me if Mr. H. understand his own distinction of Gods
decreeing, and commanding will; for with Arminians he says these are contrary
wills.

2. My argument is this, The Church covenant is tither one and the same, or a
branch of the covenant of grace, as it offers grace externally to all, to Peter
and Magus, or then it is a different covenant. That it is different Mr. H.
denies, for then it The covenant of grace solemnly entered in baptism, ties us
to all Church-duties in all Congregations, without any special
covenant-engagement, making me a special Church-brother to these of this
Congregation only, and that by divine command of a new covenant, different from
the Gospel Covenant.
should not be warranted in the Gospel, if it be a part of the Gospel Covenant,
how can they debar men of approved godliness, and visibly within the covenant
of grace from ordinances? for such are implicitly in this covenant.

3. Some are (says M. H.) in the covenant of Grace, that are not
Church Members, and contrary: true; but not if they be externally and
professedly as Israel was, for so to be Gods visible people in covenant, is to
be Gods visible Church, Acts 2. 39. Genesis 17. 7. Rev. 11. 15. Isa. 19. 25. now
we dispute whether the Church Covenant be not a branch of the covenant of the
Gospel externally proposed. Mr. H. yields it is, only he says, the
Church Covenant is not the covenant of grace according to the benefits of
saving grace given in it: true; nor is the covenant of grace externally
preached, according to which Magus and Judas, and all such Church Members are
in the covenant of grace: the covenant of grace according to the benefit of
saving grace given it, to wi^, a new heart, and remission, etc. Then this
cannot hinder, but when one vows to duties in baptism, he also vows he shall
acquit himself in all duties of warning, rebuking, gaining to Christ persons in
all Congregations he shall come unto: for sure to be buried with Christ in
Baptism, and to rise again to newness of life, Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 11, 12.
Gal. 3. 27. 1 Pet. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 12 13. engages a man, when converted, to
strengthen his brethren, to gain others, Ps. 51. 12, 13. Luke 22. 23. 1 Cor. 7.
16. and undeniably to gain a trespassing brother, Mat. 18. and it must be
commanded in the covenant of grace; and to exhort another while it is to day,
Isa. 2. 3. Isa. 19. 23, 24, 25. Zach. 8. 21, 22. Ier. 50 4, 5. And therefore it
must be will worship and unwarrantable, to teach that a visible professor is
not called, nor can lawfully gain a trespassing brother, as Mat. 18. until he
be inchurched a member to that one Congregation, and that he is not to gain to
God, and to bring into fellow Church-duties the inhabitants of another City,
nor in covenant way to exhort one another while it is to day, nor to strengthen
one another in Church duties of love, while first we be all inchurched, by
particular agreement, and covenant to this only Congregation. Yea, it is the
nature (says Mr. H.) of all Corporations, that one cannot be a Member, or free
Citizen, without the consent of that Corporation.

Ans. If entering the covenant of grace and professed faith in Baptism put me
not in a state of brotherhood to any, but to It is vain doctrine that none can
be my Church-brother, whom I am to gain, but one under the same only
Congregational covenant with me.
the five thousand men, and multitudes beside of the same Congregation, Acts 4.
4. and also Acts 5. 14. Acts 6. 7. (whose faces I never saw, nor can see, to
enter this new covenant with them.) Then

1. All of other Congregations, as to the duty of Church-gaining, as to me are
Pagans.

2. Mr. H. must warrant from the word the distinction of Christians, and of
Congregational brethren.

3. To Christ's second coming, none can be made my Church-Brother, though
visibly and professedly he have with me one hope of Calling, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God, one Father of all, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. but one of the
same Congregation, and that by this new covenant.

4. He is never my Congregational brother, but by this new engagement. Nor

5. Of the same visible body with me, notwithstanding of the oneness, Ephesians. 4.
4, 5. but by this.

6. Nor can he eat of one bread with me, contrary to Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
1 Cor. 12. 13. and our brethrens way, being not my brother, nor a member of
that household of Faith, Ephesians. 2. which to Mr. H. is only a Congregational
household.

7. Nor should I love him as a visible brother to me, contrary to 1 Ioh. 3. 14,
15. nor give him alms, as such, contrary to 1 Ioh. 3. 17, 18. 3 Ioh. 5. Iam 2.
14, 15.

M. H. The word (says Mr. R.) teaches that I should confess Christ, walk
before God, etc. but that I am under a divine law to swear this covenant which
is different from the covenant of grace, in relation to this duty, is no divine
law.

Ans. But to say there is no divine law to necessitate a man to enter into
another covenant for marriage, beside the covenant of grace is strange. So a
man may take the place, and do the duties of a husband to a woman, and tell
her, I have been these many years in the covenant of grace, and there is no
necessity to make a mariagecovenant beside. A Nimrod might say, the Gospel
teaches to pay tribute to Princes, and the Prince to exact it, and there needs
no other covenant between Prince and people.

Ans. The reason is altogether impertinent, for a Pastor is no Way of the
Churches, c. 6. sect. 6. page 103 sect. 7. Cotton of the Keys. c. 4. page 17.
Mr. Hooker Survey. A Pastor is not as a husband to his own Congregation only,
for he may perform pastoral duties to other members and Congregations. See Mr.
Robinson Iustific. of Separat. 317, 318. in the the same mistake with Mr. H.
but disputing more nervously then Mr. Hooker: Epaphras though at Rome is a
Minister at Coloss. Answ. A fixed Minist^r laboring among them, in that part
of the Vineyard: true; but he was actu primo, habitu all the world over a
Minister, wheresoever he opened his mouth and tendered the seals.
married Husband, no Monarch to rule over one single Congregation only. So when
he dispenceth Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper to forty of another
Congregation, which he may lawfully do, 1 Cor. 10 17. 1 Cor. 12. 13. As our
brethren teach: the Pastor says, I am no married Husband, nor
Church-covenanting Pastor to you forty foreign members of another
Congregation, but yet I do the duty of your own sworn, and only Husband and
Pastor to you, in dispensing to you this Seal of the Covenant, and there is no
need of a marriage covenant between you and me.

Is not this by Mr. H. his own doctrine, to quit the argument, when it undoes
his own cause, and to say the comparison of husband and wife is blasphemous?
And the like is said of that of Prince and people; for he is no Prince nor
Magistrate to a people which never promised, nor covenanted with him for
subjection and obedience: and a covenant is necessary in both these, but a
Pastor may and does discharge pastoral acts to these with whom he never entered
a marriage-covenant, all our brethren grant.

2. Mr. R. denies not, but there may be a Covenant between a fixed and a proper
Pastor (to make him fixed and proper, not to make him a Pastor) and this
Congregation, but that agreement makes neither Husband nor Prince; but my
argument is, that the covenant of grace gives marriage membership to the man
who enters it, to all Congregations on earth, and warrants the sound
professor to gain a trespassing brother in all Congregations, without the new
fansied marriage, or covenant between him and them. And the covenant of grace
entered did this.

See and answer my Arguments, and prove not to me a marriage-membership with
this only Congregation, by an asserted comparison, wickedly said. But Mr. H.
speaks dishonourably of partaking Church-ordinances, and seals in another
Congregation, and from another Pastor, when he will have these acts to be
adulterous, and traitorous, performed by no Husband, but by a strange man, and
a foreign usurper and tyrant.

Mr. H. That of Baptism is removed. Page 80.


Ans. The answers of Mr. H. are removed.

Mr. H. The Gospel requires me to seek for the help of a godly Pastor, and to
marry, and not to burn, therefore there is no marriage covenant to make a
husband, and such a man a Pastor to me.

Ans. This heedless similitude ever brought to the fields is already removed.

2. There is a difference between making a man a Pastor to me fixed, and making
him a Pastor simply; the former I grant, and Mr. H. shall gain nothing thereby.

3. If the Gospel bid me pray every where, remember the Lords death till he
come, gain an offending brother every where, teach, warn, comfort the brethren
every where; Ergo I must pray Church-ways, partake of seals, etc. at the Church
of Ephesus, of Philippi, of Rome, etc. without any new engagement, or covenant
superadded to the Gospel Covenant.

CHAP. XXV.
Whether a Pastor or Professor be first a member of the Catholic visible
Church, before he be a member of a single Congregation.

MR. H. Some Paradoxes fall from the Pen of Mr. R. a Pastor Page 81.
gifted and called by the Church, is a member of the visible Church before he
be their Pastor, though he be a member of no Congregation.

2. That a Pastor may have a calling from the Church before he be elected by a
Congregation, and so an Individuum vagum, a Pastor of all people, and yet of no
particular people. But if all the Congregations are all the members that all
the v^sible Church has, then he that is not a member of a particular
Congregation, is no member of a visible Church, for that which comes not within
the number of members is no member; but all particular Congregations are all
the members that a visible Church has.

Ans. That he must be a member of a visible Church, before One must be a member
of the visible Church, though no member of a Congregation, before he can be a
Pastor of a Congregation.
he be the Pastor of a single flock is clear.

1. He must be baptized into one body visible, whether of Jews or Gentiles, 1
Cor. 12. 13. for an unbaptized man cannot be a Minister.

2. The qualifications of an Elder or Watchman, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2.
2. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8. And that he be in covenant with God, and visibly holy, and
th^^ he as well as the Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. 10. may be proved to be such as agree
to learned and godly members, who are broken off from membership for no
scandal, but through persecution, and pestilence, then it cannot be a paradox,
if some that are no members of a single Congregation, and so visible professors
known to be faithful and able to teach others, as 2 Timothy 2. 2. and so in
covenant visibly, as the visible Israel of God, and as Gods covenanted Nation
and Kingdom, Isa. 19. 16, 17, 25. Rev. 11. 15. Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Psalm. 22. 27. and
members of the visibly covenanted people, and Church of God, be called to be
Pastors and Elders, except it be said that public suffering for Christ, and
affliction only, and not sin make men learned and holy, incapable to be Elders.

2. That a Pastor is made a Pastor by ordination, 1 Timothy 3. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Acts 6 6. by such as Timothy, Titus, Apostles and Elders is
clear in Scripture: and not one word in Scripture says, that unofficed men
laid hands upon any to make them Elders. Nor will it ever follow that a Pastor
may be ordained, and called a Pastor, or an individuum v^gum, and appointed
over no certain flock, except that Mr. H. prove that we now, when Apostles are
ceased, do separate the ordination of officers by the Presbytery, from the
election of the people, A Pastor is made a Pastor by only ordination, but it
follows not, Ergo, he is now lawfully made a Pastor by ordination separated for
any designed and certain flock, consenting and choosing him to be their Pastor.
When Augustine confesses that the Donatists, who separated themselves from the
true Catholic Church, did beget sons to the Church, and had the true
Sacraments, he shows that they were members of the Catholic Church, though
members of a separated Church. De Baptismo contra Donatist. lib. 1. c. 10.
Certe quidem nati erant, nec tamen ad ipsam Ecclesiam, de qua nati erant, per
pacis uaitatis vinculum pertinerent; ergo ipsa generat, and per uterum su^^ and
per uteros ancillarum ex eisdem Sacramentis tanquam ex viri sui semine.
and that the presbytery may do as the prelates, ordain a man to be a pastor
every where, when as no certain flock calls him; which we teach not: for
ordination only makes a pastor, sola ordinatio, but that ordination is not
solitary, and it is alone, but inseparably joined with an inviting, and choosing,
and consenting people. But that consent and choice does not formally constitute
a man an officer, but only appropriate his labors to this consenting people.
Mr. H. argues here just as the Papists do. If we be justified sola fide, by
faith only, and not by works; ergo we are justified by such a faith as is void
of all works, and so by a dead faith: we deny the consequence, the man sees
with the eyes only, ergo he sees with the eyes plucked out of the head: The
like Paradox M. H. imputes to me, if only ordination formally make a Minister,
ergo ordination now where Apostles are not, though separated from election of a
certain flock, makes a lawful Minister in a settled Church State, it follows
not: indeed in some cases, as hereafter I shall clear, only ordination of
Officers makes a lawful Minister.

Nor is it here as Mr. H. imagines in the case of marriage; for
marriage-covenant makes both a man a husband, and a husband to this woman only,
and to no other: but election of the people makes not a man a Minister, but
only appropriates his Ministerial labors to this flock fixedly.

3. Not is that any thing but a fansied contradiction, he that is not a member,
inchurched and married to one only particular Congregation (for so is Mr. H.
his sense) he is not a member of the Catholic visible Church; For Presbyterian
members are so neither members one way nor another.

1. Apostles and members dissolved are not fixed members of a single
Congregation, and yet members they must be of the visible Church Catholic:
sure it is no Paradox, that the Apostles are such members, for they had right
to all the seals in all Congregations; Ergo, they must by this reason be
members and no members: the like may be said of godly professors so journers,
of these baptized by John Baptist, Matthew. 3. by Peter, Act. 10. by Paul, Act.
16. For if we say that professors are only members of a particular
Congregation, then we confine a Brother to be gained only to one Congregation,
let all the rest perish, they are not my brethren.

2. To deny men to be members of the Catholic visible Church, is to confine
all the Church-blessings, and Church-prayers, Church-comforts, Church-faith in
Church-hearing, Church-partaking of seals to the one only Congregation whereof
I am a member, for in all other Congregations whereof I am no member, there is
no assembly-glory, nor no assembly comfort The woeful absurdities which follow
from the membership of Pastors and Saints confined to one only Congregation.
promised, Isa. 4 5, 6. no assembly, o^ Church-protection, and Church-leading
from a cloud by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, no joy in the
public sanctuary, Ps. 84. 1, 2, 3. Ps 42. 1, 2, 3, 4. Isa. 2. 2, 3. no comfort
in a Church Way through ^ion in which the fool shall not err, Isa. 35. 89. no
more comfort to me, who am not a member of that flock, then to the Heathen and
the Eunuch; for I have no more a place there then the Heathen: contrary to Isa.
56. 4, 5, 6. nor have I Interest in Church-holiness, Zach. 14. 20, 21. and the
sanctuary beauty, Ps. 27. 4. Ps. 23. 6. which the Angels desire to learn by the
Church, Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 11. 10. more then if I were
excommunicate by Mr. H. his way.

3. Consider if this be not a Judaizing, and a confining of all these spiritual
privileges, and glorious Church-comforts, Worship, and Church prayer once
confined to Bithel, to the Temple, 1 Kings 28. 29, 44. Dan. 6. 10. which Christ
has made common, and excepts of in all places, Ioh 4 21. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Rev. 1.
10. to one single Congregation, whereof I am a member.

4. Its against the nature of the seals, that is, our union by spiritual
ingraffing into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and we all eat one bread, 1 Cor. 10.
17. our communion in love with all the Saints is here sealed, and the broken
bread seals the body of Christ broken, not for one man, and for only one
single Congregation, but it seals Christ's love to the Redeemed world, Ioh. 3.
16. 1 Ioh. 2. 2. to the whole redeemed, saved, sanctified Church, Ephesians. 5. 23,
26, 27. Ioh. 10. 11. and 11. 51, 52. for the Catholic Bride, not a limb, a
single Congregation is the complete object of Christ's intent.

2. The complete and adequate matter of his work and soul-travel on his
incarnation, dying, rising, ascending, interceding, giving of the holy Spirit,
Luke 19. 10. and 2. 10. 1 Ioh. 2. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Rev. 1. 5, 6. Heb. 7. 25.
Ioh. 16. 7. Isa. 53. 11.

3. The only complete recipient, and principal subject of all the gracious and
saving actings of Christ, of Church-callings, of the Promises, Covenant
preached.

5. By this the congregational body may say, I have no need of thee.

Obj. Yea, I have materially need of thee for counsel, rebuke.

Ans. But is Body-need, Organ-need, and Church-need that Paul speaks of, 1 Cor.
12. 26. Peter's body has no Organ-need of Paul's feet to walk, for he has two
feet of his own; but he may have physical need of another kind: So the
Congregation has need of Heathens to rebuke them, but this is no Church-need.

6. Paul, 1 Cor. 12. would have no schism in the body, but would have the
Churches to have the same Church-care one of another, and not to be divided in
one Faith, one Baptism, one Church-head, one Church-Gospel, etc. which must be,
if I be not a member of all congregations.

7. We are to suffer one with another, rejoice one with another, but no
Church-feeling is required of me, if I and those of another congregation be not
of the same visible body, by virtue of the fellow-feeling between the members,
the Apostle cannot speak of a natural compassion: for humanity will teach
Christians to mourn at the destruction of Heathens, but they are not for that
of the same body of Christ with us. But as Churches and members of associate
Churches are visible professors and members no less than single congregations.
all these prove that there is a visible body of m^^y congregations, and so
that there is a Catholic integral visible body. So we thus argue: If the
Church-actings, and sufferings, and rejoicing condition of those of associated
Churches be visible and audible to us, no less than the Church-actings, and
sufferings, and rejoicing condition of the single congregation, whereof I am a
member: then must the one be a visible Body and Church as well as the other.

But the latter is true. The Proposition is clear: for if the properties and
accidents be visible, the subject is visible; because this is the formal reason
why a congregation is visible, for we see not the spirits and faith in the
hearts of the single congregation, but we see their profession in single
persons, and their meetings in one place, for hearing, praying, praising and
partaking of the seals. Now all these we see in three or four or six meetings,
or conventions of the Churches associated, which shall but make one numerous
congregation of ten thousand, as the dissenting Brethren said of the Church of
Jerusalem: and we see them severally meet, as we see the Church of our own
single congregation. As for their poverty, sickness, imprisonment, and the
sufferings of these of the same congregation of which we are members, we see
not these in Church meetings, but in single members, and these must be visible
in many congregations, as the famine in Judea for which Paul made a collection,
as well as in one. From all this its clear, that it is false which Mr. H.
says, That all particular Churches are all the members that the Church visible
has. For Apostles, godly sojourners, dissolved members, are not members of
congregations, not are they congregations themselves, and yet they are members
of the visible integral Catholic Church.

CHAP. XXVI.
Other Arguments against the Church Covenant are vindicated.

Mr. H. Mr. R. plainly affirms, That when one enters a member of such a
Congregation under the Ministry of A. B. he comes under a new relative state,
by an implicit^ or virtual covenant, page 95. which is cross to that which was
affirmed page 92.

Ans. Mr. H. cites not my words to the full. I deny not, A sort of covenant is
not denied, but the question is mis-stated.
but he that enters a fixed member of a congregation, comes under a new relative
state of a virtual covenant, and so does he that enters a member of a Christian
Army, of a Family, of a Society in a Ship. But the state of the question is not
touched: for the state of the question is not, Whether this new Covenant make
the adjoyner a member of the visible Church, where as he was no visible member
before; that is, whether a born Englishman, by being made a citizen of London,
was made an Englishman and a born Subject of England, whereas he was not a born
Subject before?

2. Whether does this New Covenant give him right and claim to
Church-ordinances, and seals of the Covenant of grace, so as without it, the
man has no right at all to Ordinances. Sure, its a great sin to lay more
weight on either the Temple or the Ark than God has laid on them. But this
Covenant so used is a fancy.

Mr. H. A Church newly erected becomes a sister-Church with others, yet she
needs not a new Covenant (says Mr. R.) to accomplish Par. 1. p. 82.
it. Ans. No certain, our Covenant once entered, all the relations that depend
thereupon are included in the first Covenant. A woman once being married, all
duties to the husbands kindred results from the Marriage-covenant, there is no
need of a new Covenant.

Ans. Yea, but a Church newly erected becomes as really a part of a Synodical
body that is really obliged to engage for association, says Mr. H. (and its
both lawful and useful) as a person Survey, par. 4. cap. 1. concl. 1. page 1, 2.
becomes a member of the single congregation. And officers are no less married
to Synodical duties (by the light of nature and right reason (says the same
Mr. H.) than single persons Mr. H. Survey, ibid.
are married to congregational duties; therefore a covenant is as necessary in
the one as in the other, magis and minus non variant speciem, if there be a
marriage, here officers are more married to the associated Churches in general,
as to the complete correlate, than to the single and inadequate correlate the
bit of a single congregation.

2. A man born in the Covenant of grace, and baptized, is engaged in all duties,

Mr. H. The Apology said, Its not the Rule of the Word touching Man and Wife,
Magistrate and Subject, that makes people in such a state, but the Covenant
thus stands unanswered by Mr. R.

Ans. This is for me; but he being born in the Gospel Covenant, The blasphem us
comparison making the Pastor the Husband, and the congregation his married
wife, until death, is refuted. Due Right of Presbyt. l. 1. p. 127. Enarist. Ep.
2. Council. Carthag. 3. cap. 38. Council. Sard. Cen. 1. Council. Antioch. c. 21.
Enarist. de Epist. ejectis. Sicut vir non debet adulterare suam uxorem, ita
neque Episcopus Ecclesiam fuam, ut eam dimittat. Innocen. III. Omnipotens Deus
conjugium quod est inter Episcopum and Ecclesiam suo tantum judicio reservavit
dissolvendum. Calv. Com. in Isa. 54. v. 5. Ecclesia agnoscat qualem maritum
habere ac revereri debeat ((...) Deum). Luther Com. in loc. Habetis maritum,
non Mosem, non Petrum, non Paulum. Bullinger, Musculus, Gualther, Com. in Isa.
14. v. 5. Nor do our Divines acknowledge that Council. Gener. par. 1. Epistola
Papae Calixti secunda, page 136. allegata est uxor legi, quamdiu vir ejus
vivit, Romans 7, etc. similiter and sponsa Episcopi, quia sponsa uxorque ejus
dicitur Ecclesia.
and baptized to all Churches, he is a son, a married member to all
congregations.

2. Mr. R. constantly denied the naked comparison, as blasphemous and Popish,
the Church is Spouse to no sinful man, Pope or any other. Enaristus, The
Council of Carthage, of Sardis, of Antioch, so judge, That the Bishop is the
Husband, the Church his Wife. Innocentius the III. As Almighty God has left
the Marriage-covenant to be dissolved by his own judgment only, so let not
the Bishop leave his Church. But Calvin and Luther say, The Lord is the Husband
of the Church: So Bullinger, Musculus, Gualther.

2. It makes communion between the Pastor and those of diverse congregations to
be acts of Adultery.

3. It makes a Pastor to be married till death.

4. When the congregation is dissolved by persecution, the godly Pastor is cast
out of his Masters service by the nature of this covenant, because he is
faithful to Christ, and that by Christ himself.

5. It divorces between all godly Pastors, and all Churches on earth, so that
it is not lawful to preach pastorally, or to tender the seals to another
congregation, or any member thereof, though Letters of Recommendation (as our
Brethren say) may give Church right to the se^ls to those of another
congregation to be admitted to the Lords Supper; yet we still desire to Quere,
Whether the Pastor, upon the banishment or death of the Pastors of sister
congregations, may not lawfully, pastorally preach and tender the seals to
them, or not? if the former, here is a strange man acting as a husband to
another man's wife.

2. Here is a Pastor acting as a Pastor and a Shepherd to those that are not
his flock, and that by no intervening of a Church Covenant; and he wants the
essentials of a Pastor, which is the choice of that people.

3. Here is Mr. H. his relation between Pastor and People broken, and their
principles destroyed, if the latter be said.

1. What difference is there between his tendering of the seals to those of
another congregation in his own Church, and in another Church, except the walls
of the house make the difference?

2. Why should he not tender the other seal of Regeneration common to all
covenanted ones, Act. 2. 39. as well as the Lords Supper?

3. If he may not as a Pastor in another congregation; How, or by what
authority of Scripture are Pastors only Ambassadors of the King, Messengers of
the Lord of Hosts, Workers with Christ, Stewards, Dispensers of the Mysteries
of the Gospel, Sent of God, Friends of the Bridegroom, and can act only as
such within the precincts of a congregation; and lose both name and thing, when
they pass over the line to visible Saints of another congregation? The Priests
might not offer sacrifice and offerings, but in the place that the Lord should
appoint in his Word; show us a word confining pastoral acting (...) Ambassadors
to one flock only.

6. This destroys the communion of Churches as Churches, Mr. Cotton, Keys, c.
6. p. 25. Mr. H. Survey, par. 4. c. 1. concl. 4, 5.
and makes Synods, in which Pastors act as Pastors to other congregations
associate, (as Mr. Cotton teaches) to be no Ordinances of Christ.

7. The same husbandly power must be in Doctors, so that they write not books
as Doctors to other Congregations, but only to their own.

8. What Scripture warranteth the same Pastor in the same Sermon preaching to
his own flock, and to many strangers of another congregation, to act as a
Pastor to his own only, and to others as a gifted man? and to hear in the same
word to the conscience of the one by pastoral authority, and to the other by
private authority, such as a gifted plowman or woman has? The Brethren make
the pastor a married husband and head of the congregational Church, as Papists
make the Pope the Head of the catholic Church. Christum caput Ecclesiae
universae libentissime confitemuratqui sub Christo summ^ capite vicarius ejus
i^ terris, caput, ut sic dicam, Ministerialo, non principale recto nominetur,
n^gari nullo modo potest: ita Bellarm. de Sum. Pontif. to. 1. c. 24. col. 1. l.
D. and de pontif. Romans l. 1. c. 9. So the Jesuits of Rhemes on Ephesians. (...). v.
5. Though Christ in a more divine, ample, absolute, excellent and transcendent
sort -- be severaign Head -- in regard of motion, life, spirit, grace ^^suing
from him to the members -- yet the Pope may be Ministerial Head.


9. Only Christ is the Bridegroom, Spouse, Husband of his Church, Ioh. 3. Ephesians.
5. Cant. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. and it will not suffice to say, Christ is the supreme
Catholic Husband of all Churches, but the pastor is the under-politick head
and husband of the congregation, as some distinguish. For the Husband and
Bridegroom are as incommunicable Titles proper to Christ only, as to be the
Head of the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. Col. 1. 18. and yet Jesuits do but mock, when
they say, That Christ is the principal and perpetual Head of the whole Church
in a sovereign and principal manner, but the Pope is the Ministerial Head. Nor
do Papists make the Pope a Father, Husband, Bridegroom and Head of the Church
by the spiritual influence of life, motion and grace, yet are they refuted by
Willet, D. Fulk, Cartwright, and ours: And Mr. H. will but ad naus^am
inculcate, that the Pastor is the married Husband, and the Congregation his
only Wife; and that he may not act as a pastor toward others than his own
flock, more than a man may venture to take the place, and to do the duties of a
husband to a woman -- and tell her he is in the Covenant of grace -- and there
need^ Marriagecovenant. Hence I infer, he cannot dispense the Lords Supper to
one of another congregation, contrary to himself and his Brethren, except he be
married by a Church Covenant to them; and so he must be a husband, and perform
the duties of a husband to a hundred persons, of a hundred associate
congregations. But it had been fit Mr. H. had produced any words of mine that
bear, that being in the Covenant of grace can warrant a man to discharge
pastoral duties, either to one congregation or other, before he be lawfully
called of God by the Church, and before he formally consent and engage not
implicitly, but formally and expressly to feed the flock of God; or that any
man's being in the covenant of grace licenses him to do all duties whatsoever of
a Pastor, of a Magistrate, of a Husband, of a Physician, before he be lawfully
called of God to the calling of a Pastor, a Magistrate, a Husband, a Physician.
And Mr. H. wrongfully would that the Reader should believe, That Mr. R. so
teaches. There are some actions indeed that the visible and professed being in
the covenant of grace warranteth a man to do, to wit, to partake of the seals
in all congregations, without any new Church Covenant, to gain a trespassing
brother, to counsel, teach, rebuke, comfort Church Members of all
congregations, where it shall please God he shall be for the present. And Mr.
R. denies that these are either pastoral, or husbandduties, and thinks Mr. H.
in a great error: for if one of another congregation should trespass against a
member of a sistercongregation near by, Mr. H. has furnished the offender
rebuked with this Reply: You and I are not congregational Brethren, nor married
members of the same congregation; and therefore the covenant of grace warrants
not you to rebuke me, or to tell the Church of my obstinacy in Adultery, except
you and I had both sworn in the same Marriage-congregational covenant: for the
covenant of grace no more warranteth you to gain me in a Church way, than it
warranteth a man to do husband-duties to the Woman with whom he never made any
Marriage-covenant; and so all duties of this kind performed by Presbyterians
never so godly, must be Antichristian and adulterous.

Mr. H. This new Covenant makes the new adjoyner a member of the congregation,
(says Mr. R.) never (...) of us (says Mr. H.) said any such thing. The Church
as totum essentiale, made of visible Saints covenanting to watch over one
another in a Church Way, is before her officers, the particular members are
members before they choose their Pastors, and therefore are not made
Church Members by this new covenant.

Ans. There be too many ways to the Well here. I said, the new covenant makes
the new adjoyner a member of the congregation. Yea, I add, A member of the
visible Church, whereas he was no better then a heathen before, and the
Churches of New England say with me; Though Mr. H. say, That never Way of the
Churches, c. 1. sect. 1. page 2. prop. 3. For all the joining of faithful
Christians into the fellowship, and estate of a Church, we find not in
Scripture that God has done it any other way, than by entering all of them
together (as one man) into holy covenant with himself, to take the Lord as the
Head of his Church for their God, and to give themselves to him, and one to
another in his fear, etc.
one of them said any such thing. And sure this is one Church Covenant by which
persons are made fixed members of a congregation; Ergo, they are by this
covenant made members of the visible Church, whereas they were as pagans
before. But there is another Church Covenant, by which pastor and people are
married, and every member so married, as they cannot act as Church Members
without their own congregation, and he cannot act as a pastor toward any, but
toward his own flock. Hence a new Quaere, Whether there be two different
Church-covenants?

3. Its without question, that the family of Abraham was Gods covenanted people
before circumcision was instituted, Genesis 17. nor is there any ground for a
formal Church-covenanting among themselves. And it speaks against all
Scripture, to say there was a Church covenant in Egypt, and in the Wilderness,
Exodus 19. 1, 5. for they were not made Church Members, for members they were
before, by these covenantings with God. And this is Mr. H. his own consequence,
They are members before they chose their Pastors: Ergo. So I retort.

Mr. H. If this covenant difference the visible Church from the M. R. 5 Arg p.
83, 84.
invisible, as the formal cause; then there have been no visible Churches since
the Apostles times till now. Now the Churches (says Mr. H.) in England,
Holland, etc. have the implicit covenant, at their practice evidenceth.

Ans. Yet it must f^ow, since presbyterian Churches believe and practice
juridical power, without the bonds of a single Independent Church in diverse
associate Congregations.

2. And do not contend for, but are against really supposed Saints, as only
constituent members of the visible Church, and in the causes internal and
external.

And 3. are so contradictorious to Independency, there have been no Church,
according to the rule of the word, since the Apostles days.

2. If an implicit covenant suffice, we shall find popish Churches to have much
of that.

Mr. H. Though many unwarrantable wayet convey this covenant, yet it self may
be warrantable.

Ans. If by ways Mr. R. mean, as he does, ways inseparable, Read for this a
Judicious piece of my reverend and learned brother Mr. R. Baily, his disswasive
from the errors of the time, and the disswasive vindicated, An. 1675.
causes, pillars, means and undeniable consequences, the covenant must be the
more unhappy, as the unlawful ways of the Mass, the lifting up of the bready
God, and Idolatrous Ceremonies inseparably conveying it, render it unlucky.

Mr. H. It is a dream to say, that when the Apostles came to plant Churches,
that private men, not the Apostles converted them; Where is the man (of ours)
that will affirm that all (All) are converted by private Christians?

Ans. The reply auswers not a whit to the Charge of Mr. R. now when the
Apostles are not.

2. The Apostles, by our Brethrens way, are not Pastors so much as
extraordinary nor, public men, for extraordinariness destroys not the nature
of Pastors; and to our Brethren Pastor and flock are relatives; but the heathen
are no fed stock, nor these who now teach the Gospel to the heathen, Apostles
nor Pastors. All are converted in ordinary by private men, or by no pastors by
our brethrens way.


3. These who teach that now Apostles ceasing, Pastors as Pastors convert none
according to the revealed command of Christ; but pre suppose all are converted
before they be admitted members: they convert not as Pastors; Ergo, they must
convert them as no Pastors; Ergo, they convert them as private men, except
there be a middle preacher between a preaching officer, and a private man, but
this every where is taught by our brethren: now this middle uncalled man, must
be the ordinary converser of all.

2. Mr. H. teaches that the Church homogeneal, in ordinary, now when there are
no Apostles, is before Baptism and Ministry; now this Church is all the visible
sovieties of confederate Survey par. 1. c. 11. p. 55.
converts on earth. Let Mr. H. tell us who converted them: not Pastors, for
they are a framed Church in esse and operari, the Fathers and sole Creators of
all Officers.

Mr. H. It is unwarrantable to say Pastors now convert not Indians By our
brethren, pastors, convert not Indians.
and Heathens, says Mr R. It is warrantable enough, says M. H.

Answ. Enough is a feast. Converters of Heathen now are either Apostles,
Evangelists, or Ordinary Officers and Pastors, or of some middle new Officers:
this latter cannot without Scripture be said, not the former, for they want the
gift of tongues and miracles; nor are they ordinary Pastors. For Pastor and
flock, says Mr. H. Shepherd called, and Church choosing, Husband and Wife are
Relatives. But Indians are no choosing Church.

Mr. H. Men must be satisfied in conscience of the conversion one of another,
says Mr. R.

Ans. To reasonable charity they should, says Mr. H. and no doubt it was in
Ananias, Saphira.

Ans. But their long conversing together, for this satisfaction Mr. H. brings
down to two poor experienced Witnesses, Magus Way of the Church. c. 1. pro. 5.
sect. 2. p. 6, 7, 8. Survey par. 1. c. 4. 7. p. 87.
and Judas, for every one must witness of another, and that witnesses were
called and judicially deponed, that all the 3000. Act. 2. and all Judea, and
all round about who were baptized, Matthew. 3. 3, 4. Mark 1. 5. Luke 4. 21. were
real converts, who can believe, except you believe? for so says Mr. H.

Mr. H. What is all this to overthrow the covenant?

Ans. Very much; for it destroys the Ministry: for though some private
Christians may convert some, yet no man can show The way of our brethren does
destr^y the ministry.
me, by our brethrens way, that pastors now do convert any at all; contrary to
Mat. 28. 19, 20 Romans 10. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Act. 26. 16, 17, 18. or if they convert any, they do it not as pastors.

M. H. They which have no Church Power, can put forth no Church power, but such
as Churches to other Churches.

Ans. The proposition is weak, they put forth an act of love, of counsel, of
approbation, of conjunction, as well as power. Mr. R. grants one single
Congregation to have no power over another; many Churches sent to Parliament,
to declare their judgment, may approve of their determinations, if holy, if
not, may confute them; yet they have no Church Power over the Parliament.

Ans. 1. My argument is mistaken, many Churches, suppose mine, have not power
by this way to receive in one Church, nor James, Cephas, and John power to
receive authoritatively Paul, as they do, say Calvin, Pelicanus, Pareus,
Piscator, Diodati, Beza; yea Ierom also before them. Calv. Com. Gal. 2.
incitavit ad sanciendum Ministerii societatem. Pelican. ib. Synod. (Paulus)
primarius fuerit inter Apostolos. Pareus, in Collegium Apostolorum nos
receperunt. Pisc. Me pro Apostolo agnoverunt. Diodati. Beza. Symbolum nostrae
consensionis dextram dederunt. Hieronym. Gal. 2. Many Churches may put forth a
Church Power upon one Church associate, as James, Cephas and John, Gal. c. 2.
as Apostles received Paul into the College of Apostles.


Mr. H. If Mr. R. const^ue a token of consent, consensionis, to be a Symbol of
authority, it is beyond my understanding.

Ans. Mr. R. never understands private consent, or private counsel, such as one
private man or woman may give to another private person, of their own, or of
another congregation, to be public authority; but I acknowledge a public
authoritative, and Aopstolick consent to be in James, Cephas, John; and their
meaning was, Brother Paul, our counsel as Brethren, is, and our consent, you be
a Preacher, but we have no Apostolic authority from the Lord to own you as an
Apostle. Now that is the true meaning of Mr. H. for this of Mr. R. must bide
yet strong: these that have no Church Power can put forth no Church-act. Such
as one Church may put forth toward another single Sister-Church, as Mr. R.
often grants, as one single man cannot excommunicate another; yet one single
man being a Pastor in a Church, Judicature joined with the Church binding and
loosing, such as is Mat. 18. may give consent, not private by way of counsel,
but public, by way of authoritative influence, as a partial and collateral
cause, that Paul, Gal. 2. be authoritatively adopted into the number of the
Apostles, and that they be excommunicate who say, they are Apostles, but are
not, and do lie, Rev. 2. and a married wife has no marriage-power over any man
but over her own husband; nor is it to be heard, which Mr. H. says, I but she
may put forth an act of love and counsel to all men. But I ask, may she put
forth a certain act of matrimonial love, or perform a certain matrimonial duty
to all men on earth? this would be too near unchaste acting. So let Mr. H.
answer, whether these three, James, Cephas, and John, gave Apostolic public
consent, that Paul should be received an Apostle, or only a private counsel. If
the former be said, why contend we? if the latter, what more had Paul from the
given right hand of these Apostles then he had before? he was no more to them
an Apostle then before, yea, more to three private Believers in Galatia;
contrary to the scope of Gal. 2. These Churches sent to the Parliament that
way, not representing the National Church and Kingdom covenanted with the Lord,
can give no Church-determination, more then so many single Pastors; yet it is
an official judgment, not a private judgment.

Mr. H. It is not warrantable that one not in office (says Mr. R.) Page 88.
but a private Christian, should pray, exhort, preside in the framing of a
Church, and in ordaining of Pastors. Ans. The practice of the Church of
Scotland will say to this, we allow not public prophesying of unofficed men.

Ans. 1. Here is ordinary prophesying, such as that of the Some chief and
ordinary church-prophesying, and church-praying is given to the unofficed
church, as to the only kindly subject by Mr. H. Mr. H. Survey par. 1. c. 8. p.
52.
Apostle Peter at the calling of Matthias, Act. 1. and public
Church-prophesying and praying; such as is by the Prophets or presbytery of the
Church of Antioch, Act. 13. when Paul and Barnabas were called to be Apostles
to the Gentiles: and since officers are but adjuncts of the Church to Mr. H.
and separable accidents, by no institution of Christ have pastors hand in
ordaining pastors; but the settled way till Christ's second coming is that the
male-Church kindly per se, make and unmake all the officers, which cannot be
done, but by Church prophesying of unofficed men. 2. Expectants being pastors
in fieri, sons of the prophets, by command of the prophets, vi materiae, for
trial must prophecy: that you cannot warrantably say from Scripture of your
prophets.

LIB. II. CHAP. I.
Whether or not a company of Believers destitute as yet of Officers, and
combined together by this new Covenant, be truly called, and be in truth and
indeed a Church?

MR. Hooker moves the question, whether such a Mr. H. par. 1. c. 8. page 89.
Mr. H. is dubious what is the instituted Church in the New Testament. Way of
the Church of N. E. c. 1. sect. 1. pro. 1. page 1, 2.
company be a Church indeed? by which he insinuates, that it is a certain kind
of a visible Church, but not the only visible Church instituted by Christ in
the New Testament. Therefore Mr. H. stands obliged either to form the question
in other terms, or to show which is the only instituted visible Church in the
New Testament: for the Discipline-book of N. E. says, that Church which Christ
in his Gospel has instituted, to which he has committed the Keys -- the
Officers, Censures -- is coetus fidelium, a combination of the godly -- called
a particular visible Church. And Mr. H. comes to our hand, and (so with a
trumpet giving an uncertain sound) he tells he speaks of the Congregational
Church, as it goes before Officers; which is a Man in the Moon, and proved by
no Scripture at all.

Mr. H. The trumpet here gives an uncertain sound. M. R. expressions are so
full of variety.

Ans. It is a groundless charge, except you bring expressions of Mr. R.
ambiguities, which is not legible to the Reader: I blow the trumpet always
against such a visible Church as Mr. H. forgeth by arguments from the word,
which are not answered.

Mr. H. A Church ministerial is taken two ways. 1. Generally, Pa. 8. par. 1.
p. 90, 91.
as implying any delegate power in the exercise of any Church-acts, under
Christ. So a company of visible Saints has power of admission of members, and
election of officers; and in case they prove heretical, to reject the officer,
and make him no officer. All these are granted by Mr. R. Ministerial power is
taken strictly, as it includes an office power, so it is not ministerial.

Ans. Mr. H. dictates, but neither teaches nor brings one word of Scripture to
prove a distinction that has neither head nor feet.

2. The members of the distinction are coincident; for to ordain officers, and
excommunicate them is governing strictly and most properly; as is in the second
member. And yet in the first Mr. H. makes a Church without Rulers, to be a
Ruling Church to ordain officers, and excommunicate. Mr. Cotton Keys c. 4. par.
2 as the Presbytery cannot excommunicate the whole church (though Apostates)
for they must tell the church -- so neither can the church excommunicate the
whole Presbytery, because they have not received from Christ an office of rule,
without their officers. M. Cot. contradicts M. H.
member, to excommunicate makes a ministerial Church largely so called. The
distinction is a begging of the question, and destroys it self; for it is to
ask whether visible Saints, wanting such as are the only Governors and Rulers,
who are called in the word (...), 1 Cor. 12. 28. (...), 1 Timothy 5. 17. (...),
Heb. 13. 17. Rulers, be a ruling and a governing Church, for a Society that
does ordain Elders, and which censures them, if heretical, with
excommunication, must be a Ruling, and so a Ministerial Church, if there be any
Ruling and Ecclesiastic Church on Earth. If any say that a Society that
appoints Stewards and Officers over the house, and excommunicateth them, is not
a politic governing Society; they may deny that the man which makes use of
reason is a reasonable creature. And to frame a distinction, and say a man is a
reasonable There is no warrant in the word for a male Church-ruling and
admitting members, ordaining and excommunicating officers, and yet that is void
of rule and office
creature in that sense, is poor Logic. We can give instances where the
Presbytery ordains, and lays on hands, 1 Cor. 4. 14. and where Titus and other
Elders are to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. and Timothy, and in him
others are charged to lay on hands, and ordain no man suddenly, while he be
proved to be a fit Officer, 1 Timothy 5. 22. 1 Timothy 3. 10. and where Timothy and
others with him are commanded, 2 Timothy 2. 2. to commit the ministry to faithful
men, who are able to teach others. Would Mr. H. show so much for the power of
Rule in a company of Believers, void of Officers, or give us a shadow of reason
in the word from precepts, practices, promises, for this new Church, that
ordains and excommunicates without Officers, they should have something to say
to this, who upon good groun^ say, they coin a new Church of their own, unknown
to word.

Mr. H. indeed elsewhere says, Such places shall prove Ti^ thy and Titus to be
Prelates.

I answer, 1. Mr. H. and our Brethrens way shall be straited with this
groundless Argument, as well as we.

2. We say, these Epistles in point of governing, as trying The Ep^ to Timot^
Titus are ne^ there written to them as to Prelates, and Pastors of Pastors, nor
to unoffic'd christians, nor to them as Evangelists, but especially as
representing Elders, to be a copy to officers, to the appearing of Christ.
of Pastors, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. of Deacons, ver. 10. of Elders, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
ordaining or laying on of hands, ver. 22. receiving of accusation by witnesses,
19, 20. the ordaining of Elders thus and thus qualified, Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Timothy 2. 2. preaching the Gospel in season and out of season 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. with
gentleness, 1 Timothy 5. 15. ruling in the house of God, 1 Timothy 3. 16. charging of
men to preach sound doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 3. dividing the word aright, 2 Timothy 2.
14, 15. These Epistles (I say) are written to Timothy and to Titus, not as
little Monarchs, with preeminence above other Elders, but to them as
representing all faithful Officers in the College of that Presbytery, 1 Timothy
4. 14. who are to keep that command unviolable, to the second appearing of
Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13. and they are not written to Elders as having dominion over
the faith of the people.

2. If these Epistles were written to Timothy and Titus not as representing
Officers, but as the Church representing the people, yet wanting Officers, and
so in a Church-capacity, then it should be Paul's mind that the people in that
case destitute of Elders, should preach the word in season and out of season;
as Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. and that the people, in that capacity, should, as
the approved workmen of God, divide the word of truth rightly, 2 Timothy 2. 15. as
well as they ordain Elders, and make and unmake Officers, by the places, 1 Timothy
5. 22, 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. yea, and the Apostle should not have ordained
Titus to appoint Elders in every city, for he should have appointed the Cities
and Churches of only believers to ordain their own Elders.

Yea 3. the Church void of Elders, by our Brethrens way, are the only society
and visible Church on earth, who make and unmake, call and excommunicate
Officers, and Officers have no hand in it, but accidentally: for, Elders are
made, and if heretical, rejected (says Mr. H.) by the people, having no Elders
at all. Ergo, these Epistles must be written to the believers of Ephesus and
Crete that yet want Officers, that they may be instructed how to behave
themselves in the house of God, how to lay on hands, how to receive
accusations, and how to prove and try officers. Yea, Paul should not have
written Rules to Timothy and Titus the public Officers, who by their office
ought to have no hand in calling or rejecting of Officers by this way.

Lastly, says Mr. H. All these are granted by Mr. R.

Whereas in many pages I dispute against this new visible Church, and grant no
such thing, but suppose all the Officers should turn heretical in this, in that
case the people in tutela inculpata salutis, when they turn Wolves, may
withdraw. But Paul's Presbyt. cap. 4. ans. to ar. 6. p. 45.
I say not they can authoritatively excommunicate, and make and unmake
Officers; and the Officers, when the people turn Familists, may withdraw and
remove the Tabernacle.

Mr. H. God has set officers in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Therefore the
Church is before officers. Page 90, 91.


The setting of the candle in the candlestick presupposes the candlestick; the
Church is the candlestick, Revel. 1. 20. the officers are the candles. Mr. R.
answered, It was not good Logic.

Ans. I yet maintain this to be naughty Logic, and a naughty Grammatication:
and if this be the best Argument for this The Logic of Mr. H. God set officers
in the Church; Ergo, the Church without officers is a ruling Church before they
have Rulers, is naughty. So Mr. Robinson, Justif. of Separat. Pref. p. 9.
Bishops and Elders are the only ordinary Governors in the Church -- But not
essential to the Church. Sure they must be essential to the governed Church.
Mr. Robinson ib. p. 295.
new conceit, it cannot stand.

God (says Moses, Genesis 2. 7.) formed man of the dust, and God breathed in his
(that is) in the nostrils of the man, the breath of life.

Ergo, He is a living man before the soul be breathed in him. Its naughty
Logic like this.

Mr. H. God made man of earth, i. e. the body of man of the earth, and he
breathed into the nostrils of that body so made by that mean, the breath of
life: to affirm the body was made before the soul was infused; and that the
body, which is the subject, to receive the soul, must be in nature before the
soul, is very good Logic.

Ans. The Logic is yet naughty: for Moses says, God breathed in man a living
soul, therefore Adam is a living man before his soul be infused. By this Logic

Mr. H. will but change my consequence, parallel and large as good as his. And
have it thus:

God breathed in man's body as the matter, a living soul as the form.

Ergo, the body is in nature before the soul.

I shall not deny that consequence: but 1. The antecedent is not the
Grammatical phrase, and the figurative speech of Moses, as my antecedent is.
God breathed a living soul in the nostrils of man: Ergo, he was man before God
breathed in him a living soul. So I desire Mr. H. to answer the like quirk of
Grammar, Zech. 12. 1.

God creates the spirit in the midst of man.

Ergo, he was a man before God created a spirit in the midst of him.

So Isa. 42. 5.

God gives breath and spirit to the people, and to those that walk on the
earth.

By this Argument,

Therefore the people are a living people, moving and walking upon the earth,
before God gave them breath and spirit. What more absurd?

So Mr. H. God has set officers in the Church:

Therefore the Church is before the officers.

So God has set the members, pastor and people, eye, ear, hands and feet, etc.
every one of them in the body, as pleases him, 1 Cor. 12. 18. this is as much
as, God has placed single believers also (for believers are not members
visible without Gods setting) not yet clothed with adjuncts (as they call them)
of officers in the Church, ver. 18. or in the body visible.

Therefore by the consequence and grammatication every way alike,

The body or Church visible of combined believers, shall be before the body or
Church visible of combined believers. But the Conclusion is absurd. What then
has Mr. H. gained by this Argument? Of necessity then, when the Apostle says,
God has placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets;

The word Church, must be the visible Catholic organick Church, which is made
organick by such organs as Apostles, Prophets, so seated.

Like this, God has created a soul in man, and yet he is a man by the soul
that is created in him, and is not a man before it be created in him.

Mr. H. Beside there is advantage to the cause, that not only the Page 92.
subject in which these officers are, is totum essentiale, but by virtue of her
choice which is causal of the officers, they are there, says Mr. H. and
therefore in reason must be before them.

Ans. Its a great disadvantage, and an untruth, to call the By Mr. H. the
adjuncts beget the subject, the sons the fathers.
Elders and Rulers of a politic ruling visible Church, which is an organical
body, the adjuncts thereof: for the members and organs of an organical body,
are the integral parts, and so in a physical consideration, the essential parts
of the whole integral are not adjuncts by any Logic I know: and if you take
away the integral parts wholly, you destroy the integral whole; but if you
remove the adjuncts or accidents, you destroy not the subject.

2. What Logic is this, to make the Fathers, Apostles and Pastors who beget,
and the Ministers by whom we believe, and visibly believe, Romans 10. 14, 15.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 3. 5. the separable adjuncts of begotten children? This
is strange Logic, Whiteness begot Snow! And this is as strange, that this
Church of believers is the cause, and the officers the effect; that is, the
adjunct is the cause, and the children, the Church of believers, or the subject
is the effect, and the effect begets the cause, and is before the cause, and
the fruit has being before the tree, and the children before the father: for
if we speak of a constant Rule, as now we must do, when Apostles are removed,
if the Church of believers be a visible Church, having the Keys and using
them, even to admit officers, and to excommunicate them, they

1. Dispense censures and govern, who have no call to carry on censures and
government, by preaching the Word, or exhorting and praying, for there are no
officers as yet, etc. If these be visible believers, who are their fathers who
begat them? for there are no officers yet to beget them.

3. Who begot them by the preaching of the Word? and if they were heathens, and
are now converted, who either did convert them or baptize them? for there are
no officers as yet: Did every one baptize another? or did unbaptized members
baptize their own Ministers who are yet unbaptized? and this argument must be
strongly retorted: The officers cannot be the effect of this Church, for they
are the only causes of the very materials of this Church; for officers must
convert, gather a flock to God, and baptize them, if it be true, that faith
comes (in the Lords ordinary and instituted way) by hearing of sent Pastors,
Romans 10. 14.

Mr. H. The Church (says Mr. R.) is the candlestick, not The Churches Rev. 1.
2. are not a number of unofficed believers, but the believers with Doctors and
Teachers as shining Lamps.
simply without candles and lamps; the Church Ministerial is the candlesticks,
and the Ministers the shining torches and candles. Its cross to all men's
apprehensions, says Mr. H. that the candlestick should be no longer a
candlestick than the candle is in it: They are bought and sold for
candlesticks. Is not a subject a subject, though the adjunct be not there? What
kind of Logic is this?

Ans. Its indeed unknown Logic, that officers the fathers should be adjuncts,
and the Church of believers begotten by them, as is said, the children should
be the subject.

2. Mr. H. will have a figurative speech against all Logic and Grammar, to be
a proper speech, and the candlestick, Rev. 1. 20. to be like the candlesticks
of brass or other metal, or wood, which are bought or sold. So when its said,
Christ walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, the sense must be,
Christ walkesh in the midst of Churohes destitute of Angels and Officers:
Whereas he has promised his presence to the officers, Matthew. 28. 20.
especially, L^^ I am with you -- and by this Christ must promise his presence
to blind candlesticks, and to Churches wanting officers and Angels. Then the
meaning of this, Rev. 2. 5. I will remove the candlestick, must be, O Ephesus,
I will remove believers, and that homogeneal body of Saints, as destitute of
Angels. Never man dreamed of any such sense as this since the world was. But
the true sense is, I will remove a shining Ministry, and the Ordinances, and
the eight of the p^ed Gospel, and the Word of the Kingdom; as Zech. 9. 8. Three
shepherds also I cut off in one month -- Then said I, I will not feed you.
Amos 8. 12. They shall seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. Mat.
21. 43. The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, Acts 13. 46, 47. Let Mr. H.
show how the Church without the Minister is called the golden candlestick? And
where the Church of believers, without the stars and torches, is called The
light of the world? Godly and found Interpreters, Pareus, Pignetus, Marlorat,
Piscater, Di^^ati, English Divines, The Church are candlesticks, Pareus Com. in
Apocalyp. in loc. Candelabris assimilantur -- quia Ecclesia gestat facem
coelest is doctrinae. Pignet. Apoc. 1. Quia in ea v^rum lumen lucet. Marlor.
Quia in ea sunt Prophetae, Apostoli, Evang^listae -- quia lucent per
saluberrimam vitae doctrinam. Piscat. Apoc. 1^ observe. 39. Candelabra illa quae
vidisti -- in vera Ecclesia instar auri splendet and lucet pura doctrina. So
Diodati, English Annotations, Beza.
because they bear (says Pareus) the torch of heavenly Doctrine. So Pignetus,
Marlorat, Piscator.

Mr. H. A Corporation of Aldermen, before they choose a Major, is a free
Corporation: Ergo, the Church of believers is a visible Mr. H. Survey, p. 92.
Church before it have officers. A man cannot be a husband before he have a
wife, yet he may be a man wooing woman before he can make her his wise.

Ans. 1. The comparison is most unlike. For,

1. A Corporation of Aldermen is a Corporation of free It is not a like in a
Church wanting officers, as in a civil corporation wanting Rulers. Papists so
argue. See Jac. Gualter. in Tabula Chronographic. Secul. 1. ad an. 100. verita.
sect. 1. p. 150.
Citizens and Magistrates, such as Aldermen are, though they yet want a
Magistrate supreme, or a Major. The Church void of all officers (...) not a
body capable of governing in a formal way.

2. Say they want Aldermen, they had by nature an intrinsacal power to choose
to themselves private men to be their Rulers, whereas before they were no
Rulers: But the making and laying on of hands upon men, to make them Elders,
agrees not to believers, because visible believers, by the Law of Nature, but
by a positive Law of God is given to a certain number of Presbyters or Elders,
1 Timothy 4. 14. as is above proved.

3. Say that forty Pagans, not baptized, were made by the travels of some
private Christian, man or woman, visible Saints, forty unbaptized could not
make unbaptized Pag^ their Rulers and Pastors, as they could make some of their
members their Civil Magistrates.

4. That Corporation doe^ he get and create their Rulers, and their Rulers, who
are posteriour to them, did not beget them, and make them free Citizen^. But
officers ^^cording to the fixed Rule of the Gospel, now when Apostles cease to
be, are the only fathers who baget visible professor.

Mr. H. If the Church ^^net a Church without officers, then Page 92.
as often as the officers die, the Church di^ also.

2. When the Church for gross heresias rejects the officers, the Church must
destroy her self, while she labors her own preservation. Does a Corporation,
when they put out a wicked Magistrate out of his place, therefore destroy their
own Liberties, and nullify their Corporation? Such Arguments may seem ^n^ugh
to cast a cause, and yet Mr. R. by them can turn all aside.

Ans. Its unfit that a man should so reflect upon his Brethren, It is not
absurd that a politic body destroy its own politic being, when they rem^ve
Lions and Leopards which destroyed him.
when there is so little strength.

1. The Pastors being the husband, and the Church the wife, sure, if the wife
destroy the husband to save her self, she destroys her own wife ship, while she
labors the preservation of her self as a woman: and if the Church destroy all
the heretical officers, is there any absundity to say, She destroys her own
Ministerial feeding, her own sacramental communion, by which she is one body
with all the Saints on earth, as the Brethren grant; and its sure from 1 Cor.
10. 16, 17. and 12. 13. as touching any spiritual well-being and feeding by
these wretched feeders: but they have no authority to do it. I see no
inconvenience, why a Corporation may not out, and lay aside all their Aldermen
and Major, if they turn Lions and Leopards, and so destroy the present
individual Government, while they labor their own safety, and the safety of
their privileges. But the case is not alike, except Mr. H. prove, That the
Church of believers has the same positive power of Government intrinsecal
without their officers, and only fathers who begat them to Christ, to use the
Keys, and formally to excommunicate them, as a free City has over their
Magistrates.

2. If the officers die, sure the organical Church dies, and the organical, and
the ministerial and politic essence of that visible Church, as it is totum
integrale, dies.

2. I retort the Argument. When the Church of the Jews, Acts 13. and 18. turns
heretical, and blasphemes, and refuses to be the married wife (I speak in our
Brethrens language) if the Church of officers reject them, and turn to others,
it shall not follow.

1. That the officers destroy their own husbandly power, while they labor
their own preservation: which is the great absurdity that Mr. H. puts upon Mr.
R. as enough to cast the cause.

2. Shall it follow, That the officers without the people, or governing
without, yea contrary to their consent, is a true visible Church? in no sort.

Mr. H. When the tents are removed, they are not the shepherds tents: to remove
the candlestick is to remove the Ministry, and Page 92, 93.
remove all the Officers, the Church is not a body visible eating one bread, 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17. So Mr. R. But Mr. H. answers, Yet they are called tents fit to
receive shepherds, and are the same they were before the shepherds were chosen,
and remain the same: To remove the candlestick is to remove the Ministry,
because Ministry and Ministers have their dependence on the Church; destroy
the man the whole, you destroy the parts; but it holds not contrariwise: its
true in a Ministerial Church, i. e. an organicum totum, when you take away any
part, you lame the integrity of it; but you dedestroy not the essence of it, as
it is totum essentiale.

Ans. It is enough to me, if ye remove all Officers and Shepherds, it is no
ruling Church, though the fitness of choice (which is no act of government) do
still remain; yet the fitness to ordain and to excommunicate remains not, for
they never had it; Luke distinguishes the one from the other, Acts 6. 3, 5. the
multitude (...), chused not the Apostles; but the twelve Apostles, To remove
the candlestick is to remove the Ministry, and so the church is not a politic
church any more.
not the multitude, ordained them by praying and laying on of hands, v 6. as
the Elders do, and they only, in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22.

2. It is good that Mr. H. grants that to remove the Candlestick, is to remove
the minist^y; I hope he means the shining, burning, and guiding Ministers and
Watchmen, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Mat. 5. 14. Ioh. 5. 35. But in the other page 91, 32.
It is cross to all men's apprehensions (says he) that the Candlestick should
include Candles and Lamps.

3. Nor is it true in Mr. H. his way, that to remove the candlestick, is to
remove the Ministry; for there remains a preaching and a praying Church
(which is at the ordaining of Officers, and sending them, Act. 1^15. and 6. 24.
Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. Act. 6. 6.) which does only make and unmake officers, says
Mr. H.

4. Destroy the whole (says he) and you destroy the parts; but it holds not,
contrariwise: why not contrariwise? if you destroy all the parts (otherwise the
Logic is naught) take away eyes, and ears, and hands, and feet, and all the
integral parts, or all the essential parts, and you destroy the whole, in any
sense; too much of this Logic Mr. H. gives us.

5. Take away (says he) in an Organick or Ministerial body a member, you lame
the integrity. Now the ministry and officers are removed by the people, because
they are heretical, as Mr. H. teaches page 90. I pray you, remains there a
ministerial or organick body? no, says M. H. there remains a homogeneous body.

4. Take away any part, you lame the integrity; take then away the ministry,
you lame the body. O Logic! the ministry is a separable adjunct to Mr. H. page
92. Here it is an integral part; is an integral part an adjunct? is the eye an
adjunct of the organical body? is the integrity hurt, because a separable
adjunct is removed?

5. Nor is this true, take away any part in an organical body, and you lame the
integrity; it is only true of an organical part, not of any part; take away ten
members, believers only, the Church remains an entire, and unlamed integral
body: let ten free members of a City be removed by death, yet the City remains
an unmaimed entire body of Citizens, ruled by Major and Aldermen.

6. Remove the ministry, the essence and organical body remains not.

Mr. H. That which is added, is more beside the cause; It is granted Page 93.
where Officers are not, there is no communion of the Sacraments, is there
therefore no Church Communion?

Ans. If this communion be removed, there is no communion of the Church, which
being many members, is one body, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 12. 12, 13. And what
reason but a Church, and the only instituted visible Church in the new
Testament, as the book of Discipline of N. E. makes it, should be a complete
Church The way of the Churches of Christ in N. E. c. 1. sect. 1. prop. 1. p. 1,
2.
in being and operation, and partake of all Church Communion, though it want
the officers, which are to Mr. H. but poor harmless separable adjuncts? page
92. and this is somewhat for the cause.

M. H. We have done now with the first Quere, and made it clear, That this
Church is before all Officers, and may be without them.

Ans. So Mr. H. has done, and made it as clear as midnight darkness, with
whole two Arguments, the one whereof is a poor Grammatication, and scarce that,
and the other a begging of the question; that there is a ruling Church before,
and without officers, which may make and unmake officers.

CHAP. II.
Of the Nature and Being of a Presbyterial Church.

Mr. H. The qualification of the Church as totum essentiale, Survey par. 1. c.
9. p. 94.
in the order and pr^cedency of it, in regard of her true Officers we have
dispatched. Now we speak of it in comparison with a Presbyterian Church.

Ans. Let not then the Reader expressed any visible Church organical to be spoken
of; Organs are but separable adjuncts, the only Church spoken of, and
acknowledged by Mr. H. and our brethren, is an homogeneal Church of only
believers, which Mr. H. now calls the Church, before he called it a Church, and
this Church, page 94. but we ask the question whether the word Church, Mat. 18.
17. Tell the Church, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth.
And 2 Cor. 1. 1. 1 These. 1. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 15. be this congregational Church
without the separable adjuncts of officers: and the truth is, the place Matthew.
18. The principal copy of the Independent Church, can mean no Church according
to our brethrens way: for no reason can say Officers can be no essential parts
of the visible Church by Mr. H. his way.
that the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 16 19. and the power of binding
and loosing. Matthew. 18. 17, 18. are given to the separable adjuncts of the
Church: but such are the officers, says Mr. H. page 92. and to such as are no
essential parts of the instituted Church, and of the only visible Church of the
New Testament. But M. H. makes it clear, as he says, that the Congregational
Church is before the Officers, and may be, and is without them, therefore
officers can be no essential parts of the Church of the New Testament. And so
this Church void of Officers, must be to our brethren, the first and principal
subject of all Government, Rule, Keys, Officers, and what not?

Mr. H. being to evert Presbyterial Government, he begins Page 94, 95.
at the Pillars.

The Presbyterian Church consists of three Pillars.

1. There must be several congregations, made entire of such members to make up
an integral body of Rulers and Ruled.

Ans. There is a crack in this Pillar, it is not essential to a Presbyterian
Church that all the congregation be entire, and formed The two first Pillars of
a Presbyterial Church, to wit, 1. framed Churches. 2. Formal commissioners sent
to Presbyteries, are to us no pillars, to Mr. H. they are.
Churches, having their own Officers distinct from the offices of others, we
cannot determine that Matthias had a determinate flock, to which only he was a
fixed Pastor, and Peter another, and John a third; we rather judge the whole
twelve fed in common, sometimes in one congregation, in this house, daily, and
sometimes in another; but all the huge thousands could not feed in one house,
otherwise many congregations framed and fixed, or not framed and fixed, are all
under one Presbytery, as the Learned and Reverend Assembly at Westminster
teaches. If the Pillars be dreams, the house that M. H. storms is also a dream.

To the second Pillar we shall speak hereafter, if the Lord will.

3. These Churches send Rulers, by way of delegation, to whom they submit.

Ans. This also is a faulty Pillar.

1. They so send as they may be present to hear, dispute, dissent, to what is
amiss, nor are the Pastors delegates.

2. They submit to them not simply.

But first, reserving judgment of discretion.

Secondly, and with liberty to appeal.

3. The whole Elders of six congregations in a City may all meet in one common
Presbytery, without any delegation; and that is a Presbyterial Church, as is
the meeting of a Congregational Eldership.

Mr. H. To their power of Jurisdiction the Churches must submit -- but it
arises from a power of order or office to preach.

Ans. Well said, then cannot they exercise the highest acts of jurisdiction, to
excommunicate all the Elders, as Mr. H. says, page 92. they do, for the people
has no power of order or official power to preach the Gospel, and administer
the Seals, page 92. and yet Mr. H. says, they may communicate all their
officers.

Mr. H. There is a Jurisdiction official that issues only from the office,
this the officers have.

Answ. This Lenitive is a Corrosive. Here is the matter, the people have
jurisdiction, and do excommunicate, but not by an official jurisdiction, but by
another power: So a Midwife baptizeth in the Roman Church, but not by a power
of Order, as a Priest, but its valid. An Usurper judges, but not by a power
derived from the Royal Power of the Sovereign Ruler.

2. By what Scripture can any power of the Keys given by Christ only to the
Church of believers, be given to separable adjuncts of the Church?

Mr. H. None is a steward, unless appointed over the Family by Christ, 1 Cor.
12. 27, 28. Hence Papists and Prelates err, officers and offices are
coronation-mercies, and proceed from Christ's ascension, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

2. They are means of worship instituted by him.

3. He only can bless them.

Answ. 1. None are stewards to put in and put out stewards and excommunicate
them, but such as are appointed of God: But believers without officers are no
stewards at all.

2. Censuring and excommunicating is an authoritative way of edifying, 2 Cor.
10. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 14. show in People that are no stewards have
no authority to censure, or thereby to edify.
all the Word, where believers and private Christians are to edify and build
up in the faith their Pastors, and that in an authoritative way. The people so
must

2. Be coronation-mercies, and gifts given of Christ, ascending to heaven for
the perfecting of the Pastors, and the work of the Ministry, to gather in
Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors to Christ. Whereas the Text says the contrary,
That Pastors were given to gather in the people, and the people, or unofficed
Brethren, were not given to gather in Apostles.

3. If Excommunication be a Worship administered by the Brethren upon Pastors;
then must a promise be made to unofficed Brethren, who excommunicate, Behold, I
send you, as Matthew. 10. 16. This we read not.

Mr. H. He that is called and appointed an officer according to God and the
Rules of the Gospel, as he needs no other power but that of his office, to
authorize him to execute it; So there is no power by rule or right that can
hinder him in the due execution thereof.

Ans. This is a ground against both Episcopacy and Presbytery. Presbyters may
preach in other congregations than their own, if they be officers over it, as
Bishops may in many congregations. How pastors are regulated in the exercise of
their calling.


2. The Pastor, if called of God, may do his office, without horrowing a power
from the Pastor of pastors to do it; but he must preach hic and nunc in an
orderly way, upon a day, and time of the day appointed by the Church.

3. He has an office to preach and administer the seals any where, yet must
he have the call by desire, consent, or some other way, before he can do it in
another congregation.

4. Nor can he rule or administer censures as his alone, extra collegium,
without the authoritative concurrence of the Elders, and tacit consent of the
people, though he be an appointed officer of Christ. So this ground is weak.
Other weak grounds we shall consider after.

CHAP. III.
The Arguments of Mr. H. against the Presbyterian Churches are removed as weak.

MR. H. Arg. 1. If the Churches combined have no more Survey c (...). par. 1.
p. 99.
power than they had before they were combined, they can exercise no more
Jurisdiction than before; and therefore have no Presbyterian power, are no
Presbyterian Churches.

But they have no more power after their combination, than before: Ergo.

The Assumption, where the doubt only lies, is made out thus: They who have no
more office and officers than they had before, they have no more jurisdiction;
as in the first ground, power of jurisdiction flows from power of office. But
they have no more officers, for each send their own; therefore they have no
more power.

Ans. Mr. H. says, The doubt is only in the assumption, and The Churches
united have more power extensively after they are united than before; but not
intensively, and in nature more
takes the proposition for undeniable: The major is false; for by this
argument, two single congregations each a hundred in number, lying so near as
they may most conveniently meet, cannot lawfully unite in one Church, for the
better attaining the end of Christ, which is edification: for say they be the
same number of offices and officers, then they can exercise no more power of
jurisdiction, after the combination over two hundred, than each of them did
over one hundred. But the Conclusion is absurd. Yea, this Argument destroys the
Synod, Acts 15. for suppose the number of offices and officers to be equal in
the Synod, after the Synodical combination, and in the Church of either Antioch
only, or Jerusalem only, before the combination, which is a facile and
ordinary supposition; then they can exercise no more Synodical power (it
matters not what be the kind, whether of power of jurisdiction, or not) after
the combination of these Churches than before; and so the judgment of a Synod
should be no more than the judgment of a Congregation. But the consequence is
absurd. Let Mr. H. see to it, and deal with Mr. Cotton to answer him.

2. To the Proposition. If the Churches combined have no more power
extensively, feeding a larger number after the combination than before, then
they can exercise no more jurisdiction, no more, by way of extension; it is
false: for their united power is extended to a larger number now, then the
divided power was before to each single flock. If the Churches combined have
more power intensively, of the same species and nature after the combination
than before, then they can exercise no more jurisdiction intensively than
before. Its true, it is the same power of Christ, the same valid
Excommunication, the same binding and loosing as to the specific nature of
binding and loosing, that is exercised by five Churches in a City, and
exercised by ten Churches about. We multiply not species, to make all
congregations to differ in nature and specie, as Mr. H. does against Logic;
whereas they have the same essentials, Christ the Head, the same Ordinances,
Seals, the same Faith; but then it shall never follow, Therefore they have no
Presbyterian power over many Churches, and therefore they are not distinct
Presbyterian Churches in local distinction; magis and minus non variant
specious. Nor are Presbyterian, and Provincial and National Churches different
in nature, but only in extent of Jurisdiction.

3. Its a wide mistake, That a Presbyterian Church has its formal essence from
a voluntary actual combination in such Actual voluntary combination is no
pillar of the Presbyterian Church.
bounds, or such a circuit more or less: that is not a Pillar of Presbyterian
Churches; for their near association, by dwelling where they may edify or
scandalize one another, gives them right to be an associated Church, not simply
habitation, but the habitation of such and such professors in covenant with
God, baptized, and giving themselves up in profession to Christ as disciples,
before there be a formal consent, they are obliged to associate: yea, nor does
that voluntary combination make a Presbyterial Church.

Mr. H. Arg. 2. If the Presbyterian Ministers have Jurisdiction, Page 99, 100.
then, over all the Churches of the combination, or only ^ver some; not over
some only, for that is against the definition of a Presbyterian Church:
Therefore they must have Jurisdiction over all the Churches, ten or sixteen. If
they have Jurisdiction over all these, then they are Officers, Pastors,
Teachers, Ruling-Elders in office to them all; for there must be an office, and
so officer before Jurisdiction; and there is no Jurisdiction exercised but by
an officer. To say they are Pastors of them all, is to make a road and ready
way for Pluralities, Non-Residencies.

Ans. Mr. H. gives us, as also the Dissenting Brethren in Twelve pastors feed
12 congregations in Jerusalem, or in some large city in common, not being fixed
any of them to any one congregation, all the 12 are pastors to all the 12
congregations, and yet it is not possible physically, that any one man can
reside in all the 12 congregations; here shall be diverse Non-residents and
Pluralists, but not in a Prelatical sense.
the Assembly at Westminster did, in stead of Scripture, a number of supposed
incongruities, which with equal weight fall upon their own way, as upon ours.
For suppose that the twelve Apostles, Act. 2. and 4. and 6. for diverse years
were Pastors to the many thousands that made up diverse, eight or ten
congregations, who daily convened from house to house, Act. 4. 46. and 5. 42.
in Jerusalem; and that all the twelve feed all the ten congregations in common,
Matthias not being a fixed Pastor to this congregation more than to this; nor
Peter a fixed Pastor to this flock rather than to this, which is a thing most
ordinary in great Cities, where there be 12 Flocks, and 24 Pastors, and variety
of gifts by interchange, proves more edifying. All the Pastors have
jurisdiction, yea and Pastoral charge over every one of the twelve. Then 2.
must they be Pastors and Teachers to every one of the twelve, and because all
the 24 cannot every one of them be residents and dwellers in all and every
congregation of the ten or twelve Churches in Jerusalem, (that is physically
impossible) here shall be Pluralities and Non-residents, and that which our
Brethren call Diocesan Prelates here.

2. That the Presbyterial preachers be pastors and teachers, habitu, and actu
primo, and in common to all the Churches of the combination, in acts of common
concernment, though they be not actu secundo, actual laborers, proper and
fixed pastors, residents and dwellers in every congregation (for that was
physically impossible to the Elders of Jerusalem) to all and every
congregation, is not absurd, but necessary; and the charge of Pluralities, and
Prelatical Non-residents, follows by no Logic, except you call the twelve
Apostles, who preached fixedly at Jerusalem some years, Non-residents, because
that they could not every one of them dwell in every family of so many
thousands at once: In which sense, multitudes of Independent Ministers shall be
Non-residents; and suppose there shall be a common Treasury to pay the
laborers their wages, and that collected out of the goods of all the thousands
so combined, the Independent Ministers upon the same account must be
Pluralists, and receive wages from many, to whom they neither are nor can be
fixed, and proper and peculiarly feeding Pastors.

3. Wisdom may forbid the Brethren to use this Argument, There is no
jurisdiction exercised, but by an officer: for the whole people, men and women,
the only Church instituted in the New Testament, or their unofficed Male
Church, the Fraternity exercise the highest Jurisdiction, and excommunicate all
their officers, and yet they are not officers by their own principles.

Mr. H. Mr. R. denies the Assumption, That they bear the relation of proper
Pastors to every one of these Congregations.

Mr. H. Proper Pastors they must be to all. If the relation of Eldership to a
Classical Church be founded upon the same office that a Pastor has to his
particular congregation, then the Elders bear that same relation of Watchmen to
a Classical Church, which a Pastor does to a particular flock: for where there
is the same office of a Pastor, there is the same relation of Watchman and
Pastor, the one issuing from the other. But the first is said by Mr. R. Lib 2.
335. also they put forth authoritative acts, which issue only from proper
Pastors, they are proper Pastors to those upon whom they can exercise such
acts, else they had no warrant to put them forth.

Answ. I yet in this sense deny the assumption, that they are proper Pastors,
that is, actual imployers of their labors of feeding, both by fixed teaching
and governing, to all the flocks of the classical Church; for that is
unpossible, except they could be in many Congregations at once so feeding. But
I deny not, but constantly teach, that the Presbyterian Pastors are properly,
that is, formally, essentially, habitu, actu primo, Pastors in relation The
Elders of the Presbytery are fixed and proper Pastors, only to one flock and
Pastor in common, in matters of common concernment to all the rest of tho
associate Churches.
to all the flocks, not of the classical Church only, but of all the visible
Churches on earth. As a Physician by covenant actually employed to attend all
the sick of such a City, suppose Norwich, is their proper Physician, yet so as
he is essentially a Physician to all in England, who shall by providence employ
him. An exquisite Gardener by paction, is a proper Gardener to such a man who
conduces or hires him a certain time, to labor such a plot of ground, yet so
as essentially and actu primo, he is a Gardener to all the Country round about
who shall employ him. So is one a proper Schoolmaster to teach Grammar and
Rhetoric to the children of such a City, yet so as he is a Schoolmaster to
all the children of the country who shall employ him. Christ sends his Pastor
Archippus intentionally to feed all his flocks in all fields, and he is
essentially a Pastor to them all; but for the more convenient attaining of
Christ's end, he fixes him by the choice of the people to the Church of Coloss,
not as a Husband to a Wife.

2. Mr. H. With his little finger aims not to twitch the probation of this.

1. Where there is the same office of Pastor, there is the same relation of
Watchman and Pastor. It is false, a Physician, a Pastor providentially fixed to
cure and feed this City by special covenant, has a more near relation to cure
and feed this City; having a twofold relation, both by the calling in general
of a Physician and Pastor, and by a special solemn oath, and hand-writ to this
City; and both the Physician is the same public Physician, and the Pastor the
same public Watchman officio, by office essentially, habitu, actu primo, to
all the sick bodies and sick souls in the country. A mother is the same mother
to ten children, but has a special relation to the eldest as her heir.

2. As born with more pain and labor then all the other nine.

3. As more dearly loving him then all the other nine. Here is the same place,
the same officer, but sundry particular relations.

3. Mr. H. leaves that unproved, the Presbyterian Pastors cannot put forth
authoritative acts Pastoral, but hoc ipso, they must be proper, i. e. their
fixed Pastors, and made theirs by the particular A Pastor may administer the
Supper of the Lord, which he does as a Pastor to these of another Congregation,
yet is he not a fixed proper Pastor to those of another congregation. Cotton
Keys. c. 6. n. 3. p. 25. Mr. H. Survey. par. 2. c. 2. p. 65. Way of the
Churches of Christ in New England. c. 6. sect. 6. page 103 Hr. H. Survey. par.
4. c. 1. p. 1, 2, 3, 4. Our brethren destroy Synods, though they give them the
name of ordinances of Christ. Mr. H. Survey. par. 4. p. 1, 2, 3. When no more
is given to a Synod but to counsel and advise, it is for that no more an
ordinance of God, then a private man or woman giving a counsel is an ordinance
of God.
choice of the people to feed and govern these, toward who^ they put forth
these pastoral acts; because indeed it is adultery to them who are no husbands,
to put forth pastoral acts of governing, upon those to whom they are not fixed
Pastors; ye^ they tender the Supper to foreign members; and so this is a
rotten pillar of this way.

2. Forsaken by Mr. Cotton, and the way of the Churches of N. E. and by Mr. H.
himself.

3. It destroys Synods and all communion of Churches; for Mr. Cotton yeildeth,
as truth of the Gospel taught by a Minister of the Gospel, binds to faith and
obedience, not only because it is Gospel, but because also it is taught by a
Minister, for his calling sake, seeing Christ has said, whosoever receives you,
receives me; they bind not only materially, but formally, for the Synods sake.
I see not how this can be answered, though indeed the Discipline of N. E. and
Mr. H. say the contrary both of this and their own grounds; for Elders in
Synods put forth authoritative and pastoral acts, to these Churches of which
these Elders are not proper and fixed Pastors; but Pastors they are to these
Churches, as to all the Churches of the combination, else they cannot
warrantably put forth acts pastoral, for their feeding and governing to
edification, except it be said, a Synod is no ordinance of Christ; which all
the Brethren and Mr. H. himself deny. All acknowledge a Synod to be an
ordinance of Christ. But the truth is, they but mock the Reader in so saying,
for they give no more to it, but an act of charity, to counsel, as one brother
counsels another: Intuitu charitatis, says the Discipline of New England. And
so Mr. H.

For, what 1. availes it more to say a Synod is an Ordinance of God, because
they can give a charitative counsel, then to say one single Believer is an
Ordinance of God, or a Woman who can counsel a man? The Synod then is no
positive Ordinance of divine institution; for upon the same ground, if a Synod
be an Ordinance of God, because they may counsel the Churches, we may appoint a
new Ordinance of a Synod. For, first, one refuting. Another for rebuking. A
third for confirming. And a fourth for comforting.

2. It is but a mocking of the world, to say the association of Churches is an
ordinance of God, for they can give counsel to the Churches of the bounds (what
may be replied, had I time, is soon washed away.)

But first, so can twenty other Churches without the bounds Private Christians
and women giving counsel to men may as well be called an ordinance of Christ as
a Synod.
of these Churches; so can many eminent Christians in another Congregation, not
in office, give a counsel by way of charity to a Synod convened synodically,
shall they for that be a Synod of a Synod? and shall they be an Ordinance of
Christ distinct from a Congregational Church for that?

Yea, Abigail a woman, a captive maid, gave, the one a divine counsel to David,
and the other to Naaman the Syrian. Shall women therefore be made new
ordinances of God? and if neither the one counsel nor the other have any weight
from the givers of the counsel, but only from the word; it is in vain to name
the one an ordinance of God, more then the other: as for reverence to the
persons, a Synod of Elders, more then one single man's counsel, adds not the
eighth part of a feather as touching authoritative weight to the Counsel, if
the Synods counsel amount to nothing more in point of a divine ordinance; then
Mr. H. says, any Counsel may lay a burden upon any Survey. par. 4. c. 1. p. 6.
man's conscience; so any Christian that shall publish and preach that 1 Cor. 6.
18. flee fornication -- may lay a burden upon every soul, not from the
authority of him that speaks, but because it is Scripture that is spoken; and
this is all the authority of Synods. Would the Lord appoint Men, Elders, and
Brethren, and Churches to come many hundred miles to heal rent and spoiled
Churches, and the result of all is a mere counsel which a woman at home may
give? for the Scripture by the law of Nature warrants women to give this as
well as men, 2 Samuel 20. 16, 17 -- 21, 22. 1 Samuel 25. 25, 26, 27. -- 32, 33, 34.
2 King. 5. 3, 4, 13. And God reveals to women, servants, poor ones, as much of
this as to others of higher place.

Nor shall it help the matter, to say, it is safer to seek counsel from men
then from women, from many then from one; for in the multitude of counselors
there is safety.

Ans. It is true.

But 1. This is no ground to seek to a Synod of Fathers and Elders of the
bounds of these, who are no Pastors nor Elders to us, and can put forth upon us
no Synodical, no Pastoral acts; upon this ground, we should select Counselors
out of one or many Churches, that have no relation to us; and so this is
nothing for such a Synod, but only for many gracious Counselors, private or
public, nothing at all for a Synod of Elders.

2. When all is done, their Counsel is but a Counsel, that has as much weight,
as it has conformity with the rule of the Word, and so has the counsel of a
Woman, or a servant. And it is considerable that the book of Discipline of New
England has no Chapter nor Discourse of Synods, which shows they little value
them.

Mr. H. These authoritative actt which are put forth in other Page 101.
Churches issue from him, either as a Pastor, or as no Pastor; If as no Pastor,
then acts of Jurisdiction may flow from him that is no Ruler. Mr. R. will
gainsay this, if they proceed from him as Pastor, then either as Pastor of his
own Church, which cannot be; or of another Church, and then one man may have
two Pastoral offices. And all these Churches must be either his flock, or not:
his flock they must be, if he be Shepherd to them, for that the nature of
relatives requires, the combined Churches are many distinct flocks, and he
cannot be a Pastor of many flocks.

Ans. This is the former argument with a new dress, quod fui^ demonstrandum.
But did Mr. H. believe his Topic probabilities would be received for
demonstrations?

1. To that, These acts proceed from him either as Postor, or as no Pastor. Let
him be a Pastor to a Congregation compassed A Pastor constantly feeds his own
flock, and administers the Lords supper to forty persons of forty congregations
about, as Mr. Cotton and Mr. H. grant: but he has not forty pastoral offices
for that.
about with nine single Congregations in Jerusalem, in convenient nearness, he
feeds his own particular flock, as a fixed Pastor actually employing his
constant labors upon them, and by the same pastoral office, as Pastor habitu,
actu primo, to all Churches, and more nearly to these nine, he exercises acts
of government for edifying all the ten in points of concernment, which
necessarily must concern them all; and it no more does follow by a shadow of
consequence, that he exercises two pastoral offices over many Churches, then
the same Pastor exercises three Pastoral offices, or four over his own
particular flock, as if it were four flocks, because he preaches pastorally to
some, and administers the Lords Supper to others, as to strangers.

2, Others as Infants, he baptizes as unconfirmed members. Or,

3. Others he excommunicates.

4. Others he converts as finding them no visible Saints; by one and the same
office he feeds and governs all.

2. The same argument is retorted, Archippus administers the Lords Supper (as
Mr. H. his book of Discipline, and Mr. Cotton Mr. H. Survey. par. 2. c. 2. p.
65 Way of the Churches of N. E. c. 6. sect. 6. p. 103.
teach, and the word warrants him to do) to forty godly visible Saints out of
forty Sister-Congregations, either as a Pastor, or no Pastor, to these forty;
either as to his own flock, or not his own flock, not as no Pastor. Mr. H. Mr.
Cotton (except they follow Socinians) and all shall gainsay that; if as a
pastor, then by Mr. Hookers argument, he must have Pastoral offices over forty
Churches. So the same argument destroys the Synods, though some way soundly
established by Mr. Cotton; Survey. par. 2. c. 2. p. 65.
yea, Mr. H. grants it is lawful to tender the seal of the Lords Supper to
those of other Congregations, yea, he is warranted by the word so to do, 1 Cor.
10. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12,
13. It is against the Congregational way; and it is not equal to bring, quod
fuit demonstrandum, such strong demonstrations (as he calls them) against Mr.
R. and the Presbyterian Church, which destroys his own congregational way.

3. If he act as a Pastor and Shepherd to them, his flock they must be, for
that the nature of Relatives require. This is a mistake of the nature of
Relatives; for the adequate and complete correlate to which every ordinary
pastor is referred as a Shepherd to the flock, as a husband to the wife, actu
primo, is all the Churches on earth, as a physician is referred to all the sick
on earth, not adequatly to this one sick person, but actu secundo, in the
actual exercises of the ministerial calling, very pastor indeed now is referred
to one flock, as a fixed providential feeder, and to these round about, the
same way in acts of government that concern associate Churches: but it follows
not, as is said, that he is a proper fixed pastor to these Churches round
about; for these words, feed the flock, which is (...), amongst you, 1 Pet 5.
1. and Act. 20. 28. Take heed to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Overseers, Have no such sense as feed the one single Congregation
only, as a husband to your wife, that is in Ephesus, and beware of the
spiritual adultery, of taking pastoral care of the other Churches of Christ
that are, (...), amongst you. Mr. Cotton says, the Church in the Canticles
(and say I, the pastors also) take care not only for her own members, but for
her little Sister, which she thought had no breasts, Cant. 8. 8. And I hence
infer, that a pastor is to take a pastoral care of the Churches associate, Acts
8. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 16. for they were among them as well as the single
congregation. And when Paul says, take heed to the whole flock, (...), he
means not only a single congregation, but diverse congregations and many sheep
in the flocks of diverse congregations, as (...) signifies not a few, but
exceeding many in Scripture, Phil. 2. 21. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Ioh. 11. 48. Ioh. 12. 32. Rev. 5. 13.

Mr. H. The Presbytery are Elders to the classical Church, says Mr. R.) in
some respect, not simply (...), not in things proper to Page 102.
each congregation, but in things common to all the united Churches, to wit, in
things which rather concern the consociation of the thirty Churches (about)
then the thirty Churches combined in particular. By our Saviors rule, Matthew.
18. (says Mr. H.) the offender is privately,

First, to be rebuked.

Secondly, then before two.

Thirdly, before the Church nearest the Congregation. The classical principles
admit not this.

2. Suppose the man in his private fault continue obstinate, this obstinacy is
re^ propria, proper to the Congregation, why may not the Congregation without
the Presbytery then oast him out? for this pertinacy was made known only to the
Congregation or Church.

Object. But the neighboring Churches must avoid his company upon knowledge
given.

Answ. So must the Churches of another Presbytery or Classis, or of another
Province, and therefore there is no more need the one should have a hand in the
censure, then the other.

Ans. 1. The congregation in private scandals by our principles The place Mat.
18. is mistaken by our brethren, contrary to the scope, and to the mind of
Fathers, Doctors, Divines, Councels, Martyrs. So widely D. Bills. mistaketh the
place M^t. 18. Perpet. go. vernm. c. 4.
(which Mr. H. it seems, knows not) does admonish, and the offended person is
to admonish, according to the order of Christ, Matthew. 18.

2. Mr. H. takes for granted, that the place Matthew. 18. is a Rule for removing
only private scandals: 2. And that by the word (Church) Matthew. 18. is meant
only his own Independent congregation.

3. That Christ, Matthew. 18 shows of no removing of scandals between two visible
Saints dwelling in one Christian family, who by the principles of Mr. H. may by
their own free choice be members of diverse congregations: (a strange dream!)

4. He supposes it must be only one single man that trespasseth against a
brother, but if ten, or many sister-Churches transgress against
sister-Churches. Learned Whitaker, Calvin, Beza, Pareus, all Protestant
Divines, all Fathers, all learned Doctors, Papists, Lutherans, Doctors,
Councels, all the Martyrs who by the Text Matthew. 18. appeal to a General
Council, did but abuse the Text, in applying it to Synods: whereas Tell the
Church, is now found to be only the single congregation; whereas the contrary
is sure. There is a figure

1. In thy brother, for he means many brethren, within or without the
congregation.

2. By trespassing, by a Sydecdoche, he means all scandals; else we were not to
complain of public scandals to the Church.

3. By the Church, he means all Churches respectively, as those of Antioch, in
case of scandalous doctrine, Tell a Synod, Acts 15. 2. The obstinacy is not
proper to that congregation, if public, the offense of it stumbles the
neighboring Churches. But

4. It will not follow, that All of another Province should have Why only the
nearest Churches have real hand in healing offenses.
hand in the censure, as well as the Presbytery, because those of another
Province may hear of it, for that is non causa pro causa: for they are not in
danger to be leavened, so as those that are nearer; and the wisdom of Christ
has accommodated Discipline to our bodily craziness. For as when there be
twelve thousand members at Jerusalem, he will not have them all to meet at one
house, since they have twelve Apostles to teach them, but in sundry
congregations, Acts 2. 46. and 5 42. not can they partake of the seals in one
house, nor can they personally watch over one another, as the new
Church Covenant teaches: So neither will he have Elders (...), in cities,
where many thousands were baptized, purging their own body, and its not to be
supposed that actual government for ordinary scandals should be by the personal
presence of the Elders of remote Presbyteries and Provinces, far less of the
Elders of the whole Catholic visible Church. For Nature, Reason, and the
practice of the Apostles would say, Except the scandal be more than ordinary
wide and spreading, only the Churches nearest to be edified or stumbled, should
have hand in healing and censuring; though the whole Catholic and visible
Church have also here some influence, to wit, tacit and virtual in that common
Rule of Discipline which regulates the whole Catholic body, as is said
hereafter.

Mr. H. The second difference assigned by Mr. R. is, that the Presbytery takes
care rather of the regulating of the acts of governing in all these Churches,
than the governed Churches. The differences between Elders governing in the
Presbytery or Classis, and of the same Elders in their fixed congregations.


Mr. H. They express their care in judicial acts, and that directly and
immediately upon scandals and scandalous persons of any congregation.

Ans. Mr. H. should have added my words to the full, that the Reader might have
seen my mind. What I speak comparatively, Mr. H. would not hold it out to the
Reader, as if I meant it absolutely. For

1. The Presbytery is glad that lesser evils be healed by Rebukes within the
congregation.

2. I deny not but the Presbytery does, and must directly and immediately judge
greater scandals, especially between congregation and congregation, between
Elder and Elder, and Rulers and Ruled of the same congregation, but ever under
the former Reduplication, as they are an associate body.

Mr. H. 3 Differ. The Presbyterian Elders are Elders to all the Churches, as
the Elders themselves are in collegio Presbyteriali, Page 103.
and properly as they are in Court.

Ans. But I assume (says Mr. H.) the Elders there are proper Pastors of their
own particular congregations; therefore they must (if at all) be so here. A
Pastor in an Island cannot teach, admonish, excommunicate, but in coetu
congregationali, or severed from his Church, yet this hinders not but in these
regards he is a proper Pastor to them.

Ans. Mr. H. yet halfs my words, and sets down one member Mr. H. sets not down
M. R. his words perfectly, but often in halfs, and scarce that, as here.
of a distinction, and leaves out the other. They are Elders to the Churches in
the Presbyterial Judicature; but separatim out of that (say I, page 326.) they
do not watch in such a way for all the souls of the Presbyterian several
congregations, as they do for the single congregations of which they are fixed
Pastors. And this is enough to make different relations pastoral (which is my
intent) between the Elders, in order to their own congregations, and to the
associated congregations, as the Elders of Antioch are Elders judging in the
Synod, Acts 15. one way to Jerusalem, and other to Antioch, where they have
their proper fixed charge to teach and rule: and I shall not stand to yield
that they act as Elders, and by the same office of Eldership in the
Presbyterial, and in the congregational Judicature, but an accidental
difference there is.

2. Its most unfound that Mr H. says, That a Pastor cannot A pastor is not a
pastor only to the assembled congregation, as Mr. H. says, but also to them
all severally, and to this or that single person of the flock.
teach, admonish, excommunicate, but in a congregational meeting. This is first
to make him a congregational Pope or Prophet, as the Papists do the Pope, only
in Cathedra, in the pulpit, or before the congregation. 2. All the days of the
week, except in the actual congregational Assembly, he is a private man by this
reason. But the Word shall warrant the pastor as a pastor to visit, to warn
from house to house, Col. 1. 28. Acts 20 20. and 2. 46. and 5. 42. in season
and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and 2. 25. for he does not these as a private
gifted man.

3. By this reason a pastor is so a pastor, a husband, a watchman to the flock
actually assembled only, but not a pastor to give an account of this or that
man or woman's soul to God in the flock; then if this or that man perish through
the fault of the Elder, who gave not warning, Mr. H. has taught the Minister a
good excuse: I cannot be charged as an unfaithful watchman with the blood of
this single man who is lost, Mr. H. says, I am only a Pastor in relation to
the flock assembled Church-ways, but I am not a Pastor nor Watchman to one
single man. But ah! this distinction shall not save the man from the charge of
blood! Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. and 33. 13, 14, 15. and 34. 4, 5. Heb. 13. 17.
I would not have expected from such a man's pen such a Tenet.

4. Differ. The Presbytery has a Church relation to all these M. H. page 103,
104.
thirty congregations not takin distributively, but collectively, as they are
united in one Church classical, and in one Government. Ans. If the Presbytery
put forth acts of Jurisdiction upon these Churches distributively, as they are
severed, then they have a Church-relation to them distr^butively. But they
admonish and censure several persons of several Churches.

Ans. 1. So do the Synod Elders at Jerusalem, Acts 15. put Though pastors in a
Synod, by M. Cottons grant, put forth pastoral acts upon many congregations,
yet shall it never follow, that they are proper and fixed pastors to these
congregations: so neither does this militate against a Presbyterian Church.
Page 104. See Bilson, perpetual Government, c. 5. c. 12.
forth authoritative pastoral acts, by the grant of Mr. Cotton, upon the
several Churches distributively taken, yet are they not the proper pastors of
these Churches, and Commissioners of Parliament upon persons of a single city,
but as they have failed not against the Laws of that city, but against the
general Laws of the whole Nation and Parliament: But it follows not, that these
Commissioners are Aldermen, or fixed Judges of that city; and so Mr. H. his
consequence is weak.

Mr. H. These Presbyterial Elders must exercise jurisdiction over
congregational Elders, which is conceived by Mr. R. to be absurd.

Ans. Pastors, with majority of official Jurisdiction over pastors of another
lower species, as Bishops above pastors, I still look upon as absurd. But that
Elders in a Synod exercise Jurisdiction over Elders of a congregation that are
the same in nature and degree with them, is no more absurd, than for an
Eldership of a congregation to exercise Jurisdiction over some two or three
scandalous Elders of their own number, which Mr. H. will not call Episcopacy.

Mr. H. Mr. R. adds, Elders of an Independent congregation, are not Elders of
their single congregations, being separated from their Courts. It seems a
paradox, for if separated from their Court, their office remain, then
jurisdiction must remain.

Ans. Its not a seeming, but a real paradox, my words are Pastors can exercise
no jurisdictio^ being separated from the court, but pastoral acts of teaching
they may in private exercise, and that from house to house. Page 104, 105.
halfed. I said, They are not Elders separated from their court in the notion
(these are my words omitted by Mr. H.) of the relation of a
Church-jurisdiction; for they can exercise no jurisdiction, neither
excommunicate, nor relax from excommunication, being not in Court, except they
be prelates.

But Mr. H. adds a real absurd paradox, that they cannot exercise pastoral
acts of teaching, but in the Church-assembly; which refuted before.

Mr. H. 5 Differ. Congregational Elders have power of order, and power of
jurisdiction without the Court, but they have not power of jurisdiction but in
the Court. Elders have a power of jurisdiction as watchmen, but a power of
Church-jurisdiction they have not, but in the Court.

Ans. I never heard that their entering into the assembly should Sitting in
Court gives no new power of office to elders, but they cannot put it forth in
formal jurisdiction but in the Court.
add a new power.

2. Nor did Mr. R. say, their entering and sitting in the Court adds a new
official power; they had the official power actu primo before, but they can no
more put it forth in acts, being separated from the Court, than a pastor might
excommunicate his alone in his private chamber; which were tyrannical and null.

Mr. H. The example of the great Sanhedrim touches not the cause, or then
destroys it: Nor does the example of Commissioners of Parliament; for they
get a new office to sit in Parliament, but an Elder of a congregation by
sitting in the Presbytery gets no new office.

Ans. It is a weak answer, to say it helps not, and not show Its a mistake all
along in Mr. H. th^^ if an Elder put forth pastoral acts in a Synod or in a
Presbytery, to this or that congregation, that therefore he is a fixed pastor
to this or that congregation.
the cause, but to lead the Reader implicitly: for the great Sanhedrim ruled
over all the Tribes, and yet a Judge out of the Tribe of Dan, though a member
of the Sanhedrim, did not rule over the Tribe of Benjamin, but only in the
Sanhedrim, and in some common cases. The getting of a new office is neither up
nor down; the Commissioners of Parliament rule in that Court over all the
Shires in the Land, and by that Commission every Commissioner becomes not a
Major of every City, or a Judge in every Shire. And by Mr. Cottons grant, the
Elders in a Synod exercise pastoral acts, and lay on burdens, Acts 15. upon
the Churches, and get no new office thereby: But they do not for that become
proper Elders and pastors over every single congregation in the bounds of the
Synod.

Yet to Mr. H. this is a principle, That if the Presbyterian Elders put forth
pastoral acts upon all the congregations, then must they be pastors to all the
particular flocks, for shepherd and flick are relatives, Arg. 2. 101. But the
Conclusion is absurd. This is no less against Mr. Cotton, than against Mr. R.
and against himself, who admits strangers to the Lords Supper, etc.

Mr. H. It is obvious to every man, that the Elder of the congregation has the
nature of an Elder in general, and so can and does put forth general actions,
that are common to other Elder. Where the act is, the object must be, in its
proportion; and all this he does without the Classis in his particular station:
for the species determines the act of the genus, as Socrates confines the acts
of the humans Nature to himself: and its known, the Classis meddles with the
particular offenses, that are as special as any Elder in an Island, does meddle
within his own place.

Ans. 1. Its obvious to all men, That Mr. H. speaks new Logic, obvious to the
understanding of no man, I doubt, to his own. For the Elders of a congregation,
because independent, and subordinate and countable to none on earth, but to
Jesus Christ (as Papists say of their wooden Head the Antichrist) determine
within themselves. Suppose they he but some twelve of the twelve thousands at
Jerusalem, if these be once a formal Covenant-wise married Church of people and
officers, they do determine of the Doctrine of Circumcision, of the Doctrine of
Balaam, Acts 15. Rev. 2. 14. (for Pergamos is to them an independent flock) and
of Arrianism, and of Doctrines and Scandals that concern many hundred Churches
about; and whether they determine right or wrong, its against the liberty and
power Christ has given to that Redeemed Body, of ten and twelve to tell the
Churches: Oh! they must not part with their Sovereignty so; or if they consult,
its but of courtesy: for, single Pergamus is rebuked (say our Brethren) for
not using their Church Power in a Doctrine that concerned thousands as well as
them.

2. What a mystery of Logic this may be, who is so happy How wide Mr. H. is in
his Logic, the Presbyterian Elders determine of special actions and persons,
for species determines the act of the genus.
as to divine? Every particular Elder can, and does put forth general actions
that are common to other Elders: Why? The species determines the act of the
genus. The Reason contradicts the Conclusion which it is brought to prove: For
if Socrates confines the acts of Humane Nature to himself, they leave off now
to be general actions, and by being contracted to the species (his species is
Socrates a single person) they are now most special actions.

Mr. H. takes our meaning to be, That the members of Synods and of the
Presbytery, determine of the Ideal, general, abstracted Nature of Men, of
Doctrines, of Actions in communi, that needs not (says he) for the
congregational Elders put forth general actions, but confined and contracted to
Socrates: So does the Classis, the National, yea the Oecumenick and General
Assembly put forth acts, determinations, both of general Doctrines, and condemn
them also, as confined and contracted to Socrates, to Balaam, to Iezabel, to
the Nicolaitans, and to the single men of that impure Sect. And Acts 15. 24.
the Synod condemns some certain particular, individual men, (...), Some men
from us have troubled you, and said, Ye must be circumcised. Now the abstracted
nature of men disputed not and made not the (...) and the rent, as v. 6, 7. but
some single men. And this comes from another wild notion of Logic that Mr. H.
teaches, That the Catholic visible Church is the Genus, and under it is this
or that Independent Church. Of this hereafter. S^ the Church of Boston is the
Catholic integral Church: for, G^nus praedicatur de specie.

Mr. H. Its as undeniable, there be general acts in preaching and watching,
which are common to all congregations, which the Presbytery neither do, nor can
dispense conscienciously, because the Pastor cannot attend them: It will not
suffice to say, He was Pastor to the Catholic Church before, for then before
the combination he had as good power to exercise jurisdiction, as any of them.
This is against Mr. R. who grants that one Church has not power over another.

An. 1. Its undeniable, That the Apostles who were Pastors of the Catholic
Church, could not attend acts of Teaching and Ruling in all the single
Congregations, for that is physically impossible. But Mr. H. says, Its morally
impossible, and unlawful for a pastor to put forth a pastoral act in any
Congregation, but that to which he is married, more than a man can perform
marriage-duties to any but to his own wife: Neither to be an Apostle, nor to be
an ordinary Pastor, does so give right to any to feed the flock in Macedonia,
nor in Bithynia, in this flock and congregation, and not in this, without the
intervening of some special call of God.
which is shameful Doctrine.

2. Mr. H. frequently devises Objections of straw, and then fires them at his
pleasure, He knows Mr. R. denies, that to be a pastor of the Catholic Church,
gives so right to the Apostle to preach and feed in Bithynia, but there was
need of a call of God going before, as is clear, Acts 16. and so must pastors
of the Catholic Church now have a call from Presbytery and Congregation,
before they can lawfelly put forth in act their general pastorship which they
have to the Catholic Church. Nor is this against the Church not having power
over a sister-Church, because a pastor of one Congregation has power jointly
in a Synod to exercise pastoral acts Synodical over many Churches.

CHAP. IV.
The following Arguments of Mr. H. against a Presbyterian Church are removed.
That the classical Elders separate Ruling from Teaching, are Prelates,
non-Residents and Pluralists, and what not, by Mr. H. his way.

MR. H. That course which severs which God has joined Page 106, 107.
together is unlawful. But the classical combination does this. Ruling and
teaching belong to the office of a Pastor and Teacher, they have the prwer of
the Keys, and there cannot be full binding and loosing, but by ruling and
t^aching, Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2.

2 Both binding and loosing are required as nec^ssary to Christ's end, the
gathering and perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 12.

Ans. The assumption may import that the Presbytery must be Rulers, and by
office, no Teachers, as the Prelate is, who by majority of power is the rule of
the Pastors, and they his Deputies; the so severing of teaching and ruling in
the subject cannot be charged upon us, but that the severing of them in regard
of the object, is no sort of dividing of those which God has joined, is clear;
because the Pastors teach some, and rule in common others The separating of
ruling and teaching in Pastors, in regard of office is unlawful; but the
separating of them in acts and objects is not unlawful, but necessary.
associate. And Mr. H. has not proved the assumption.

For, 1. Elders in Synods dogmatically and authoritatively See Bilson,
Perpetual Government. c. 5. c. 12. M. H. does no less separate ruling and
teaching then. Presbyterians do.
teach, as Mr. H. teaches, par. 4. page 5. conclus. 3. therefore Mr. H.
himself separateth teaching and ruling. And Mr. Cotton says more.

2. The people without officers may excommunicate all their officers, and so
bind them, and receive them in again upon their repentance, and so loose them,
as Mr. H. teaches par. 1, c. 9. page 92, 93. and yet the people cannot teach
these officers as their Pastors. Is not here an irregular separating of ruling
from teaching?

3. Such of the flock as are from their youth kept under by the terrors of God,
Ps. 88. Godly Elders, who are not to be rebuked, but entreated as fathers, 1 Timothy 5. 1. need not juridical Church-binding and loosing, and yet need the
preaching of the promises. Then in regard of the act and object, exercise of
jurisdiction may be severed from teaching.

4. Pastors can exercise no jurisdiction, but only in the Court, but Pastors
not in Court may teach pastorally the whole flock.

5. The Churches that meet in a Synod, may exercise the power of non communion
toward a Church (which is a Church-governing, for their edification) if the
Church obstinately maintain an heresy; and yet the Churches so convened cannot
pastorally teach this Church. Let Mr. H. see if he be not as prelatical as Mr.
R. If this be Prelacy, I thought Mr. H. had been better versed in the doctrine
of Prelacy.

Mr. H. Grandfathers and Fathers do bear a relation to the same Children
diverse ways (So Mr. R.) So then as a Grandfather (says Mr. H.) cannot be both
a Grandfather and a Father to the same One may be both a classical Elder to
the associate Churches, and a fixed Elder to a single congregation, as the same
man is both a Grandfather and a Father to diverse children.
Child, neither can an Elder be both a proper Elder and a classical Elder to
the same Congregation.

Answ. One man cannot be both a Grandfather and a Father to the same Child.
True; nor is one man a proper Elder to his Congregation, and a classical Elder
to his own Congregation; for he is formally a classical Elder, not to his own,
but to all the associated Congregations.

2. It is but a comparison, and so admits of halting; a Grandfather is a
Grandfather to his childrens children, but a Father to his nearest children;
so the same man is a classical Elder to all the associated Churches, and a
proper and providentially fixed Elder to his own flock; as one was both a
Priest to judge between blood and blood, and yet, if the matter was too hard,
the same man was a Judge and a Member of the Sanhedrim, Deuteronomy. 17.

Mr. H. his last difference: The Judicature of Classis and Congregations Page
107, 108.
do not differ formally (says Mr. R.) but only in more or less extension of
power.

Ans. Then there are no specifical acts that the one puts forth, but the other
can put forth, as occasion shall require; gradus non variant speciem, then they
can ordain officers and excommunicate in the Congregation. He said before, if
there be the same office, there is the same definition, and the same causes, to
wit, of election, and choice of the Classical, and of the Congregational Elders.

Ans. The difference is only of more or less, as of a River and the whole
Element, though diverse learned men judge the Congregation to be no governing
Church at all, but only their Elders the delegates of the Presbyterial Church,
which consisting of diverse Congregations is the first governing Church.

2. There are no s^^cifick acts which the Elders collectively taken, may not
exercise in both the one and the other: but then shall it not follow, th^^ a
single cong^^gational Eldership may ordain and ex^^mmunicate in one (...)
Congregation there alone divided from the body? for congr^nal Elders cannot
teach o^derly (and he is the God of ord^r, (...) (...) in his Church) in all
the Congregations without a cal^.

Nor 2. Exercise the power of a Synod in them all.

3. I (...) this argument; Archipp^^ has the same office to the whole
Congregation, and to the single m^mbers who chused him, and whom he feeds; or
then he has so many officer as there be choosing and fed members, ^^ught by the
word and ruled, which is absurd: E^go, as the single vo^^ of one member made
him a Pastor to one, and of a second made him a Pastor to a second, and so
forth. So the ^otes of the whole made him a Pastor to the whole: for that is
the same offic^ th^^ has the same causes, and the same choice and election,
says M^. (...). Ergo, where the same causes are not, the same office cannot
be, but one single electing vote, and the electing vot^^ of the whole Church by
Mr. H. his way, cannot be the same causes, for one vote makes him not a Pastor.

2. If Archippu^ has the same office to the whole congregation, and to every
single member, then as he (...) pastoral acts of teaching and ruling to the
whole, so to the parts and single members; but this latter is denied by Mr. H,
page 104: who says, That a Pastor cannot put forth Pastoral acts, but in the
Church assembly, A strange imagination!

Mr. H. By the same official power (says Mr. R.) that a Pastor Page 108, 109.
teaches his own fleck viva voce, he teaches others by writing.

Ans This is a new invention that I never heard of before.

1. The official power, by which he preaches, he receives by election, and he
may be rejected from it by the people, in case of delinquency.

2. By his official power he may require them to hear, but may not require all
Churches to read his writings; and if they offensively refuse to read, he
cannot censure them, as he may censure them that refuse to hear the word.

3. If this power of writing of Books, to edify the Churches, proceed from his
office, all Ministers by their office should write A Pastor fixed to a
congregation may exercise pastoral acts of writing, preaching to other
congregations then his own.
Books.

4. That which another may do with as much authority, and more authority of
truth, as being more able, yet being out of office, that cannot belong to the
officer; but to write books is such.

Ans. 1 Official power is not from election, but from the saying on of the
hands of the Elders, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2 2.
Tit. 1. 5.

2. It is true, that a Pastor cannot require by his office those of another
Congregation to hear him preach, and receive the seals from him, nor censure
them, if they refuse; but it is a bad consequence of Logic, therefore he does
not exercise these pastoral acts to them by his office, as the Brethren grant.

2. A Minister by his office may require his hearers to give much alms, pray
much, read and confer much, both these of his own and other flocks; yet he
cannot censure them for not coming up to the highest pitch of these affirmative
duties, except he may rebuke them, and so may he do all who are remiss in
reading edifying writings, and the Church may censure unsound books, Acts 15.
24.

3. Neither Mr. R. nor any judicious man can teach that either a gift to write
Books, or of eminent preaching, praying, exhorting, proceeds out of a power of
office; it is a sanctified gift which the Church sees and judges to be in
any, before they call him to office; and any gift is by order of nature and
time before the office, and so proceeds not from the office; and therefore it
is not required that every Pastor should have a gift of writing books, but if
the Lord have given it to any, they exercise it as such gifted officers as the
Prophets and Apostles, as such Prophets so gifted did write Canonick
Scriptures; so are Pastors, if gifted, to write and preach in their way, and
both to write and preach by their office. Nor is it good Logic, that all in
office should write books. because some by virtue of their office writ books;
for a Minister gifted with four Talents is obliged to gain with these four
Talents, and that as a Minister by virtue of his office; but it is weak Logic
to infer, Ergo, all Ministers by virtue of their office are obliged to gain
with four Talents, for many are obliged by virtue of their office to gain with
only two to their Lord, and with only one.

4. It was needless to Mr. H. to prove writing of books does not belong to the
power of office, because a learned man out of office may do it with more
authority; for Mr. R. had no such intention. For, sure if such a thing agreed
to the office-power, as the office-power, then all Officers, Pastors, Elders
were obliged to write books, and yet Mr. H. does not very happily prove it,
because many learned men unofficed may with more authority of truth write
books, then officed men. It is only some officed men he must mean, or it is not
true. And then I retort it thus; many officed men may write books with more
authority both of truth and of office (and two are better then one) then some
unofficed men less learned. Ergo, some gifted Pastors do not as Pastors so
gifted, and by virtue of their office relating both to the presbyterian Church,
and their own Congregation edify all the Churches about, by writing books. It
follows not.

Mr. H. We are told that Elders are ruling in all Churches Page 109.
collectively taken, and they are teachers (...), in some reserved acts, not
constant teachers, he that rules teaches, but always the same flock.

Ans. Take classical Elders as they are congregational Elders, and that is all
one as to say, no classical Elders, and then they are no teaching Elders; and
all that is gained is this; a classical Elder as he is no classical Elder, is a
teaching Elder. And so there is no distinction.

Ans. Such quirks become not grave M. H. What is a Synodical Elder? Mr. H.
says a counselling Elder. I reply, that is no Elder, but a counselling Brother
or Sister. But Mr. Cotton and our Brethren say better. A synodical Elder is an
Elder synodically teaching the Churches with pastoral and dogmatick authority,
without all power of jurisdiction, that is a Synodical Elder, as no
Congregational Elder (but as he judges in Synod) is a teaching and a ruling
Elder. Then I infer, that al Synodical Elder must be both an Elder and no
Elder. So animal as he is, (...), is non h^mo, but he is viv^^s. It were easy
to weary the Reader with many wild unsolid notions, such like, Ergo, animal is
homo, non hom^.

Mr. H. So a Pastor may be a teaching Pastor to one Church, and Page 110.
a ruling Pastor to two or three, or thirty. This is a Bishop.

Obj. The Bishop arrogates thi^ to himself alone.

Ans. Show a rule of Christ, why the Elders may not join many Elders to join
with him; for you have no rule of Christ to join many to him to rule many
Churches, nor has he a rule to assume many to him.

Ans. Not any of the separation ever refuted, with that A Pastor teaching one
congregation fixedly, and ruling in Collegio other associate Churches is no
Prelate.
strength of Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, the domineeringg prelacy, as the
godly presbyterians in Britain, and the reformed Churches. But so many thousand
Independent Monarchies, and two Congregational, or three Elders (for a Deacon
is for Tables, Act. 6.) subordinate in point of jurisdiction to none on earth,
is a more lively image of a domineering Prelacy, then all the Presbyteries on
earth.

2. There is no rule to join other prelates or elders to a prelate: an unlawful
officer, having power of jurisdiction, the only proper pastor, and all others
are but pastors under him and his delegates. But Mr. H. cannot say that the
pastor of a congregation is an unlawful pastor, to whom so many bastard pastors
are added, if he do, this shall reflex upon his own way; for the Synodical
Elder is a pastorally teaching Elder to many Churches, Antioch, Jerusalem, and
also a teaching and ruling Elder to one congregation by our brethrens way: Is
the Synodical Elder therefore a pastor of pastors, and a Bishop? And Mr. H.
cannot say but that there might have been diverse congregations in Jerusalem,
and yet unformed Churches; and that the twelve Apostles did feed and rule them
all in common, and so shall Peter teach one Congregation at once, and rule many
whom he cannot teach (for physically it is impossible he can feed many at once)
and yet there was but one Presbytery, and this we shall hear Mr. H. confess
hereafter. Ergo, the twelve Apostles and Church-Elders feeding many
Congregations not formed with fixed Pastors shall bring in such sort of
Bishops, as Mr. H. charges upon me. Page 100.


Mr. H. If they do not both rule and teach, they cannot fulf^l their Ministry.

Ans. How is it proved that Pastors cannot fulfill their Ministry, except they
both rule all the Churches with acts Synodical, and their own Congregations
also?

2. How is it proved that there is a blank in the Ministry, except Pastors both
teach and rule these same persons? some of the Congregation are so
experiencedly taught of God, that rebukes and censures of excommunication are
never drawn out, nor need to be drawn out against them; never Interpreter so
expounded Col. 4. Page 110. 111.


Mr. H. If Pastors be Pastors and in office when they are out of Court, then
have they Church-jurisdiction out of the Court; but the first is true. Also
censures should be dispensed in the Congregation, and there they must preach
also.

Ans. Priests when not actu^lly sitting in the Sanhedrim, Members of Parliament
are Members sitting in the House; and Pastors are Elders actu primo, when not
sitting in the Congregational Judicature; Ergo, they can exercise acts of
jurisdiction out of Court, in their Houses; and may the Eldership preach out of
the Court? it is a shame to hear such Logic.

2. Belike Mr. H. thinks it unpossible to dispense censures, but the Elders
must preach: Ergo, when the people excommunicate their whole Officers, because
heretical; they must also preach pastorally: for it is pastoral ruling and
teaching which makes a fulfilling of the Ministry: but the conclusion is
absurd, let Mr. H. see to it.

CHAP. V.
The Argument from the onerousness of Presbyterial Ruling of many Churches, and
of Congregationally feeding of others, against the Presbyterial Church, are
discussed.

MR. H. The classical course lays a burden upon teaching Elders, which Gods
word never laid, and which they are Page 111.
not able to discharge; the Apostles appointed Elders in every Church to feed
the fl^ck, not the flocks. Mr. R. the way of watching over Sister Churches is
as dreadful for onerous, careful, laborious watchfulness in the way of
conscience, as to be bound thereto by way of duty; for this bond of lovely and
brotherly consociation, which is the foundation of Presbyterial governing, ties
us to do no more in governing and helping other Sister Churches, then if We
had no further warrant to promote their ed fication, then the alone relation of
brotherly consociation. The sentence is (says Mr. H.) unperfect; and therefore
that it may reach his purpose, I think is must be thus expressed: the bond of
brotherly consociation ti^th us to do no more in governing Sister Churches,
then brotherly consociation simply can do, is true; but impertinent to Mr. R.
his scope, which is to compare the bond and burden between brotherly Of the
onerousness and labor in governing associating Churches; how it is the same
with onerousness and labor in counselling united Churches, and how it is not
the same.
association and office-imposition, as if there were a parity between them.

Ans. 1. The classical course lays no other burden upon teaching Elders, by
way of united jurisdictions in governing neighbor Churches that are the same
body, and have the same seals common, as Mr. Cotton and his own Discipline
agrees (as I often cite) then the way of Churches both associated by brotherly
association, and by Synodical and authoritative governing, as the same Mr.
Cotton teaches, and Mr. H. says it is true, but not pertinent; and if it be
true, why contend we?

2. That it is not pertinent to my purpose, is denied: Why? Because (says he)
Mr. R. his scope is to make a parity and equality between the burden of
Brotherly consociation and of Officeimposition. But that is a change of my
words, and therefore must lie upon Mr. H. as his, not my words, except they be
wrested; Nor is it my scope to make an equality in quantity, as if there were,
as Mr. H. most mistakingly says, the like care, onerousness and labor
required in duties of Christian watchfulness in a brotherly way, as in duties
of office relation: But in equality of onerousness of answering to God for
duties, the like conscience, the like sincerity, the like faith of giving an
account to God, is required in the one as in the other. And he leaves, upon
this account, out the word, in way of conscience, or in fore Dei, and says my
words are imperfect; but wherein they are imperfect, he shows not, which
makes his own words imperfect: and therefore he turns my Negative, That we
are to do no more in governing sister-Churches, than in counselling and
brotherly advising, into an Affirmative never dreamed of by me. That brotherly
association tieth us to do as much, as if we had no further warrant; and t^ we
are to do by his way as much in brotherly duties to all Christians in other
Provinces or Nations, in France, Germany, Holland with whom we can by no
physical possibility be present, and whose faces we never saw, as we are to do,
by fixed office, to the single congregations to which we have a providential
call, by the election and choice of the people, for whom we are to search the
Scriptures, and study pleasant words, and for whose souls we are to give an
account. But

1. Its a fruitless dispute to prove in sundry pages what Mr. R. grants.

2. If he proved from my words (from his own he may) that these are necessary
consequences, he had done as became a Refuter.

3. He cannot from what I say deny, but grants, That brotherly consociation
tieth teaching Elders to do no more in governing neighboring Churches, than
brotherly advising, teaching, admonishing, tieth us unto, in point of
onerousness and laborious care, and so it well follows, That there is no more
laid upon Presbyterial Elders in governing neighboring Churches, than is laid
upon their counselling, and brotherly advising Elders, in point of daily
occurring scandals, as is clear in the Rise of Familists, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, etc. and many scandalous persons arising in sundry Churches lying
together.

4. The care and onerousness in brotherly watching, essentially, The
obligatition to brotherly help to my brother, though it be as onerous as an
obligation of teaching the flock, it does not tie me to the use of all the
means positively to go all the world over, and warn and admonish as the other
does.
formally in rendering an account to God, as being keepers to our Brethren all
the world over, with whom we converse in other congregations, happily at our
door, and occasionally, is as binding before God, as the care of teaching
Elders in exercising power of Jurisdiction in Collegio, and in things common to
diverse Churches; but it follows not, that Christian love tieth me to all the
positive means of warning my brother to go to Germany, to America, to try and
admonish all the scandals that are committed there.

5. This same Argument is thus retorted upon Mr. H. if the Apostles, as
Church Members, as Believers, be obliged all the world over, to eat the Lords
Supper, as Paul did at Troas, Acts 20. 11. a^ Corinth, 1 Cor. 10. 17 and in all
the Churches on earth, to eat and receive the Lo^ Supper, not as an Apostle
with an Apostolic, but with a faith common to all Christians; then must he be
obliged as a Christian with the like care and onerousness to leave his calling
of an Apostle and to go to all places on earth, to remember the Lords death,
and as a Christian to lay down preaching, planting of Churches, working of
miracles, and to teach, rebuke, as a Christian, in all places. Its not enough
to say, That the Apostles

1. Were privileged persons, and so might eat the Lords Supper all the world
over, for they eat not the Lords Supper as Apostles were t^ed not as Apostles,
but as Christians to eat the Lords Supper in all Churches all the world over.
Apostles, but as believers, who were to try and examine themselves, and so
d^^ncerningly to remember the Lords death until he come again, as other
believers were.

2. Is it enough to say, They were occasionally only to discharge these
Christian duties, as they should be locally present, for so are teaching Elders
to perform official duties to these neighbor Churches with whom they
occasionally converse in the occasional emergency of scandals: and if Pastors
were in Africa or America, they might, without any new ordination or official
call, preach and govern as Physicians of souls. But by Mr. H. his way, the Lord
in the day of Judgment might say, Thou wast a member of that body, with which
thou had a right to ^at the Lords Supper in all Churches on earth; therefore
I require at thy hand the blood of them that are lost in America, because thou
watched not over all the Christians on earth, which is physically impossible.
And I require at Paul preaching in the the W^st, the blood of such as perished,
when he was 300 miles absent from them, for Paul had an official call to all
the believers on earth. As Mr. H. says, our Presbyterial Elders must give an
account for souls that are lost in all the Presbyterial, Provincial and
National Churches on earth, and go all the world over to cure scandals, leaving
their own calling of Merchandise. But by this (says Mr. H page 115.) a
pastoral care is f^r more enerous and laborious than Christian and brotherly
care in some sense. I grant all, and there is nothing proved against me, who
say, that this ties teaching Elders to no more in governing Sister Churches, in
point of binding the conscience to answer for them, as far as they have power
in matter of common concernment, for the well being of all the near hand
associated Churches, then brotherly consociation can do. And Mr. H. page 112.
says this is true, and yet in some sense pastoral care is far more onerous and
laborious, to wit, in using more means in watching fixedly over a Congregation,
by constant preaching in season, and out of season, in standying pleasant
words, administering the Sacraments, etc. Nor did I ever say any thing to the
contrary.

Mr. H. An eminently gifted man in an Island, where no Pastors Page 115, 116.
are, is no less (says Mr. R.) tied in conscience in the extraordinary
employment of his calling, then if he were formally ordained and chosen their
Pastor. In some extraordinary cases a gift and Christian love ties even as much
to onerousness in using means to save, at the office it self. See what I add in
that place, (Mr H. says) then this gifted man in an Island, in using his
general calling as a Christian, destroys his particular, as a Merchant, and
turn Minister. 2. This is to confound the general and particular calling.

Ans. Not at all, for in this case, the extraordinary necessity of gaining
souls, when other Pastors cannot be had; and ordination and election by that
means are invincibly wanting hic and nunc, turns his Christian calling in place
and room of the particular calling of a Pastor; and so Mr. R. said well, that
in some extraordinary case like this, The naked R^lation of Jurisdiction adds
nothing to care and onerousness in point of labor, by preaching the Gospel.

Mr. H. If we have a divine command (says Mr. R.) to be our brethrens k^epers,
then our Christian watch in that regard requires Page 114, 115.
as much onerousness and care as office watch. It follows not (says Mr. H.) am
I bound by office to watch no more over the people left to my pastoral care,
then as a Christian over these of another Province, whom I am occasionally only
to gain, and whose faces I never saw.

Ans. Mr. H. leaves out the words, in point of conscience to answer for them to
God, Which I have. Otherwise in regard of A man is tied to use more means for
feeding the single fl^ck, that he is a fixed Pastor unto, then as a christian
he is to use toward other churches.
using of more means, he is obliged to more constant feeding, by word, seals,
daily watching over the single flock, then over all Christians on the other
side of the Sea, and some thousand miles distant from him.

But if the foundation of governing classical Churches be the love and union of
the members of one body of Christ, then there is much care, onerousness, and
labor, which is required in brotherly consociation to help, as the care and
onerousness which is required in officership.

Mr. H. Ans. The proposition has no truth, because I love all consociated in
one Synod, whom I never saw, and with whom I could never meet to do good, or
receive good. But if I should be bound to put forth the like onerous and
laborious care for their spiritual good, as for these, to whom by way of office
I am bound in the same Congregation. Then officers must either do too little,
or be bound to do too much.

Ans. This is neither my Argument, nor my words: my words are, Par. 1 page 332.
Now if we distinguish ONEROUSNESS, CARE and LABOR by way of jurisdiction, the
former is as GREAT IN FORO DEI, in the Court of conscience, as the latter.
These words are left out by Mr. H. qua fide; let the Reader judge; for the
toil, care, onerousness and labor in point of conscience in the kind, and
sphere; I urge in both, by necessity of a divine command: but the like care,
onerousness and labor in quantity, in the use of more means, in constant
preaching, personal comforting, to all the Christians on earth, as to the
single congregation, I utterly deny. But can Mr. H. deny but the Apostles and
Brethren, Act. 15. did ow as much care, onerousness, and labor in a binding
conscientious way in laying on synodical burdens, which bind not only (says
Mr. Cotton) materially for the weight of the matter imposed by divine Mr.
Cotton Keys of the Kingdom, c. 6. page 25.
precept, but also formally from the authority of the Synod, upon the Churches
of Jerusalem, Antioch, Syria, Cilicia, as any pastor ows to his single flock;
and that because these Churches are all one consociated body? and yet Elders of
the Synod were never to see the faces of all these members of the Churches.

And I put this quere to the Brethren, what warrant of Christ is there that a
member of an Independent Church ow Church-care to watch, teach, admonish,
rebuke, comfort, as Col. 3. 16. Heb. 3. 13. 1 These. 5 14. to a fellow member of
the same congregation only, and ow no Church-care to another brother, dwelling
in the same house with him, having with him the same faith, the same baptism,
the same Lord, the same covenant of Grace, the same Savior, only because he is
a member of another Independent Church?

Mr. H. Arg. 5. If they be Pastors over all the Congregations Page 117.
of the circuit, then they were new chosen by the Congregations, or not, etc.

Ans. This is a repeated blast of an old horn; there is this required, that
Churches about, by their silence approve him as Pastor to one single
Congregation; but that all Congregations make a special election of him to be
their fixed Pastor, is no more required, then that the Churches of Antioch and
Jerusalem chose the Apostles and Elders, who yet Act. 15. exercise pastoral and
official acts over them by the grant of Mr. Cotton and our Brethren.

They are Elders of Ephesus, i. e. of enery Congregation of the Page 117. 118.
combination, as all the Kings, if they were met in one royal Court to govern
the Nations, in things of common concernment to all, yet are called the Kings
of the Nations. These are words (says Mr. H. to darken:) the Elders met here,
have a new power distinct from the power over their several Congregations, a
Commission, i. e. a new Creature. The Kings if so convened, have a joint power
of confederate Princes, to act in things of common concernment, and if that
power were distinct from the particular power that they have over their own
territories, the comparison were parallel.

Ans. We may suppose such a convention of Kings, the Commissioners A commission
in a Presbytery is no new office, but apower of order appointed by the God of
order.
or M^ssengers of the Churches have no new office, but only are met to determine
of such a thing as disturbs the Churches, Act. 15 5. they differ as Elders, and
such Elders sent and nominate by the Church, and act as Elders by the same
official power common to Elders that are not sent, and are called by the Church
Apostles and Elders, Act. 15. 23. and 16. 4. and 21. 18, 25. then sending and
commissionating is a condition of order appointed by the God of order, no
devise of men: and the Churches submit to them as to no new office.

But 1. as to the messengers of the Church, and gracious and sound Elders.

2. If they speak according to the Law and the testimony, not otherwise, and
the answer is as much against Act. 15. and against Mr. Cotton and all that are
for Synods, either juridical or consultative, as against Mr. R. for they go to
Synods, who so go by a new power of order, not by a new office.

Mr. H. This course nullifies the power of Elders, and propl^^f a Page 119, 120.
Congregation, and their proceeding in a righteous way; for the Classis may
judge a member to be excommunicated, whom the Congregation judges. and that
truly not worthy of that censure; here Due right of Presbytery. The votes of
associated Churches added to the votes of the Elders of a congregation
strengthens, but hinders not right proceeding, except by accident.
the power of Elders and people which act in a way of Christ is wholly hindered.

Ans. This weak Argument is fully answered by me before; That Government, which
of its own nature hinders and nullifies the righteous proceeding of the
Congregation is not a power from Christ. True; but now the assumption is false:
for the presbyterial power added to the just power of a Congregation does
strengthen, and not nullify the power of the Congregation That Government,
which by accid^nt, and abuse of their power in over voting two Elders, who
proceed according to the rule of Christ, hinders and nullifies right proceeding
in on^ single act, is not from Christ, is most false: For because an abused
power, and abused government is not from Christ, it follows not that the power
and government it self is not from God. I added an answer Due Right. p. 335.
to this in my Book which Mr. H. passes over in silence. Suppose the
Congregation and Synod agree in the truth, as they do Act. 15. Will you say
that Peter, Paul and James, their power is nullified, and their three votes are
swallowed up in that greater convention; because to their power is added in
this dogmatical determination, the power and voices of the rest of the Apostles
and Elders; yea, and some say of the whole Church, Act. 15. 2, 6, 25. and 16.
4. and 21. 18, 25. So say that the Congregation of Thyatira (suppose it so to
be) by assuming to themselves a huge number of Elders and visible Saints shall
by over-voting the former Congregation, conclude that Iesabel shall still teach
and seduce. Mr. H. cannot say, that the added power of the Elders and Members
of it self is not of Christ, but rather their abusing of their power in that
wicked act, is not from Christ; for the adding to the Church two thousand to
three thousand, to make five thousand is lawful, Act. 5.

Mr. H. To this Mr. R. answers, de jure, the power of the greater Page 120.
in this case ought to be swallowed up of the two voices of the Elders of the
Congregation. But says Mr. H. so the weaker should overbear the stronger, the
part the whole.

2. This opens a gap to endless dissension, the fewer say we have the truth,
the other, we have the truth, and who shall be the Judge?

Aus. Mr. A. cites my words (as frequently elsewhere) so here imperfectly, and
mutilates the sense, if their power and voices be against the truth; it is fit
that many voices be swallowed up by two, Iure in fore Dei: for Christ gave no
power to thirty to err, and to excommunicate an innocent person, he has given
no power, but to edifica^ion, 2 Cor. 10. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. But I said not that
Iure Ecclesiastico, the fewer, and the part, should overbear the many, and the
whole. And what will Mr. H. say, the fewer names in Sardis judge that a Iezabel
should be excommunicated; the whole says no. The fewer say we have truth, the
whole say, we have truth; by the brethrens way no remedy, but be the matter
heresy, or scandals, incest and parricide, the larger part of every single
Congregation in the midst of 24. sound Churches has a power independent, and
from which there is no appeal on earth, to excommunicate the few names that are
in Sardis and keep their garments clean. If ye say, so is it in a National, in
an Oecumenick Council by the The sounder part of the Church is the Church.
Presbyterian way:

I answer in either the one or the other; if there be a manifest departing from
the faith, and the man of sin sit in the Temple of God, and the fornications of
Babel be multiplied, the fewer and weaker being Sa^ior pars Ecclesiae, the
sounder part are (as Mr. H. says, Iure in the Court of Heaven) the Church.

Mr. H. Arg. 7. This course cannot attain its end appointed by Page 121.
our Savior, whose wisdom fails not, nor can be frustrate in its preparation.
But the Classis excommunicating, when the Elders and Congregation refuse to
submit, would be of no force.

Ans. Let the larger part of the Congregation by three votes How the ordinances
are not conttary to the Wisdom of Christ though they attain not always finem
operis.
excommunicate a godly sound man, and descern an Arch-heretick to preach, as a
Godly Socinian; Where is the end of Christ attained by you?

2. It is an Arminian and unsound tenet to condemn the wisdom of Christ,
because he draws not his Ordinances, Gospel, Promises, Precepts, Seals,
Censures, according to his irresistible Decree, by which the infinitely wise
Lord cannot come short of his end intended of the Ordinances themselves, finem
operantis; for his Counsels and Decrees must stand, Isa. 14. 26, 27. Ps. 33.
10, 11. Romans 9. 19. and who has believed our report? Isa. 53. 1. Some, yea
many stumble at Christ and the Word, Isa. 8. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Romans 9. Shall
we accuse the Ordinances, the Gospel and Seals, because God attains not the
end, the Salvation of the hearers? How unjust is it to accuse the Wisdom of
God for this sinful folly of men?

But the Lord draws his ordinances and seals according to his approving will,
and thereby his Wisdom attains the end, finem operis, which is to save and
render unexcusable; and though the Classis be divided from the Congregation,
and the Congregation be divided, the fewer keeping the rule, and the greater
number erring: this is no more a just ground of challenging the immaculate and
spotless Wisdom of God in the ordinance of Presbyterial censuring, then we may
challenge Christ's coming in the world, to bring the sword, not peace, Matthew.
10. 34. his ordinances are media nata apta, of their own nature apt to bring
union between the Classis and the Congregation; if it fall out otherwise, the
blame is in men's corruption.

There were answers given to these Arguments by me; Mr. H. would not set them
down, nor remove them, as he answers, but in halfs and parts.

CHAP. VI.
Some seeming inconsistencies mistaken by Mr. Hooker, are cleared.

MR. H. Pastors as they stand in relation to the Congregation, and in reference
(says Mr. R.) to the Classis, have not two, Png. 122.
but one office, page 329; 333. and yet they are elect to the office of a
Pastor in the Congregation, l. 1. and l. 2. page 201. but not elect to the
office of a Pastor in reference to the Classis, l. 2. 345. which is very
strange, since there is but one and the same office.

Ans. Is it strange that Mr. Cotton and the dissenting Brethren teach; Elders
in reference to the Synod, and Elders in reference How Pastors are Pastors in
reference to the Congregation, and how to the Synod, and associated Elders.
to the single Congregation at Antioch, and at Jerusalem have but one and the
same office of Elders; for they are not twice Elders, nor two sort of Officers,
by reason of these two relations. If they be, say it out, and yet these were
elect Pastors in order to their Congregations, and chosen to employ their
labors constantly there only, as married Husbands to their Wives. So Mr. H.
par. 1. c. 7. page 81, 82, 83. and yet neither Mr. H. nor Mr. Cotton can say
they were elect to the office of Pastors in reference to the Synod, though they
exercise pastoral acts in reference to the Synod (Cotton Keys. c. 5. p. 25. Mr.
H. par. 3.) and the associated Churches. Is not this strange? For the eighth
Argument repeated from Survey, c. 8. Arg. 1. page 99. is answered.

2. I ^esire the Reader also to consider my words, page 244, 245. The
Congregations acknowledging and consenting to the classical Presbytery, do
tacitly choose and consent to the common charge and care that every Pastor has,
as he is a member of that common Court, which does concern them all. and
therefore when Mr. R. says, that Pastors are not elect to the office of a
Pastor, in reference to the Classis; the sense is in every page known to be,
that Pastors are not chosen to be fixed and constant feeders of all the
Congregations of the Classis, because they feed and rule in things of common
concernment.

Mr. H. The power of a Congregation, and of a Presbytery, and their acts (says
Mr. R.) differ not essentially. But Elders (says Par. 1. c. 9. page 122.
Mr. H.) do, and must preach, watch and feed, by virtue of the essence of their
office, therefore they have acts formally d^fferent.

Ans. That Elders do act as Elders, and put forth specific acts of Elders in
the Congregation, and in the Presbytery; Ergo, Their acts in one differ in
nature from the acts in the other: it no more follows then this, Peter laughs
to day, ergo it shall be rain to morrow. That Elders must constantly and
fixedly teach and feed the Churches, whom they govern synodically, is denied It
is, and must be the same office of a Pastor in reference to the congregation,
and in reference to the Presbytery and Synods superior.
by Mr. Cotton: and that they must put forth all the acts of the essence of the
office, and that constantly and fixedly to all the Churches congregational,
presbyterial, synodical, to which they are referred as pastors in their several
relations respectively is most false.

Mr. H. If it be one and the same office of a Pastor to the Classis, and to a
Congregation, as Mr. R. says, l. 2. 329. then the office relates one and the
same way to both the classical and congregational Church; then if the
congregational Church be their proper flock, so must the classical Church be,
quae sunt idem inter se, sunt idem uni tertio.

Ans. the first consequence is naught; If it be the same office, then the
office relates the same way to both the classical and congregational Church. A
Pastor has the same office to the whole Congregation, and to one single man,
to whom he preaches; for he is not two Pastors, one to the whole, and another
to the part. An Elder is the same officer to Antioch, and to the Synod at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. for he is not two officers in reference to these two. But
it follows not that the office relates the same way to one man, and to all the
Congregation; nor is he referred to the Synod as the fixed and constant feeder
of the Synod, but he is referred to a Congregation of Antioch, as their fixed
and constant Pastor; it is wild Logic, that one and the same office must
relate, one and the same way, to one and to ten hund^^d, to the adequate, and
to the inadequate correlate; and these that are one in one Faith, one Baptism,
one Lord, one and the same Seals, it will not follow that they are one every
way, but in illo uno tertio. For the whole Congregations on earth are one in
all the essentials of a Church, one Faith, one Lord, but it follows not that
all the Congregations on earth are but one single Congregation. The thumb is
referred to the hand, as a member, and also to the whole body as a member; yet
it is referred to the hand as a nearest and proper member; but to the whole
body in a more common relation, as the toe is referred to the body, yet is not
the toe a part of the hand as the thumb is, but both are parts of the body.

Mr. H. The combination of Churches gives no office, and so no Page 114.
power to the Elders of many Churches, for they were Elders before the
combination.

Ans. That they were Elders before the combination, and made and ordained by
the laying on of the hands of the people, which is your homogeneous Church, is
an unwritten Tradition.

2. The tacit consent of Sister-Churches even before the formal combination is
enough on their part, who neighbor with them to make them Elders.

M. H. Would you see a Pastor that has the formal essence of a Page 123. The
classical Elder has nothing to do with Prelacy.
Pastor, and yet never did, nor is bound to preach? it is the classical Elder.

2. The Pastor may preach in his own Congregation, and Minister the Sacraments;
but (...) Presbytery keeps the key of jurisdiction.

3. The classical Elder is not bound to preach to them, over whom he has
jurisdiction. And this is the Bishop.

Ans. A bishop is rather a Pastor to Pastors, then to the Churches: Envy cannot
say this of the Elders of the Presbytery.

2. The formal essence of a Pastor is not in being fixed to one Congregation,
as a Husband to a Wife; so that it is adultery to act as a Pastor either in a
Synod, or in another Congregation, as Mr. H. teaches; for so Elders in a
Synod, Apostles and Evangelists should not have the formal essence of Pastors.

3. It is false that he is not bound to preach and minister the seals to
another Congregation, or members thereof, if he be called thereunto. But the
Bishop is a Bishop ex officio, is bound to preach to none, but a Sermon to the
Clergy once a year, and not that he may be a Bishop and never preach.

3. The Pastor of a Congregation as a Pastor has power of jurisdiction in
Collegio, and has no majority of jurisdiction and ordination at all, as the
Bishop has.

4. The Pastor of a Congregation, yea, all the officers thereof, poor men have
no jurisdiction without the people, yea, the people without them have majority
of jurisdiction to make and unmake all the officers, which is the formal
essence of a prelate by Mr. H. his way; the prelate is the virtual Church: tell
the Church, i. e. tell one single man, the Prelate, who need neither do by
vote, or consent of other Elders or people, as the prelatical way teaches. Our
Elders are neither over the says of the people, nor can they dispense censures
contrary to the mind of the Godly. So Mr. H. has not found the prelate with
us: but the Male, Church which is above all their officers, and all others is
the prelatical Church.

But what if the Elders meet and confer this power of sole Jurisdiction upon
one man, and make him more then a Moderator?

Ans. What if the firmament fall? if they make a Bishop, they make a Bishop. I
cannot stand; but see more of the prelates their majority, pride, dignity,
privileges in the Authors cited, Niceph. l. 8. c. 11. Sozom. l. 1. c. 14
Tripart. Hist. l. 1 c. 19. Cypr. Epist. 80. Bernar. Epist. 80. Eusebius. l. 10. c.
3. Hieronymus in Episto. ad Titum, and ad Euagrium Epist. 85. ad Nepotianum de
vita Clericorum. Socrates l. 7. c. 35. Cyprian. l. 1. Ep. 4 and. l. 4. Epist.
2. Council. Antiochen. c. 14. Bernard. in Canti. Ser: 77. and Epist. 82.
Brightm. in Apol. 3. See Archiep. Spalaten. de Rep. Eccles. l. 3. c. 1. Edwar.
Didoclav. in altar. Damasceno. p. 24, 25, 26, 27. and fere per totum. Beza De
gradibus Ministr. c. 1. etc. August. Epist. 19. Whitaker Cont. 4. q. 1. c. 3.
sect. 30. Waldenses aut Aeneas Silvius Histor. Bohem. c. 35. Thom. Waldens.
Doct. fidei, Tom. 1. l. 2. c. 60. Tom c. 7. Reinold. Colloq. cum Ha^t.
in nature and essence distinct from our Elders, or from Synodical Elders,
against whom the argument fights with the like strength as against us. What
famous Independents have refuted prelacy, I or a few can read.

Mr. H. What rule of Christ condemns the Churches of error, for giving the
power of jurisdiction to one man, but will condemn the i^vesting many Elders
with jurisdiction over many Churches? let Mr. R. give me one place of
Scripture, or one sound Reason for it; that one may be a Pastor to a people, by
whom he was never chosen, etc.

Ans. The places of Scripture that tell us the Elders of Jerusalem were over so
many as their constant officers, who could not meet in one Congregation,
declare they had jurisdiction over that Church, otherwise Elders of that Church
they could not be: but they could not all of them be chosen their Elders
constantly teaching in all the Congregations; for that was unpossible.

And our grounds for a Presbyterian Church, and for Presbyterian Elders are
these.

1. To appoint Elders (...), in every City. Tit. 1. 5. Is to appoint a
College, or Church Officers in every Church, the Town, or City of Samaria
receiving the Gospel.

1. As many, even from the greatest to the least, as were bewitched by Magus,
Act. 8. 6. 9.

2. Both men and women were baptized, v. 12. and so were made a Church.

3. The number being above the strength of Philip, and so more then one
Congregation, they stood in need of Peter and John, v. 14. to help in the work.

2. The first samplar Church of Jerusalem is one Church in Government, A
presbyterial Church was at Jerusalem, Rome, Thessalonica, Ephesus, etc.
for their Elders are called the Elders of the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 2. 43,
44, 47. and 8. 1, 2. and 5. 11. and 11. 30. But that this Church was not all
one Congregation, is clear.

1. From the multitude thereof, Act. 2. 43. three thousand.

2. Act. 4. 4. Five thousand. And then (...), multitudes of men, and women,
Act. 3. 14. and yet they were multiplied, (...), exceedingly; and a great
company of the Priests (hard metal to be wrought upon) was obedient to the
faith, Act 6. 7.

2. They meet in sundry places from house to house, Act. 2. Synod at
Westminster.
46. and 5. 42. for the celebration of the Lords Supper, breaking of bread; nor
is it like they durst bring into the Temple the new seal of the Supper. The
dissenting Brethren refused that.

3. The multitude of twelve preaching Apostles for some years, and seven
Deacons for the poor, declare, that in

1. Such a plentiful harvest,

2. In such a necessity of gathering souls.

3. Of preaching in season, and out of season; that one Apostle could not
preach to one Congregation, the other eleven hearing, that were twelve reapers
all in one ridge, in one single Congregation, where eleven that time must be
silent.

4. The Apostle spoke with diverse tongues, that these of all nations
understood, Act. 2. 1, 2, 3. Therefore in diverse meetings; nor is it clear,
that all the three thousand heard Peter: the Text says (v. 37.) they that
heard were pricked, Act. 2. 11. the rest of the Apostles also spoke, as Mr. H.
thinks.

5. What agrees to the Apostles as Elders, agrees to all Elders, The Apostles
act as an ordinary Presbytery, Act. 6.
but the Apostles Act. 6. as Elders, not as Apostles (which is a Presbytery of
twelve Elders over diverse Congregations) chose Deacons, lay hands on them, and
praying ordain them, v. 6. and use the joint concurrence of the people for the
choosing of them, as a standing example to the Churches. Now what they do as
Apostles either in writing Scripture, working miracles, speaking with tongues,
etc. they neither seek nor need the help or occurrence of others, either
people, or any else. There is no ground to say that all these thousands meet in
Solomon's porch, Act. 5. 12. at one act of divine worship Congregational, or
that they were all joining in one and the same prayer, or that they returned
(to wit, Peter, and John) to their own, that is, all the thousands, but to the
Apostles, who spoke the word with boldness, Act. 4. 23, 31. nor does the word
(...), multitude, note every individual person, man and woman, Mat. 8. 37. The
whole multitude of the Gadarens besought Christ to depart: Festus, Act. 25. 24.
All the multitude has deal^ with me about Paul. Luke 1. 10. The whole
multitude were praying without. See the Reverend Assembly at Westminster.

They meet (...), in every house (it notes a Church-meeting, Act. 5. 42. and
16. 15. and 20 7, 8, 10. Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19. Phil. 1. 2.) but that all
these thousands interessed in ordinances and government (as the Brethren say)
meet for the same word, breaking of bread, government and censures, in the same
house, needs no refutation, it refutes it self.

3. The Church of Rome, though one body, had many members, The Church of Rome
was a Presbyterial Church.
Romans 12. and could not be one single Congregation.

1. In it were many Churches lesser, as the house of Aristobulus, Romans 16. 0.
Of Narcissus, v. 11. and 14. Philol^gus, Ne^ea, Iul^us, and all the Saints with
them, v. 15. the Church at the house of Aquila and Priscilla: many teachers and
fellow-helpers, ve^s. 3, 9, 12.

4. The Church of Thessalonica could not be one single Congregation; The Church
of Th^ssalonica, of Antioch, Presbyterian churches.
their faith being heard in all Achaia and all places, 1 These. 1. 6, 7, 8. of
them Paul gloried in all the Churches, v. 16. Paul at one Sermon converted of
them (...), a great mul titude, and of devout women, Act. 17. 4. not a few:
also what must be the growth of that Church, (...), Act. 15. 33. when they
tarried at Antioch, Steph. some time, Beza not a Steph. Cum aliquid temporis
ib^ consumpsissent. B^z^. Aliquandiu, tempore non parvo. Lorin. In Loc. non
solum P^trus, sed Pau^us aliique Apoli and Apostolici viri versati sunt.
Marloratus, Hoc quidam exponunt quod sacer coetus in eorum d^iro cogeretur.
Pareus Com. in Romans 16. Observemus ve^o Ecclesiae nomen paucis fide^^ous
Christi nomine congregatis convenire -- ubi duo vel tres -- nemo tamen inde
collig^^ Ecclesiam dom^sticam esse infallibilem. B^za in Romans 16. 5. Neque
mirum est in tam ampla civitate distinct^s fuisse fidelium coetus. Calv. ib.
Horum itaque domum Ecclesi^m dixit, non solum quia Christi fidem exceperunt,
sed quia hospitio credentes admitterent.
little time. Paul and Barnabas continued there (...), with many other
Teachers; and when God lays the daily care of all the Churches upon one man,
2 Cor 11. 28. and upon other eminent members of the same body, that the Lord
sent so many eminent Teachers, and Prophets to one Congregation only at
Antioch, at Corinth, who can believe it?

5. The Church of Eph^sus had diverse Congregations, if not more then one, 1
Cor. 16. 19. The Churches of Asia salu^^ you, Aquila and Priscilla salute you
much in the Lord, with the Church at their house. So Marlorat, so Par^us and
B^za on Romans 16. See the English Divines on the place, and Diodati. There were
diverse small assemblies in one and the self same City. See 1 Cor. 16. 19. Col.
4. 15. So were Church Assemblies ordinary for praying in the house of Mary,
Act. 12. 12. Joh. 20. 19, 26. in an upper chamber, at preaching, praying and
choosing of an Apostle, Act. 1. 13. praying and baptizing in the house of
Iustus, Act. 18. 7, 8 preaching in the Scho^l of Tyrannus, Act. 19 9.
preaching. c^lebrating of the Lords supper in a house of Troas Act. 20. 8, 20.
and 5. 42. and 10. 24. The Assembly of Divines at Westminster proves that
there were more congregations then one at Ephesus. 2. That there were many
Elders over them as one flock, Act 20. 17, etc. 3. That these congregations
were one Church, Rev. 2. To which add,

1. The multitude of converts Luke says, Act. 19. 10, 17. three times (...),
all the Jews and Greeks in Asia and at Ephesus heard the Gospel, a great door
there was opened, Sorcerers converted, Act. 19. and Paul gives direction to
Timothy, how he should govern in the house of God. 1 Timothy 3. 15, 16. at
Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1. 3. upon whom he should lay hands, 1 Timothy 5. 22. 1 Timothy 3. 1,
2. 1 Timothy 6. 4. to what faithful men able to teach others he should commit the
Ministry, 2 Timothy 2. 2. Had it been a single congregation, where one might teach
at once only, what needed such watching over false Teachers, speaking perverse
things, and gathering Disciples and Churches out of one single Church, Act 20.
27, 28, 29. and trying of false Apostles, Rev. 2. 1, 2, 3. who were not sent to
one single congregation, and there has been need to take heed to such as speak
lies, sow unprofitable questions, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 12. 2 Timothy 6. 3, 4.
2 Timothy 2. 14, 15, 16. and so there must have been many preaching Elders there.

6. At Corinth there have been many instructers, 1 Cor. 4. 16. many Doctors and
prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 31, 32.

7. Though there be many Churches in Galatia, Gal. 1. 2. yet must they be one
lump, who have power to judge and censure false teachers, Gal. 5. 9. and there
is a Church restoring made by spiritual officers, Gal 6. 1. otherwise they
might have replied, We Galatians have no power in one body to cut off a
troubler who infecteth the whole lump, every single congregation is to see to
that, and the troubler is without our Churches, save to one only single
Independent power, say our Brethren.

8. Its not possible that the Churches can send their common That sund^y
Churches send messengers prove a meeting of the Elders of those Churches, for
all men and women who are the Churches of the redeemed ones could not meet in
one place. M. H. Survey, par. 1. c. 3. p. 40.
Messengers whom they choose, 2 Cor. 8. 19, 23. except the Churches convene,
men, women and children, or then convent in Elders of many Churches, or the
Apostles must have gone from Church to Church to beg suffrages and votes: which
sort of Election is never heard of in any Writer sacred or profan^.

As to the first, who can believe that men and women and children capable to
hear and be baptized also (which is the only Church of Believers owned by our
Brethren) the externally covenanted and redeemed did send the Apostles to
Jerusalem? or received the Apostles, and did welcome them? or salute the
Saints, as Act. 16 3, 4. Romans 16. 16 Act. 15. 22, 27, 28? therefore need for
it, the second must be said. That the Churches in their Heads, Rulers,
Officers, sent them, which is a very Presbyterial Church.

9. If diverse Churches meet for laying on burdens by power of the Keys, as M.
Cot. says, and exercising acts of Church Government, then there is a
Presbyterial Church governing without and above a single congregation, by
pastors neither chosen to be fixed and constant teachers, nor that can possibly
teach many congregations. But the former Mr. Cotton and our Brethren teach.

Obj. This is no Church Power (for a Synod is not a Church) because it is no
Church-jurisdiction.

Ans. 1. The Antecedent is false. 2. The Consequence is There is a Church Power
in a Synod without and above a single congregation.
naught. A number of private Christians wanting all official Authority, so
might lay on Synodical burdens binding materially, if this be no Church Power.

2. They are called the Decrees of Apostles and Elders, Act. 16. 4. written and
concluded. Act. 21. 25. Says James, Act. 15. 22. It seemed good to the
Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men. Now whether
Church note the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, or the multitude of believers
only, or the Church of Jerusalem, made up of both, the Decrees must come from
Church Power, governing, teaching, uniting and removing a Schism. Though it
were no power of jurisdiction, yet here is a Church Power above a Church,
except it be said that so many pastors of the same or of diverse Churches, or so
many private Christians commissionated from no Churches, made the Synod, Act.
15. and Synodically said, It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us. But this
shall no more import the promised presence of Christ to such as are convened in
his Name, Mat. 18. 19. 20. and 28. 19, 20, 21. Ioh. 2. 21. than if so many
private Christians had been convened, and so may such of a sister-Church remove
all Schisms, and a Synod shall be nothing at all.

10. If Christ build the power of binding, loosing, gaining upon brotherhood,
Mat. 18. If thy brother offend, etc. then as far as brotherhood goes, if I
possibly can converse with him, and may be offended or edified by him, so far
must the power of jurisdiction be extended; because these two, The gaining of a
brother, 2. The safety of the Church by edifying of others, and removing of
scandals, are intended by Christ. Mat. 18. but brotherhood is without the
bounds of the congregation whereof I am a member; Romans 16 14. Salute the
brethren that are with them; 1 Cor. 16. 20. All the breth^en salute you. These
were brethren of other congregations.

2. If there be no Church-tye upon me to gain any but those Mat. 18. cannot
warrant me to gain no trespassing brethren in a Church way, but only the
brethren of that congregation of which I am a member.
of mine own congregation: then 1. There may be communion of Saints only
within the same congregation, and no communion of Churches: what Scripture is
for this?

3. It must be the will of Christ that we bestow no Church-rebukes upon other
Churches; which must be contrary

1. To Christian love, to save others.

2. Contrary to zeal for the Lords glory.

3. Spreading the Gospel.

4. Desire to remove Scandals.

5. To be made all things to all men, to save some.

6. To serve one another in love.

7. To promote the common interest of the whole catholic Body of Christ.

8. Its against our praying for the Church, and that all Israel may be saved.
Narration of the practice of the Churches of N. E. p. 16, 17, 18.


9. Against the Doctrine of our Brethren, who say, That Churches ought to
rebuke, exhort, warn, comfort Churches.

10. Its against the communion of Spiritual privileges of one Head and
Savior, one Covenant, one God, one Faith, etc. Its not enough to say, We are
the same Body entitative, for that Way of the Churches of Ch^m. N. E. c. 6.
sect. 1, 2, 3. Cotton Keys.
entitative Body without this congregation, is either visible or invisible; if
visible, then members of diverse congregations are of the same visible body: and
to say that other congregations are not as visible as that whereof I am a
member, to me and others about, is to deny twice three to be six; for one
Christ, one Faith, one Profession, the same seals, are as visible in a Church
within few paces to me, as in the Church whereof I am a member: to say it is
invisible, is to speak against sense.

CHAP. VII.
Of a Church in an Island.

MR. H. If a Church in an Island may dispense all Censures, Par. 1. c 9. sect.
3. p. 125.
and all Ordinances, then every congregation may: But such a Church may. For 1.
it is a City and a little Kingdom of Christ. 2. The essential notes of a
visible Church agree to it.

Ans. The consequence from a broken arm to a whole arm The independence of a
Church in an Island is its affliction, not its power.
is not good: or, because James the day before he be beheaded in strong prison,
cannot discharge all Christian duties to brethren, and to neighbor Churches,
therefore he is not actu primo a Christian. A Church in an Island is not
actually associated with other Churches, and so cannot in the full extent
dispense all Ordinances of rebuking, comforting neighbor Churches, and of
withdrawing communion from them, because of the want of the object, not because
of defect in the subject: I might retort the argument, Therefore associated
congregations cannot dispense all Ordinances of rebuking, comforting, etc. But
the latter is absurd.

2. An homogeneal Church in an Island void of pastors and men able to teach,
cannot administer the Seals by Mr. H. his way.

3. A Church so divided, and not associated, is imperfect, and may remove
scandals within it self; but it follows not, Ergo, every associated Church may
remove scandals within it self, and without it self also independently, and
without any subordination to united powers of the associated congregations, it
follows not, the notes of a visible Church agree to such a Church imperfectly;
except it be said, That the same Church from its own intrinsecal and internal
independency can dispense censures, it proves nothing; but the independency
here is extrinsecal and objective, and so accidental, and the affliction, not
the power of jurisdiction in this Church.

Mr. H. There be all the officers in such a Church in an Island, and all the
operations, operari sequitur esse -- and the end is the same in both, the
perfecting of the Body.

Ans. There be neither all the Church-operations, because There are neither the
same perfect operations, nor the adequate and complete end of edification in a
Church in an Island.
there is no dispensing of pastoral acts, censures, Church rebukings,
Church-warnings to neighbor Churches; nor is there the same adequate end,
which is the perfecting of the visible body round about, as far as may be,
which is the complete end of an associated Church: the perfecting of one single
congregation, is a mangled and imperfect end.

Mr. H. 3 Ground. Where there is an office or power appointed of God, there
needs no other power, but the office to authorize the work.

Ans. There is nothing more false. Every pastor has a power to preach, but
there is need of a call of God to preach to Macedonia, not to Bithynia, Acts
16. There is need of a call to preach fixedly to this, not to this flock, and
to ossociated Churches.

2. How is it proved? its but begged that there is a power independent in an
associated congregation.

Mr. H. If the power be the same, and the end the same, the power must be vain,
if it be not put forth to the end: the power Page 126.
and institution of Christ should be wronged, if it should be hindered in
attaining its end.

Ans. This is also a false ground. Power of admonishing, of rebuking, of
preaching, is not wronged, when the object, to wit, neighboring Churches, are
not; and the Lord cannot wrong his own institution. Its a carnal reason, to say
an institution is in vain, and a power, when they are not put forth in all
possible acts. Steven is stoned, James is beheaded, Paul imprisoned, the Church
scattered, that they cannot by a physical impossibility meet to remember the
Lords death, preach the Gospel, dispense censures, is therefore the power given
by Christ to do all these in vain?

Mr. H. Neighborhood of other Churches, is but a separable adjunct, it can
add nothing to the constitution, and so to the operation of the Church; for
death and dissentions may take away some Churches, and may nullify them.

Ans. This is for me. Neighbor Churches are extrinsecal to The nonexistence
of associated Churches adds nothing to the power intrinsecal of a
congregation to rule the associated Churches if they were.
the nature of a Church in an Island: Ergo, the Church in the Island has a
ministerial and official power actu primo to rule, and jointly edify the
neighbor Churches, if they be. If any say Evah was accidental to the nature
and to the operations of Adam, will it hence follow, a power of procreating
children is accidental also to Adam? no more does it follow from the
notexistence of neighboring Churches, that the Church in the Island has no
power to edify, and jointly rule those neighboring Churches, its poor Logic,
because the object is not, to remove the power: Such a man is in a dark
dungeon, Ergo, he has no visive faculty; and because light and colors add
nothing to the visive faculty, or to its nature and essence; Ergo, if light and
colors be removed, the visive faculty is removed. So associated Churches are
accidental to the Church in an Island; Ergo, that Church is deprived of all
politic power to govern associated Churches, if they were, it follows not.

Mr. H. Suppose a Church be gathered in a wilderness, any latter Page 126.
Church planted beside it, cannot binder nor abridge the liberty, power,
authority and operations, that all are from Christ; and when the same
intrinsecal power of constitution according to God, remains unaltered, the
operations remain the same.

Ans. 1. A Church or Churches added, do not hinder or abridge, nor bring any
privative power; but the added Churches bring a perfecting, helping and
cumulative power to perfect objectively in complete operations the former
Church in the Island, in things of common concernment, in which hoth that
Wilderness-Church, and the added Churches must be either edified or scandalized.

2. When the same intrinsecal power remains unaltered, the operations may be
altered to the better, and perfected. Mr. H. devises much Logic of his own:
When the visive faculty of a man brought out of a dungeon who could not see the
daylight, sees now, should the operations remain the same, when he is brought
forth; Ergo, as he saw not before, so he sees not now.

Mr. H. If it be said the Church in an Island should submit to a combination of
Churches, as well as combine as members of a congregation: Ans. 1. This is to
beg the question. 2. Suppose they will not (submit) then the other Churches
cannot command that, no more than a particular congregation can command me to
be a member. 3. They ought not so to combine, as to prejudice the operations of
that power they have received of Christ, and there is no warrant of Christ to
hinder the operations of a Pastor or ruling Elder, more in one act of his
office than another.

Ans. The contrary is a begging of the question. For The adding of associated
Churches to a Wilderness-church does strengthen and perfect, and not nullify
the intrinsecal power of the Wilderness-church.


1. The Church in an Island should submit to the counsel and advice of new
added Churches, as to the Lords Word, by Mr. H. his grant, Ergo, a new addition
of Churches, as an addition, does help, and not hinder the power.

2. The addition of a new power of jurisdiction to the power that was in the
Wilderness-church, and that in matters of common edification, as in dogmatick
points, by grant of Adversaries, is no prejudging, ^xcept they over-vote, in a
corrupt way, the Wilderness-church. And we say, Christ never gave any power of
erring, or maladministration.

3. The adding of 50 members to a Wilderness-church consisting of 25, shall
have the same inconvenience: for the Wilderness-church is to submit to these
added members, if added according to God (as we suppose) as to as lawful a
Church-judicature as the Wilderness-church was before the addition. But what if
they will not submit? Let Mr. H. see to that. I should think, by Mr. H. his
grounds, they ought to submit, for they are added according to the Rule of
Christ; and by Mr. H. his grounds they ought not to submit, (which is a
contradiction.) For

1. The power of the Wilderness-church, the authority within themselves,
offices, officers, were before complete, were all from Christ. Ergo, the
operations should be the same, and they should vote and conclude as they did
before, without the addition of 50 members.

2. Those 50 added are separable adjuncts to the constitution and nature, and
so to the operations of the Wilderness-church. For by Mr. H. the
Wilderness-church being of 25 members, was complete in essence and operations,
before the addition of 50 members.

3. The 50 members over-vote and nullify the righteous preceding of the poor
holy Wilderness-church of 25. Ergo, here the power of a single congregation in
the Island and the Wilderness must be over-turned by these three Arguments of
Mr. H. Let his defenders see to it.

4. A congregation may command me a visible professor so and so, dwelling near
the Fountain, to confess Christ before men, and so to be a member.

Obj. They cannot excommunicat^ a r^fus^r to be a member, for a non-member
cannot be c^st out.

Ans. Its all along a false principle, that a man is no member until

1^ A Court congregational judicially judge of his Regeneration.

2. Until he actually consent, and give up his Name as a married party: 3. and
that to one only congregation; all are rotten and headless principles. What
way pastors may be hindered in exercising pastoral acts, or acts of ruling, is
clear: he may not publicly preach in a set time of his own appointing, without
the Churches consent, by whom he is to be regulated, which is no hindering of
the exercise of his power, as Mr. H. imagines, but a regulating thereof.

Mr. H. The addition of any thing besides an office, adds no Page 117.
power of right or jurisdiction.

Ans. True, but it extends the right of the Wilderness-church to so many
members added, to 50 Infants to be baptized when born, to ten Churches about,
when the Lord shall add them, not to rule over them, but to rule jointly over
the whole combination with them, for promoting the Gospel in all.

Mr. H. The ground of the combination is of no force, to wit, the preventing or
curing the taint and pollu^ion that a scandal will bring, by the nearness of
combination. Therefore the combination is of no force, the scandal falls out in
another Classis. 2. In the outside of the combination, nearer the congregation
of another Classis than their own. 3. It goes far to another Province and
Nation. The righteous proceeding according to the Rule of Christ, is a cure
appointed to remove it, wherever it falls out, far or near.

Ans. By combination, we do not mean only a combination of a Presbytery, but
also of a Province, Nation; yea, of When scandals fall out far off or near
hand, how association of Churches removes them.
all the sound Christian Churches on earth, as the Synod of Dort, 1618.
condemned the unsound Doctrine of the Arminians, by writing to all those either
within or without the Church, and nearness of habitation is not the adequate
ground (though a ground it is, 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported there is among you
fornication, etc.) of the danger of pollution.

2. The reason, Because the scandal may fall out without the combination of the
Classis, is no reason why the combination is of no force, for the combination
is upon other grounds also, to wit, the establishing in the faith, the increase
of the Churches, Acts 16. 4, 5. the gathering of the Saints, and perfecting of
the body, Ephesians. 4. 12. edifying the body, beside the preventing and curing of
scandals.

3. Its to beg the question, to say, that the proceeding of the Independent
congregation of Antioch (say it were so) is a cure for the scandalous Doctrine
of salvation by circumcision, preached at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 1. troubling the
Churches of Syria and Cilicia, Acts 15. 23, 24. Yea, this is for Mr. H. to say,
the holy Ghost used not a sufficient cure. As for that, to say scandals should
not be prevented and cured by the combination, because they may fall out
without the combination; his meaning is, without the combination classical, or
congregation, it makes Christ's remedy nonsufficient, that either there can be
no Provincial, no National scandals, contrary to experience, or then Christ
has provided no Church-remedy to remove them, but only the power of a single
congregation, which has no power at all, but over themselves. Hence this
rotten principle, The limiting of Churchedifying and Church-comforting to one
only congretien whereof the man only is a sworn member, is an unwarrantable
and comfortless way.
That Church feeding is due to none under the New Testament, but to persons
hampered into the Pinfold and Judaical Prison of one single congregation,
against which 1. it licenseth the most godly Saints on earth, residing at
Corinth, if they be no Church Members of that Church,

1. To deny Christ and Church-ordinances before men, when Christ's sends out his
servants, as Mat. 22 3, 4. Luke 14. 16, 17. for they may say, the Lord calls
none to Church-ordinances at Corinth, but members of that Church, and such are
we not.

2. It licenseth them to despise Church-prophecying, Church-praying,
Church-praising.

3. To disobey a Gospel-command, though they have visibly to the conscience of
all tried themselves. Do this in remembrance of me: whereas Christ limits his
invitation to all who can discern his body. Mr. H. must say its adultery for
the members of the Church of Philippi, to remember the Lords death in the
Church of Corinth.

4. That Doctrine is not of God, which debars the birds, sheep, and children of
God sojourning in what fields or land soever (as it were) from feeding as his
Eagles upon the carrion, in every lawful Church Way; or from watching at the
gates, and waiting at the posts of the doors of Wisdom, except in that only
congregation to which they are sworn by marriage oath, or from seeding at any
table of the Lord, or dwelling all the days of their life in the New
Testament-sanctuary, to behold the beauty of the Lord, Prove. 8. 35. 36. Psalm.
23. 6. and 27 4. except in one single congregation: but such is the Doctrine of
The Way of Churches of N. E. c. 1. sec. 1. p. 1. c. 4. sec. 3. sec. 4. p 70,
71. Mr. H. Survey, pa. 3. c. 2. p. 10. M. Cotton, keys of the kingd. c. 7. p.
39, 40, 4^.
an independent congregation, the only visible Church of the New Testament, as
they say.

5. That Doctrine is not of God, which confines Church-comforts,
Church-praying, etc. to one single congregation, and puts us in a worse, if not
in as hard a condition as the Jews, whose public Temple-service was tied to
the Temple; whereas in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 3. 8. (as in the Old also in
some sense) we may pray in every place, lifting up holy hands without wrath and
doubting. But we may not pray, praise, and heat Church-wayes in any place by
this way, but in our own congregation, although the Lord promise to create on
Zions assemblits a cloud and a smoke by day, and the shining of a fleming fire
by night, Isa. 4. 5. and that upon all the Lords Mount.

6. The sojourner is left to the Eunuchs complaint, I am a dry tree; there is
glory in this assembly, but I have neither part nor portion in it: Nor will it
establish the heart to say, I see the beauty of the Lord in my own
congregation, for these under the New Testament can find no solace and comfort
from that Psalm. 106. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear to
thy people. Nor can it be the comfort of an Institution, which is something
more to a believing sojourner, and David banished to want, then we conceive^
when David's spirit is overwhelmed, when he wants the joy, presence and comfort
of instituted holy days, Psalm. 42. 4. and of Tabernacle-consolation with the
covenanted people of God, which made the sparrows more happy than he was, Psalm.
84. 1, 2, 3, 4. and yet he had soul-refreshments in lively desires, Psalm. 63.
1, 2. For the godly sojourner is not of that covenanted visible body with the
Church to which he is a stranger; for by this way, he is an alien, and deprived
of their sanctuary joy and glory of that cong^egregation, both in
Church-hearing, believing, and joy of the seals.

7. By this way, Christ must promise his Ministerial presence, and his Spirit,
not always, as Mat. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Ioh. 20. 21. Acts 1. 8. and in
every congregation where they open the mouth, but only in one fixed
congregation. With what faith can they preach elsewhere? or people hear the
pastors elsewhere?

CHAP. VIII.
Arguments against a Presbyterial Church taken from the Name and Nature of the
Church, Matthew. 18. are discussed.

MR. H. A Church in the Gospel is never used for the Elders Mr. H. par. 1. c.
9. p. 127, 128. sec. 4. 3 ground
only.

Ans. It is never used in the N. T. for men only who govern, secluding women
and children, as Mr. H. takes it; nor for the people secluding the Elders as a
governing Society; but of the signification hereafter. But it cannot be a
binding and authoritative loosing Church.

Mr. H. There cannot be a definition given that will agree to a Congregational
and Presbyterial Church.

Ans. Ergo, There is no Presbyterial Church, it follows One and the same nature
agrees to the congregational, presbyterial Church, etc. Page 127. 128.
not.

2. As we take a Congregational Church for the Eldership ruling, it is false.
One and the same nature of a Ruling Church agrees to the Congregational,
Presbyterial, Provincial Eldership: and so they differ per magis and minus, as
is said.

Mr. H. If the Congregations be species specialissimae of a true Church, then
there can be no lower species resulting or arising from them, as this does.

Ans. No Logic can say, the Church of Boston so existing The congregational,
Presbyterial, National, Oecumenick Churches are species specialissimae.
has other species of the Church of Boston under it. The hand of Socrates
cannot be called species specialissima; nor is the hand, to speak Logically, a
species; it is a part, and an uncomplete part of the body. If Mr. H. mean, as
it seems he does, that we make Presbyterian, Provincial Churches, lower species
and kinds of Congregational Churches, the pious man refutes Presbyterian
Government, which he understands not. For species specialissima praedicatur de
inferioribus, according to Aristotle his, Ramus, and all Logic. And O what
Monsters feed we if this be true properly (a Presbyterial Church is a
Congregational Church) or (a Congregation is a Presbyterial Church) for the
congregation is an integral part of the Presbyterian Church, the Presbyterian
likewise an integral part of the Provincial: but neither of them is species to
other, except we say, Euphrates is the Element of Water, the Element of water
is Euphrates.

M. H. If every congregation has all the integral parts of a Church, then it
is an entire and complete Church.

Ans. Therefore it is an entire politic Church in its association How a
congregation is an entire church. Tertul. in Apolog.
with other Churches, it follows not. But what then? London is an entire city
having all the integral parts of a Society, Major, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Rulers
and ruled, Ergo, London is no part of England, nor ruled by the Parliament of
England. What Logic is this? But if the meaning be, that the congregation
associated in the midst of ten congregations, is so a city different in species
and in nature from all other congregations, and so married to its own Pastors,
as the husband and wife are, so that to exercise Church-acts, official acts
without themselves, is adultery and unlawful; and so as this Church is no
integral part of the body Catholic, its against Scripture and sound reason,
and a begging of the question.

Mr. H. Every integrum is made up of his members, therefore in nature they are
before, therefore Churches before Classis; therefore what each have they
receive from them; therefore they have no office, but from them; therefore both
ordination and jurisdiction come from them.

Ans. I desider at a Syllogism.

Every whole Incorporation is made up of its members that are before the whole,
and has power, offices, ordination and jurisdiction from these members. It is
denied by us, and nakedly asserted by Mr. H. For Though the Churches of
believers, men and women be before the Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors,
Presbyteries, Synods, yet it follows not, therefore must Apostles, Pastors,
Synods have their calling and authority from those Churches.


1. The Churches are before the Apostles, Ergo, the Apostles had their
immediate calling and power of jurisdiction from the Churches. It is against
Scripture: as women and children are by nature before officers; ergo, officers
have their ordination and jurisdiction from women and children. 3 Churches are
before counselling and advising, yea as Mr. Cotton says well before,
pastorally and authoritatively determining Synods, Ergo, Synods have all their
synodical power to counsel and pastorally teach from the Churches, they came
from, it follows not, not will our brethren yield the consequence.

Mr. H. If a Congregation grow too big, and therefore be forced Sect. 4. p.
128. Mr. Hooker acknowledges that diverse meetings and Church conventions may
may be all under one Presbyterial government, only he will not call them
Churches.
to swarm out; or in ease they transplant themselves from one place to another,
so that part be forced to go before others, to make preparation for those that
follow, we then send an Offic^r with the smaller party, and the greater number
remain with the rest: and yet are all but one Church in our account, and under
one Presbytery of chosen Elders of the Congregation.

Ans. 1. Why do not our Brethren show a practice of this in the Church of
Jerusalem, consisting of so many Act. 2. and 4. and 6. thousands, if more then
five thousands all in one congregation? Was there not need that four or six
congregations should swarm out of six thousands, and six Officers be sent with
them? in which case, suppose they go forty miles to a new Colony, and five
congregations meet in five sundry places for Word and Sacraments, here must be
five Churches, ^s our brethren take the word Church, 1 Cor. 11. 18. Act. 11. 16
and 21. 22. and 4. 31. Mat. 18. 17. and 16. 18. Sure, though they had no
Officers, they are a homogeneous true visible Church, as Mr. H teaches, page
1. c. 5. page 5. and so here, or six Churches (if we contend not about names)
under one Presbyterial government, which is the yielding of the cause, and yet
at forty miles distance, and yet by no will or appointment can they meet in one
place, O but they are all one Church in our account! one congregation in
Christ's account. Show us Scripture for this acception of the word Church in Old
or New Testament; that they are one single congregation, otherwise Mr. H. his
account is no account: If they be one Church, because they have one and the
same power, jurisdiction; officers they had before. So we say, and the same
power and jurisdiction in nature and essence we grant; but so all the
congregations on earth have one and the same power and jurisdiction, covenant,
seals, says, Christ, hope of glory; so we agree. Why dispute we, if the
meaning be, that all these six swarms (for a thousand will be a number too
great for one congregation, if not sufficient) are but one individual
congregation, though now separated by forty miles, and meeting in six sundry
places.

1. Give us Scripture for that Church. 2. Give us any Greek Author sacred or
profane, that so speaks, for we stand not to Mr. H. his account in this. 3.
Where there are and must be six sundry meetings, coitiones six numero
distinctae.
2. Six companies hearing at the same time six several Sermons.

3. Partaking of six Tables of the Lord numerically distinct, Way of the
Church. c. 1. sect. par. 1.
here sure must be fix congregations, as our Brethren define us a Church, a
company of Believers meeting in one place, etc. And if so, here is a prelacy.

3. A number of non-residents; for all are Elders ruling; but it is physically
impossible, that all can be Elders teaching. So Mr. H. then it is no^ essential
to a Church that they meet all Survey par. 1. c. 9. p. 110, 111 etc.
(...), in one place, as the brethren often tell us.

M. H. But when the Congregations are fixed, and they established in peace, and
settled with support about them, not more then may comely and comfortably meet
together, to partake of all ordinances, should be one Church.

Ans. If the six swarms, which issue out of the numerous Mr. H. must be forced
by his own principles to grant there is one visible Church which cannot meet
conveniently (...), in the same place, and yet under the same Eldership.
Church of Jerusalem, disturb the peace, and make war and division in the
Church, it is strange. The Eldership or Presbytery over these six swarms, so
separated by many miles in diverse Colonies, may either meet and exercise
discipline, and dispense censures to these six swarms not yet settled, and
provided with Officers, or they may not meet. To say they may not meet for that
end, is to deny that they are under one Presbytery of the same chosen Elders,
contrary to what Mr. H. said. If they may meet to dispense censures, here shall
be ruling Elders, and no physical possibility of teaching the swarms so
separated as forty miles, they may happily hear of written Decrees, as Act. 16.
4. but cannot be edified by preaching.

2. So this Church congregational which cannot comely and comfortably meet to
partake of all the ordinances, is no ordinance of Christ, and so no
congregational Church. But such are these swarms that are forty miles distant.

3. This Church is either visible, or not; neither can be said by Mr. H. his
principles, as elsewhere is proved.

Mr. H. Hence an answer may be easily accommodated to the examples which Mr. R.
brings for a Presbyterian Church.

1. That of the Apostles will no wise suit his end for to make up a
Presbyterial Church; there must be many congregations, many Elders appropriated
to these congregations, which have power over their own only, and not over
others; and these must combine, and upon the combination, the Elders must
assemble and d^spence their censures, and set down their decisions. But there
were no Elders at Jerusalem appropriate to their several charges and Churches,
which had power only over them; and such Elders the Apostles could not be,
because though they had all power in them, yet they had no power limited for
that should contradict their Apostolic commission.

Ans. I smile to read this worthy man yield in terminis a Presbyterial Mr. H.
yields to us a Presbyterian Church at Jerusalem.
Church; and yet be says, the examples serve not Mr. R. his end. Why? says he,

1. To make up a Presbyterial Church, there must be many congregations; good:
so say we.

2. There must be many Elders appropriated to these Congregations, which have
power over their own only (says he) and not over others; That we deny. I
should say, any other save this worthy man, (whom I much loved and ever
honored) who would write a Book against Presbyterial government, and yet did
not understand the constituent elements of a presbyterial Church, deserves to
be censured; for Mr. H. yields all the presbyterial Church that Mr. R. pleads
for, or that the famous Synod at Westminster desire; where there were eminently
learned men, who well understood Presbyterial government, and all adversaries
thereof. An eminent man Mr. Ier. Buroughs, one of the dissenting Brethren, did
not oppose, nor enter his dissent against the proposition, concerning a
Presbyterial Church, as Mr. H. does; nor look upon it as a principal of
Presbyterial government; only the Dissenters did hold, there was but one single
congregation at Jerusalem, in which they are redacted to miserable absurdities;
and in these two Mr. H. contradicts them: let them compose their domestic
contradictions. See the answer of the Assembly of Divines to the seven
dissenting Brethren, An. 1644. Suppose in Jerusalem (says the Synod) there
Page 51.
were ten congregations, and twenty officers, feeding and ruling them in
common, not one of them fixed to any one congregation. This kind of Presbytery
would pass for a lawful government: and none of these incongruities or
absurdities are charged on them, by this argument: and it shall not follow that
ruling and teaching are not commensurable, as the Holy Ghost makes them
commensurable.

2. Mr. H. cannot, nor any man for him, clear from that text Act. 2^ whether
they were fixed or not fixed, they are the Elders of the Church of Jerusalem,
that is, as Mr. H. says, contradicting the dissenting Brethren, Elders of
diverse congregations, under one Presbyterial government, which is all we crave.

2. Fixedness or not fixedness of Elders is an accident of the Fixedness or no
fixedness of the Elders of Jerusalem to their own proper congregations is
altogether accidental to the Church presbyterial. The Apostles fixed feeding at
Rome, at Corinth, is not opposite unto, but of that same nature with his
feeding pastoral all the world over.
visible governing Church to our Brethren: who hold that it is the same
numerical Church homogeneous, which being void of Elders, may choose their
officers, and thereafter being fixed and formed, may excommunicate all their
Elders, if they turn heretical; so that the people is the Church without their
officers, and the officers to Mr. H. are separable adjuncts, and the coming or
going of the separable adjuncts of the Church cannot alter the nature of the
Church. It is most weak, that Mr. H. says, that the Apostles could not be
fixed Pastors to them, for then they should be limited Pastors to them, and so
not Apostles: for there can be no contradiction between Apostles and Pastors,
for their fixed preaching, and fixed administering of the seals. For example,
Paul's pastoral officiating a year and six months at Corinth, Act. 18. 11. and
so many years at Sphesus, so many years at Rome, differs not in nature and
essence from the pastoral preaching and administering of the seals in constantly
fixed Pastors, chosen to the congregation for all their life: and yet he
remained habitu, and actu primo an Apostle. Yes the adding of an extraordinary
seal of a miracle, contradicts not the charter, or the preaching of the Gospel,
more then Samuels judging at Gilgal, is opposite to his judging all Israel at
Ramah: Extension of preaching to many is a mere accident; and a members
receiving of the Supper in his own Church is not opposite to his receiving
thereof in four other Churches. See the Answer of the Assembly, page 115, 116.

As also, if the twelve Apostles govern, as they do, Act. 6. All the twelve
meetings, and yet neither do, nor can preach all All the incongruities that are
the only arguments of Mr. H. against a Presbyterial church, are militant
against the presbyterial Church which Mr. H. grants was at Jerusalem.
of them to every one of the twelve, except all the twelve be in twelve several
meetings at once, then (which is a monstrous impossibility)

1. Ruling is divided from preaching.

2. Then all the twelve cannot fulfill their Ministry. Yes,

3. Then Episcopal ruling of many Churches, and neither being bound, nor able
to teach any of them, or all of them, is not sinful. But sure the Apostles
might govern, send their decrees, and Epistles to many Churches, the members
whereof they never saw in the face.

Nor could all the many thousands, who had power of judging with the Elders, as
our Brethren say, meet in one place comely and comfortably to act: and
therefore Christ so must never have appointed such a judicature, to rule all
these congregations, who are entitatively one; so must they say what we say,
and more. For all the congregations on earth are entitatively and in nature
one, and yet our Brethren will be far from saying, that they are all under one
government, as they say that these meetings at Jerusalem were.

M. H. The rest of the examples of Antioch, Ephesus, Rome, though it were
granted upon their greater growth, and increase, and so want of Elders, they
might meet in diverse places for the while, these might still be under one
presbytery, their officers in a distinct manner attending upon them. And
therefore Gerson Bucerus in his answer says here, Quis adeo ineptire
sustinuerit, etc. Who can say; that because they meet in diverse places, they
were under diverse Presbyteries, or Elders?

Ans. 1. This is a short way of answering, with a leaving out of the Church of
Samaria, a great City, wherein all both men and women were baptized, the Church
of Corinth, of Thessalonica, etc.

2. And yet there is no less cause to say all the Saints Mr. H. well near also
yields that there was a Presbyterian Church at Antioch, Ephesus, Rome.
at Rome, Antioch, Ephesus, Samaria could not meet in one place, then that
these of Jerusalem could not.

2. If they might meet in diverse places, for the while, and yet be under one
Presbytery; Here is a Presbyteriall Church of many Congregations, for a while.
Here is a Prelaticall and Antichristian Government, for a while, at least
ordained by Christ.

And Mr. H. writes a Book with a huge noise of absurdities, with which he
burdens his Brethren the Presbyterians; yet he will suffer their Church to
stand, for a while.

3. Who told Mr. H that a Presbyterial Church may stand for a while, during the
time of the growth of the the Church of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, but no
longer? for when the swarmed out Churches are once settled, the Presbyterian
Church must down again, since the Scripture speaks nothing of this. Who gave
Mr. H. leave to set up an Antichristian Tabernacle (for so is the Presbytery to
him) for an hour, and pull it down again?

4. It is a wonder that Mr. H. should cite Gerson Bucer cuttedly, as a Witness
so much for a Presbyteriall Church, not in the swarming out of Churches only
(of which Bucer has not one word) but in the settled state of the Church: for
Bucer contradicts Mr. H. and all his as foolishly erring, when they say such
Churches meet in diverse places for the Word and Seals; Ergo, they are
independent in their government, and cannot be under one common government.
Bucer says, if they lie near together, it is folly to say they are under
diverse Presbyteries, and so say we.

Mr. H. 2. It does not appear out of any Text, nor any evincing Argument
gathered therefrom, that (setting aside the Church of Jerusalem) they should
needs meet in several places.

Ans. Then the Church of Jerusalem met in sundry places, by Mr. H. his
argument: but this shall offend the dissenting Brethren, that maintain against
the Synod at Westminster, that There are the like reasons, that the multitudes
of Believers at Rome, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, Samaria, Thessalonica, could
not meet in one place, and so there must be in these huge Cities many
Congregations under one Presbyterial Government, as for the multitudes at
Jerusalem.
they meet all in one place.

2. Mr. H. should have given a reason, why the Church of Jerusalem met in
sundry places, and not the other Churches of Antioch, Ephesus, but because he
saw our Arguments run as strong for other Churches as for Jerusalem. He was
pleased to dictate what he could not demonstrate, and so leave the Reader in
the dark.

3. Before I leave this, let Mr. H. or his teach what is meant by this, that
there were about three thousand added to the Church, Act. 2. 21. whether by the
Church be meant the one hundred and twenty, of which chapter 1. and whether there
the one hundred and twenty were there to receive the three thousand as members
at that time in a judicial way? And if they were not there, how the three
thousand were not added primarily to the Catholic Christian Church that then
was; and secondarily What is meant by Church, Act. 2. were added to the Church.
to this, or to that Church? as we say. For when there were said to be added to
the Church, they were not added to themselves.

Mr. H. 3. Let it be considered, whether by Church may not be meant many
Churches. Saul made havoc of the Church. i. e. of the faithful of many
Churches.

Ans. It is weak as water, Saul persecuteth the Church, i. e. Mr. H. inclines
to exp^ the word C^h of the ^^^thful, Saul made havoc of the C^. E^, there is
(...) Presbyteri^ a church. How watery is this L^gick?
members of the independent Church: Ergo, there is no Presbyterial Church.
Ergo, there is not such a thing as a Synod, for he persecuted James, Peter, and
the Elders and Brethren, members of the Synod, where he might find them; now
the Apostles were not fixed member of congregations: and let Mr. H. consider
whether Luke gives not a better interpretat on then he, Act. 83. Saul made
havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling m^n and women, and
committed them to p^ison. So that Saul destroyed the scattered members, that
were not inchurched, and where he found any of this way, Act. 9. 2. whether
members of a congregation, or not, even members of diverse meetings under one
Presbytery, as he grants, he persecuted them. And by this the Church at
Jerusalem, Act. 11. 22. must be Churches congregational at Jerusalem. And Act.
2. The Lord added to the Church such as should be saved; that is, the Lord
added to diverse Independent Congregations, such as should be saved; good: but
this Church and these common Elders meet for acts of Government, Act. 2. 18.
and the day following, Paul went in with us to J^, and all the Elders (verse
25.) were present. S^re the place shows they meet for acts of Government. Yea,
Act. 11. 30. and 21. 18. They sent alms to the Elders of Judea, to be
distributed to the distressed in Judea. As also the Elders of Judea were
members of the Synod, Act. 1^. And how could there be administrating of the
seals without any jurisdiction at all to debar the unworthy?

CHAP. IX.
The Arguments of Mr. R. for a Ministerial Church from Matthew. 18. are
vindicated from the Exceptions of Mr. Hooker.

MR. H. If Christ allude to the Synedry, then must Mat. 18. Par. 1. c. 10. p.
130.
be expounded of a Presbyterial Church. Mr. H. both Proposition and Assumption
is denied.

Ans. Mr. H. leaps from one Book to another. I no Mr. R. argument, Mat. 18.
from allusion unto the Jewish Sanhedrim abused, not answered.
where frame an Argument from a mere allusion: but so, if Christ so allude to
an authoritative company, that has power of binding and loosing, as the Jewish
Sanhedrim in this Mat. 18. then he judges the Church, Mat. 18. to be a
Juridical Church.

2. Its a poor Argument, he alludes not to the Jewish Synagogue, because that
Synagogue had no power of Excommunication, as this Church Mat. 18. has, says
he: but can there be no allusion to a Judicature, except the one, to which
allusion is made, and that of which the present speech is, have the like power?
Then cannot the Scripture allude to earthly Princes, who place their greatest
Courtier upon the right hand, because earthly Princes have not the like power
with the Father of Jesus Christ. This destroys all allusions, which abound in
the Scripture; as Paul, Romans 10. 18. alludes to the Sun; Malachi compares
Gospel Worship to the burning of Incense, chap. 1. shall it then follow, that
the one is of the nature of the other? That allusions bring little light, is
said without ground; for they being grounded upon Metaphors often, which bring
light, must bring much light.

3. That Synagogues had no power to excommunicate, seems to bring darkness, and
not light. The contrary is Job. 9. and 16. Though they abused that Ordinance.

Mr. H. Its in vain to send the plaintiff to a general Council, he might be
dead before he be relieved, and the Council be gathered.

Ans. We send no man by a loup to a General Council, but the grieved man may
appeal to the nearest Judicature; and Mr. H. will have him to loup to a General
Council at the first, being accused of a scandal, which declares, that he would
elude all the Government of Christ, between him and that Judicature.

2. We do not maintain any Appeals whatsoever, but only M R. is not for all
appeals whatsoever, justor unjust, but for such as are edifying and necessary,
and relieves from tyrannical oppression the plaintiff.
righteous Appeals. Illud tantum p^ssumus, quod jure possumus.

3. So may the plaintiff be buried before a Synod, by way of consultation, may
be had; the ways of Discipline, a^ all Christ's ordinary ways in the Gospel,
may possibly never take effect in those to whom the word is a savor of death
unto death, but that does not nullify an Ordinance of God.

Mr. H. Our Savior, Mat. 18. points at a standing Tribunal of such a Church as
is at hand, whereof both parties were members. Page 131.


Ans. Its a perverting of the words of Christ, Mat. 18. that The removing of
scandals, Mat. 18. cannot be of only scandals between brother and brother of
the same congregation, except I must not own as brethren to be gained, those
of another Church beside me.
no man trespassing, whom I must endeavor to gain, can be my brother, but he
who is a member of the same congregation of which I am a member. This is to
renounce and quit all brotherly communion with all Churches on earth, but only
that single congregation of which I am a member; when not one brother, but
twenty or many Churches of brethren without the congregation, as false brethren
of Judea trespass against Antioch by perverse doctrine, Act. 15. there is not a
Judicature a^ hand, has Christ provided to tell no Church, and left no remedy
to remove the greatest of scandals?

Mr. H. How could a Church in an Island, or the first Church at Jerusalem, Act.
1. 23. exercise discipline upon an offender upon this ground?

Ans. Why not? since the purpose of Christ is, That every Church, even the less
of one hundred and twenty, Acts 1. and the greater of ten thousands, Act. 2.
and 4. and 6. should respectively purge themselves; and when association of
many Christ wills every little congregation to exercise discipline upon an
offender, Ergo, there is no discipline to be exercised in a greater Church. So
Mr. H. But the contrary rather strongly follows.
Churches about shall be, they should also purge those without the
congregation. Scandals fall out where many meetings are, and one only
Presbytery over them, as Mr. H. grants: to which of the meetings shall: the
plaintiffs complain? The offenders are of diverse Meetings or Churches that are
not at hand.

Mr. H. The Sanhedrim is a mixed Judicature, partly of Ecclesiastical, partly of
Civil Judges, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. 2 Chronicles. 19. Ergo, allusion cannot be made
thereunto.

Ans. The Consequence is naught. The Sanhedrim was not mixed by institution.


2. Mr. H. with the Prelates, confound the Judicatures, but they are clearly
distinguished, while one is appointed for the matters of the King another for
the matters of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. So are they distinguished, The Priest
or the Judge, not the Priest and the Judge, Diut. 17. 12. Men might sinsully
confound them; but sin is no institution of the Lord.

Mr. H. Arg. 2. The Church of believers is that which meets for prophesying and
for praying: but this, Mat. 18. especially for binding and loosing, and
censures. Mr. H. The Church of believers is assembled mainly for prophesying
and praying, yet not only, but for censures also, the Word being ended.

Ans. That is indeed in question, That men, women and children meet ordinarily
every Lord's Day for to act in all Ordinances; and after Sermon to leed witness,
bind and loose, and that under the notion of believers, for neither here, nor
in Scripture, is there warrant for this.

Mr. H. Arg. 3. The Church Mat. 18. is such a superior and judicial Seat, as
is to be obeyed in the Lord, under the pain of excommunication: But a multitude
of believers are not such a seat. So Mr. R. Mr H. The Major is the question,
and the Conclusion is to be proved, whether a particular congregation be the
highest Tribunal, or the classical Church: and Mr. R. takes one part of the
Conclusion to pr^ve the other: If the congregation be not highest, then the
classical must be. The Minor should have been proved, not nakedly propounded.

Ans. I propound a Syllogism, and for answer to the minor, Mr. H. transforms my
Argument, which I dreamed not of, and says, I take one part of the conclusion
to prove the other, If the congregation be not highest, then the classis is.
But, Sir, that is not one part of the conclusion to prove another; but since
you bring it, its a lawful Syllogism, Either the congregation or the classis is
the highest Tribunal: But not the congregation. Yet this is Mr. H. Arg. not
mine.

The Church Mat. 18. is such a superior seat, as is to be obeyed, as being
over us in the Lord, etc. But no Scripture, no Paul's Presbyt. c 8. p. 88. The
Church, Mat. 18. is to be obeyed in the Lord by the people, but the Church of
the people is not to be obeyed in the Lord by the people.
Divine in the world says, That the multitude of believers (I use not there
the term Congregational Church at all) is such a superior Seat, that is over
the Guides, and whom the Guides do obey in the Lord, or disobey under the pain
of Excommunication. This minor of mine is not nakedly propounded. The Scripture
says, the officers are over the multitude of believers in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 12, 14. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 17. But the contrary is never said; they do
not awake that say, this is to take one part of a conclusion to prove the
other; for its a conclusion proved by a medium, that is no part, neither
subject nor attribute of the conclusion.

Mr. H. Arg. 4. of Mr. R. Whatever the Church may excommunicate, every member
thereof convened with the Church may inflict all inferior censures.

But all the members cannot inflict lesser punishment; for neither women, nor
aged children, nor the unofficed brethren, can rebuks, exhort, or, by the Word,
openly convince the officers. Ans. The consequence is feeble, as appears from
the nature of delegated power, which is committed by Christ to persons capable
thereof, which women for their sex, children for the want of the exercise of
understanding, cannot do. People have power to choose officers, therefore women
have power to put in their voices. The Body of a Corporation may put out a
Major upon desert; therefore women and children may do it. No, the wise God
has included the votes of women in the male.

Ans. Nay, but Mr. H. shall not so elude the Argument. Whatsoever the judging,
binding and loosing Church of believers may do, that every member of the joint
community may do, in collegio, if the Keys be given to them (as Mr H. and Mr.
Cotton say) as actual believers, giving Peter's confession, Mat. 16. and
therefore Mr. H. too suddenly says, The consiquence (he would have said the
major, for its a lawful Syllogism) is feeble; for women, children, sons come to
ag^ servants, which he left out, are formal and essential parts of the
believing Church, to whom the Keys are given as to the first subject. If the
Keys be not given to them as confessing and professing believers, because not
to women, sons, servants, then not to all confessing and professing believers,
as such; then not to all blessed, as taught by a teacher above flesh and blood,
as Peter was, Mat. 16. This shall cross the Principles of our Brethren (and the
Truth and Scripture cannot but cross them) nor can it be denied, but women,
sons come to age, servants, are no less members of that Church, than the
multitude of male-believers, for they confess Christ, as Peter, are blessed,
and built on the Rock, as well as Peter, and are no less conceived in charity,
to have some spi^l good in them, as Mr. H. dictates, cap. 2. par. 1, 15, 16.
and these must be visible Saints to whom Mr. H. his definition of visible
Saints agrees; and therefore our brethren must either quit the principles they
follow, or then a multitude of believers of visible Saints must be larger than
the actual binding and loosing Church, Mat. 18. and against their will this,
Tell the Church, must be understood of, Tell some believers only, (if they
will) The Officers; but, Tell not women, nor sons, nor servants, for they are
no part of the binding and loosing Church; and, If he hear not the Church; that
is, as the Hebraism there, If he obey not the Church, if he obey not some
believers Men, and Heads of Families, not women, servants, ^ons, Let him be to
thee as a publican, etc.

2. So woman are either not capable of believing and visible Women are as
essential parts of the believing Church as men, and wom^n must no more blindly
believe what the Church believes, than men; nor must their faith in discerning
the voice of Christ in this pastor, not in this, be blindly included in the
males discerning and so women must be a part of the binding and loosing Church,
Mat. 18.
Saintship, which none can say; or they are not capable of a power of binding
and loosing: and so a power capable of binding and loosing is not given to the
multitude of believers, as the Church, Mat. 18.

3. Nor are women, sons, servants, debarred from voicing in Election, because
it is a Church Power, for it is no power of jurisdiction. For

1. Their tacit voices and consents are not excluded, because they must try the
spirits, and not upon trust, and fide implicita believe every teacher more than
men, or believe as the Church believes, more than their husbands, nor must they
take Doctrines as truth: upon their husbands word; not are women so excluded
from speaking in the Church, as they may upon no occasion confess their faith.

2. Profess vocally repentance.

3. Depose as Witnesses.

4. Accuse the guilty before the binding Church.

4. Nor may a Corporation cast out a Major by an authoritative power, such as
binding and loosing is, Mat. 18.

5. We seek a warrant why the votes of women in choosing their Pastors, must
more be included in the votes of the male, than their being essential parts of
the redeemed Church is included in the males, or their confessing publicly,
that Jesus is the Christ, as many women Martyrs, and sons and servants have
gloriously done; and yet their confession of Christ to the death must be
personal, and not included in the confession of husband or parents, as Mat. 10.
32.

Mr. H. Arg. 5. of Mr. R. Those to whom the essence and definition Survey, par.
1. c. 10. p. 133.
of a Ministerial Church, having power to excommunicate, does belong; those and
those only are understood under the Name of the Church, Mat. 18. But the
essence and definition of a Ministerial Church, having power to excommunicate,
does not necessarily belong to a great company of believers assembled
Churchwise.

Ans. Both propositions may be denied. Neither a Church without officers, nor
as having them, is here only understood; but the second sense is here firstly
attended. For both people and Elders have their power, parts and places in a
right order and manner; when its said, a Ministerial Church is here understood,
Ministerial notes either Ministers without the body exclusively, and that is
false, or Ministers with the body inclusively. Now a Ministerial Church in the
fairest sense aims at both. In the first sense, the proposition is false; in
the second it does not conclude to whom the essence and definition of a
Ministerial, i. e. of a Church of Ministers, without the body, having power to
excommunicate, does necessarily belong: These and these only are here
understood. This Mr. R. l. 1. p. 226. refu^eth. The Church principally meant
Mat. 18. must be the binding and loosing brethren which are the Church fi^st^y,
the officers are only separable adjuncts thereof, says M. H. Par. 1. c. 11.
p. 198.


Ans. Well then Mr. H. denies the conclusion; then both a Ministerial Church,
and a Church of Redeemed, meeting to partake of Ordinances, have their part
here: Ergo, women have their part here.

2. If a Church in both s^nses be here understood when all the Officers turn
grievous Wolves, Socinians, Papists, Familists, such as say they are Apostles,
and do li^; then

1. Must the people that are stumbled complain to themselves. This is not just,
to make the complaining party (says M. H.) judge. What if they unjustly
complain, and say their officers are Presbyterial and Prelatical, and are Legal
Preachers, and preach neither Christ nor Free Grace, then has Christ ordained
them whose lips preserve not knowledge, to be the only judging and first
Church, which has power to excommunicate, to be the When all the office^s
turn wolves, the people must complain to the people, and when the people turn
Familists, Socinians etc. to whom s^a^l the officers complain, acco^ding to M.
H. mind?
first and only Judges-of sound Doctrine, and Heresy in officers. And suppose
the Church of people and officers be here firstly understood; we cannot
complain of the Familist people (of which there were too many in N^E.) to the
Elders, for the same reason.

2. Nor is it true, that people and Elders (the people must in judging be
first, by Mr. H.) have their power, parts and place in this work, for all
Elders and people have equally a decisive voice, except women, and children,
and se^vants; and by what reason they want votes, a reason (...) yet is not
heard of.

3. There is no reason that binding and loosing may be transacted by only a
power of judgment in people, for then a The officers cannot bind potestate
officii, since the Keys were given to the Malechurch, before the officers had
being, as M H says.
power of office is accidental to binding and loosing, how then can a society
with both power of judgment and of office be understood here firstly? as Mr.
H. says. Therefore I ask a reason, why officers, who are mere adjuncts, such
a^ come in at the by, and as latter in nature, power, and operation to the
visible Church, should have any hand in binding and loosing, since all officers
are made and unmade, ordained and cast out by the male-Church, by this way?

4. Nor can the officers bind and loose as officers, nor has Christ given
this power to the officers as officers, by this way of our Brethren. For they
say,

1. That the Keys were given to Peter, Mat. 16. as to a believer, not as to an
officer.

2. Officers to them are but adjuncts of the visible Church, and the Keys are
given to the visible Church before they have officers, and the people may make
and excommunicate them.

3. Here is strange work! the Keys were not given to Peter as an officer, but
as a believer, and yet he uses the Keys as an officer.

4. The Church is not made Ministerial by us, without the body exclusively
wholly (for Christ's Government is voluntary) nor ought any new thing to be
concluded in our Assemblies, while the people hear of it: for if the Romans
used rogare and suadere legem, and obtain the consent of the people thereunto,
far more are they not to be acknowledged as Church-laws, that are to be
obtruded upon the godly against their will and knowledge; and much more if they
be against the Word of God, and former godly acts with consent agreed unto by
the Church; that is, whether the people consent or not, but yet without the
body, whether they exercise acts of jurisdiction or not, for no act of
jurisdiction is due to them; and to exclude the consent of women, no less
interessed in practice of conscience than men, is to be Lords of their faith.

Mr. H. The sixth argument refers to former proofs, etc.

Ans. And Mr. R. refers to former Replies.

Mr. H. Its evidently false, that there can be no complaint to a multitude; for
complaints may be made to a Parliament.

Ans. How can complaints be made to ten thousand of the We cannot tell the
church of Jerusalem or Galatia, by M. H.
Church of Jerusalem, for that Church, as Mr. H. grants, page 128, 129. met in
sundry places, not in one: No Parliament or Judicature consists of such a
number. We cannot complain to the many Churches of Galatia of their wicked
tenet of Justification by Works, for they are scattered in diverse societies,
and its unlawful (say our Brethren) to meet in their officers to exercise
jurisdiction.

Mr. H. Arg. 8. The house of Cloe complained to Paul. 2. Paul gives rules about
the Elders receiving of complaints.

Ans. That house complained to Paul, because his Apostolic Authority might
have been helpful, but they might have complained to any of the Church of
Corinth. Paul advises Titus to hear complaints, to prepare them for the Church.
3. If the people must consent tacitly to the censures, before they be dispensed
they must hear the complaints.

Ans. Paul gives rules and directions to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 19. v. 1. and
Titus, cap. 2. as to pastors, not as to believers, concerning the manner of
receiving complaints, nor is there in Scripture, Precept, Promise or practice
of believers to receive Women have no less a tacit consent, a faith of practice
in eschewing the society of the excommunicated, in admitting of him again, and
of all members, and in election of officers, than men, and in other duties
recommended to Churchmembers.
complaints, we are surer than our Brethren; and its safer to expound thy, Tell
the Church, that is, Tell Timothy and the Elders; then, Tell the Church, that
is, Tell any member of the Church at Co^inth, i. e. Tell any woman, or servant,
for they are as essentially members as Timothy or any of the Elders: 2. and
must join their consent to censures, because members must hear the scandals,
because they must tacitly consent before censures be dispensed, it follows not
that members must be told; for the tacit consent of women is requisite, for
they may be scandalized or edified by the good or evil dispensing of censures
as well as men.

2. They may not converse with excommunicate persons more than men.

3. Their consciences must not be Lorded over more than the consciences of men,
in the dispensing of censures.

4. They must have a vote tacit or formal in choosing of a Pastor, and must not
take him blindly; and complaints to women, sons, servants, yea, and the
precepts of withdrawing, Romans 16. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 6, 10. 2 Th^ss. 3 14. 2 Timothy 3.
5. Tit. 3. 10. Ioh. 10. 11. oblige the consciences of women, sons and servants,
then women may receive witness against Elders; as well as Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 19
20. but with such qualifications and limitations. For Mr H. maintains this
connection, Complaints may be made unto the Church (Tell the Church, Mat. 18.)
to all, without whose tacit consent there can be no proceeding to
excommunication. But without women's consent there is no Excommunication, no
Admission, no Election, Responde it a, vol non.

Mr. H. The people may censure heretical Elders in an Island.

Ans. So they may in justa tutela aeterna salutis, but not by the power of the
Keys.

2. And so may the Elders, remaining godly and sound, remove with the
Tabernable and Candlestick from a people in an Island, if they dance to the
golden Calf, and be incorrigible: Yea, if the Elders and men in an Island turn
Familists, and the women, sons, servants remain sound, Let Mr. H. show what the
sounder part of the Church may do. And though women be forbidden
authoritatively to teach in the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 7. Let M. H. show how women
are all excluded from Church duties in their way, more than men.
1 Cor. 14. and publicly, yet they may teach the younger women, Tit 2. 2, 3.
give a seasonable rebuke and counsel to men, 2 Samuel 20. 16, 17. 1 Samuel 25. 23,
24, 32, 33. and a woman a sister is to labor to gain a sister, by Matthew. 18.
and that in a Church Way; and women, as other Church Members, are to teach,
exhort, warn, according to their place, as well as men, Col. 3. 16. Romans 15.
14. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Heb. 3. 13 and 20. 25. Let M. H. teach us how their faith
is included in the men in these duties, in consenting that a savoury man, not
an Heretic, be their pastor.

Mr. H. Arg. 9. That Church is here understood to whom the Keys are given,
Mat. 16. but they are given only to a Classical Church. Ans. The minor is
barely affirmed.

Ans. My Argument is divided: The minor is not barely affirmed. The Keys are
given to Peter, as representing Elders and Apostles, to whom Christ says, John
20. Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven; to whom he said, As my Father
sent me, so I send you: but this official sending is most undue to the people;
and its equivalent to that Mat. 28. Go, teach and baptize. But Christ said not
to unofficed Brethren, Receive the So Cypr. Juban. Epist. 73. page 22. Nam
Petro primum Dominus super quem adificavit Ecclesiam -- Mat. 16. Istaem
potestatem (clavium) dedit -- and post resurrectionem -- sicut me misit pater,
etc. Firmilian. ad Cypr. Epist. 75. Cypr. page 239. n. 14. Hinc intelligi
potest quod soli Petro Christus dixerit, quemcunque ligaveritis, Matthew. 16,
etc. Quando in solos Apostolos insufflavit Christus dicens, accipite Spiritum
Sanctum, etc.
holy Ghost; Whose sins ye forgive, etc. Go, teach and baptize. So Cyprian.

Mr. H. Arg. 10. of Mr. R. The only apparent argument against this
interpretation is weak, and therefore this sense has ne strength.

Ans. Both parts fail: 1. There may be other Reasons given. 2. It does not
follow, that the different sense is clear, because many better Reasons happily
may be rendered, than were alleged. Mr. Ball according to his sagacity and
sharpness of dispute, seeks far and wide where to find, where the word
Church notes only the Elders, but all comes to this, One may suppose such a
sense.

Ans. 1. Mr. H. denies the Antecedent and the Consequence, The word Church can
signify no other, but the ruling Church Mat. 18. and the notation of the word
Church in our brethrenssense is neither Mat. 18. nor elsewhere. See how Bilson,
Perpetual G ve n. c. 4. mistakes in this.
and proves both to be false with the same Argument, Because many better
Reasons may happily be given; which is bad Logic: for other Reasons may be given
(and Separatists, Morellius, Anabaptists, and Prelatical men have besieged, but
never taken in this Text) but if this be the only seeming and apparent reason
given for popular jurisdiction, yea or that can be given, the consequence is
not proved by Mr. H. his Adverb happily, which implies No as well as I. And when
Mr. R. says, the Reasons against our sense are Sophisms, its not an answer to
say, I. but stronger arguments happily may be rendered by others, such as never
were alleged before. What if one should say stronger Reasons and clearer
Scriptures yet than ever have been alleged, may happily be rendered for unwritten
Traditions, Image worship, Praying to the Dead? Papists should be little
stronger than they are.

2. The Argument is but this:

If the word Church in all the Scriptures so often mentioned, be never taken
for the Elders only, it a strong suspicion it is not so taken in this place,
Matthew. 18. But the word Church -- is such.

1. The major is denied. All the judiciou^ Interpreters find a word only in
this sense in this place, and that it cannot bear sense according to the
analogy of faith, but in this sense only, as scope, matter and circumstances
of the place enforce; and yet the same word must be otherwise taken in many
other places: And when all is done, the conclusion of the apparent reason
amounts but to a suspicion; and Mr. H. of his own adds the qualification of
strong suspicion, and Mr. R has leave upon better grounds to add, that his
own suspicion is weak.

Mr. H. wrongs that eminently learned and godly man, Mr. Ball, who proves the
Elders here must be meant, and no other Church, and Mr. H. touches not with one
finger his reasons.

2. I retort the Argument. If the word Church of the Redeemed meet to partake
of all Ordinances, Word, Seals, Censures, etc. often mentioned in Scripture, be
never taken for Brethren only, excluding believing women, sons come to age of
15 or 16 years, which are the far larger number of the Redeemed, confederate,
visible Church, called, sanctified, as 1 Cor. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1.
Col. 1. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. 2 Thessalonians 1. 1, etc. then can it not be so taken, Mat.
18. and the Assumption must be as strong, That the word Church in this sense is
destitute of the least loving look of the allowance of any Text, that might be
a second in the field; as is the Rhetorication, in place of Disputation of Mr.
H. therefore we desire a parallel place for the acception o^ the word Church or
only male-Church of Redeemed meeting for all Ordinances.

Mr. H. answers not, when he tells us, that Women for their sex, and children
for want of the exercise of understanding, are excluded from governing.

Ans. That is another question, whether they be excluded from Though women,
children of age, and servants, be excluded from governing, yet the question now
is a far other thing, Whether the word Church, Mat. 18. if it be the Church
of Redeemed ones meeting to and for public ordinances in the same place,
include not women, etc.
governing from this, what is the notation of the word Church, Mat. 18. and
whether women, children come to age, and servants, be not essential parts, and
the far larger part of the Church of believors, fed, redeemed, of the Church
which Christ has instituted in the Gospel -- that is, (says the Discipline of
N. E.) of a combination of faithful godly persons, meeting for that end, to
partake of all the Ordinances of God in one place-built on the Rock, Mat. 16.
If such a signification of the word Church be not in all the Scripture, is not
this to have in the bag a stone and a stone, when we say, Tell the Church --
and if he hear not the Church, Mat. 18. is the Church-meeting in one place for
hearing the Word, receiving the seals, professing the faith of Peter built upon
the Rock, which essentially includes women, aged children, servants, but yet
Tell the Church, is not Tell the women, aged children and servants, for they
are excluded from governing (say they) true, but they are not excluded from
being members of the Church, Mat. 18. which in its proper signification (as our
Brethren say) signifies only this redeemed visible Church built on the rock
meeting in one place, etc.

3. The word Church, (...), must in Scripture be restricted to the subject
matter and the end, wherefore the convention The word (...), Church, is ever
taken in Scripture according to the subject matter and scope of the place, and
so must the binding and loosing, or excommunicating Church, Matthew. 18. be
taken, and cannot note a company of redeemed ones, Men, Women, Servants,
Children of riper age come together in one to partake of Word, Seals, Censures,
the only acception of the Word Church that our brethren can give us from
Scripture.
is instituted; and seldom is it taken, but it excludes some such, as Act. 19.
it cannot signify the Church of Christ, but a civil tumultuary meeting. The
town Clerk dismissed the Church.

2. Ephesians. 5. 26. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for her. The Church
there is such a Catholic body visible, or invisible, as he shall present
without spot or wrinkle, and excludes rotten members professors, as Magus, who
are no more but visible members, but includes all real Saints, Men, Women,
Infants, Jews, Gentiles, etc.

3. It notes these who convene in the same place to be fed with Word, Seals,
Censures, Act. 11. 26. a whole year they assemble with the Church, 1 Cor. 14 4.
he that prophecieth, edifieth the Church. It must exclude Infants, who though
members of the visible Church, yet cannot be edified by prophesying: but cannot
but include Women, more aged children and servants: and say there were but one
place in all the World, where the Church came together for the hearing of the
Word, receiving of the Lords Supper, that one place were sufficient to teach
what the word Church notes in that place. And so here, Mat. 18. is the like
case.

4. Tell the Church must be, tell the Church that has power to bind and loose
on earth, and which if the offender hear not, he must be declared a heathen;
but this is neither women, children, nor servants, by our Brethren.

2. The binding and loosing here is to be expounded of the specific acts of
office, never given to any by other Scriptures, but only to officers, 2 These.
5. 12, 14. Luke 10. 16. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 20. Act, 20.
28. Romans 12. 7, 8. Mat. 16. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. Tit. 2. 5. Ioh 21. 15. Ephesians.
4. 11, 12. Is. 6. 5. Ier. 3. 15.

5. Tell the Church, if he hear not the Church: shall be by us gladly expounded
of both Rulers and Professors in their own The Church, Matthew. 18. and 1 Cor. 5.
includes all who meet for the public worship, Elders, Men, Women, Servants,
aged Children, every one according to their place, according as Paul rebukes,
comforts, teaching in his Epistle, 1 Cor. 1.
kind.

1. Let him be to thee as a Heathen, that is, to the whole Church, women and
servants, by withdrawing from his company. Pu^ge out, all ye who have been
puffed up and mourned not, and such were women, and so men also to whom he
writes. 1 Cor. 1. 1. And women were a part of the lump in danger to be
infected; and upon that hazard were not to eat and drink with an excommunicated
man, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 12. and were not to be mixed, but to eschew scandalous
persons, 2 This. 3. 14 Romans (...) Romans 16. (...).
16. 17. nor receive such a man unto their house, nor bid him God speed, 2 Ioh
10. 11. Tit. 3. 10. which the women were to do one way, and the Elders another
way. So 2 Cor. 2. 7. Ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him. Sure
women, children of age, and servants, to whom he writes, were to forgive, in
their way, for to them he determined to come, 2 Cor. 1. 15. They were a part of
his rejoicing. v. 14. they were anointed, established, sealed The women in
their daily practice are concerned in conscience to censent unto, or dissent
from the sentence of excommunication, or forgiving and readmiting again, and
that upon rules of the Gospel as well as men.
by the Spirit, v. 21, 22. as well as the men and Elders. And say the word of
confirming their love, were an authoritative word, as it is; Yet it is so, as
applied to the Elders, not as applied to women. As the same word of Worshipping
relating to Jehovah is a religious adoring, relating to David is civil
reverence, 1 Chr. ^9. 21. The people bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord
and the King, 1 Samuel 12. 18 All the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel.
Though they were two really distinct actions. And this cannot be denied by Mr.
H. who gives to the Elders an official power of jurisdiction, to the Brethren a
judicial power of judgment; Ergo, they excommunicate not one and the same way.

6. Yes, and Paul writes to Timothy, not as to a Christian simply, but as to a
Pastor representing the company of Elders (as Christ speaks to Peter, Mat. 16.)
as to a Pastor to take heed to Doctrine and reading, 1 Timothy 4. 14, 16. What
Widows, 1 Timothy 5. 9. What Watchmen, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 5. 17,
22. What Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. 10, 11. there should be in the Church. How he
should rebuke, preach. Now this way the people should be warned, how to preach,
how to rebuke, not to lay on hands suddenly, to save themselves and others by
preaching, if they have a joint power of ruling with officers. It is true he
writes to Timothy as to a Christian, to flee the lusts of you h^, but in order
to the Ministry, that he may be an example to the flock, 2 Timothy 2. otherwise
women, children come to age, servants, are to flee lusts, and to follow
righteousness, faith, love, peace, etc. yet they are to exercise no
jurisdiction.

7. Tell the Church, cannot bear this, as Mr. H. would say, tell first the
Church of Officers and people, when the officers are too ordinarily grievous
wolves, seducers, blind guides, Idol-shepherds, Act. 20. 29. Mat. 7. 15. 2 Pet.
2. 1, 2. 1 John 4. 1. Rev. 2. 14 20. Tit 3. 10. Ier. 23. 9, 15. Ier. 14. 14,
15. Isa. 56. 10, 11. Mich. 3. 5, 6. Zach 11. 8, 15, 16. Then must the keys and
power of binding and loosing be firstly in the people, not in the officers who
are separable adjuncts (as our brethren say) the garments of the Church, not
parts of the Church, as garments are not parts of a man.

Lastly, Mr. H. cannot build his new house, but by raising the foundation
stones of all our worthy Protestant Divines, and Fathers, Caelv. Inst. l. 3. c.
4. sec. 12. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. sec. 2. Instit. l. 4. c. 12. sec. 2. l. 4. 9.
2. Pet. Martyr, 1 Cor. 8. Dav. Parens in explic. catech. q. 85. Art. 4. Obj. 1.
p. 480, 484. Com. ^n Mat. 18 Gul. Buc^n. loc. com. de potest. Eccles. and Syno.
lo. 43. q. 25. Dan. Tilenus Synt. dis. 30. de Council. Th. 4. 9^. (...), 23.
Profess. Leyd. Synop. purio. Theolo. diso. 49. these 10. page 779. Joan. Pisc.
com. in Ma^th. ^8. 15 d Eccles. lo. 23. these. 73. Willet Syn. Papis. con. 3.
Genesis Conc. 4. 7. page 140, 141. B^za in ^n. Mat. c. 18. Trem. lius in verse.
Sir. Mat. 16. 19, 20. Iunius dis. 47. De Discip. Eccles. th. (...). th. 6.
Joan. Comerio Tract. in quo Eccles. Roman. p^ae exam. c. 17. page 567. Anton.
Walaeus To. 1. defunct. Eccles. page 467. Wende^^n Theol. l. 1. c. 28. fig.
VII. q. 1. page 622, 623.
who prove that the Pope should hear the general Council from Matthew. 18. So
Chrysostom. hom. 85. in Joan. Orig. hom. 7. in Ezekiel. August Ssrm. 49. de ver.
domini. Cyprian. Jewel Apolo. c. 8. div. 2. page 55. Tho. Mort. Appel. Protest.
l. 4. c. 2. sect. 8. page 451. 452. Aene. Sylv. in Gest. Conc. Basil. fol. 5.
51. Romans Pont. non audist Eccles. Christum non audiet. And Riv. Catho. Ortho.
To 1. Tract. 1. q. 8. Papists that are sounder, as Gerson, Almain, Occum,
Cusanus, Contaren^^s, Ca^etanus, Ferus, Toletus, Menochius, Maldonatus, etc.
say the Pope is a Brother, and ought to hear the Church.

Mr. H. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus stands for the whole Church. says
Mr. R.

Ans. See how strangely shall that sound, To the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, i. e. To the Church of the Church of Ephesus.

Ans. This is a poor consequence, it is known there are often two Tropes in one
word. The word Angel being put for many What is meant by the Angel of the
Church, Rev. 2. Mr. H. his conceit removed.
Angels, as Didoclavius and other learned Authors from Psalm. 34 7. prove. And
then these many overseers are put for the Church, and rebuked in the people,
and the people in them. When an Ambassador speaks to the Parliament, he speaks
to England, and when he speaks to the Speaker, he speaks to the Parliament.
Will it follow, the Ambassador speaks to England of England? A headless
conceit, and such quirks make a cause to be suspected; so when one offended
tells the Church, he but tells the brethren of the Church; and this is the
Church of the Rob Parker. de Politia Eccles. l. 3. c. 15. n. 1. Ex his qui
eluctari, capit nobiscum, sentire necesse est Ecclesiam fidelium a Christo
intellectam esse (Mat. 18.) non quia simpliciter consideratur, sed quia
disciplinam exercet juxta temperamentum Aristocraticum in Presbyterio,
Ecclesiam quippe primo loco dic Ecclesiae praecise partem Aristocraticam, id
est, Presbyterium existimamus, quae vero posteriore his verbis, Si Ecclesiam
non audietit, etc. sic excommunicantem propter contemptum Ecclesiam, includit,
and non decernentem tantum and examinantem, tum and partem Ecclesiae
Democraticam continet, qua populi consensus ad excommunicationem necessarius
est.
Church. And if women, sons, servants be excluded, as Mr. H. excludes them,
then he tells the Church of the Church.

Mr. Parker, though not far from our Brethrens way, has said the very same;
for which Mr. H. refuteth Mr. R. And if Mr. Parker shows my mind in that, when
Mr. H. refutes therein M. Parker, I yield; but he contradicts Mr. Parker.

Mr. H. It is said Acts 18. 22. Paul saluted the Church at Jerusalem, it cannot
be thought in reason, that the Elders only were saluted; because the scope of
Paul was to confirm the hearts of the Disciples, and therefore had an eye to
the weakest, and those that wanted his sweet refreshing, who heard of his
arrival, and assembled to give comfortable entertainment to him, and to be
comforted by him.

Ans. The Argument must then be thus, if any: Paul saluted and kissed (for so
is the original word) as many as he confirmed and encouraged in the way of
grace at Jerusalem. But he confirmed in that way, all and every one, man,
woman, servants, rich, poor; Ergo, he kissed them all, and saluted them all.
Let Mr. H. see to the conclusion, it is all his own.

2. The Argument is not brought to prove that the word Church there notes
precisely only the Elders. Nor does Mr. R. allege it upon that account
precisely; but that the word Church may note some eminent professors, and note
a Church of all, men, women, children, yea the thousands who meet in The place
Act. 18. 22. Paul saluted the church is wronged by M. H.
sundry places, by the grant of Mr. H. came not out to meet Paul, and were
saluted of him; for to be saluted, was but a matter of courtesy, though
Christian, but to be comforted and confirmed in the faith is another thing.

Mr. H. The word Church in the Hebrew and Greek used by the Septuagint, notes
the Rulers of the Church, not always the body; and it is granted without any
hurt to our cause.

Ans. Since the signification of words, and of the word The word Church is not
in scripture, as our brethren take it. Nor is there a place in Old or New
Testament, or in any Divines, imaginable for the sole male-Church.
Church, as Moses and the Prophets use them, is frequently followed in the New
Testament by the Evangelists and Apostles; it is clear, our Savior, Mat. 18.
departed not from the received signification of the words in the Old Testament
used by the Septuagint. And so the word, Tell the Church, has a better warrant
to be expounded. Tell the Rulers, then, tell all the faithful men, women,
children, and servants; therefore the suspicion is so strong, as Mr. H. said,
that there is no parallel Text for this signification of a male-Church
excluding women and officers, who may excommunicate all officers; and whereas
he so much contends for the signification of the word Church, Let him answer
what is meant there, 1 Cor. 11. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have
no such custom, neither the Churches of Christ. If the meaning be, that the
congregations meeting in the same place, contend not among themselves; what if
they so should do? who should right them, by our Brethrens way? and if that be
the Church that meets in one place only, when shall the Church Catholic which
Christ loved, and gave himself for, meet? not until the day of Judgment? and
did the Brethren testify of the charity of Gaius, 2 Ioh. 16 before the Church,
was that in the convened together congregation? or was it not before the men of
the Church? And 1 Cor. 11. When ye (...) together to the Church, Was not this
to the meeting of men and women, except women be debarred from the Lords
Supper? And when Saul made havoc of the Church, he must persecute only the
binding and loosing Church; but the Scripture says, he persecuted both men and
women, Act. 8. 3. and 9. 2.

Mr. H. Arg 11. The Church which the Plaintiff must tell, is to admonish
publicly the offender. But this is the Church of Elders, 1. These, 5. 12. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Luke 10. 16. for they only are to receive public complaints, Tit.
1. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 19. 2 Timothy 4. 2.

Ans. Complaints are to be given to the Elders, that they may prepare them for
the congregation, and lend the action. T^^^efore the incestuous Corinthian
(...) said to be r^ of many, and so judged of many, not by the judgment only
of discration; for so they might judge these that were without, but legally.

Ans. Mr. H. answers not one word of Scripture for telling the complaints to
the Elders. Christ says, Tell the Church, that is, tell all the visible
Saints, say our Brethren.

2. That the incestuous Corinthian was rebuked legally of many, that is, of the
Elders and Brethren, or Male-Church only, that is said, not proved. If we speak
of judging by the judgment of discretion, he was rebuked of Elders, Brethren,
Women, aged Children, Servants, for it concerned them in conscience to have
knowledge of it, and to yield to withdraw from him, and to forgive him, upon
his repentance to join with him, else their obedience must be blind.

2. The minor is false.

1. For though they judge Heathen with the judgment of discretion, it follows
not, that therefore Brethren, Women, aged It cannot be denied but all in their
own respective ways officers, men, women, servants, 2 Cor. 2. did rebuke and
censure, and also forgive the incestuous Corinthian.
Children, and Servants should not also judge an excommunicate person by the
same judgment.

2. The probation is faulty, for I appeal to the conscience of our Brethren,
whether there be not sundry kinds of judgment of discretion, and whether
Church Members have not one kind of judgment of discretion toward the
excommunicate man, who is now under a medicinal Church-cure, and another
judgment of discretion toward them that are without, and were never members.

Mr. H. to Mr. R. his twelfth Argument, It has received an (...) out of a
mistake, because neither women alone, nor children will make a Church, nor have
any public power put into their hands for that purpose.

Ans. I never said in any Argument, that women and children there alone ma^e a
Church, nor spoke I of women's ruling there: But yet I say, women, children of
years of discretion, serva^^s being the Lords freemen and professing the faith.

Arg. 1. The essential parts and largest part of the Congregation^ Church of
Believers, professing the faith of Peter builded upon the rock, Mat. 18.
^^^ting every Lords day to partake of all the Ordinances; and therefore if the
Church, Mat. 16. The way of the Church, c. 1. sect. 1. p. 1, 2.
signify such a Church (...) that which you say, women and such children and
servants must especially be understood as parts thereof, under the name of the
Church, tell the Church, and if so, the Church to which we complain, does not
bind and loose by your own grant.

2. What ground is there in the Word, that the Brethren alone, Women by our
brethrens way, servants, and children of age, who meet to partake of the
ordinances, word, and seals, as our brethren say, must be parts of the Church,
Matthew. 18.
because men should, only be mooned by the name of the instituted Church in the
Gospel, or the (...) Church of Believers, partakers of all the ordinances,
excluding women and such children and servants, since there (...) neither made
nor female, bound nor free to be regarded in the condtion of believing visible
Saints? Gal. 3. 28. (...) 9. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 21, 22. So is not this very like to
the respect of persons condemned by the Apostle I^, chapter 2, 3, 4, 5. when
brethren because of their sex, and heads of families must be the only Church of
believers, built upon the rock, the Body of Christ, the Kingdom of Christ, the
Redeemed of God, partakers of all the precious ordinances, and the only visible
Church above all the officers, women, children, servants?

3. Nor has such a Church of only few, any such power put in their hand, and
so to say, because it is said, Tell the Church, except Mr. H. prove them to be
the governing Church above the Officers, is to beg the question; for Mr. Cotton
and Mr. Buroughs say, without officers the brethren can exercise n^
jurisdiction, Cotton Keys. par. 16. Buroughs Iren,
no excommunication, one of the highest acts of rude in the Church; they have
nothing without the officers (says Mr. Buroughs) but brotherly admonition, no
jurisdiction. And Mr. H. is to give a parallel place in old and new Testament
if he hear not the Church, id est, the male-Church of Brethren, let him be cast
out.

Mr. H. Arg. 13. Not only the Church must convene to worship God in Spirit and
Truth, but that they bind and loose by the Pastoral Spirit of Paul, and
officers in their convention.

Ans. The Church met has power to execute all acts of discipline, as well as
doctrine.

2. The Church of Corinth is blamed, because without the knowledge of Paul, or
his authority (as they ought to have done) they did not excommunicate the
incestuous person, only for their encouragement, he expresses his consent, and
the concurrence of his spirit.

Ans. That the Church of Believers without the pastoral spirit and authority of
Paul or any other officer, and excluding the tacit consent of women, children
of age, and believing servants, could exercise all acts of Discipline and
Doctrine, that is, of pastoral preaching, destroys Mr. H. his principles; for
who can preach but sent Pastors? Romans 10. 14. not unofficed brethren. And as to
the point of Jurisdiction, Mr. Cotton and Mr. Buroughs, with me, deny it, and
Mr. H. nakedly says it. That the Church of Corinth was rebuked for not
excommunicating the man, is true: But 1. what means he by the Church rebuked?

1. All that were rebuked must be the Church; can Mr. H. deny but women,
children of years, servants, were rebuked, as those who were puffed up, and
mourned not? ver. 1, 2.

2. And as those who were a part, and the largest part of the If as many do
excommunicate, as Paul writes unto, 1 Cor. 5. and as Paul rebukes for not
mourning, and were a part of the lump in danger to be leavened, and were to
keep the feast, and eschew the company of the scandalous, that is, the whole
redeemed Church, as Mr. H. argues, then sure Women must excommunicate, 1. Cor.
5. as well as men. See Mr. H. par. 1. c. 10. p. 138.
lump, that is, of the body of the people in danger to be leavened with that
scandal, ver. 6.

3. As those who were to keep the feast (Christ being sacrificed for them) With
sincerity, ver. 8.

4. As those who should not familiarly converse with scandalous fornicators,
ver. 11. but all of them were to judge, and put away the wicked person from
among them, ver. 13. in a way suitable to their place, that is, the officers
with Paul's Spirit, or a pastoral authority like unto it, the brethren, women,
children of age, and servants, professing the faith in their way, by
consenting, and by the judgment of discretion so far as belonged to their
practice in withdrawing from the delinquent. 2. Not did I deny that the Church
of Corinth should have excommunicated the man before Paul wrote to them, but
that they should have done it without Paul's knowledge, is only said, not
proved; and that any save officers, and such as were endued with such a
pastoral spirit as was in Paul, could have done it, is only asserted by Mr. H.
his sole word; and this answer insinuates, that the only male-Church did it,
and they needed not any pastoral spirit; only Paul adds ex superabundanti
his encouraging consent, whereas the work might have been done without officers
by this new male-jurisdiction, which is contradicted by Mr. Cotton, and not
owned by the Scripture.

LIB. III. CHAP. I.
Of the first subject of Ecclesiastic Power: Of the delegated Power of the
Church.

THere is a double Authority, one Supreme and Monarchical Mr. Hookers. Survey;
par. (...). cap. 11. p. 185, 186.
only in Christ, and another Subordinate and Delegate; which (...) a Right
given by Commission from Christ to fit person^, to act i^ his House according
to his order. By Right, is meant jus, or (...), which according to God, certain
persons possess in their external administrations issuing from such special
relations, unto which they are called by Christ. 2. Its given to (...) persons
who are capable to receive this power, not to women, children, ^admen, etc.
Therefore let the Reader take notice of that, as not worthy to be considered.
If power be in the Church of believers, then women and children may exercise
it, (...) Mr. Ball, Mr. R. for they are not fit persons appointed by Christ to
manage this power. Lastly, they must act according to Gods order. The whole
Church is an Army terrible with Banners, but the parts do fight in their own
order: The power is in the whole firstly, but each part knows his rank; the
officers in their part, order and manner, the members in theirs. The whole acts
some things immediately, some things mediately.

Ans. A Mona^chical power in Christ we know, and authority delegate of
Jurisdiction in the Ambassadors and Officers, Mr. H. his fit persons the first
subject of the Keys, ^^amined, is found light
who are called (...), 1 Timothy 5. 17. (...), 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. (...), Heb. 13. 17.
Rulers we know: but that the people or Church of believers especially separated
from officers, are called Rulers, or endued with any delegate power over we
know not whom, we read not in Scripture.

2. By the Keys he must mean both the Keys of Knowledge and of Jurisdiction:
But what Scripture gives the pastoral Key to unofficed Brethren? I do not know
a right given to fit persons, without any mentioning of the first subject, the
Church of confederate Saints, as Mr. H. which includes women, Sect. 2. p. 192.
children of age, servants, (for these are fit persons to be members of the
Church built on the Rock) and of the Church of Believers) Ergo, they are fit
persons, and as fit, some of them, to wit, children of years of discretion, and
believing servants, as the Brethren; for neither Sex, nor want of
understanding, nor distemper of judgment, the three causes of unfitness owned
by Mr. H. can render them more incapable than the brethren: yea, the brethren
being often unlettered Tradesmen, Unlettered brethren are not fit persons to
judge of sound and of heretical doctrine, as M. H.
and many of them dull and rude, though believers, are most unfit persons to
judge of sound and unsound Doctrine, and of controverted points, whether the
Pastors teach perverse things, Acts 20. 29. hold the doctrine of Balaam, Rev.
2. 13. or not; and yet by Mr. H. they are the only, and none but they are to
judge and try the learning, ability of Pastors, unsoundness in Socinian,
Antinomian, Popish, Arminian, etc. Tenets, though they know no more the
Tongues, Arts nor Sciences, than some Priests who can scarce read the
Mass Book in Latin, nor understand the Languge thereof; and they only have
power to depose them all for Ignorance and Heresy.

2. As for women, they are redeemed, built on the Rock, and have a voice tacit,
or no, let Mr. Hooker say.

1. To choose or refuse Officers, 1. They are of the sheep that can discern the
voice of Christ in sent Pastors, Joh. 9 and this is Mr. H. his argument to
prove that the people should call their own pastors, as hereafttr he says.

2. Women must have a vote in admission of members, which Mr. H. calls
potestatem judicii, a power of judging; for they Survey, pa^ 1. c. 11. propos.
4. p. 203.
are not to own as Church members, and to rehuke, and tell the Church, and to
gain brethren and sisters blindly; they, by the judgment of discretion, if not
by more, according to Mr. H. must have some hand in this. Women are to try, by
the judgment of discretion, the spirits of Teachers, whether Antichristian or
not, whether they be of God, or no, and to hold what is good, as men, 1 Ioh. 4.
1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Ergo, they must try both men and doctrines; and must, as was
said, withdraw from the unsound and scandalous: therefore what Mr. Ball and Mr.
R. say touching them, must be considered, If the power be in the whole Church
firstly, then must the power of the Keys be in all the members firstly also,
if Logic have place; and if it be in all, then its in women: How came it to
women? show the Scripture. And whereas Mr. H. says, The whole Church is
terrible as an Army with Banners, it says, the Church ruling and conquering by
the Keys both of Knowledge and Jurisdiction, is made up of ruled commanders,
and ruled soldiers, not of a number of only brethren; and soldiery acts of
ruling (for of the Church that bears the Keys Mr. H. must now speak) in
women Mr. R. would know: for that terribleness is in acts of Discipline, not a
little: if all be terrible, then also women. Your homogeneous Church, which
only, and none but they, by Mr. H. his doctrine, may lift a Banner against all
the officers, and depose and excommunicate them every man: But Mr. Cotton says
to this, What haste brother Mr. H?

Mr. H. This power is either a power of many when combined, and this is either
a power --

Of judging, judicii; or of donation:

Or its power in one a power of Office:

The power of judgment the whole has, and does use in admissions and
excommunication: the same power that takes in must cast out.

Ans. The distinction of power of Office or Order in one Consent is in the
people, but no judicial authority, as antiquity and our Divines prove.
who is a Pastor, and of Jurisdiction in many in a Presbytery, is warranted by
Scripture.

But for the power of judging, and of giving of power, potest as donationis, to
others to preach and administer the seals, in the people who have no power
themselves, it has neither the countenance of Scripture nor Reason, and is but
a device of Merellius holden by Mr. H.

Calvin says, The thing before judged was cleared to the people. Pet. Martyr,
Pareus, and others, say well, Excommunication Calvin Com. In 1 Cor. 5. In horum
primorum confessu prima erit cognitio, inde res ad populum, sed jam
praejudicata, deferebatur. P. Martyr in 1 Cor. 5. De Excom. quaest.
would not be done nisi plebe consentiente, without the consent of the people;
which includes women and servants, over whose consciences, faith and practice,
Rulers are not to domineer, more than over the consciences of men. Cyprian by
the plebs and universa fraternitas, the people and fraternity, understands the
whole redeemed flock, men and women. Its true, Cyprian threatens some
Presbyters, that if they go on in their scandalous way, they should give an
account to the people, apud plebem universalem; and writes to some that desired
to be reconciled to the Church of Carthage, All things shall be examined, you
the people being present. But judging there, as frequently Pareus in 1 Cor.
(...). Cyprianus ad Cornelium Episcopum Romanum scribit se multum apud plebem
laborare, ut pax daretur lapsis, quam si per se dare potuisset, no^ erat cur in
plebe persuadenda se fatigaret. Cyprian. Epist. 3. Examinabuntur singula
praesentibus and judicantibus vobis. Cyprian. Epist. 16. 11. 5. Quando a
primordio Episcopatus mei statutum nihil sine consilio vestro (presbyter is and
diaconis fratribus scribit) and sine consensu plebis meae privata sententia
gerere. Cyprian. Epist. 38. Vehementer contristatus sum J. C. acceptis ^^eris
vestris, cum mihi propositum semper and votum sit universam fraternitatem
vestram incolumem continere and gregem illibatum etc.
with Cyprian, is no authoritative judging given to the people. He who answers
to Pamelius in his learned Annotations, gives no more to the people, but the
knowledge of Church Affairs: About Anno 70. as Eusebius says, Simeon the son
of Cleophas is chosen in the room of James, all the disciples consenting. The
Council of Carthage, Anno 420. Let not a Bishop ordain any Clergyman without
an Assembly of the Clergy, and let him seek the peoples consent, connivance and
testimony.

So was Cornelius made Bishop of Rome by the Authority of God and of the
Clergy, and by the suffrages of the people. Our Divines, Bucerus, Calvin,
Bucanus, Tilenus, Beza, Virttut, give consenting, and in some cases correcting,
not judicial Bucer in Mat. 16. Ut Romae olim, ita hic potest as populi,
authoritas senatus.
power sure, but which is great enough, a Negative consent for eschewing of a
Schism. And the Professors of Leyden, Urfine, Pareus, Iunius, give the people a
vote, a consent in Excommunication: and this cannot exclude women who are
offended, when the whole Church is offended. The times of Ambrose did witness
more pride in the Clergy, who began to do all without calv. Instit. l. 4. c.
11. number. 6. Cyprianus sic clerum (in excommunicatione) praefuisse, ut plebs
interim a cognitione non excluderet.
the people.

Chemnitius, Daneus, the Confession of Bohemia, of Helvetia, the Synod of
Middleburgh, the Synod of Tylleburgh in Nassovia, Anno 1582. teach, That the
whole Church with consent of all did excommunicate, but the judging Authority
is in the Eldership.

Mr. H. The power of election is especially to be attended by the end, as a
corporation has power to choose a Major, and to give him power. 3. The safety
of the whole is to be attended, and that is to submit one to another, and be
rebuked one by another. Bucan. de disciplina Eccl. l. 44. quaest. 13. Jus
excommunicandi penes presbyterium, sed tamen conscia and approbante tota
Ecclesia. Tilen. Disp. 28. These. 12. Quamvis scripta sit epistola ad to^m
Ecclesiam Corinthiacam, non tamen omnia quae in ea continentur ad singulos
pertinent, ut ex elequentiae, scientiae encomiis patet. Pareus in catech.
Ursin. quaest. 85. 4. 4. page 477. Beza de gradibus minist. cap. 23. Viretus
dialo. 20, 21. Zwingl. Cor. 31. Profess. Loyd. Sy^. disp. 48. th. 24. Synedrii
authoritas, popu^i consensus. Ursinus ad Fred^. 3. Elect. and 9. 85. Iunius,
Eccles. 3. 1. Cypr. cod. vetust. Epist. 68. Coram omni Syn^goga jubet Deus
constitui sacerdotem, and ^stendit ordinationes sacerdotales non nisi sub
populi assistentis consci^nt a si ri oportere, ut plebe praesente, vel
detegantur malorum crimina, vel bonorum merita praedicentur, and sit ordinatio
justa and legitima quae omnium suffragio and judicio fuerit examin^ta; nec hoc
in Episcoporum tantum and sacerdotum, sed and in diaconorum ordination: bus
observasse apostolos animadvertimus. Origin. contr. cells. lib. 3. Senatum
Ecclesiasticum qui est Athenis, Corinthi invenies (...). M. H. and his Brethren
following Papists, prove their Male-Church from civil corporations. The example
of the people both creating and choosing their Major and Rulers, brought by Mr.
H. to prove that the people ordain and call their officers, it Popish, and is
no rule to us, and the differences are waste.


Ans. Papists prove. the Pope and Prelates from such have their warrant, peoples
choosing of their Pastor is from the rule of the Word, not from civil
corporation, from which it differs.

1. The people makes one of no King to be a King, and does not only choose
him, 2 Chronicles. 29 22. the people kinged Solomon; S^ul, 1 Samuel 11. 15. David, 1 Chronicles. 12. 38. but the choice of the people does not make an officer, but the
laying on of the hands, or ordination of the Presbytery does that, 1 Timothy 4.
14. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. Act. 6. 6.

2. The Corporation civil may limit the Major in regard of time, for a year,
and no longer: 2. they may make him half a Tyrant, a Dictator, and absolute, or
give him less power, that he shall rule none but with the consent of 12
Ass^ssors; but the people may not make him a Pastor for a year, and then lay
him aside for no fault, as a Major is unofficed; nor may they limit him so as
he shall not preach in season and out of season, but by the consent of 12 men.

3. The Corporation may erect it self in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, and may
create Consuls, Dictators, Praetors, Tribunos Plebis, etc. as may most serve
for the safety and peace of this State: but the Church may bring in no new
officers, but those appointed by Christ; nor may they alter the government, and
metamorphose it into another than that which is according to the pattern showed
in the Mount.

4. Women and servants have no vote in choosing or creating Rulers, but since
they are to be fed, and this concerns their conscience, it is not so here in
the Church; though men may domineer over the civil power of women, yet not over
their faith. If some acts were to be performed by a King or Major, without the
skill and knowledge of counselors, and of which the counselors are as
ignorant as the Church of believers ordinarily are of Tongues and
Controversies, it might well be said, that the Wisdom of God never appointed
such counselors, and for such an end, as to appoint such men to be
counselors, and such to create Pastors; and therefore its a naughty Argument
taken from a Civil Corporation, and Popish. From a worldly Monarchy, Papists
prove their Monarchy in the Church. Yea, this Argument proves,

1. That Pastors as Pastors have no warrant by any Institution of Christ, to
try, ordain, and lay on hands upon Pastors: for 1. that which is to be done
according to Divine I^stitution by a company of visible believers, to whom
Christ has committed the power of the Keys, as to the first and prime
subject, before officers be created, that cannot be done by officers, as having
the power of these Keys.

2. So visible saints and women, as well, yea, and by better right, might
appoint Elders, i. e. choose and elect them in every City, then Titus could do;
yea. Tit. 1. 5. (...) Tim. (...). 22. (...) b^tter right then Timothy: as for
the place Ephesians. 5. 21. wh^^h Mr. H. had no leisure to cite, every one submit
unto another, what Logic is here? is every Woman a Church to another? for it
The place (...). 5. a^ submit one to another, is mistak^n by Mr. H. it speak^th
nothing of Chu^ch-subjection. Z^us in loc. (...) ux^^es, libero^, and maritis
and pa^^ntibus. B^s, (...) in familia and Republica. Calvia. Ubicunque regnat
charitas ib^ mutu^ est servit^^. B^za, mutua reverentia. Hi^ronymus, Baines on
Ephesians. 3. C^jetan. in ^ocum. T^llian. in Apolo. Praesident probati qu^que.
Seniores honorem istam non pre^io, sed testimonio adepti. Theophylact. in Mat.
18. Non solum quae solvunt Sacerdotes s^nt soluta, sed quaecunque and nos
injuria affecit, vel ligamus, vel solvimus, and ipsa (...) ligata and soluta.
(...) o^. in 1 Timothy 5. Synagoga and posteri Ecclesia Seniores habuit, sine
q^o^um consilio ni^^^ agebatur in Ecclesia, quod qua negligentia ob^t nescio,
^^si forte doctorum desid^^ -- magis superb^^.
is not spoken of Church-subj^ction, but as Ambrose, of the subjection of
humility. Mr. R Boide, Zanchius, of the subjection in families, and
Commonwealths, as of the Wife to the Husband, the Children to the Parents, of
the subjection of L^ve, as Calvin and Beza. Hieronymus, poni^ general^
principium politiae Christiana. So Caj^tan. Paul Baines says, it is the
submission of humility, which the highest owe to the lowest, the husband to the
wife; is not every woman the daughter to submit to the mother? is not this a
busing of Scripture? may not the father and the son be in diverse congregations?
and though it were meant of Church subjection, owe not I Church-subjection to
these of another congregation, as to these of my own? and should Mr. H. limit
the sense of the Holy Ghost to one single congregation, i. e. submit only to
these of your own congregation?

Mr. H. The power of rebuking pertains to all, (...), to rebuke, Rebuking Mat,
18. is wildly mistaken by Mr. Hoo^^r.
Mat. 18. 15. (...), to judge, 1 Cor. 5. 1^. both which express acts of
proceeding in a judicial way, the whole may censure the part; they are
superior, as officers, when they keep the rule, but inferior, as members, and
in submission, when they break the rule.

Ans. There is little Logic in dividing the power of private judging, which
every one owe to another (no man is a Church to his brother) into a power of
rebuking, and a power of Church-judging; for that 1 Cor. 5. 12. is the
Church-judging by excommunication: so the face is where the neck should be.

2. The rebuking, Mat. 18. 15. is indeed in order to Church-rebuking, and to
excommunication; yea, to rebuke is a duty of the law of nature, Lev. 19. 17.
Ps. 141. 5. but by Mr. H. his way, I must rebuke none but offenders of my own
congregation. May I not then rebuke, but hate brethren of another congregation?
for so Moses expounds Lev. 19. 17.

3. If to rebuke be a judicial Church-rebuking; I pray you, may not women
rebuke women and men both, and labor to gain them, if they trespass, and to
tell the Church? sure, Abigail, Pilates Wife, Sarah, and other godly women did
rebuke, counsel, and complain of offenses, and they are not exempted from this
duty of the law of nature. Does not then M. H. clothe women with a
Church Power? and why but as Iezabel and wanton widows are censurable, Rev. 2.
20. 1 Timothy 2. 12. may they not rebuke? and it appears that a brother must
forgive until seventy seven times (for upon this occasion Peter moves the
question, Mat. 18. 15, 21, 22.) but not so, women, aged children, and servants,
for they must be less apt to forgive then men.

3. If Mr. H. so much please himself in Dichotomies, why but to these two he
might have added 2 Cor. 2. 7. (...), to forgive, and (...), to comfort; and
others also, as teaching, Mr. H. his division of power of 1. rebuking, 2. of
judging, a narrow and a weak Dichotomy.
exhorting? all which cannot be taken from women, servants, aged children,
except you ex^me them from the Law of Love. And howbeit the rebuker be the
superior as he rebukes (which yet is not true in an unjust rebuker, for he is
inferior) yet either too much shall be taken from, or too much given to godly
women by Mr. H. his way.

Mr. H. objects, If the people should censure the Pastors, then there should be
Pastors of Pastors, and the Sheep should be Shepherds, not the Sheep.

Ans. The consequence is feeble, because the people judge not as officers, but
as members of the whole, to whom by virtue of the common Laws of combination
they have subjected themselves to be ordered, for the common good.

Ans. Mr. H fathers not this argument upon me, nor upon any of ours, but
Stapleton, Grego. de Valen. Toletus, Pererius, Esthius, and other Papists, who
urge the like to exime their By Mr. H. his way, the flock are over the
shepherds, the flock feed, and watch for the soul of the pastors.
Clergy from being subject to civil powers. Own the Argument, for then the
shepherd should be subject to the sheep, which is not absurd, in diverso
causarum genere. But these who gave power as officers to excommunicate, are
here ruled by such as have that power, and such, to wit, the people and flock,
have that power, have the keys.

2. Are to edify by excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 20.

3. The Rulers are to obey the people, as such, who watch for their souls, Heb.
13. 17.

4. Take heed that they perish not, and therefore must give warning and rebuke,
lest these perish over whom they have the power of the rod that way. And so the
people authoritatively watch for their shepherds, and the shepherds, to wit,
all the officers must submit unto the sheep, the people, as being over them in
the Lord, having the power of excommunication above their heads.

2. It is but a conceit, to say, that the brethren excommunicate It is but a
poor evasion of Mr. H. that the people does excommunicate the officers, not as
officers, but as members; for none are sure to be excommunicate, but as
scandalous and rotten members.
not their pastors as if they were officers, for they excommunicate them, as
having received the keys to use them against their Pastors, as the Church
having authoritative power over their Pastors, as members of the Church; and it
has no sense to say, that the Church excommunicates, not as the Church, and
contrary to Mat. 18. 17, 18. nor can members as members excommunicate; but
says he, the officers are not excommunicated as officers, but as members. Nor
are any the most scandalous excommunicated as officers, or as saints, or as
members, but as scandalous officers, or scandalous professors, or as rotten and
leavening members corrupting the whole lump.

Mr. H. Suppose the members of a Class offend, the rest who censure them are
not Pastors of Pastors to these whom they censure.

Ans. The whole watch for themselves, and rule, and govern themselves, as the
Parliament do rule their own members. But it is nonsense to say that the sheep
are in the Lord over the flock, for the Scripture says the contrary, Heb. 13.
17. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. v. 7.

Mr. H. Suppose the Pastors turn Heretics, the ruling Elders with the rest
consure them; here are the inferiors judging the superiors.

Ans. This is to beg the question, for if there be none to excommunicate the
Pastors, but only the ruling Elder with the The ruling Elders there alone with
the people have no power by the Word to judge the Pastors.
people, Christ committed not half a Key to any society. The Key of Ruling
without the Key of Preaching is committed to no society on earth; and therefore
not to the rul^ng Elder with the people. If there be more teaching Pastors with
the ruling Elders, then an heretical Pastor may be censured by the whole
Judicature, and by the ruling Elders in Collegio, where he has an equal vote
with the teaching Pastor, and does not as an inferior judge the teaching
Elder, but as a collateral and joint Judge censure with the whole Judicature.

Mr. H. Its a staple Rule, No man by nature has an Ecclesiastical Page 189,
190.
power over another by constraint; one comes a Christian convert from China, to
a Country or City where many Churches are, It is no staple rule, that one
cannot be compelled to join in a congregation.
none of them can, by the rule of the Gospel, compel him to join with one more
than another. He may freely choose what is most suitable to his heart, and may
be most to promote his spiritual edification.

Ans. Neither Civil nor Ecclesiastic power here has place. 1. This staple
Rule (Mr. H. abounds with staple Rules which are much irregular) except it be
proved by the Word, is a staple untruth. No man by Nature has a spiritual
power, either gift, office, or grace: But by Nature here is opposed to free
consent. Children born in Abraham's house are without free consent members of
that Church: Be it so, one congregation more than another cannot compel the
China-convert to be a member of their congregation; but if he be baptized and
profess, the godly Magistrate may compel him to hear the Word, and receive the
Seals in the place he resides, so it be a sound Church. The Magistrate cannot
compel him to faith and heart duties, but he may compel him to external
profession; nor does his being a member of this rather than of any other
Church, make him a member of the visible Church; nor is that any thing but
staple forgery: the ^uler cannot compel a man to love his Neighbor, but he can
c^mpel him to the external duties of love, and punish him if against love he
beat or kill his Neighbor. He cannot compel any to the faith, but if one come
to years desert his faith professed in baptism, both the Church and the
Magistrate may punish him as a run away.

The Church cannot by carnal weapons (says he) impose any Church-constitution,
as Nature gives not this power Ecclesiastic: true, it is a free gift of God:
So a civil Ruler (says he) should not impose it, that is a poor consequence,
he should impose all civil duties that are external, and which the man's baptism
and profession ties him unto. What ever is done here (says he) in the
constitution of Churches, is done by an Ecclesiastic Rule, not by a Rule of
policy. This yet is most weak. The Magistrate The Ruler makes no Church-laws,
but he may compel Christians, yea and subdued heathens in some case to obey
them when they are made.
makes no rule of constitution of Churches, nor any Ecclesiastical Rule, as Mr.
H. says. But it follows not, therefore he cannot impose it, when it is made.
The Magistrate makes not the hearing of the Gospel to be lawful; but it follows
not, Ergo as the preserver of both Tables of the Law, he may not command
Christian subjects to hear the Gospel: yea, to me its most probable, he may
compel heathen people lawfully conquered to desist from Idolatry, blaspheming
of Christ, and to hear the Gospel.

The man comes from China acknowledging God in all his ways, as Abraham left
his Country, Genesis 12. if he be an Idolater, they should not lodge him, 2 Ioh.
10. he comes not as indifferent to be married to this or this Church, or to
none at all; as a man sins not if he marry none at all, 1 Cor. 7. but if he be
a professor that joins to no Church, he lives scandalously; therefore the
adequate cause of membership, or to this membership, is not mutual consent, as
in marriage, but both parties are under a command to confess Christ before men;
and its a selfish thing to make a man's own heart the Judge and Determiner of
his membership, and not the Churches led by the Rule of the Word: and so the
Church is obliged to receive him, and he is obliged to join a member, according
to Cant. 1. 7, 8. Mat. 10. 32. Page 190, 191. There is no Scripture that
unofficed men have a power of creating of officers.


Mr. H. The power scattered in many, when they are voluntarily combined, they
may give it to one, and this is a power of Office, and they may covenant to
submit to him their united right. Hence it is more than plain, they may give a
call and power to such and such to be Pastors, and yet themselves be no
Pastors. Christ gave some to be Pastors, Ephesians. 4. he furnishes men, 1 Corinthians.
12. 28.

Ans. Where is Mr. H. his Logic now? Why made he not once a Syllogism, or a
face of a Consequence?

1. There is a power scattered in many. What power? of ordaining by laying on
of hands to make men to be Pastors which were none before? By what shadow of
Scripture or Reason is this said? one half of a Command, or Promise or Practice
shall silence me, if they may give their scattered powers of Jurisdiction to
one, they may create a Monarch, an Arch-Pastor or Pope over themselves. I judge
Mr. H. thinks not so: but Scripture should here speak, and not Mr. H. and tell
us, who gave to people, to men and to women (who have no less a power to know
the voice of Christ in this Pastor, and to choose an officer than men) the
scattered powers official to call and create officers.

2. They may give this power to one: prove this; its a non ^ns, a power of
ordaining even virtual they have not, therefore they cannot give it.

3. Christ gave gifts to men, God has placed Pastors in the Church, Apostles:
what! Ergo, the people gives power of being Apostles, Pastors, to men who were
not Apostles and Pastors before? This is Mr. H. his Argument: Are Mr. H. his
words Ames. in Bellarm. enervato ^om. 2, l. 3. c. 2, Oves rationales (foeminae,
adulti, pueri, servi) possunt eligere sibi pastorem non per jurisdictionem, sed
potius per subjectionem. See the mistakes of D. Bilson, Perpetual Governm. c.
7. Page 191.
Oracles, and Principles that cannot be denied?

4. The people, men and women as sheep, choose a Pastor by no act of
Jurisdiction, says Amesius, but rather by Subjectione and Election makes not a
Minister, but only appropriates his labors to his people, quoad
administrationem, says Cyprian, Ordination is the call and juridical sending.
Now the Apostles and Presbytery ordained Elders, Tit. 1. 5. laid on hands and
ordained, Acts 6. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. committed the charge to
faithful men, able to teach others. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 3. show me so
much for your new Male-Church, excluding Females, who may be unbaptized men
converted in China.

Mr. H. A divided power in many, is not an united power from many. The peoples
is a divided power, lying in many combined, and therefore not the same. Hence
the power of judgment is not the power of office, and therefore the fraternity
may have the one, when they have not the other.

Ans. Here is no Argument at all. This new Church, that now is called the
Fraternity, a new name, not in Scripture, in Many bre^h^e^ have no divided
powers to make ^ne an officer.
this sense has neither a divided nor an united power, to make, ordain and
call to the holy Ministry one who was no Minister before; and so the question
is begged, A divided power to choose in many, is not an united power. Its true
of the power of electing and choosing of Officers, they are diverse powers, and
therefore the society has the united power of choosing a Minister: but some
men there alone have not a power, being divided from the Church of women,
children and servants.

2. Mr. H. finding himself ebb in proving, he tells us, that the fraternity
may have the power of judging, and not of office: and he has given no Word of
God to prove, that the power of office, and the power of juridical judging (for
of that we now speak, for the judgment of discretion women have) are
different, that is, in diverse subjects: But I deny that any has official
power, but that man has juridical power also; or that any has juridical
power, but he has also a power of office. Mr. H. brings no argument of the
weight of a feather on the contrary. I deny not but they have diverse formal
exceptions, and because the power of judgment is not the power of office,
therefore the fraternity may have the one, not the other. Weak Logic.
Differunt conceptibus formalibus, Ergo, differunt subjectis. A power of
discoursing, rationale, is not a power of laughing, risibile; sure: and
therefore (says this simple Logic) a man may have the one, and not have the
other, that is, a man may be rational, and yet not risible: I am sorry that
godly and judicious men build such hay and stubble upon the foundation.

3. Why does Mr. H. give this new Church a Latin Name, The Fraternity, that
is, a Church of Redeemed ones built on the The fraternity or brethren are in no
place of Scripture put for the male-Church of Redeemed ones, far less for the
congregational male Church. Way of the Churches, cap. 1. sect. 1. page 1, 2.
Rock, made up of Brethren and no Sisters? Ah! are women, servants, aged
children, nor redeemed, not built on the Rock? So is there a Gospel-instituted
Church described. The word (...), as Stephanus tells us, is only twice in the
New Testament: 1 Pet. 2. 17. Love the brotherhood, that is, the company of the
brethren, say Mr. Leigh, Beza, Calvin, English Stephan. in Concord. N. T. Mr.
Leigh Crit. Sac. N. T. p. 7. Beza (...) achava pro fratrum coetu. Calvin. Pro
fratribus collective sumptis. English Divines and Lorin. ipsam Ecclesiam.
Esthius. Qui regeneratione fratres sunt. Piscator. (...), die brud^rschaff id
est, totam multitudinem fratrum: sic infra 5. v. 9. sic Latini nobilitatem pro
nobilibus. Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 17. Cum fraternitatis nostrae vel utilitas
vel necessitas sic utique gubernetur -- fraternitatem universam meo nomine
salutate. So Cypr. lib. 3. c. 18. Augustine. Basilius Epist. ad Galliae
Episcopos fratres.
Annotators. The company of the brethren; Lorinus, The Church; Esthius, The
brethren by regeneration, and new birth. So Piscator, The brethren that are
regenerated; as the Nobility is put for the Nobles. Let any man judge, if name
or thing be so much as hinted at, when Paul and the rest of the Apostles export
the brethren, Iam. 5. 12. My brethren, swear not, does he not forbid women to
swear? or speak they of the brethren only of a single congregation? Yea, and
when Paul determined to come to the brethren at Rome, Romans 1. 13, 14. to whom
he was debtor to preach the Gospel, came he only as such a debtor to brethren
of a single congregation? or only such brethren of a single congregation
justified by faith? are they only no debtors to the flesh? Romans 8. 12. and 7.
1. and 10. 1. and 7. 4. Wherefore my brethren, ye are bec^me dead to the law by
the body of Christ: are not women dead to the law through Christ? See Romans 8.
12. 1 Cor. 1. 10, 26. and in many places of the Old and New Testament, if the
Scripture mean only unofficed men by the Fraternity and Brethren. Cyprian has
the word Fraternity, the whole Fraternity: but all that read him know, he
means most ordinarily the whole Church and flock of men and women. And when it
is taken for only men, it is brethren in office, Act. 10. 23. and 15. 23.
never for brethren of this new devised Church. Augustine uses it sometime for
brethren in the Ministry, and so does Basil and the Fathers.

Mr. H. However the Elders are superior to the fraternity in regard of office,
rule, act and exercise, which is proper only to them, and not to the
fraternity, the people or Church are superior to the Elders in point of
censure, each have their full scope in their own sphere and compass: The office
of Major, King, Emperor is not prejudged, because the Corporation, Parliament,
Princes and States for faults may depose them.

Ans. What he calls the fraternity in the one line, in the next he calls it
without all Scripture, the People or Church, as if women If brethren and Church
be all one, women must be no members of the Church. M. H. makes censuring no
act of ruling.
and servants were no part of the people and Church redeemed by Christ.

2. Whereas he makes the people or Church superior to the Elders (all of them
if Heretics) in regard of censure, not of office and rule: He makes censuring
or excommunicating no part of rule, contrary to Scripture. Excommunicating is
either an act of teaching; or 2. of administering the Seals; or 3. of visiting,
by private exhorting, convincing or comforting, for an act of feeding for
public edification it must be, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 8. But that it can be
none of these, it needs no probation; to excommunicate, is not to preach, etc.

2. It is contrary to Mr. Cottons words. Cottons Keys; c. 4. n. 2. p. 16.
Excommunication is one of the highest acts of rule in the Church, and therefore
cannot be performed but by some Rulers: Now where the Elders are cu^pable,
there be no Rulers left in that Church to censure them.


3. The Ordinance of Christ is prejudged, where ^nofficed men take on them the
name of the Church, and are not the Church, and to excommunicate, where they
have no such power of the Keys given to them by any word of Christ. The
instances of a Major, King, etc. prove nothing: All free Societies L^x-Rex,
(...) 6. page 28, 29, and seq.
may, by the Law of God, create, and also choose Solomon, David to be their
King, and unking them again for a fault, as elsewhere I have proved. And here
is a clear Law of God, but that a new devised fraternity of some few unofficed
brethren should rule and overruled, and the sheep excommunicate all their
officers, must have a word of institution, not Mr. H. his naked word.

M. H. Hence the censure of Excommunication, for the act is Page 191.
common to the Elders, only for the manner of managing of it, its peculiar for
the Elders to be leaders in that action: and thence it is they are called
(Leaders) (...), Heb. 13. 17.

Ans. I know not why the censure of Excommunication should not be common to
both the Elders and this new fraternity, both in regard of the power and the
act of Excommunication, except Mr. H. show, that the office adds a new power
of Excommunication, which the fraternity has not; and if so,

1. The fraternity, before they were officers, and now when they are all turned
grievous Wolves, do excommunicate, and yet they want this new official power of
Excommunication, which is strange; for then they shall not have the complete
power of Excommunication: and yet they exercise the act with commission from
Christ.

2. It is to me a mystery, what superiority in the manner of managing the act
of Excommunication, the officers have above M. H. abus^s, but expounds not the
place Heb. 13 17. in making all pastoral authority over the people to be in the
pastors, presiding and ordering of the meeting in the censures, especially of
Excommunication.
the fraternity, they load, i. e. they preside and moderate in the actual
d^^pensing of censures, and therefore are called Overs^^rs, Heb. 13. 17. Good;
Ergo, moderating the acts of judging, makes the Pastor an overseer and watcher
for the souls of the members of the Judicature, as one who must give an account
to God, for so the place Heb. 13. 17. 18. is. Was ever Scripture so tortured?
The scope of that place is, Heb. 13. that men, women, obey their watchmen,
feeding by the Word preached, by Seals and Censures, the flock; so the words.
So Beza, Calvin, Pareus, Marlorat, Piscator; so Cajitanus, Justinius Martyr,
(...), Rulers. Never man, I dare say, Father, Protestant, Lu^^^ran, Papist, or
Interpreter, who expound that passage, dreamed that the officers are called
overseers, Heb. 13. 17, 18. because they lead and preside, or convene and
dissolve the congregation. Calvin. Ut plebs fidem and reverentiam pasto^^bus
habeat. ^ar^us. Obedient in domino. Marlorat. In summo pretio habeant cum
charitate, 1 Thessalonians. (...) 12. Piscat. Hortatur ad obedientiam erga ipsorum
duces and ductores, id est, pastores, ^^ctores, gubernatores. Cajetan. Subditos
ad obedientiam hortatur. Esthius idem.
For it follows, the Moderator of a Judicature has a superiority of office
over the members of the Synod, and watches for their souls.

2. That he is the Pastor of Elders and Pastors in the act of Excommunication,
and rules them, but reaches them not, and this is the Prelate.

3. When there be twelve Pastors over one congregation of Jerusalem in acts of
censure, Peter or some other leading the action, must be a Pope with
superiority of office over these to watch for their soul^

4. When the Brethren excommunicate all their officers, an unofficed Brother
must lead the action as an overseer, Heb. 13. ^7. What superiority of
Jurisdiction has this or any Moderator or Speaker in Parliament, or Prolocutor
in a Synod? for he has but one vote. If it be a priority of honor, for age,
and grace and gifts, we must obey all the aged, and such as in learning and
holiness exceed us, for they watch for our souls, by the place Heb. 13. 17. as
Mr. H. teaches us.

CHAP. II.
Of the first subject of the power of the Keys.

MR. H. The power of the Keys is committed to the Church Survey, par. (...). c.
11. sect. 2. p. 192.
of confederate Saints, as to the first subject thereof; it is no new opinion.

2. I oppose Fathers to Fathers.

3. If it be in the peoples power to hinder excommunication to take place, then
the Elders only have not a power given them of Christ, to manage this: but this
is against the wisdom of Christ to ordain means that cannot attain the end;
which must be, if the people may ^inder it.

Ans. If man be the first and proper subject of capacity to laugh, then must
all contained under this subject, Peter, Ann^, be capable to laugh; but women,
servants, aged children are as properly the confederate and inchurched Saints
by Mr. H. his words, as men. Cyprian and most of the Fathers take in the Cypr.
lib. (...). E^. 4. pa^. 1. ca. 11 p. 186. Par. 1. c. 2. p. ^5 The way of our
brethren in most of (...) p^ples is the (...) (...)
people with the Rulers in the exercise of censures, by way of consent; but
without vanity, I say, never Fathers, Greek or or Latin, Councels, old or
late, Doctors, Schoolmen, Prote ^ant, Papist, or any Divine, till of late the
Socinians, and now the brethren of the Congregational way, and the Separatists
and Anabapti^^s taught, that the Church of believers of a single congregation,
has formally a power of jurisdiction in them to make and unmake officers, to
call and excommunicate them. But you shall find all the principles and grounds
of this new way (...) the Arminian Authors and Socinians cited in the Margin;
and Mr. H. never labored to vindicate their way from these impure Sects. For,

1. They deny the notes of the visible Church, as the brethren do against the
reformed Churches.

2. They deny the word Church, either Mat. 18. or elsewhere to signify any
thing but Believers, never Rulers only.

3. They deny the definition of a visible Church, from a profession, and
require reality of holiness, at least some of them, as our brethren with
Anabaptists do.

4. Episcopius maintains separation. Episcopius Arminianorum antesignanus in
respons. ad di^e^mata december Pentificia, to 2. quaesit. 2. p. 255. Nuspia^ sub
Ecclesiae nomine pastores, Episcopi, Doctores veniunt, uti videre est, Act. 14.
1. and 14. 22. and 15. 12. 20. 17, 18. and 1 Cor. 12. 18. and 14. 4. Philip. 1.
11. page 156. Si quaesitor secundo sensu a nobis judicato Ecclesiae vocem
sumit, unam sanctam ca* holicam Christianam multitudinem vere p^o um and
simplicium Christianorum reperiri, qui ubique in sacris Christ^ oves aut ov^le,
Christi corpus, and Ecclesia vocantur, pro certo et^a^ ap^d nos esse,
professio^em cum dicimus (not^m Ecclesiae, inquit id^m Episcop. part. 3. disp.
28. these. 9.) eam intelligi volumus, qua non singulitantum, sed plerique
singulatim, doctrinam Christi salutarem profitentur dictis ac factis: sed
juncti etiam ea faciunt quae Deus fieri voluit, and quae non nisi in coetu
fieri poss^nt. Remonst. in declara^. sua c. 22. (...). 9, 10. these. 7. Extern^m
mandatorum Jesu Christi observationem n^tam esse Arminius in disp. 54. 11. 8.
signa haec sunt verae fidei, professio, and vitae s^cundum spiritus
praescriptum and instinctum institutio, quod ad externas actiones attinet, de
quibus ^olis judicare possumus homines. disp. 58. 11. 3. Concilium nullum
(maxim orthodoxum) potest successoribus suis praescribere Episcop. par. 3.
disp. 31. 11. 12. nec enim fas est, ut quis se socium in celebratione nominis
ac beneficiorum Jesu Christi faciat ejus quem ni^il minus quem Christianum esse
novit. Ecce manifesta est separatio prorsus illicita. Idem ^^sp 32. th. 5. Si
vero ad decidendum alicujus in religione cap^t^, sive veritatem sive
necessitatem indicantur, non tantum non utiles esse conventus, sed pericalosos
etiam and tyrannicos asser^mus. R menst. ^eclar. c. 25. th. 2. 6. conditio
Synodorum, si quod in iis statutum est, libere semper examini (1 Ioh 4. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.) and ulteriori tevisioni subjectum relinqu^tur. R monst. Apolog.
c 22. Scriptura testatur nos per fidem fieri filios Dei, membra corpor^s Jesu
Christi, im^ corpu^ Jesu Christi (visibile de quo l^quuntur) ut unum quidem
corpus cum eo esse, per eundemque fiuci spiritum.


5. They deny all jurisdiction and necessity of lawful Synods, as our Brethren
do.

6. All Churches to them are visible congregations which meet in one place to
hear the Word; so our brethren Churches of C^. in new England, c. 1. sect. 1.
par. 1, 2. and Mr: H.

7. Our brethren reject ordination by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, and all juridical mission by officers of associate Churches, and
teach that aptness to teach, and holiness of live is sufficient for a call, so
the people desire them, or choose them; and so do also the Arminians and
Socinians.

8. Th^^ the whole Church, id est, the Brethren, and the Officers by accident,
being only separable adjuncts of the Church, have a juridical power of
excommunication; so Socinians acknowledge all the godly and believers to be the
visible Church, though scattered all the world over, and reject the authority
of all visible Churches and Councels, deny all juridical calling and
ordination; so that it is clear that they judge the visible professors and
people to be the visible Church, which governs and excommunicates, which is the
mind of Mr. Hooker.

Mr. H. And the brethren and (9.) some Socinians, as Nicolaides and others,
hold that wicked men by no law of God are Joan. Volkelius Socinianus de vera
Religione, Lib. 6. cap. 1. Particularis Ecclesia eo hominum coetu continetur,
qui in certo quodam loco convocatus est: veluti est Ecclesia unius domus ac
familiae, c. 15. p. 690. Animadvertendum est Ecclesiam loci illius, in quo res
ista geritur, totam in unum locum ^ogendam esse, ut nimirum tum omnes, de ejus,
qui excommunicandus est, peccato justissimum judicium faciant, tum ipsius
animadversa mal^tia uno consensu eum in Christi membris nullo pacto haberi
posse statuant. c. 16. p. 695. Ubi sit vera Ecclesia, res non est scitu
necessaria ad salutem. c. 17. p. 669, 700. Nullae sint notae aspectabilis
Ecclesiae, and quas credis esse has (assignatas a Protestantibus) non sint
verae. Theoph. Nicolaides, de Ecclesia and missione Ministrorum r^su. cap. 2.
p. 9. Ego ostendo Socinum affirmare, quaestionem de Ecclesia non omnem, sed
aliquam, nempe quaenam, and apud quos sit, esse non simpliciter and absolute,
sed vel propemodum vel modo quodam inutilem, resut. c. 3. p. 27, 28. Certe
etiamsi in Ecclesia esse possunt tam boni quam mali; non est tamen vera Christi
adspectabilis Ecclesia, in qua mali sunt perpetuo. Nam mali qui sunt in
Ecclesia, qua mali, ferendi non sunt, sed aut ad frugem perducendi, vel tandem
excommunicandi, ita ut dici non posset jure (ita plane Robinsonus) in Ecclesia
esse vel bonos vel malos, 16. 29. non dici illo loco, Ephesians. 4. Christum
dedisse pastores -- donec occurra^^us omnes -- in Ecclesia perpetuo extituros
apostolos. Pesse enim verba illa ad sola Apostolo^um tempora referri, qu^bus
scilicet multa extabant quae ab unitate fidei remorissima erant, and tantum
doceri quodnam sit officium pasterum 31. semen esse semper ad finem mundi,
etiamsi non sint qui illud spargunt. c. 9. 89. In prima Apostolica Ecclesia,
semel tantum ad consilia itum est. c. 10. p. 197. An li^ear docere absque
missione, hoc est, an absque antegressa humana vocatione and licentia ab aliis
data, quam ille mediatam missionem vocat, liceat ei qui ad docendum alios
aptus, and vitae inculpatae, alios docere Evangelium Christi. Notandum vero hic
imprimis illud est, nullam missionem quae ab hominibus proficiscatur, vel
mediatam dari. Missio solius Dei est Jesu Christi: Adeo ut nec ipsi Apostoli
quenquam mittere proprie loquendo, potuerint, aut misisse legantur. 102. Qui
nova revelat ei missione nec opus est, nec esse potest: Apostlis opus fuisse
missione, non ministris qui nunc sunt.
to be suffered in the visible Church, and they are not there Iure. Mr. H.
offends, that unregenerated men, when known to be such, are to be suffered to
be there, or that the ordinances should be dispensed to them; which to be, is
against

1. The patience and meekness of Christ (I speak of the known non-regenerated,
that are not scandalous) and so against the Page 106. So. cinus satis esse ad
munus public docendi comprobandu^, si illi ita velint, qui cohortationes and
explicationes istas audiunt, id est, solam and nudam electionem populi absque
ordinatione pastorum facere comprobatum ministrum: Belle. Socin. adversus Gabr.
Ementropium adversus Cap. 1. -- p. 7. Quaenam and ubi sit Ecclesia, plane
incertu^. Socinus. Resp. 11. -- ad Resp. Andr. Volani, nullus deinceps
hominibus quantumvis doctrina -- and authoritate, add etiam sanctitate
pollentibus, nullus hominum conciliis quamvis sancte in speciem and legitime
congregatis, nulla denique -- visibili Ecclesia quamvis perpetua and universali
-- in judicio -- divinorum oraculorum interpretatione standum nobis Jonas
Schlighintingius ex praelectione. Joan. Crelbi Com. ad Galat. in c. 5. p. 263.
Duo autem tantum sunt quae hoc Christianae communionis vinculum ru^pere
possunt: vel pestilens aliquod dogma, quod salutem prorsus adimat; vel mores
minime Christiani -- si in errore pertinaciter haereat; aut etiam ob flagitia
pro Synagoga Satanae haberi debeat, nihilominus ob mores flagitiosos, nisi
prorsus sunt flagitiosi, non tam licet uni alicui, aut multi minori parti ab
aliis recedere, quam omnibus ab uno, vel long pluribus a paucioribus, si ipsis
interea paucioribus liceat secundum Dei praecepta vivere, ac conscientiae suae
consulere, and nullus extat caeteris Christianus purior -- vel etiam sperari
possit. Valentinus Smalcius in Refutat. Thesium Wolfangi Iranthii, disp. 12.
page 297. Ubi vero non est obedientia, ibi nulla est vera Ecclesia. Idem page
282. Vera and sincera doctrina forma est Ecclesiae, quae scilicet illi dat
esse, and gyrus est valde ridiculus, si pro notis Ecclesiae doctrina vera and
salutaris censeatur; tam enim incertum est, ubi sit vera Christi Ecclesia, quam
incertum est ubi sit vera and salutaris doctrina, nota enim semper est notior
eo cujus est nota.
patience and meekness required in his servants and Church in order to his end.

2. Against the institution of the visible Church, the school of Christ; no
master ought to exclude out of the school a child, who though dull of learning,
yet is well disposed, and keeps the laws of order and discipline; for it is
ordained ^o fine, that the non-regenerate may be effectually called.

3. None should be excommunicated, but these who are extremely scandalous, or
obstinate; and so none are to be excommunicated for simple non-regeneration,
which can appear only to be non-regeneration to some regenerate only, Ps. 36.
1. and not to them infallibly.

4. By the command of Christ, and so jure, John Baptist baptized huge
multitudes, of whom he had no assurance that they were regenerate, when by the
spirit of God he names them a generation of Vipers, and rebukes them as
Hypocrites, who thought it holiness enough to be the carnally born sons of
Abraham, Mat. 3.

10. I do not speak this to lay any odium upon the brethren, as if they loved
the ways of Arminians and Socinians, but upon a twofold account.

1. Because Mr. H. passes all what I said of this, as not worthy Ref. These. de
ordine Eccles. disp. 4. p. 377. An hujusmodi constitutio (missio) sit prorsus
necessaria ad constituendum verbi Dei Ministrum: Hoc autem nos negamus, nihil
enim tale (quod caput rei est) legimus in descriptione eorum quae ad Episcopum
constituendum requiruntur, ubi tamen omnia ea recenseri necesse est, sine
quibus munus istud consistere nequit; nec curandum est quicquam, quod ii qui
alios docent ab illis nec vocati nec missi sunt, dommodo secundum canonem
Apostolicum apti sunt ad munus illud obeundum. Cateches. Raccovien. de Ecclesia
Christi, c. 1. page 334. Non multum juvat signa verae Ecclesiae inquirere -- at
tenere salutarem doctrinam, cum ecclesiae Christi sit natura, signum illius, si
proprie loquatis, esse non potest, cum signum a re cujus est fignum differ
oporteat. c. 2. 240, 241. Nonne ii qui docent in ecclesia, ut singulari aliqua
ratione mittantur, opus habent? Resp. Nullo modo -- Apostolus describens
diserte omnia quae ad constituendas personas ejusmodi pertinent, nullam
missionis facit mentionem. -- Cum his duabus rebus p^aestant, vitae innocentia,
and ad docendum aptitudine, proper ejusmodi constitutionem merito apud omnes
justam authoritatem invenire debent. Ita Episcop. disp. 26. th. 2, 3. Ostorod.
institut. cap. 42. defens. ^ocin. Tract. de Eccles. and Minist. miss. contra
Miedzebo, c. 1, 2. Falsum est Apostolos semper requisivisse in Ministro
ordinationem. Andr. Radecius in notis in Resut. nodi Gord. c. 4. Absque
approbatione aliorum aliquem munus aliquod ob^re non posse concedimus, sed hac
ratione missio eliditur, nam ut liberum est in libera republica, eum qui aprus
sit ad munus obeundum eligere, sic in Christi ecclesia, eum qui aptus est ad
docendum alios ad id munus eligere, notum est Orbi Christiano Arminianos and
Socinianos tolerantia^^, locum habere debere profiteri in omnibus doctrinae
capitibus, exceptis paucissimis, quae fundamentalia vocant. Episcop. disp. 28.
th. 14. Remonst. in Apol. Ubique in declar. in Praef. Arminius ubique
libertatem prophetandi vastam praedicat. Theoph. Nicolaid. in resut. Tract. de
exer. de Ecclesia, c. 2. Socin. Com. m. 1. epist. Joan. and ubique. Socin.
tractatu de Eccles. pa. 4. Ecclesia significat omnes non professione tantum,
sed simul etiam re ipsa Christi fideles and revera pios -- p. 1. Ecclesiae
nomine intelligere debent coetus omnes adspectabiles, qui Christi salutarem
doctrinam profitentur. Adolp. Venator. in declarat. sua, page 164. Credo
Ecclesiam coetum esse in unum evocatum, ad audiendum ea quae divina and
spiritualia sunt, and ad salurem spectant. Quae ad salutem necessaria
paucissima sunt -- Remonst. in Confess. cap. 22. sect. 4. Sub uno tamen
praecepto sidei in Jesum Christum (sed verae, sed vivae per charitatem
operantis) comprehendi possunt. Theoph. Nicolaid. Refut. Tract. de Eccles. c.
11. S. 2. c. 3. Socinus Tract. de Eccles. sect. 124.
the answering; though indeed, to speak or comply in opinions with enemies to
Christ, his redemption, satisfaction, and free grace, is not overly to be
looked on; especially in a new frame of government spiritual in the house of
God.

2. Because the Presbytery is called Antichristian, prelatical, formal, by our
brethren. I love not high appeals, judging that they often fail against the
third command; as for toleration maintained by Socinians and Arminians I impute
it not to Mr. H. or the brethren of N. E. But there be not many, to my
knowledge (I say no further) for the congregatonal way, but they are for
toleration in non-fundamentals: and how few fundamentals there be possibly.

2. What they are, who can define? so that this way seems to me no less new,
then other sinful ways of Arminians and Socinians; and what mischief
toleration brings forth in Britain also.

Lastly, we hold that censures should not be dispensed against the peoples
mind; for as Augustine says, the censure shall not August. contra Donatistas.
edify, if most of the people be infected with the same scandal; and if the
people shall not in their practices yield, it may breed a separation and a
schism. But it is a naughty consequence, if Though the peoples not consenting
may hinder excommunication to be, it shall never follow, that therefore the
people have judicial power to excommunicate.
the people may hinder excommunication, then it is no ordinance of God, which
is executed without the peoples judicial power; this follows not, except the
people had a Ius, a judicial power from Christ to hinder excommunication, which
they have not; yea, and though they had a judicial power, yet if they use it
not right, but abuse that judicial power (suppose they had it) it follows not,
Ergo, excommunication is not an ordinance of God. For,

1. The Elders may abuse their power, and so hinder excommunication; and
without them, says Mr. Cotton, no act of ruling and excommunicating can be;
shall therefore excommunication be no ordinance? persecutors do hinder the
preaching of the Gospel, shall the preaching of the Gospel for that be no
ordinance of God? but the people lawfully may withdraw their consent, and then
there shall be no excommunication. This yet proves not; If the peoples power
lawfully used hinder undue excommunication, then the Elders only have not
power. For the peoples power lawfully used, hindered King Saul to put Jonathan
to death, and hindered all the Judges from doing the same; Ergo, King Saul and
the Judges only have not judicial power of life and death, but the people have
it also? it follows not: yea, but (says he) that Christ shall appoint a means
of reformation, and purging the Church, that in an ordinary course shall not
attain the end, is deeply prejudicial to the faithfulness, wisdom, and power of
Christ: any manner of way this is an argument carnal and humane.

1. Where has Christ interposed his faithfulness and wisdom, that if officers
and brethren make use of the judicial power he has given to them, the Church
shall be actually purged, is not this the question?

2. Where has he promised a reformed Church, in case these who have power to
reform, stand in the way, shall Christ's wisdom be accused, or the Gospel
reproched, because either men hinder it to be preached, or these to whom it is
preached, believe it not? or does the faithfulness of God fail, though all men
are liars? Romans 3. Is his wisdom darkened, though all become vain and foolish
in their imaginations? yea, if women, servants, children of age refuse to
withdraw from the excommunicate, the censure cannot edify; they have not for
that a judicial power to excommunicate by Mr. H. his way.

Mr. H. The keys of the kingdom, by way of Metaphor, signifies all that
ministerial power by Christ dispensed, and from Christ received; whereby all
the affairs of his house, in point of opening to such as stoop to him, and of
shutting to such as will not come under his authority, are acted according to
his mind. The Keys by all Interpreters not a judicial power of officers.
Wilson Dict. the power of teaching and ruling. Leigh. Potestas animadversionis
and poenaru^ est and symbolu^ docendi. Beza. (...) Metaph. Occonomi potestas,
Es. 22. Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in Matthew. Magna potestas notatur. August. de Civ.
Dei, lib. 20. cap. 19. Beda in Joan. Potestas solvendi and ligandi. Cypr.
Epist. ad lapsos Ep. 27. alias lib. 5. Epist. 6. Et tibi dabo claves -- inde
per temporum and successionum vices Episcoporum ordinatio and Ecclesiae ratio
decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnes actus Ecclesiae
per eosdem propositos gubernetur, cum hoc itaque divina lege fundatum sit,
miror quosdam audaci temeritate sic mihi scribere voluisse, quod Ecclesia in
Episcopo and Clero and in omnibus stantibus.


Ans. Learned Mr. Wilson, Mr. Liegh, Beza, Beda, Chrysostom, Augustine, Ierom,
Cyprian, tell us that the keys notes ministerial power, never since Learning
and Tongues were in the world, given to unofficed and private men, to exercise
and make use of them, but to the oeconomus Master-houshold, or steward.
Cyprian, and the learned Annotator, who answers Pamelius, make Stantes
distinguished from these who fell a part of the Church, because they are not
utterly to be debarred ut prophani and canes, as profane, ab omni rerum
Ecclesiasticarum cognitione, but never endued with juridical power, as the
Rulers; to these Mr. H answers nothing: only all such means (says he) as are
sufficient, private, or public, to open and shut Heaven, may be called the
keys. All means of promises and threatenings in the mouths of women. Abigail and
others of ged children and servants, yea, and of these of another congregation
are sure means of the word, for opening and shutting Heaven; shall these women
and children, and servants, for that bear the keys of the Kingdom of God?

Mr. H. The key of Royalty is only in Christ, the key of charity in the hand of
all believers, who out of Christian love lend some help, but have no power
judicial to proceed. There is the Key of subordinate power which only such and
all such have as are combined in a special corporation, and come under the
external government of the Scepter of Christ; such have good law to proceed
against such as will not stoop to the rule.

Ans. 1. What the Brethren have more then the key of charity, Women, servants,
and others have the Key of love as well as the Male-Church.
to lend help out of love, is the debate; sure if women be not excluded from
the Law of Love, this key cannot be taken from them.

2. If only such, and all such (omne and solum) as are combined in a special
corporation, have the key of subordinate power; this power essentially and
universally must agree to the so combined body. But women, aged children,
servants, are especially combined by the Church Covenant, as is easy to prove
from Mr. H. quod convenit omni and soli convenit reciproce and universaliter.
Ergo, only the combined Church Members, and all the Church Members (so women)
must excommunicate, and all for them; then the officers, as members combined,
not as officers do excommunicate; I quit all Logic, if this can be eluded. Now
Mr. H. says that confederate Saints, all, and only have the keys.

Mr. H. Pro. 3. The keys of subordinate power are seated firstly in the Church,
and by virtue of the Church, they are communicated to any that in any measure
or manner share therein: heat to first in the fire, as its proper subject, the
faculty of sense belongs first to the sensitive soul, etc.

Ans. The power of the keys belongs to the Church of Believers, How the Church
is the subject of the Keys, 1. Virtual. 2. Formal. 3. The Object.
of men and women, as the first virtual subject.

2. To the rulers and guides, as to the formal subject; as heat is in the fire,
so every part of the fire is formally hot, as a part of the first formal
subject: as iron is hot by participation, by the fire. But by this Mr. H. must
say all the parts of the Churches of Believers are endued with this power of
binding and loosing, as the partial and incomplete subject. So yetmust women,
children and servants be endued formally with the judicial power of the keys:
but this is false.

3. The keys are in the whole, in the exercise, in the rulers formally by the
judicial power inherent in them, in the people, men, and women by consent, not
by any inherent formal power juridical.

4. The keys belong to all rulers, ruled, men, women, masters, servants,
parents, children, objectively and finaliter for the edification of the whole
body, and every part thereof, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 2 Cor. 10 8.

Mr. H. Is suits not with right reason to cast some part of the power firstly
upon the people, some part upon the Rulers, as though there were two first
subjects of this power which the letter of the text gainsayeth, to thee will I
give, not to them: it were to speak daggers and contradictions to make but one
first subject of the power, and yet have others to share in this power, is more
wide from the mark.

Ans. Judge if it suits with reason, which judicious and godly Mr. Cotton
says, when the Church of a particular Congregation Keys, cap. 7. 3 Prop. 33.
walks together in the truth, all the brethren of the Church are the first
subject of Church liberty, and the Elders thereof of Churchauthority, and both
of them together, are the first subject of all The subject of the Keys
according to Mr. Cotton.
Church power needful to be exercised within themselves, whether in Election,
Ordination, or Censures of their own body.

They may distinguish between the power of the keys, and between Church power.
But it suits as little with reason to make two, to wit, Elders and Brethren,
the two first subjects, or one complete first subject of Church power, as to
make them one complete first subject, or two first subjects of the power of the
keys. Nor is it against reason, that the body organick be the first virtual
subject of the Keys, and the same body be the first formal subject of both the
Keys, and of Church Power in the exercise, the Rulers acting their way, and the
people their way, as is said; nor are there for that two subjects of power.

2. The Argument by which Mr. H. proves this is most feeble, It is said to
Peter, to thee I will give the keys, not to the (...) Ergo, Peter represents
the people, Believers only, (...) est, the male-Church of the redeemed: I would
not buy such Logic for a Not, for (...) is a collective, and represents many,
for the Keys of the Kingdom notes the Keys of jurisdiction, of preaching the
word, etc. Now see, he gives the keys of knowledge principally and firstly to
the people, and secondarily to the Elders who labor not in the word and
doctrine, in so far as they concur to make the word effectual. Nor can the Lord
have given the Key of only ruling to the preaching Elders, and therefore he
speaks to Peter as representing two subjects.

3. It is neither dagger nor weapon of blood, that the Catholic visible Church
of the firstborn including rulers and ruled, be the first subject of free
redemption, of all power of the Keys in their saving fruit, of all styles, the
Spouse, Body, Love, etc. the saving privileges of special note, that one
promised in the covenant of grace, the new heart, remission of sins,
perseverance, ruling in the visible kingdom by binding and loosing, and that
your particular congregation and society share of all these at the second hand.
And Mr. H. must be content that we look upon it as weak Divinity, that Christ
gave himself for the Catholic Church, and bestows all upon her firstly, and
that this be the first natural recipient subject of all these, as the element
of fire, not this or that fraction or fragment of that Element is the first
adequate, natural recipient subject of heat, as is above explained.

Mr. H. Prop. 4. The power of the keys take it in the complete nature thereof,
is in the Church of Believers, as in the first subject, but in the manner and
order of ruling that Christ appointed, in the parts.

Ans. Mr. H. speaks not distinctly, and should have told us what the power of
the keys is in its complete nature, and what in its incomplete and half nature
it is.

2. When he says the Church-congregational, and the male-Church of Believers
so consederate, is the first subject of the Keys, he says an untruth like to
this, this particular fragment of the Element of fire is the first subject of
heat. And, Sir, what say you of the rest of the quarters of the Element of
fire, must they, I pray you, be the subject of heat secondary, and by way of
participation? So you may say London is the first subject of the power of
government in England, yea, or Norwich; now the first subject by you is omne
and solum, and so does Mr. Cotton go before you; it is like England would take
it evil, and judge that Norwich did not logically distinguish. Our Brethren
Cotton, Keys, cap 7. 29. The first subject 1. Receives that power
reciprocally. 2. It first adds and puts forth the exercise of that power.
3. It first communicates that power to others.
must be content no Congregation is any other but an integral part (as D. Ames.
grants) of the Catholic visible Church. And Christ's design of Love was, that
the whole, by order of nature, as the first subject, should partake of all the
special privileges.

1. Grace. 2. Redemption. 3. Covenant blessings, etc. power of binding,
loosing, seals in their blessed fruit for the whole.
Nor can I say Amen to that of Mr. Cotton. Keys, chap. 7. p. 81. 1 Prop.


A particular Church or Congregation professing the faith taken indefinitly,
for any Church (one as well as another) is the first subject of all the Church
Officers, with all their spiritual gifts and power -- whether it be Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, all are yours (speaking of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor 3.
22.)

Ans. 1. Mr. Cotton must prove that Paul there speaks of a The place 1 Cor. 3.
21. All things are yours etc. misinterpreted by Mr. Cotton.
particular Church that comes all together into one place, as he speaks, citing
1 Cor. 14. 23. and that formally as a single congregation meeting in one. It
were a most comfortless Doctrine to limit that soul delighting privilege, 1
Cor. 3. 21. all things are yours, then Christ, and Grace and Glory are yours.
And verse. 23. ye are Christ's, only to Saints, as they are a Churchmeeting in
one place. What is this, but by the scope of that place, you have right to
Christ and Salvation, and Covenantpromises, as the first subject only under the
reduplication of a congregation meeting in one place, as an organized Church.
If the congregation in abstracto, as the congregation, be the first subject of
all officers, gifts, graces, by this, All things are yours, then the godly
Saints visible are excluded from Christ only, because they are not members of
a congregation, and no promises of a new heart, of remission, are made to any,
but to and for the congregation.
Ah! and shall not Christ and all things be theirs, who are in no Church State
like that of Corinth, but wander in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and
cave^ of the Earth, Heb. 11. 38 and have no certain dwelling house, nor fixed
Church congregational, 1 Cor. 4. 11?

2. What agrees to Believers, as Christians, and Believers, to believing women,
aged children, servants, and to the scattered Saints. Now in no such Church
state, as Mr. Cotton imagines the Corinthians to be in, and to John in the Isle
of Pathmes, and to the Apostles as believing Apostles, that cannot agree to a
congregation as the first subject, which reciprocally and only receives this
power. But such is this, Revel. 21. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, all are yours, death in the sweet fruit of it belongs to women, and to
Christians as Christians, though in no congregational state; Ergo, women, and
the whole Catholic Church, whether in such a Church State or not, must be the
first subject of the Keys. And it is wretched Logic; Paul says, all things
are yours, and ye are Christ's, to a congregation that meets in one place: Ergo,
such a promise is made to a congregation, as to the first subject, and as to a
congregation: then may I infer the promise to eat of the Tree of Life, to
receive the hidden Manna, and the ^ning Star, and to sit in a Throne with
Christ, is made to such as overcome in the congregation (as our Brethren say)
of Ephesus, of Pergamos, of Thyatira, etc. Rev. 2. 3. therefore these promises
are made to the Church of a congregation, as to the first subject; upon the
same ground all the congregational Church must be the first subject, and so the
only subject of all privileges of the congregational Church of Corinth, of
being justified, sanctified, Temples of the Holy Ghost, redeemed and bought
with a price, etc. And if so, these privileges must agree to the congregation
firstly, and to all other for the congregation, as that agrees first to the
fire, and then to iron, to water for the fire.

3. Paul saying, all are yours, whether Paul, etc. he cannot mean Paul, as an
Apostle, is proper to you as a congregation, in all his Apostolic travels, for
that is false: nor can the meaning be, Paul as a fixed Pastor is yours, for he
was no fixed Pastor to them, tied to that congregation only. Then the meaning
must be, Paul, and by a Synechdoche, all the Apostles and Pastors, and the
World, and Life and Death, in their labors must be for you, and the Catholic
Church, and all the Saints all the earth over, whom they must gather in, and
perfect as Christ's body, and parts of his body, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. and not
as a congregation; so our Brethren in this as in many other points abuse, but
expound not the word.

Mr. H. The power of the keys is in her (the Church congregational of
Believers) as in the cause subordinately under Christ, and it may thereby here
be acted as potestas judicii, in admission of members, in the absence of
Ministers, in censuring by admonition, for each man is a Judge of his brother,
and there is a judicial way of admonition, when the parties are in such a state
as in foro exteriori, they can make process juridice, against each other, so
there is a power of gift in all elections. Or else this power of the keys is
communicated from her to the officers, the soul does not see but by an eye,
makes an eye and sees by it, so that the Church makes a Minister, and
dispenses Words and Sacraments by Officers.

Answ. We seek Scripture, and see only Mr. H. his naked assertions.

1. The power of the Keys is radically in the Church of redeemed The
Scriptureless and unproved assertions concerning the Male-Church excluding
women.
ones, to wit, the male-Church of redeemed ones, a creature for name and thing,
not in the Word.

2. That this male-Church by a judicial power admits members, prove that.

3. In the absence of Ministers this is done, then Ministers and Elders with
the male-Church excluding women, aged children, judicially admit members, then
all female members, and children, and servants with blind obedience must own
these members, and watch over them: prove this, for women have neither consent
nor vote.

4. That every one may judicially process another, that is, judicially accuse
one another and complain, and bring witnesses against one another, and prove
the scandal: that is true, and may judicially accuse before the Church the
daughters, or servant women, yea, or men that are incorrigible after private
admonition, but that the members of the male-Church judge one another by the
power of the Keys, is the question. Give us Scripture for it.

5. There is Potestas doni, a power of a gift in all elections, well; a power
of a gift of discerning and trying, who shall be my Pastor, sure women have
their gift of discerning; why should Pastors be obtruded upon women blindly?
should men have dominion over their faith? I am glad that Mr. H. gives no
juridical power to the call and making of Officers: but only a power of gift,
Potestas doni. But the Church communicates this power of the Keys to the
Officers, that is, the male Church of redeemed Brethren. This is proved by no
word of God, but by a similitude, in which it is said (by poor Physiology) The
Soul makes an Eye, and the Brethren make their Officers, which we deny: God
makes them by the laying on of the hands of the Elders, Acts 6. 6. 1 Timothy 4.
14. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 5. 22.

Mr. H. The power of judgment is the Church formaliter.

Ans. It is often said, never proved to be formaliter in your male Church.

CHAP. III.
Whether Mr. Hooker his Arguments conclude strongly that the People have a
power of judging.

MR. H. 197. The power of judgment is in the Rulers directively (as formally
in the people) they out of an office power, leading the whole proceeding
therein.

Ans. I never heard that a chief member, either Speaker in All power of office
is by Mr. H. only in moderating and opening the Assembly, which is no power of
Jurisdiction.
Parliament, or President in Council, or Chairman in Committee, or Moderator
in Assembly, was a place of juridical power, or office over the Judicature, or
Members of the Church; a place of priority of order it is, which one may have
to day and want to morrow: for the nature of order requires that one open the
Assembly, and moderate the meeting: if this be all, the official power that Mr.
H. gives to officers, is weak, and of no worth:

2. There is no power, no act of ruling and governing given to the Pastors
above the Brethren. For,

1. To call an Assembly, Io^l 2. Is not proper to the officers, the Assembly by
its intrinsical power from Christ, may convene in his name. Nor,

2. To examine members, whether they be Apostles or not, by their way cannot be
proper to the Elders ruling, for it agrees to other members, as wel^ as to them.

3. Ordination is, and may be (according to our Brethren) and creating of
Officers, though Mr. Cotton make it peculiar to Officers, because of Act. 6. 6.
1 Timothy 4. 14. as Mr. Cotton cites; yet Mr. H. says, the Brethren may do it.

4. It is no act of the Key of Authority, that the Elders open the doors of
speech more then that one speak before another, or that Elihu speak more then
the rest of the friends, is no act of the power of the Keys. Nor,

5. Is the preparing of matters, and receiving of complaints, by our Brethrens
way proper to them then to other officers more, since Mr. H. says all equally
have the power of the Keys from the Church of Brethren. What power of the Keys
the Pastors have in preaching and exhorting, they have it rather over the
congregation, then over the male-Church of Brethren; nor is it so properly a
superiority of rule, as of doctrine, which in Synods they have over Churches;
nor can the Pastor have a directive power as a Pastor over the brethren; since
by M. H. his way, they may judge and censure him. Can the King be their Judge
with a directive power, who not being a Parliament, may judge authoritatively
whether he should be King or not, and may dethrone him?

Mr. H. Arg. 1. Ejusdem is it instituere and destituere, The people have power to
consure and depose Officers in case of heresy, or otber iuiquity, for they
gave power by election to Rulers.

Ans. It is ordinary to our Brethren to prove in a Circle, the fraternity have
power to choose Officers, ere they have power to depose; and they have power to
censure and excommunicate, he whole being above the part: ergo, they must have
power to ordain: we deny the Fraternity can either make or unmake officers.

2. That is not so undeniable a proposition, an Assembly of Officers, a Church
of thirty may constitute themselves in a Judicature, and so may a Parliament,
by an intrinsecal power in themselves: Ergo, they may for heresy and scandal
against the Law of Nature destroy and censure themselves, it follows not.

3. Apostles were immediately called of God, and made Pastors Men have not the
being of Pastors by every new call to preach.
habitu, by that call and special direction of the spirit (which was in stead
of Election) Paul is forbidden to preach in Bithynia, and called to preach in
Macedonia: how many times should the P^ostles be made Pastors, and unpastored
again, if the present call be that only which makes them Pastors? Levites were
ordained to serve the Tribes jointly, and when the Tribes were dispersed, the
Levites were dispersed, and remained Levites in whatever place they came to, as
Mr. Hudson shows. Essence and Unity of the visible Church chap. 6.


4. If Pastors be baptized, and members of the Churchonly to which they are
chosen Pastors, then as to the former part, they and all other baptized to one
single congregation, when It may be said if professors be members baptized to
one only congregation, they are unbaptized when they depart and turn members of
another congregation.
that Church is dissolved, are no more baptized, and as Pastors cannot exercise
pastoral acts, but to their own Church; neither can they act as baptized
professors in another Church, baptizing being a Citizens solemn incorporation
to the Church, and by this way to the Church independent only: as a man that is
only a free Citizen in Norwich, cannot for that be a free Citizen in York, or
perform the acts of a free Citizen in all free Cities in England, as he can
perform them in Norwich. And suppose that Norwich lose its freedom, the man is
a Citizen of no free City of England: for as he is made solemnly by admittance
into the Church, into which he is baptized a visible member incorporated by
Baptism, as by his Burges Writ, or Burges Ticket, when the City is dissolved,
and no free City, either his Burges Ticket to be a member of that City is null,
or then by The Apostle and John Baptist asked for no congregation but
immediately upon confession baptized.
his Burges Ticket he was made a member of all other congregations. John
Baptist and the Apostles, Act. 8. Ioh. 3. after a confession never asked for
their conversion, but baptized, for (...), straightway without delay, even in
the night (for so the word notes, Matthew. 21. 19. Luke 4 39. and 5. 25. and 8.
44.) The Jailer and his house, Act. 16. Cornelius and his house, Act. 10. the
Eunuch, the multitude of John Baptists hearers were baptized members of the
universal Church, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. where there was no particular congregation
to receive, and admit them as members, as Mr. Richard Baxter solidly observes:
nor is it worthy the refuting, that the Apostles by an extraordinary power
might baptize them, though to no certain Church, but Pastors now have not that
power: for the Apostles baptizing and preaching, and administering the other
seal differ not The Apostles preached and baptized in all places, as ordinary
officers by the same command, Mat. 28. 19. by which we teach and baptize.
in species and nature, from the ordinary pastoral acts of an ordinary
Minister, they speak with tongues, work miracles as Apostles; but they preach
and baptize hic and nunc, as ordinary Officers. And as to the other part, the
calling of a Minister so, must be up and down, as he officiates to his own
Church, he acts as a Pastor, as to these of another flock he tenders the Lords
Supper as a gifted man.

5. Though a congregation be of Divine right, and Paul be assigned to teach the
Gentiles, Peter the Circumcision, Gal. 2. by an ordinance of God, yet it
follows not, that Peter acts not as a Pastor, when he baptizes Gentiles, or
that Paul acts not as either, Apostle or Pastor when he baptizeth the Jews, and
that Paul was ten hundred times a Pastor, and again no Pastor, as God called
him to act pastorally in ten hundred congregations, and went from them; for the
call of Gods divine leading where to preach, and where not, in Macedonia, not
in Bithynia, Act. 16. but the local division of congregations and provinces: as
the second General Council defines; and that the provinces that belonged to
Ephesus were added to Constantinople, as Socrates Concilium Nic. (...), Socrat.
l. 3. c. 8. Concilium Chalced. c. 2. Every Bishop is a Bishop of the Universal
Church, as is the Pope. Doct. Joan. Crakantborp in defens, Eccles. Anglica.
contra M. Antonii de Dominis Archiep. Spalato injurias Anno 1625. Ed. per Joan.
Barkham c. 28. p. 168, 169. Episcopi omnes, qua Episcopi, Universalis Ecclesiae
pastores sunt consulendo, hortando, monendo, arguendo, increpando, scriptis
simul and voce alios omnes instruendo, and cum vel haeresis ulla vel Schisma
grassari coeperit, velut incendium publicum illud restinguendo and ne latius
serpat providendo.
says was from custom.

When the Bishop of Spalato defending the Supremacy of the Pope, says, that he
thus differs from other Bishops, that he is universal Bishop of all the
Churches on earth, but other Bishops are Pastors of their own particular
Diocesses and Chu-ches. D. Joan. Crakanthorp Chaplain to King James wrote a
learned book, in which he proves, that all Pastors are Pastors of the Church
Universal, habitu and actu primo, as well as the Bishop of Rome, especially
because in General Councels 2. and without them, they are to care for all the
Churches on earth.

2. That the particular designation of single congregations, is by no divine
right assigned by Christ; but by the prudence of the Church.

1. For if it were not so, there could be no transporting of Ministers from one
Church to another.

2. Because Churches then could not be enlarged, nor diminished, nor changed,
which we see may be done. Cyprian as most sound in many things, so in this is
to be considered, we are (says Cyprian. l. 3. Epist. 13. Pastores multi sumus,
unum tamen Gregem pascimus, and oves universas quas Christus suo sanguine and
passione quaesivit, colligere and fovere debemus.
he) Many Pastors, but we feed one flock. We saw how Mr. H. was pleased to fall
upon me, because I said that every Pastor is a Pastor to the Church-universal,
by exhorting in Word and Writ; yea, by ruling in Councels, and is not tied as a
Pastor to employ his labors to one single flock only: we therefore condemn in
our Brethren; (1) That the care pastoral of any Church, but of one
congregation, of which the man is Pastor Iure divino, quasi glob^ affixus, is
perished, since the Apostles died.

2. That they distinguish not between a Pastor as he is a Pastor to all
Churches, as the Lord in providence shall call, and between the same pastor, as
tied to his single Church, rather than to another, by no divine right, but the
prudence of the Church which is not infallible.

3. That it is utterly unlawful to transplant Pastors upon any necessity of the
greater good of the Church, against the law of nature.

Mr. H. 2 Arg. Its in the power of the Church and Fraternity to admit members;
Ergo, to cast them out, as appears in the admitting of officers.

Ans. 1. Observe the circular probation between this and the former Argument,
as is said.

2. Give us one Scripture or jot where the Fraternity is either called the
Redeemed Church, for so women are not Redeemed, The sole fraternity neither is,
nor is called by any Scripture, the redeemed or governing Church.
or the governing Church, for the officers are not Rulers; or let Mr. H. give
us a third Church.

3. That the Fraternity only, and no women, gave their tacit consent to the
choosing of Matthias, Act. 1. of the Deacons, Act. 6. of the Elders, Act. 14.
23. since their consciences were concerned, and they are parts of the fed and
redeemed Church as well as men, can never be proved: and who can deny women
Cypr. l. 3. ep. 3. Plebs maxim potestatem habet vel dignos sacerdores eligendi
vel indignos recusandi. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 5. alias ep. 66. Lib. 1. ep. 7. alias
64. Lib. 4. ep. 6. alias ep. 56.
to be of the plebs, people and fraternity, as Cyprian speaks? and of the
brethren that Paul, James, and the Apostles wrote unto? Does not Cyprian divide
the Church in stantes and la psos? were there not women that both yielded to
the Persecutors, and denied the truth, and stood to the truth and suffered?
Read Cyprian cited by Mr. Cotton, and in other places.

M. H. 3 Arg. Either the people have a causal virtue in judging, or only a
consent; the latter cannot be: To consent to evil is sin; to dissent from a
just sentence, makes them to hinder the execution of a just sentence.

Ans. This is already answered, and has not the weight of the some of the
water. Elders have either a causal virtue in judging, or only a consent: the
former I see not how they have.

Mr. H. Mr. Tho: Goodwyn, and Mr. Philip Nigh, give them M. Tho. Goodwyn and Mr.
Philip Nigh, Preface to Mr. Cottons treatise of the Keys.
only an authoritative directing power, such as Parents have in the marriage
of their daughter, which is an authority extrinsecal, which the Magistrate and
Pastor in their kind have; but the Virgin has the only formal and
intrinsecal power to consent, and so to make the marriage, and to dissent so as
it shall be no marriage: In which case the Fraternity only or Male-Church
formally, intrinsecally judges, and may judge, though there were no The people
have no causal virtue in judging, but only in consenting by the judgment of
disc^etion to the sentence. The argument is re^orted.
officers, as the Maid may marry, though Parents and Tutors were dead; and the
directive authority of the officers may be wanting, as the directive authority
of the Magistrate may be wanting.

2. The officers cannot consent to a sinful sentence, its not their duty to
sin, nor can they dissent from a just sentence, for then they might hinder the
execution of a just sentence, and the officers shall keep communion with a man
whom the people excommunicates; and that the people may err, is too well
known, in the condemning of Jeremiah, of Christ, and of others, And whereas he
says, The dissenting shall blemish the wisdom of God, its answered already:
It blemishes our folly, but not his wisdom, when people are divided from
Rulers, and Rulers from people.

3. There is a midst between consenting to an unjust sentence, and a dissenting
from a just sentence, to wit, a consenting by the judgment of discretion
tacitly to a just sentence, in which there is a causality popular, nor judicial
nor juridical, coming from the inherent power of the Keys.

Mr. H. Arg. 4. It crosses the rule of righteous proceeding, to Page 197, 198.
understand the Church. Mat. 18. of the Elders only: Suppose three Elders in a
Church all have been convinced before witnesses There is a necessity of telling
the Presbyterial Church, by M. H. his own argument.
in private of an offense; they will not hear; the offended brethren must tell
the Church: that is, they complain to these three Elders of these three Elders,
and make the guilty both judge and party in their own cause. 2. Suppose of
these three two be offenders, the grieved party must tell the third, and so one
shall be the Church.

Ans. This inconvenience follows clear from the hampering of all power of the
Keys within one single congregation, in the midst of six congregations round
about.

2. The Book of Discipline of New England says, A Church Independent may
consist of four officers and three brethren, three brethren are offenders, if
they cannot in this case tell the Elders only, for they are not the Church,
Mat. 18. says Mr. Hooker; Ergo, the three offending brethren must complain to
the three offending brethren, and make themselves both Judge and party;
therefore the Argument necessitates us to tell the Elders of associate Churches.

Mr. H. Arg. 5. If the power of judgment be in Rulers, then Page 19^.
it is either in some or one, to wit, Peter, and to him derived from the rest,
and that is Popery, or it is in them all equally; for those that are equal in
commission, are equal in power, but that is not, for the teaching Elders are in
degree and also in power superior to the ruling Elder.

Ans. The issue of this Argument is to strip the officers naked of all power of
Rule, and Mr. H. must take it away off his own way, as well as off ours.

2. The teaching Elders are worthy of double honor above the ruling Elder, 1 Timothy 5. 17. for they speak to us the word of the Lord, Hebrews 13. 7. and are
the Ambassadors of God, who in Christ's stead beseech us to be reconciled to
God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Their feet are pleasant, because of their message, and in
this have power above ruling Elders, and those who serve Tables, Act. 6. and
above the brethren and Church, as being sent of God with pastoral power, not
only vi materiae, by virtue of their commands, but as in an Epistle is spoken
judiciously to this purpose by Mr. Tho. Goodwyn and Mr. Philip Nigh, by reason
of M. Tho Goodwyn, Mr Phil. Nigh, Epist. to the Reader prefixed to the treatise
of the Keys.
their Ministerial Authority. Now how they can be equal in commission of
judging to the people, is the question: for as the woman is independent in
regard of intrinsecal power of consenting or dissenting in point of marriage,
the Parents directive power of commanding extrinsecal, as the judicious
Prefacers say, so the Fraternity is the only judging society by them. Yea, Mr.
H. says, The Elders are superior to the fraternity or brethren (I would he
had said to the sisters also) in office, rule, Pastors and ruling Elders are
equal as touching power juridical, but as touching the power pastoral of the
Keys of knowledge, they are not equal, but the pastor is above the other
act and exercise, and in managing the censures, are (...), overseers, by Hen.
13. 17. How are leaders and overseers in the same managing of censures, equal
in power, and not above those whom they lead and oversee, yea, to whom they are
to yield obedience, as Mr. H. cites to that purpose the place Heb. 13. 17. are
Parents equal in power who do command the Virgin, whose it is to consent to the
marriage?

3. Let the godly Reader consider, whether the Brethren, though believers, yet
ignorant of the mystery of Balaams doctrine, and of Iezobils teaching, Rev. 2.
and of the learning and qualification of pastors, and of the deep and subtle
Heresies for which pastors must be cast out, are by the Word of the Lord equal
in judicial power, and trying of Doctors and Pastors, with the Rulers, whose
office it is to know more of the mind of God, than Brethren? and whether are
they by Divine Institution so?

Mr. H. If Rulers alone have power to excommunicate by Mat. Page 198, 199.
18. then may three Elders excommunicate 400 or 500 brethren; and if so, Rulers
should not only censure the fraternity, but destroy themselves: for where no
flock is, but all are excommunicated, there are no shepherds. Besides, as Ames.
says, a body No Scripture for the judicial power of the male-Church, but
Matthew. 18. which is to M. H. a Church of redeemed men and women meeting in one
place to partake of all the ordinances. M. Cott. Keys, c. 5. p. 22, 23. as Act.
19. 9. Exo. 33. 7. Mar. 6. 11. Act. 13. 46. D. Ames. de consc. l. 4. qu. 29.
11. 10. 25.
cannot be cast out of it self.

Ans. 1. Observe in all these six Arguments, there is not one jot of Scripture,
but the one Magna Charta of Mat. 18. where yet Mr. H. will not stand to the
signification of the word Church.

2 They are not there alone to excommunicate the Church of believers, without
the consent of the Church; and we judge it no way of Christ to excommunicate
not 400 only, but six thousands, who all made one congregation of Jerusalem,
say our Brethren: But Mr. Cotton says well in the case of the defection of a
congregation to blasphemy and persecution, and no help by a Synod is to be
hoped for, the Elders may withdraw, and separate disciples from them, and carry
away the Ordinances with them, and denounce judgment against them.

3. D. Ames. whose name is savoury in the Church of Christ, says, But if a
Church should be excommunicated, then a body having and retaining its essence,
should be cast out of it self. No Judge can properly punish himself, but the
Presbytery and Synod may declare a Synagogue of Satan to be a Synagogue of
Satan.

4. It is against the meekness of Christ, and not warranted by any Scriptures,
that faithful pastors that are pastors to the universal Church should be
unpastored, because this or that particular flock to which they were sent,
leave off to be the flock of Christ, that is as much, as because they are
faithful in his house, Christ will have them cast out of his house. The
argument will conclude, That the Church excommunicating all the officers,
destroys it self. Of this before also.

CHAP. IV.
Mr. Ruthurfurd's Arguments that prove that the People are not the first
subject of the Keys, are vindicated from the unsatisfying Answers of Mr.
Hooker.

MR. H. That is not to be held, that is neither in Scripture Sect. 3, p. 199,
200.
directly, nor by consequence:

But that belivers lay hands on men for the Ministry, or receive witness, or
have in them any such power of Government, is such. So Mr. R. etc.

Ans. The first three Arguments touch not the question, for office-power is
formally in some select persons, who have a Ministerial spirit and gifts. Mr.
Robinson says, The Government before and under the Law, and in the Apostles
time, and still now, is not in the multitude, but in some chief men: But it
follows not because office-power, which is a little part of the power of the
Keys, is in officers, therefore the power of the Keys is firstly in the
officers, but firstly in them who gave both the power and the office, and
therefore had a power before they gave it, and therefore can take it away.

Ans. Mr. H. has quickly expeded my Arguments with Due right of Presb. c. 1.
sect. 2. p. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Veni, vidi, vici; It is a scorn to say, without all proof, that the
office-power is a little part of the power of the Keys: For the includent by no
Logic is a part of the thing included, the City is not a part of the House
which is a part of the City; but the contrary: now the office-power in Rulers
includes preaching, The office power is not a part, but the whole power of the
keys.
administrating of the seals, as Mr. H. grants, and also it includes a power of
binding and loosing, and of ordaining, since the holy Ghost gives rules of
right ordaining of Elders to Timothy, and to Teachers, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, and
10. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18, 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7, etc. as to Pastors, not
as to Believers, and by this to rebuke, censure, shall be no ruling at all, if
Mr. H. deny ruling power to agree to Pastors as Pastors, or to be a part of
office-power, because ruling power in officers is common to both officers and
brethren.

1. He begs what is in question, for the brethren are ruled and to obey, and
not Rulers.

2. If it be said ruling power is not office-power; its replied that Mr. H.
says that the Elders are superior to the Brethren or male-Church in regard of
office, rule, act and exercise. Now if ruling Page 191.
be common to both officers, and the Brethren, or such a male-Church of the
redeemed; then are not the officers as officers superior to this Church in
rule; yea, this Church gives power, and takes away the power of governing by
way of censure, from the officers: and so the brethren in ruling must be above
the Officers, as for the superiority official in preciding and managing the
actual dispensing of censures, as Mr. H violently alleges Heb. 13. 17. to this
purpose, it is a ruling over the ruling of the Brethren, the like whereof was
never heard, the mouth of a Judicature orders, but judges not the ruling,
and judging of the Judges. Again, if officers be both officers in teaching,
administrating the seals, watching over the manners of the people, and also in
dispensing censures with the Elders, then must officepower take up and include
both official acts, and also judicial acts and power in governing; Ergo, the
power of office is not a part of the power of the Keys, but the whole power of
the Keys.

2. It is not to the purpose, to say that Government is not in the multitude,
as in the first subject; for then the multitude and The Church Mat. 18. binding
and loosing is not a church of selected persons, by our brethrens way.
Church of Redeemed, that meets in the same place, for all the ordinances is
not the instituted Church, to which the offended must complain by Mat. 18. nor
is it the first subject of the keys. Expound to us then Matthew. T^ll the Church,
i. e. tell some select persons, the Church of some males, only excluding women,
aged children, servants: alas that is not the Church Mat. 18. nor the New
England instituted Church, which is defined to us in the first words of their
Book of Discipline; for that is not a Church of selected persons, but includes
men, women, servants, children of age, as I demonstrate from their words. Way
of the Churches of Christ in N. E. c. 1. pro sect. 1. p. 1, 2.


1. The Church which Christ in his Gospel has instituted, to which he has
committed the Keys of his Kingdom, the power of binding and loosing, the tables
and seals of the covenant, the officers and censures of his Church, the
administration of all his public worship and ordinances, Is costus fidelium,
a company of believers? These are their words. But I assume some select
Brethren only is no Church.

1. To whom Word and Sacraments only are due.

2. Such only are not such a Church as the Church of Corinth, justified,
sanctified.

3. Such only is not the company that meets in the same place to partake of all
ordinances, as they teach; for women, aged children, servants were justified,
sanctified, partakers of ordinances, as well as select Brethren: Ergo, the
visible Church instituted by Christ, is not the first subject of the power of
the Keys, except you mean the virtual subject, then it is not the first formal
subject, as fire is of heat, nor is the complete virtual subject.

But Mr. H. says cap. 11. sect. 2. page 192. The power of the Keys is
committed to the Church of confederate believers, as the first and the proper
subject thereof. Pro. 1. page 193. That the power of the Keys is seated in the
Church as the proper subject is no novel opinion. ^b. We will suffer years to
speak a little in this place, The place of those that Peter sustained in Mat.
16. to them the keys were given. But Peter speaks in the name and sustained the
place of the Church: as the Ancients, Origin, Hillary, Augustine, frequently --
troops of our Divines say.

Ans. I pray our Brethren, do the Fathers mean the Church of visible Saints,
the multitude of Believers? or go our Divines The church of believers built on
the rock is not the formal first, and proper subject of the keys.
in troops along with them in the formal, first and proper subject of the Keys,
as fire is the first formal subject of heat. As Mr. H. page 193. Now I judge
Mr. H. means his own only instituted visible Church in the new Testament, that
meets together in one place for the ordinances; if I should say the whole
element of fire is the first proper and formal subject of heat, and yet exclude
four quarters or parts of this body, as utterly incapable of heat, were I
worthy to be called a Philosopher? But the same way Mr. H. makes the Church
confessing as Peter, Mat. 16. such a formal subject, and says the fourth part
of this subject, women, children of age, etc. are not capable of the Keys; if
it be said, the organical body is the proper subject of seeing, of hearing,
etc. yet neither legs nor hands are capable of either seeing or hearing.

I answer: Then 1. the organical body is not the first and formal subject of
seeing, but Arms and Legs are capable of touching; but women, aged children,
servants, though essential parts of the visibly confessing Church, Mat. 16. are
formally capable of no power, of no exercise of the Keys at all.

2. If God give the power of seeing to the eye, as to such a watching member,
then gives he not the power of seeing to the organical body; but if God give
the power of seeing to the eye, as to a member and part of the body: Ergo, he
gives the power of seeing to all the members, Quod convenit, qua tale, convenit
omnibus; Ergo, he must give the power of watchers to women who are members.

Mr. H. Office-power is but a little part of the power of the Keys, and
therefore it may be in Officers, and yet the power of the Keys not be firstly
in them, but in them who gave Office-power.

Ans. This is, as if one would say, the power of a Masterhoushold and of a
Steward, is a part and a little part of the power of the Keys of a family; when
these only under the Lord of the house have the Keys committed to them, show in
all Oeconomies in state, a family where the Keys are committed to any but to
those in office, and such as are subject of the power of the Keys, a part and
a little part of the power of the Keys, is not the Key, the nible of a Key is
not the Key. Yes, but it may be said, the Queen and Mistress of the Royal
Family is above the Officers of the Royal House, since they are her Servants,
no less then the Kings Servants.

Ans. The officers are the believers servants objectively and finaliter, for
the building of their souls, Ephesians. 4. 11. but the question now is, whether they
be subjectively sent Potestate missionis, by ordination, and laying on of hands
(the ceremony to How the officers are above the Church of Believers, and the
Church of Believers above them.
me is Economy not to be despised, but for the thing it self I contend) of
Elders, or people, and in an official power of the Keys to shut or open Heaven,
either by preaching, seals or discipline; there is not any above the officers,
not the Church of believers in an authoritative way; as for a way of Christian
dignity, believers are, without all doubt, above all the officers on earth. And
when the Mistress is a society of sinners, that she has the power of the Keys
in any authoritative way, over her self, or any other way committed to her,
but by a whole consent, or godly withdrawing when the Rulers turn Wolves, is
against Scripture and all Reason.

Mr. H. Not only the Officers, but Offices also are included in the Keys, as
being of that ministerial power by which Heaven is opened and shut; and
Officers and Offices are ordinances, and Christ's gift to the Church, Ephesians. 4.
11. He gave some to be Pastors, etc. As Mr. K. with Chrysostom acknowledge.

Ans. To say the Officers and the Offices are included in the The offices and
officers are with as little sense included in the keys, as if we would say, the
King and the royal office are included in the royal power.
Keys, is to say ^eedless, that both the Stewards and the office of Steward
included in the power of the Keys; or the King himself, and the royal office
are included in the royal power: what sense or rather nonsense is here? Its
true, the office and officers, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. are given to the Church of
men, women, children, servants, to the multitude of red^emed, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for edifying of the body of Christ, verse. 12.
finaliter and objective, even till the coming of Christ; but Mr. H. must prove
by that Text (I doubt if he can, or any for him) That Offices and Officers are
given to the Church subjectively, that is, not to the multitude, but to some
select persons, the male-Church of the Fraternity; that this new power may
shuffle the power of the Keys from her, to some officers. But,

1. Who gives our brother leave to leap from one signification There is no
Church of only believing males wanting officers in Scripture.
of the Church Catholic of the visible Saints to the new male Church?

2. From the gift given objectively for the Church, as clear it is in the Text,
to the Church subjective of his own devising.

3. Why contends Mr. H. for the accidents, or gifts, or privileges of nothing,
or a non (...), for in Old or New Testament he cannot give us a Redeemed Church
of only believing males.

Mr. R. The offices that include both the power of the Keys, and and the
exercise of them are given, Mat. 16. to some select persons, to Peter.

Ans. Therefore they must be given to some that are not officers, for how
unpleasant is the sense to thee who bear the place and person of an office,
I will give an office, thou that have an office, to thee will I give an office.

Ans. This quirk (for an objection it is not worthy the light) is not against
me, but against the Scripture, and Beza, Bullenger, Pareus, Calvin, and all the
Fathers, who say there is promised to Peter who now was an Apostle confined, as
yet to Beza (...), non dedit, sed dare promittit. Bull. non dicit dedi. Pareus
promittit in futurum. How Christ gives to Peter the Keys, as representing the
officers.
Judea, the power of the Keys as an Apostle all the world over, and in him to
all the officers. As when a Prince gives a confirmation of the office of
Sheriff with larger privileges, then he had before. He says, I give to thee
who bear the place and person of an Officer, and Magistrate, that same
Magistracy with more ample privileges. And does not Mr H. speak as
unpleasantly? I create thee Peter, who wast a visible Saint before, now a
visible Saint. Beside that he ties so the Apostles to be fixed members of one
single congregation, which he knew their Apostolic office could never permit
them with a good conscience to discharge.

Mr. H. Arg. 4. This complete power of binding and loosing is given Page 201.
to the officer: firstly, either as teaching, or as ruling in a special work or
as officers ruling in general; if the first, then the power must be given to
teachers only (...), as Mr. R. and so only Teacher, shall be Rulers. If this
power be given to them as Rulers, in regard of the common or general nature of
ruling, then is their equal power of ruling in both Teachers and Elders.

Ans. The K^yes are given, Non uni divi^, sed unitati conjuncti^^, Mr. H. with
no better Logic may prove the General and Council of War, the Major and
Aldermen are not the first formal subject of their respective powers, as
Pastors and Elders cannot be the same formal subject of the Keys.
to all in the College of the Judicature. The ruling Elders vote, if according
to the rule, is of as much weight as the teaching Elders vote; and it is not
absurd, but necessary that all be alike here, except Mr. H. hold a sort of
Episcopacy of Rulers over Rulers in the same Judicature. This conceit (for
there is no solidity of reason here) might prove that the King and Parliament,
the General and Council of War, the Major and the Aldermen are not the first
subject formal (for of the virtual subject we speak not) of their respective
military power, or civil State powers. Yea, the Pastor as a labourer in the
Word and Doctrine, is in honor and power above the ruling Elder; the King and
General acting severally, are above their general Councels. A Child in Logic
may answer such arguments.

Mr. H. If the faithful may not lay on hands, nor receive witnesses, as Paul,
Titus, Timothy, then are they not the first subject of the power of the Keys.

Ans. The consequence is false, for ruling Elders cannot so lay on hands, nor
so receive witnesses as teaching Elders do, yet they have the power of the
Keys.

Ans. The Argument is not mine, in that place. I neither call Paul's Presb. c.
1. p. 9, 10.
the organick Church the subject, nor the first subject; but only say, since
the world was, the people are never Key-bearers, nor so called; the Presbytery
lays on hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14. the Apostles, Act, 6. 6. Timothy a Pastor, 1 Timothy
5. 22. for to bear the Keys is borrowed from a Steward, Oeconomus; as all
agree, Because the bre^hren lay not hands on nor ordain Ministers at all,
therefore they do not so lay on hands, and ordain as the officers do.
both Fathers and latter Divines. As to bind and loose is borrowed from such as
command G^ols, as Pareus observes, Ps. 105. 18, 20. 2 Kings 25. 27. Ps 149. 8.
Act 12. 6. but no official power nor act of office, as of a Steward or Jailer
is given to the people. And it is like much Logic I have here met with; the
ruling Elders cannot so lay on hands, and so receive witnesses as the teaching
Elders; Ergo, teaching and ruling Elders for all that may well be the first
subject of the Keys; my meaning is, they lay not on hands so, that is, by any
pastoral teaching power. But as for the people, they bear not the Keys at all
over themselves, nor are they in any sort Stewards to feed themselves; and
therefore they are no more the subject of the Keys then private servants of the
house, to exercise the Keys authoritatively: the Ethiopian is not white at all,
Ergo, he is not so white as a Raven.

Mr. H. To whomsoever Christ gives the Keys, to them he gives Page 401.
a ministerial spirit by way of special Embassage to remit or retain sin.

Ans. This is unsound, for the Keys are given to ruling Elders, who have no
such ministerial spirit; it is not enough to say, that power of preaching is
not formally given to ruling Elders; yet it is effective given in the fruit to
them, as Mr. R. says: for they who receive the same commission, or equal power
of the same commission, must receive the power of the keys formally.

Ans. The Keys in a ministerial way of special Embassage, to remit and retain
sins, are given to teachers by a concional way of remitting and retaining sins,
and to both teachers and ruling Elders effectually (says Mr. R,) in the
judicial and authoritative Paul's Presb. c. 1. p. 9, 10. The ministerial spirit
of forgiving and retaining sins in the external Court, though not in a
concional way, is due to the ruling, as to the teaching Elder.
application in the external Court of Christ's Church: but believers as
believers, and as visible Saints confederate, have no such power judicial
formally, or effectively. Let Mr. H. prove this, and it shall be seen there it
sticks, hic haeret ei aqua: nor is it denied, but ruling Elders have the same
power of the Keys formally, as touching the judicial application of the word
preached in the external Court: For the whole Court, Teachers and Elders, do
formally, in a judicial way, apply to the conscience of the incestuous
Corinthian his sin, thus; Thou by name have committed incest, we, by the formal
power and ministerial spirit given to us by Christ, deliver thee to Satan, etc.
All have alike formal and effective, and so causal influence in this sentence.
2. I also thus frame the Argument:

To whatsoever society Christ has given the Keys, to some of that society he
has given the spirit to remit and to retain sin by way of concional preaching
the Gospel, John 20. 21, 22. Matthew. 28. 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. for there is a
binding and loosing chiefly in the preached Word, and to all of them he has
given a formal power of binding and loosing in the Court of Christ, conjoined
with the former binding, and not to be separated from it. Give us in the word
Excommunication separated from the preaching of the Word. But Christ has given
no power judicial of this kind to excommunicate all the officers, to ordain
all the officers, to the society of brethren destitute of Pastors. And give us
leave to keep this ground of vantage, we can produce Scripture for this
practice, that the Elders laid on hands, and ordained Elders, Act. 6. 6. 1 Timothy
4. 14. and 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. Let our Brethren show, where the
male-Church of only unofficed brethren did the like, and give precept or
promise, and we are silent.

We may justly ask, By what power unofficed men may make The male-Churches
ordaining wants an institution of Christ. Page 202. Paul's Presbyt. c. 1. p.
10.
officers; there must be an institution for this, and its hard to prove
positive institutions by far off consequences.

Mr. H. Ruling Elders do not effectually (he should say effectively, as I do,
which is a far other term) apply the word in the external Court: why? because
the application of the word thus dispensed, implies that it is issued and ended.

Ans. If the meaning be, the Sermon is closed and done, and Its childish to
say, because a Sermon is closed before the censure be dispensed, therefore
there is no application of the word made to the conscience of delinquents in
excommunication.
the incestuous man repents not, therefore all place for judicial application
of the Word to the conscience of the scandalous man in the Court of Discipline,
is ended: How weak and watery is such a consequence? except we say that the
whole Court of Teachers and Elders do not apply medicinally to the man in the
external Court the Word preached; which to say, were to destroy all
Church Discipline.

Mr. H. There is a Judicial power in making application of the word preached by
any of the members who have power to admonish judicially.

Ans. That is to beg the question: for none have power to admonish judicially
as the Church, but the officers, and those that are stewards, who bear the
Keys; otherwise women have power to apply the Word, and to rebuke, and to
exhort.

2. This contradicts the former just now spoken. The Elders cannot effectively
apply in the Court the Word preached; why? the Word dispensed and preached is
ended: But here every member may judicially apply out of the Court, though the
Word dispensed be ended.

Mr. H. Mr. R. Arg. 4. The government of the Church is complete in officers,
their number, their dispensed censures of binding and loosing without any power
of the keys in the people, and therefore it is superfluous; yea, if the
believers have power there alone to excommunicate all the officers, as Mr. H.
says, the Elders in governing must be as superfluous as the sixth finger in
the hand. Ans. Though the people have power of judging, yet they have not power
of office, which is necessary.

Ans. Power of office is necessary to the preaching of the Officers are
superfluous in dispensing censure, by M. H. his way.
Word, and to the administrating of the Seals, of which we now speak not. I
hope Mr. H. questions not the necessity of a standing Ministry to the end; but
since officers are created, and all the officers may be excommunicated by the
only brethren, as Mr H. says, contrary to Mr. Cotton and the Word (now
ordaining of pastors, and excommunicating of them are the highest acts of Rule)
then the Elders are as superfluous as the sixth finger to the hand, in the
highest point of Ruling, and officers must be only necessary ad been ess^, for
the better directing and managing of censures, as Mr. H. says, only for
authoritative ordering and counselling; as Mr. Goodwyn and Mr. Nigh: But they
may be wanting, and censures well administered without officers.

M. H. Mr. R. Arg. 5. The multitude of believers must have this power either
from heaven or from men; if from heaven, either from the Law of Nature, or a
positive Law of God.

Ans. There is a positive Institution, Mat. 18. Mat. 16. Mr. R. says, God has
not made all Rulers, and have left none over other in the Lord. Ans. To have
the power of the Keys is one thing, and to be Rulers another. The Court of
Aldermen can proceed against a delinquent Major, yet not one of them is Major.
The members by covenant, not as officers and (...), censure one another, though
in the manner of dispensing the censure, they need of ficers as guides. And so
the seven^h is answered.

Ans. Mr. H. grapples with my Arguments by two's, but answers them all with a
begging of the Conclusion. Its good that these two only places, which are
sometimes expounded of the Way of the Churches, c. 1. sect. 1. prop. 1. p. 1,
2. Survey, chapter 10. arg. 5. p. 133.
Church of believers meeting in one place for the Ordinances, and that includes
all Saints visible male and female, as your Discipline; sometimes Mr. H.
expounds Matthew. 18. the Church, firstly, as it is an integral body of both
people and Elders; and 3. Mr. H. takes it for the Church of the Redeemed, and
offends that Mr. Rall and Mr. R. takes Mat. 18. for the governing Survey, chapter
11. par. 1. p. 186. Mr. H. takes the word Church in the Magna Charta, Matthew.
18. and 16. sometimes for visible Saints, male and female. 2. Sometimes for the
Church of Elders. And 3. here, for the male-Church without officers and women,
and other visible Saints.
Church. Now 4. here the Magna Charta of the word Church from Mat. 18. and 16.
must not only he the male-Church of selected brethren; so does the sick man
love to change his bed. Now Ted the Church, must be, Tell the male-Church, Mat.
18. which is built on a Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall not
prevail; as if there were no fixedness on the Rock for women, aged children,
and believing servants, but they must all turn Apostates, and only the
male-Church, Mat. 16. persevere in grace, and dwell finally upon the Rock.

2. To have the Keys, and to be Rulers, are so one thing to us, as twice three
and six are one thing. And its a wide mockery to say, that members covenanting
are to submit to one another; and, in a Church Way, judge one another, by
rebuking, Members judge and censure, and excommunicate one another, and yet they
bear not rule over one another, as M. H.
exhorting and gaining one another, and yet are not made rulers and key-bearers
to one another; that is, they exercise the keys and power of ruling over one
another, and yet they rule not one another (...), this is to distinguish
between Isaac and the son of Abraham. 2. Do not women covenant to gain the
younger women in their way, by rebuking, by Mat. 18. 15. Lov. 19. 17. 1 Samuel
25. 25, 26, 27. Tit. 2. 3, 4. both men and women? and do they for that rule, as
the male-Church? and by what Oracle? am I not to rebuke a trespassing offender
of another congregation dwelling within twenty cubits to my door, and being my
beloved brother in Christ? are not the brethren If all be rulers mutually one
to another, as M. H. must say that word, obey them that are over you in the
Lord, must be spoken only to women and children.
both rulers and ruled, both the stewards using the Keys, and members of the
house, both shepherds and flock; and what sense can that have? Obey them that
are over you in the Lord, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. except it be a
speech to only women, and children, and servants, whereas he wrices to all,
and directs such exhortations to all, except to officers, in the judgment of
all Divines whoever before our brethren so expounded Scripture; yea, he should
have said, Obey one another, for ye are all over one another in the Lord.

3. The comparison of Major and Aldermen halts, except Mr. H. say, the Citizens
have power of ruling authoritatively over, and to depose from office both Major
and Aldermen, if delinquents.

Mr. H. There is a peculiar office-power in the officers that is not in the
flock.

Ans. In order to preaching there is, but in order to juridical ruling there is
none at all; and so the eighth Argument stands untouched.

Mr. H. The 6 and 11 Arg. of Mr. R. If the power of the Keys be given to
believers as believers under that reduplication, then all believing men and
women and children have authority over the congregation, for a quatenus ad omne
valet consequentia, and all should be pastors.

Ans. Its strange that Mr. R. so often acknowledges, that we require only
charitable Saintship in members, yet he frequently supposes that we require
sincerity: 2. The believers as believers scattered, are not the first subject,
but as covenanting and fitly capable, and counted so; which women are not.

Ans. To this I before answered: Nor is it strange that I should charge real
contradictions, which by good consequence follow, upon my Adversaries repugnant
principles.

2. The question is now, What is the first subject of the power of the Keys?
but whether the place Mat. 18. proves (as Mr. H. says) that the first subject
is not believers as believers, but believers with three limitations. 1. As
visible to judicious charity. 2. As covenanting Church-wise. 3. As capable to
Rule, excluding women and children: but all the three are forgedly added to the
Text, Mat. 16. The first is added; for Peter in this confession represents not
Saints as visibly to men's account, but real Saints. For,

1. Christ pronounces Peter, and all that confess truly and Peter was not
visibly blessed, as Magus, Mat. 16. nor did he represent hypocrites like Judas,
who are M. H. his saints and make the same confession
really (though visibly, for these are not here supposed) Christ to be the Son
of the living God, really and truly blessed, as Peter, whose heart the Lord
saw. But Peter is not blessed, nor all whom he represents blessed, by Mr. H.
his way, and by his wresting of the Text only in a visible way, as Judas, who
might give the same consession with other rotten hypocrites, and not be
blessed, but cursed.

2. All who give this confession, as Peter, have received the Spirit of
revelation from the Father, which is neither visible nor audible, but is as the
hidden Manna, known to the man himself, and to God only.

3. All that so confessed, are really upon the matter differenced from all the
false Religions and Sects, of which, some said Christ was John Baptist; some,
that he was Elias, etc. as is clear otherwise, if Christ speak of a visible
confession, which Magus and other Church members like him may give; the so
confessors were no more blessed, than the wretched Herodians, who said Christ
was John the Baptist risen from the dead, and denied him to be the Son of the
living God.

4. The so visible confessors are the Church, whom Christ builds on the Rock,
that shall prevail against all temptations of Hell, and be saved, but such are
the really and eternally saved only, not the so built on the Rock, as Judas
and Magus were, and therefore that is but sand, not a rock, which is given to
believers in charity combined, and who are counted fit by Christ and capable,
which women, children, deaf and dumb are not. So Mr. H. does make the Text or
our Savior say, I charitably judge Peter, and Judas, and Magus are blessed,
are built upon the Rock.

2. The other two limitations are as blasphemous, and contrary M. H. deprives
all women and believing children of age of all comfort from confessing Christ
as Peter did, and of being built on the Rock, because they are not capable of
the Keys.
to the scope of the Text: for our Saviors scope is to furnish solid
consolations of sound faith not to Peter only, not to seeming believers only,
not to Church Members only as such, but to all persons who renounce false
Religions, such as Heredians were, and others, v. 13, 14. men and women, Mary
Magdalen and others, who by this very Scripture do really, and with the reality
of saving faith, from the Spirit of the Father of Christ, confess Jesus to be
the living God, as v. 17, 18. And I appeal to the consciences of our brethren
(I say not any thing to those that are asleep in the Lord) whether Magdalen and
others should in sincerity confess, that Christ is the Son of the living God,
and had received the anointing, and had received no Keys, no visible
membership like to what they say, may not as well claim to this place and
blessedness as Peter. And if Christ should answer them, Ye women, who by the
Spirit of the Father of Christ confess me to be the Son of the living God, and
for that suffer death from Herod and other persecutors, are blessed; but ye
have no right to real blessing by Mat. 16. 15, 16, 17, etc. for I count you
women not capable of the Keys. O what perverting Mr. H. gives to none the
benefit of the faith, joy of believing, peace, con solation in the like
confession of Peter, Mat. 16. but only in and through visible membership of a
single congregation, which is as due to Magus the forcerer, as to all real
believers. Page 104.
of the Word of God is this! Surely Mr. Smith in his Parallels has more reason
for him to prove that women share of the honor of the Keys as well as men,
from Mat 18. and Mat 16. But of this hereafter. Show me a place in all the
Scripture where Christ says, I give the Keys to the Church of Redeemed ones.
2. Show me where in Scripture the blessing of real and sincere confession of
Christ from the teaching Spirit of revelation, and ano^nting, is hampered and
confined to male-believers, and to male-believers only, members by
marriagecovenant of one single congregation. Sure the brethren fail here, as
the Popists, who retrench it to the only Church of their Pope and Clergy.

Mr. H. The rule of Mr. R. fails much against the fundamentals of Logic,
quod convenit (...), convenit (...), yet visible Saints and believers accounted
according to the rules of charity, are the subject matter of the Church, and
therefore though they be justly excommunicated, yet in Gods account they may be
inwardly Saints. And again, close hypocrites, as Judas, may be real
unbelievers, and therefore the profession is sufficient to keep such in their
office, and to evidence that all their actions Ministerial are valid.

Ans. As Mr. R. has, following Aristotle, expounded (...), that which agrees
as the ultimate specific form, or as a A contraction in M. H. his first and
proper and formal subject of the Keys.
proper passion, agrees to the subject reciprocally; as rationale (...),
resibile, (...) homini, See the medi (...) above expounded: But make
fundamental or superstructure Logic of these two, except the Logic of
contradiction, and I am silent. Mr. H. Survey, cap. 11. pro. 2. p. 194.
Subordinate power (of the Keys) only such, and all such have, (a perfect
reciprocation) who are combined in a special corporation, and come under the
external Government of the Scepter of Christ in the Gospel. If women, servants,
aged children be excluded, they being combined in a special corporation, and
under the ^xtern l Government of the Scepter of Christ, judge, Reader; and yet
believers as believers (says Mr. H. Survey, cap. 11. page 203, 204.) are not
the first subject of the Keys, but believers, as 1. Combined by
Church Covenant: 2. As counted in charity believers: 3. And counted capable
men, not women. Any man remove that contradiction.

3. I ask, If profession be enough (according to our Brethrens way) to evidence
the ministerial actions, Baptizing, etc. for example, of Judas, to be valid,
why says not Mr. H. profession is Mr. H. must hide something under that, That
profession is enough to evidence the ministerial actions of Judas and such to
be valid.
enough to render their ministerial actions to be valid, but only to evidence
that they are valid? If profession do only evidence them to be valid, they may
be, in se, in themselves null and invalid. What is under this, I know not: If
Mr. H. his sense be, that Judas was blessed, and had a Spirit of revelation to
teach him to give Peter's confession, and upon this account of a profession
though rotten, yea to Christ's charity apparently fair, yet Christ for his
seeming confession gave the Keys to Peter as to Judas. If Mr. H. would cause
the Text speak this, Mat. 16. he should gain much upon me: But no wit of men,
but our Brethrens, shall throw this out of the Text. What a poor comfort is it,
this profession keeps Peter in office? yea, it makes him blessed above men.

CHAP. V.
The rest of Mr. R. his Arguments proving that the Male-Church of only
unofficed Brethren have no power of the Keys, are delivered from the
unsatisfying Replies of Mr. T. H.

MR. H. The 9 Arg. of Mr. R. If Christ give the Keys to believers, he gives
answerable gifts to them. Ans. Such as Page 204. 205.
have received the anointing, can discern the voice of Christ and follow him,
are able to choose to themselves Pastors, as being able to relish the savor of
spiritual administrations, and to feel what key will best open their lock, can
see and discern what courses be sinful and scandalous, persons obstinate and
pertinacious therein, therefore they may choose and reject officers -- They
need not the tongue of the learned, they are reproved for careless watching, in
not purging out the incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5. 2, 3.

Ans. 1. My Argument is mangled. And whereas I, with the Word, say, If the
male-Church be Rulers, Watchmen, the only men appointed to rule, make and
unmake officers, I demand. The Epistles to Timothy and to Titus must, by Mr. H.
h^s way, be written to unofficed brethren, the males only of a congregation.
If the Epistles to Timothy and Titus be Canons to the brethren of the
male-Church that they must rule well, 1 Timothy 5. 17. rule their own house well,
be apt to ^each, 1 Timothy 3.

2. Whether unofficed brethren must be such Rulers as are to commit the Word to
faithful men, able to teach others.

3. Whether the endowments that are required in Bishops, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Tit. 1
5, 6, 7, 8.

4. Whether the count that Watchmen, who must stand and feed, and not sleep,
nor let the flock perish, Ezekiel. 3. Chap. 34. Isaiah 56. Zech. 11. lie upon
unofficed brethren?

5. Whether the crime of usurping be theirs, and not the Prophets, Ierem. 23.
and yet they are the only feeders, rulers, Judges of all to the highest
censure of Excommunication. But all the qualifications that Mr. H. gives to the
male unofficed Judges are saving grace of anointing, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. 27. which
women, who have Christ for their Advocate as well as men, 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. the
discerning of the voice of Christ, and following him, which all the sheep and
Elect of God have, Ioh. 10. 27, 28. except women, aged children, servants, be
excluded out of the number of the sheep of Christ, this is a turning of the
Gospel upside down, to Popishly confine all the Privileges of Saints, the
anointing the spiritual disce^ning The spiritual qualifications for calling of
Ministers, as Mr. H. describes them, as being able to relish the savor of
spiritual administrations, to discern and know the voice of Christ and follow
him, etc. are given to women and to all.
what key will open the heart, to some few male-believers: 1. Aged; 2.
Incorporate, so and so. But I retort it thus: To whom Christ has given the
only qualifications spiritual of Rulers endued with power of judging, those
has he called according to the rule of the Gospel to be such Rulers, and they
must dig their Lords talents in the earth, if they improve them not for that
end. But the Lord has given to all Believers as Believers of the same or of
another flock, whether in Churches this way, or not, to women, as to males, in
some measure, the anointing grace to know Christ's voice. Ergo.

2. Let it be observed, that the tongue of the learned, Esaias 50. of which Mr.
R. spoke, to absolve and open heaven to a man swallowed up with grief, and a
gift of a son of thunder, to shut the gates of heaven against the obstinate,
and such as are to be delivered to Satan, are not required in the exercise of
the keys of the Kingdom, but only such gifts as are in women; is this a good
frame of Church discipline?

Mr. H. God gives to men no calling to a place, but he gives Page 205.
rules how they are to order and direct themselves in it. But the Word has no
Canons how the people should order the Keys.

Answ. Matthew. 18. 15. If thy brother, etc. The Lord points his finger to the
Fescu^, and says, Build up one another in the most holy faith, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11,
12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. Heb 13. 17. Romans 16. 17. Observe those that cause
dissentions among you, etc.

Ans. My Argument is mistaken. If there be Rules in the The argument of Mr. R.
that there be no rules in the Word how the male-Church should rule and judge,
Ergo, there is no such judging Church, stands unanswered. Mr. H. his way
overturns the Ministry.
Word how Officers should acquit themselves, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc. how Judges,
Kings, etc. so ought there to be Rules how unofficed brethren, the only
Judges, (for Church Officers do but order and regulate judging, as our Brethren
say) should behave themselves. But this is not by our Brethrens way.

2. The Reader may observe all along, that Mr. H. and his way lays the Ax to
the root of the Ministry; for he ascribes the Church acts of office, of
opening and shutting heaven, of the learned Tongue, of Excommunicating, etc. to
unofficed men; or then he denies that there is any necessity of such in
judging, and ascribes such acts and qualifications as are in women, to their
judging Church; the very way of Anabaptists and rigid Separatists.

3. Mat. 18. 15. shall make every Churchmember, brother See Mr. John Collins
his vindic. Minist. Evangel. an. 1651. the question accurately and clearly
discussed. The Pulpit guarded with 20 Arg. an. 1652. A Plea for the use of
Gospel Ordinances, by Hen: Laurence against Mr. Dell, 1652. p. 44, 45.
Vindication of Presbyt. Governm. and Ministry, by the Ministers of the Province
of London, an. 1649. M Gillespy Miscel. q. 1. p. 1, 2, 3. etc. Vindic. Minist.
Evang. by the Ministers of London. The Ius Divinum of Presbyt. c. 11. p. 180.
or sister, who are to gain by admonishing one another, a Church-Judge, to
exercise the Keys one over another. I thought the power had been given, not
uni sed unitati, to brethren in the Judicature, not to stones scattered.

The edifying one of another, and comforting one another, and withdrawing from
dividers, are acts of love required of men, women, and of Christians of all
ranks, and by no word tied to those of the same single congregation, but to all
the Catholic Church; should not women withdraw from dividers? and therefore
these places, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Romans 16. are abused.

4. Ambrose, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Paraphrastes, Beza, Calvin, Marlorat, nor
any Interpreter dreamed the place Heb. 13. 17. was meant of unofficed brethren,
who watch and must Chapter 11. p. 191. M. H. his way destroys the ministry of the
N. Testament.
give an account for souls: yea, Mr. H. expounds it of officers, and yet he
cites Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that are over you in the Lord, i. e. Brethren of
the male-Church obey brethren.

Mr. H The prwer of the Keys is larger then the power of office, and therefore
the Lord requires not so much abilities in the brethren as in the Officers.

Ans. The difference is said, not proved.

2. If God require the highest abilities in officers to the laying Mr. H.
denies that the highest abilities that are required in the Epistles to Timothy
and Titus, are required to be in such as open and shut Heaven by the Keys. Page
206.
on of hands, 1 Timothy 5. 22. to the highest censurer, 1 Timothy 19. 20, 21.
compared with 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc. 1 Timothy 3. 6. 7, etc. then he must require
these same far more in brethren, the first and proper subject of all power, or
then the Lord calls them to highest actings, and promises to them no gift to,
or for these highest actings, such as delivering to Satan, cutting off of
members.

Mr. H. The Keys are given to Peter, as representing Church guides, Matthew. 16.
not excluding the consent of the people.

Ans. We so give the power radically and fi^stly to the Church of Believers, as
by them we communicate office power to the Elders, though they be not the first
subject.

Ans. Such a shifting of office-power from the Church of believers, which yet
is but the third part of the redeemed single Church to Elders, if Christ teach,
Matthew. 16. or elsewhere, we rest.

Mr. H. If the Keys be given to the Church, the house of wisdom, Page 207. Due
Right. l. 2. c. 9.
Prove. 9. 1. of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Heb. 3. 4. builded by Pastors, Teachers,
Ephesians. 4. 11, then not the Church of Believers without Pastors. Mr. H. the
assumption fails, for a Church without Pastors is wisdoms house, as we proved,
and is Act. 14. 23.

Ans. Mr. H. answers nothing to the places, Pro. 9. wisdom The ninth argument
of M. R. stands unanswered, the Aposties made the Church a politic church by
framing organs official in it.
has maids and a table; the house in which Timothy was to walk, was built by
officers, Act. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 5 17, Give us a pattern of
your homogeneal Church, for clear it is the Church Act. 14. 23. was the Church
of believers, no politic ministerial Church until Paul and Barnabas with the
free election of the people, made them a politic Church: so until Titus
ordained Elders, the Churches of Creet, bear the name of (...), Cities, and
though these Cities were Churches, yet could they exercise no politic actions,
nor frame Organs official to themselves, until the first founder made them
politic ministerial Churches. Otherwise, as Paul and Barnabas exhorted them to
continue in the faith, so they should have commanded them to use that radical
power, to create officers and not have encroached upon their power of the Keys.

Mr. H. Paul charging the Elders to feed the Flock, or the Church, Acts 20.
implies there is a Church distinct from feeders.

Ans. No doubt, there is a flock of redeemed and fed ones of men, women,
children, 1 Pet. 4. 2. Iam. 2. 2. Act. 15. 35. that were of late Catechized,
Gal. 6. 56. different from watchmen, The feeders and the fed church are
different, but this fed church is not the ruling and judging church.
but Paul bids the feeders censure the grievous Wolves, v. 29, 30. but he bids
not the fed Church do it, far less implies he, that the third part of the
redeemed was the male-Church, and did, or could exercise discipline over both
officers, and women, servants, and children. Let us see that employed.

Mr. H. If they want Officers (says Mr. R.) they want the power of edifying.

Ans. They want the power of edifying, as an organick body, but it has power
to ed^fie it self, as totum essentiale.

Ans. Christian edifying one of another in diverse congregations, 1 These. 5. 12.
Col. 3. 16. Heb. 3. 13. by women and children of age we deny not, but a Church
edifying without Pastors, or a perfecting of the body without officers, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, and 28. 1 Cor. 14. 4, 12. we find not. (2) Your
male-Church edifying without Pastors, must also edify as an organical body. In
it women and children be silent, and some unofficed Mr. H. gives to unofficed
men what is peculiar to Pastors.
brother teach, pray, and preside in the creating of officers, and do the like,
when the Officers turn grievous Wolves, and are to be cast out, for then some
unofficed brother must be Mouth and Organ to the rest, and that is the very
charge that Peter sustained in pastoral preaching, at the creating of an
officer, and the Apostle Matthias, Act. 1. 15.

Mr. H. Let Mr. R. tell how God set teachers in the Church, if teachers be
before the Church.

Ans. Let Mr. H. tell how God gives breath to them that walk on the Earth,
Isa. 42. 5. Was there breath before there was a living The Church is no
politic Church before they have officers.
man walking on the earth, or was there a living man walking on the earth,
before there was breathing? Teachers are before Converts, as Fathers are before
Children. John Baptist and the Apostles were before such as they converted to
the faith and baptized. Noah before the Vineyard, which he dressed, God planted
Apostles and Teachers, even in the organical politic Church, before it was a
politic organical Church; for by setting Organs in the body, he made it an
organical body; but it is a senseless inference, Ergo, these Organs, who are
both Organs and Fathers, and causes procreant of the Church, had no being
before the politic Church had being; for natural organs in a physical body are
only organs, but not causes of the natural body, but politic organs may be
both, and in this case are both.

Mr. H. To these are the Keys promised, who are Stewards of the mysteries of
God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. servants of his house, 2 Cor. 4. 5.

Ans. The Servants are Pastors and Teachers in these places, then the ruling
Elder shall bear no Key.

Ans. Yet the conclusion is strong against the unofficed bearers.

Mr. Cotton and the New England Discipline and Paul are herein Way of the
Church of N. E. c. 2. sect. 2. p. 13, 14, 15. and p. 36.
as much crossed as I am; for to them the ruling Elders are Stewards applying
in censures in the external Court of Christ, the Word, as the Teachers apply it
concionally. Mr. Cotton makes the ruling Elders to be included with the
Teachers of Ephesus, Act. 20. And by the Argument Mr. H. may deny office-power
of overseeing the house, to all, but to such as labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Mr. H. The places, Isa. 9. 6. Revel. 3. 7. speak of Monarchical power in
Christ only, and prove not the point of delegated power.

Ans. Nor did I bring them for any other end, but to prove Mr. H. denies the
signification of the Keys given to all officers contrary to all the learned
read, (...) Isa. 14. 17. Isa. 50. 5. Isa. 26. 2. Isa. ^2. 2^.
that the Keys whoever bear them, Head or Servants, do signify a power of
office, steward, Oeconomus, Commander of the Castle, and so are never given to
unofficed brethren, for which cause I brought Fathers, Doctors, Divines,
Protestants, Learned Papists, saying the same. And Mr. H. passes them all
without an answer. So the Learned Pag^in, Mercerus, Shiml^rus, Buxtorf. Ark of
Noah, Mr. Leigh, and all Dictionaries expound the word, (...), when given to
House, Prison, Gaol, Kingdom; and Stephanus, (...), and Mr. H. dictates against
the authority of all the Learned Interpreters and Linguists, and tells us
bes^de an office power, it notes, Matthew. 16. a judicial power of the spouse
and wife to admit unto, or reject out, in the family as cause requires. But 1.
one word of Scripture he gives not. 2. Nor Page 209.
says Christ, Matthew. 16. any such thing, as he gives the Keys to the Church
upon the Rock, as the formal subject, though it may be gathered, he gives them
for that Church as the object and final cause.

Mr. H. To these Mat. 16. does Christ give the Keys, to whom be gives warrant
and official authority, for actual exercising of opening and shutting; but this
he gives to Peter, as representing Teach^rs and Elders: to thee will I give,
etc. whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, etc. So Mr. R.

Ans. All may be granted, and the official authority may be formally in the
officers, and originally and virtually in the Church.

2. The proposition is fall^, to wit, to them the power of the Keys is given,
firstly, to whom warrant and official authority is given for the exercise of
the same Keys; for the power of the Keys is larger then office-power.

Ans. 1. My Argument is yet wronged, to the same person Mr. H. wrongs this
argument of mine, for by Mat. 16. both the power actu primo, and the exercise
of binding and loosing actu secundo is given to Peter; Ergo, these two cannot
be given to all believers as believers. The keys cannot be given to Peter, as
representing believers, and also as representing the guides.
to whom he promises the power, or keys, or the power in its essence, actu
primo, to the same person he promises shall exercise the specific acts of the
power and the second acts, that must be the first formal subject to which God
pro^iseth a ^sonable soul, and the second and specific acts of disco^rsing,
and that must be essentially a man: Now unofficed brethren are not Ambassadors,
but they are only these, to whom the Ambassadors and officers are sent.

2. By Mr. H. the ^eyes must in their official power begiven to Peter, as
representing the Guides, and also the power of the Keys, in the power of
ruling must be given to Peter, as to the first subject representing believers:
If the Text speak this, it is a new conceit, that never an Interpreter dreamed
of, and it must be made out, that Peter i^ spoken of in the Text, in that
^^ofold relation; but that Peter's binding and loosing on earth are acts of
office, or at least include ^cts of office, and acts both of concional and also
juridical remitting and retaining of sin, and who despises Peter and the
officers in either, despises Christ and him that sent him, is clear, and that
remitting and retaining sins is a binding and loosing, cannot be denied, and
that remitting Binding and loo^ flows from the Lords calling to an office,
Ioh. 10. 21 22. So Cyprian as is cited before.
and retaining of sin flows from Christ calling the Disciples to an office, is
as clear, John 20. 21. As my Father Apostled me, so send I you, receive the
Holy Ghost, whose sins ye pardon, they are pardoned, etc. And that this is a
clear commission to Peter and all officers in him to exercise an official power
of binding and loosing, is apparent by this Text, if by any in the New
Testament. But Mr. H. against this clear Text says, here Pastors have good
warrant for their office power, because the Church has received power to
admit, choose and refuse officers, etc. But because Mr. R said they have clear
commission for the Keys, both in power, v. 19. (...), and in the acts and
exercises, (...), and what thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven;
But, though the place be clear, and all Interpreters teach it, yet will not Mr
H. grant that by Mat. 16. (...) Peter and other Church Officers, Christ gives
both the power of the Keys, or the Keys and the exercise of the power, v. 10.
I will give to thee the Keys -- and whomsoever thou shall bind, etc. And if
Mr. H. say not this, he shall be forced to say that these, to wit, the power of
the Keys, and actual exercise of the Keys, which are clearly holden forth, v.
19. are given to Peter, so confessing Christ, that is, as he represents all
believers so confessing Christ. And so all such must have both the Keys and
the formal exercise of pastoral binding; for that pastoral binding is given to
Peter, v. 19. and brethren and women so confessing, must pastorally bind, v.
19. Then how can an official power be given to Peter, as he represents this
male-Church upon a mere allegiance? As to the place, Matthew. 28. 19. it
abundantly The place Mat. 16. must warrant all officers to their official
calling and to the acts thereof, to wit, of binding and l^osing by way of
preaching.
warrants the Disciples to an office-power. But the question yet remains,
whether this place, Matthew. 16. especially does not warrant more clearly,
Pastors as Pastors to both the power and exercise of the power of the Keys: And
by this, To thee will I give the Keys, must yet have this sense, I will give
the Keys to thee Peter, as representing both the Pastors and Believers of the
male Professors only. Yet Peter gave not that blessed confession as an Apostle,
but as a Believer enlightened by the spirit of the Father abo^e flesh and blood;
nor was Peter as an Apostle builded upon the Rock, and above the prevailing
temptations of Satan and Hell, except we hold from this place, the Popes
infallibility; but it is good that it is granted, that by this place, the Keys
must be given to Peter, as representing the officers also: for here (says Mr.
H.) Pastors may have good warrant for their office power. Then is the thing we
contend for Mr. H. grants that by Matthew. 16. the Keys are given to Peter, as
representing the officers also.
granted, if M. H. would prove the other, that here the male Church excluding
women has good warrant, as the first and proper subject to challenge the power
and exercise of the Keys here spoken of, Matthew. 16. he had indeed performed a
great point. But this remains that the Reader is left in the mist what to make
of our Brethrens way by these words, upon this Rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Nor is it fair arguing to flee
to the old Testament, says judicious Mr. Firmin, because the Children of
Israel, Numb. 8. 10. laid Firmin, Separation examined. p. 70, 71. The Children
of Isreal's laying on of hands, Nam. 8. what it was, that it is no shadow for
the male-Church to ordain officers of the New Testament.
hands upon the Levites: for what if one say, Moses the Magistrate laid on
hands?

2. If it be a good warrant where officers are, as in the place were Aarons
sons, yet the people only, and not the Presbytery, though there be a sufficient
one, must lay on hands.

3. Aanon, as Mr. Firmin notes, verse 14. completed the ordination; for he did
wave those Levites before the Lord. 2. How is it proved that Moses gathered the
whole people, Numb. 8. 10. Thou shall gather the whole assembly, the whole
Church: and they shall offer them in sacrifice (says Vatablus) and by that
Aria. Mont. Coetum. (...). Vatablus, offeret Levitas in oblationem Domino.
Menoch. Ut hac manuum impositione testentur se Levitas contribules suos a se
abdicare, and Deo quasi munus and sacrificium offerre, in ejus dominium and
ministerium transfer. Iunius Numb. 8. approbante Ecclesia. Cyril. Alexand.
Cyprian. Epist. 24. 33. 68. De divina ordinatione descendit, ut sacerdos plebe
praesente ordinaretur. Tertul. Apolog. c. 39. Leo Mag. Epist. 87.
(says Menochius) who collects from R. Stephanus, Vatablus, and others) they
did not author it atively ordain the Levites, but gave over to the Lord and his
service, the Levites, Deuteronomy. 31. 20. Gather to me all the Elders, v. 30. and
Moses spoke into the ears of the Congregation. Rehal, Iunius, Di^dati, English
Divines, they consented to the call of the Levites. Cyrillus, Alexandrinus, and
Cyprian, Tertullian, as Leo Magnus also say, the people chused, or the Levites
were called, they being then present. So Beda, Quidam ex populo manus
imponebant. Iunius. Piscator. Pareus. Cajetan. Lorinus. Principes Tribuum pro
populo. Lyran. Numb. 8. Ponent manus] quia assensum devotionis electioni debent
praebere.
Lyranus, Iunius, Piscator, Ainsworth, say a part of the people laid on hands
on the Levites. Cajetan and Lorinus, the Princes of the Tribes, in place of the
people, laid on hands and consented, quia offerens (says Lyra) deb^bat ponere
manum super oblationem suam. So Diodati, they imitate such as offered by laying
on the hand on the oblation.

Now Mr. H. his binding and loosing comprehend. A filis Israelis Beda, sub
multorum testimonio and cognitione facienda est electio, ut examinatio digna
celebretur, ut nemo reprehendere possit, debent enim testimonium habere bonum.
eth all acts of Church Power not only by public Jer. 40. 4. Psalm. 105. 20.
Rev. 9. 14. Job 12. 18. Psalm. 105. 17. Judge. 15 10. Psalm. 149. 8. Act. 21. 8.
Act. 22. 4. Mark 3. 27. Psalm. 102. ^0.
preaching (for so the ruling Elder should have no key) but also by
excommunication and admission, admonitions which issue from judging power, as
we proved.

Ans. That is said gratis, admonition and consent to receive in, and cast out
members by cansent, necessarily agree to women, it so much concerning their
daily practices and conscience, and they have no judicial power.

2. By no Scripture can Mr. H. prove that admonition of Brethren is
Church-binding and loosing, Binding and loosing are acts of authority by the
Scripture in Rulers, who have command of prisons, which unofficed people have
not, they not being Rulers.
and that it is limited to one congregation. Nor can a single flock bind a
member of the Catholic Church, or a sojourning visible Saint to Church*
judging in one single congregation; nor is there one jot in Scripture to tie
the Brother, Mat. 18. 15. If thy Brother tr^spss, etc. To a Brother member of
that only congregation, of which the Plaintiff is a member.

3. I said that binding and loosing are words of official authority undue to
unofficed brethren, at the Scripture says. See the Margin, Ier. 40. 4, etc.
above.

Mr. H. The promise is made to Peter, because of his consession in name of the
Believers.

Ans. The Text says no such thing, but because of his consession.

1. He, and all men and women, who so sincerely confess, are blessed, because
really regenerate; flesh and blood has not revealed that, etc. v. 16.

2. Because of this confession, a promise of perseverance is made to the whole
Catholic Church invisible, then the way how to fulfill this promise is set
down, I will make this invisible The true sense of that, I will give to thee
the keys of the kingdom, etc.
Church visible, and I will give the Keys of Word and Censures to thee Peter,
and to all the called Pastors, etc. for the Churches salvation of men and
women, that they may be kept invincible upon the Rock.

Mr. H. grants, that the Keys are given to believers who may be hypocrites.

Ans. Add, and to them as the first formal subject: This is before refuted.
But it is asked, Why Brethren believing and Its not said, Mat. 16. that Christ
promises the keys to the Church of redeemed ones.
as so incorporated, should be made the first subject of the Keys by this Text,
and not also the first subject of the love of Election and Redemption, by which
they are built on the Rock, and made impregnable against the gates of Hell; for
the one is said of the Church here, and not one word that he will give the Keys
to the Church.

As also Mr. H. grants, that Christ speaks not to Peter as representing all
believers, but only the disciples and male-believers: But whom say ye that I
am (ye disciples?)

Ans. Its true, he propounds the question to the disciples only, but says he
that hence only men and unofficed Brethren The evasion of Mr. H. that Christ
said, Whom do men say that I am? to the disciples only, as representing only
the malebelievers of a single congregation, excluding women and all who so
confess Christ with the same sinceriey, has no feet. How far from the mind of
sound Antiquity and of Protestant Divines, the places Mat. 16. Flesh and blood
has not revealed this; and, Upon this Rock, etc. See Magdeburgens. Hist. Vol.
1. Cen. 1. l. 1. c. 4. p. 56. ib. p. 32. as super hanc Petram, i. c.
confessionem. lb. p. 40. What is the true Church, see hist. Magd. ib. Cent. 1.
l. 1. c. 4. p. 127, 129. 130. The Magdeburgenses hist. Vol. 1. Cen. 1. l. 1. c.
4. p. 138. expounds it soundly of the perseverance of the Saints, not of the
visible Church, as Papists do.
of a single congregation who give such a sincere confession, are blessed, and
built on the Rock? So he says, Matthew. 13. 10, 11. to the disciples only, To
you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, to them it is not
given: Are there then none the Elect of God, men or women, to whom the grace of
saving faith is given, but only the disciples? So Luke 22. 28. Ye are they
that have continued with me in my temptations: v. 29. And I appoint unto you a
kingdom. Then to the disciples and men, not to women who suffer with Christ,
there is a kingdom appointed. Upon this account, all the Promises and
Consolations of sending the Comforter, of the many mansions in his Fathers
house, which he was to prepare for them, do belong to the disciples, as
brethren, and as a male-Church of a single flock without officers, not chosen
women, aged children that believe: and therefore these words of Mr. H. that
Christ sp^s not to all believers in the person of Peter, Blessed are ye, for
flesh and blood, etc. most injuriously bereave all women, all men, that are not
members by Covenant of this male-congregation, of all the Promises of the
Gospel, and comforts which Christ uttered to his disciples only. Not to say
what before I said, that

1. This is contrary to the scope of the Text. And

2. contrary to the Peace, 2. Comfort, 3. Joy, 4. Blessedness Mr. H. his
exposition of Mat. 16. that Peter in that confession represents the
male-members of the congregation only, is contrary to the scope of the Text,
and to the faith, comfort and blessedness of all believers so confessing.
in the state of Regeneration, 5. Faith of their Perseveran^^, and 6. Victory
over temptations, from the gates of Hell; of all, who contrary to Sects and
Heresies, and sundamental Errors touching Christ his Nature, Offices and
Dignity, sincerely believe, and confess that he is the Messiah the Son of God,
be they women, aged children, servants, sincere visible Saints of another
congregation, or sojourning Saints.

Mr. H. If believers (says Mr. R.) (...) giving Peter's confession, and built
upon the Rock Christ, be made a ministerial Church, then the official power of
binding and loosing should be made as fi^m and sure from defection, as the
Church of believers built on the Rock.

Ans. The Assumption is denied, for the Church to whom the Keys are firstly
given, though they have a virtual power to call men to office, yet they have
not formally official power; nor is official power, which in great Apostasies
may fail, of like stability with the visible Church, which can never totally
fail.

Ans. My Argument is not faithfully repeated (of which I often complain) if the
Ministerial formal power of ruling, and creating and unmaking of officers (a
virtual power of which he of new speaks, I know not, for who has the formal
power of calling officers then?) be given to believers, though destitute of
Pastors, because believers are in a congregational frame If to be built upon
the Rock be to be built in a congregational Church-frame, then the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against the office, against the visible frame of
congregations. Some of our Divines make the Church of believers, men and women,
the virtual subject of the Keys, and of all Church Power. But Mr. H. makes
them more than a virtual subject, for he must make the formal calling and
creating of officers, and excommunicating of them, and so preaching, as was the
Apostle Peter's case, Act. 1. 15. and the Prophets, Act. 13, 3. who prayed and
laid on hands on Saul and Barnabas, and sent them as Apostles to the Gentiles,
a formal act of the Church of Redeemed ones, men and women, servants and
children, for which we have no Scripture, and as little Reason, for we may so
say the Flint formally makes fire. Hist. Magdeb. Vol. 1. Cen. 1. l. 1. c. 4. p.
138.
built upon the Rock, nothing hinders but ministerial power, that is the power
of the Keys given to believers, which is but a gift given to hypocrites often,
should be as firm as though believers were built on a rock. Mr. H denies the
Assumption only, and seems to yield the Proposition. I appeal to the Reader,
if these words, I will build my Church (in the frame of a Congregation
Independent) upon the Rock Christ, of the confession of Peter, have any such
sense; for in all Scripture the building upon the rock has no such sense, but
notes Christ's building of real believers on himself in the most holy faith,
which building cannot sail. And whereas Mr. H. says, The visible Church cannot
totally fail, as our Divines say, they mean the Catholic visible Church, and
not your Independent congregations, of which they knew nothing who teach this
Doctrine. So this Argument of mine stands. Promises of never falling are made
in Scripture to things, not to persons, as to the Kingdom, to the Gospel, to
the Dominion of Christ, Psalm. 72. 8. Isa. 9. 7. Luke 1. 33. Isa. 55. 11. Psalm.
110. 2. Mat. 24. 14, etc. but ever in order to persons, especially to that
excellentest of persons: But of temptations to offices, and institutions and
promises to such, as here, we read not.

Mr. H. Those to whom (says Mr. R.) Christ gives the Keys, do represent the
person of Christ, and who despises them, despises Christ, and who honor
them, honor Christ, Mat. 10. 40. Now Scripture never says so of believers,
They that hear and obey believers, hear and obey me. Ans. The Proposition is
false, to represent Christ as stewards, belongs only to them who have office
power; but the Spouse had power in the family before the stewards and officers
were.

Ans. 1. Yet that must be meant of believers, men and women, Those who bear the
Keys represent Christ as sent by him. But this do not the male-Church.
He that despises the preaching male Church, despises me.

1. The forgiving or loosing from excommunication, as well as preaching the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 2. 10. and excommunication it self, which is given to unofficed
brethren by Mr. H. is done, 1 Cor. 5. 4. in the name, (...), therefore they who
despise the unofficed Brethren excommunicating, despise Christ; and
excommunicating of heretic Pastors, or judicial rejecting there cannot be,
except unofficed brethren publicly rebuke, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and in the Name of
Christ judicially declare the man an Heretic, and the doctrine Heresy, Tit.
3. 10.

2. The comparison that makes every male. Church a Spouse The Scripture makes
not every male-church the Spouse and body of Christ.
of Christ, and so multiplies Spouses and Bodies of Christ; whereas the
Scripture makes but one visible Spouse on earth, Cant 4 1, 2. and 6. 8. 9. and
7. 1, 2. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. one Body, 1 Cor. 12 12, 13. Ephesians. 1. 23. Col. 1. 18.
will not furnish an Argument. For,

1. A Spouse without stewards may feed; may therefore Theoph. Nicolaides de
miss. minist c. 10. p. 91, 92, 93, 94.
unofficed brethren preach, and tender the Seals, as Socinians say they may
baptize one another?

2. A Spouse may create servants of her own devising; so may not unofficed
brethren do.

3. The Scripture makes the Catholic Church Christ's Spouse by faith; what Word
of God warrants every male-society to be a Spouse of Christ by a new devised
Oath or Covenant? and our brethren cannot give us a Scripture, where the male
congregation excluding women is called the Spouse, Body of Christ built upon
the Rock, etc.

Mr. H. Those to whom the Keys are given (says Mr. R.) do authoritatively
forgive and retain sins: The fraternity (says Mr. H.) forgives judicially, 2
Cor. 2. the officers authoritatively.

Ans. Brethren and sisters forgive by way of charity, the officers
authoritatively. A judicial forgiving distinct from both in a male-Church, is
the question begged by Mr. H. not proved.

2. He supposes Paul writes to this male-Church void of Pastors; whereas
there were many Pastors there, 1 Cor. 14. 29, The male-Church of Corin'h does
neither judicially forgive, nor is it written unto by Paul excluding women and
others.
30, 31. and 4. 15. and. 1. 12. nor could they without officers celebrate the
Lords Supper, as they did, 1 Cor. 1 (...) frequently.

3. He supposes they only were judicially to forgive the incestuous man;
whereas all in their own way, men and women, were to forgive him, and to
converse with him as a brother, 2 Cor. 2 7, 8. as is said before.

CHAP. VI.
What Church it is that is built on the Rock, Mat. 16. whether the visible or
invisible Church, the Catholic or the single Independent Church.

BEfore I examine Mr. H. his Reasons, take notice of what Chap. 11. pro. 2. p.
215.
Mr. H. says, which may conduce to this:

The Keys and power (says Mr. H.) must be given to a single society, i. e. to
a sort and condition of men under some special relation, To thee will I give,
etc. as to a single society, not to them.

Ans. That the Keys must be given to a single; that is, according to Mr. H. his
sense, to a single Independent congregation only, that they may exercise
Jurisdiction only within themselves, and that all others, though as free
Churches as it, are (...), without is never proved by Mr. H. nor gives he ^s a
pattern of such a Church Independent in Jurisdiction.

2. His Argument, Because it is said, To thee, as a single society, Chapter 7.
sect. 4. p. 128. Many thousands may be one Church.
not to them, is naught: Did not the Lord give, in Peter, the Keys to the
twelve Apostles, and to six or ten sundry societies in Jerusalem? but they were
one Church; so the combined Elders in a Presbytery is but one single society:
yea but says he, they are many Churches. Ans. They are, and may be but four
societies meeting in four sundry places, and scarce all eight hundred, and
therefore a more single society than eight thousand and above, which Mr. H.
says made but one congregational Church of Jerusalem: And is not the society
of a Synod Provincial or National, one single society also by this account?

2. Let the Reader judge how our brethren use the word Way of the Churches of
Chapter m. in N. E. c. 1 sect. 1. pro. 1. p. 1. 2.
Church, as Kid leather stretching it in and out at their pleasure, as it
serves best for their turn, for here the single society capable of the Keys, is
a new male Church of redeemed ones.

Also consider but the first proposition.

1. These words, The instituted Church of Christ in the Gospel, The 1.
proposition concerning a Church instituted, Way of the Churches of N. E. c. 1.
sect. 1. prop. 1. p. 1, 2, 15. is examined, and found insufficient and faulty.
to which Christ has comm^tted the Keys, the power of binding and loosing, the
seals, officers, are most ambiguously set down, and can hardly bear truth
either in a passive or an active sense: for its false that the Keys passively
are not committed to women, for they must be bound and loosed, and have the
Seals and Tables of the Covenant, as well as men.

2. In an active sense, its false, that to women, understanding children, the
dispensing of Censures, Seals and Tables are committed.

3. The power of the Keys are not committed to the Church instituted, as to the
proper subject, but only by those pious Authors, to a limb or wing of it, the
male redeemed are never called, The instituted Church of the New Testament.

4. And how the seals are given to the male* Church as to the How our brethren
make the seals to be given to their congregation.
subject, when they want Pastors, I see not: The Tables and Seals are given to
men and women redeemed, as the end and object for their salvation and
edification.

5. So they are given to Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, to all visible
Saints, but in the intention of God, to all Rulers and ruled, men and women,
not as mere visible professors (for God intends no such thing to a mere Magus,
to whom agrees the complete essence of a visible member) but as invisible and
chosen ones.

6. Nor is it either didactick or suitable to a Systeme of Church-policy, That
the administration of all Christ's public Worship and Ordinances, is committed
to a company of believers, for the active administration of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, and of the preached Word, is not committed to unofficed brethren,
or to women, who are members of this instituted Church of the Gospel; otherwise
in a passive sense all are to partake of the Worship and Ordinances, according
as their capacity is: but how the male-Church void of pastors can receive them,
I know not.

7. I say not much, that its not Grammar to say that this Church is a communion
of Saints: A community it is, which word is in our language a Concrete.

8. That its a combination of Saints meeting for that end (to partake of the
Ordinances) by common and joint consent into one congregation, is ut erly
unsound; for as this is a delineation of Our Brethren describe their Church
from a Church-assembly, and exclude all of another congregation from their
Churchassemblies.
a New Testament Church-Assembly, to pa^take of the Ordinances, so it makes it
contrary to the institution of a Church under the Gospel, to members of another
congregation to meet, to partake of pastoral preaching or seals in a Church,
whereto they never gave common and joint consent, as never being inchurched
members thereof; yea, and all of another congregation by this reason hear the
Word in that foreign congregation, not as visible Saints, but as Pagans, and
such as are without. And its as strongly concludent against hearing in another
congregation than their own, as against Church-rebukes, and (as our Brethren
teach) Church judging, and admonishing between brother and brother: for as
there is indeed a providential necessity of partaking of pastoral preaching and
seals in another congregation than the members own; so is there the same
soul-necessity of the like rebuking and gaining of a brother, Mat. 18. 15. If
the trespass be committed in another congregation, There is a necessity of
Church Communion in rebukes, as in seals.
and be private as yet, as if it were done in the offenders own congregation,
except it can be proved that from Mat. 18. Christ's mind is, if a brother of
another congregation fall in a pit to the hazard of his salvation, I should let
him perish there, I am not his keeper as touching any Church-remedy for
gaining, according to Mat. 18. which sure we cannot do to our enemies ox, if he
fall in a pit; yea, and there is as great, if not a greater necessity, to use
the remedy of rebuking, Mat. 18. to gain him when he falls in a spiritual ditch
in another congregation, as to preach pastorally, and to tender the Lords
Supper to him in another congregation, and as the Bread in the Lords Way of the
Churches of Christ in N. E. c. 6. sect. 1. page 103. Cotton, Keys of the
Kingdom, c. 4. p. 17.
Supper (say our brethren with Mr Cot.) is one Bread, and a seal of our
communion with the Lord Jesus; but also of our communion with his members not
only of our own Church, but of all the Churches of the saints: so we are to
gain our brethren by admonition, teaching rebuking, by Matthew. 18 not only as
they are members of the single independent body congregational, but of the
whole Catholic body, 1 Cor. 12. 16. for whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the members rejo^c^ with
it. And Rom 12. 4, 5. compared with verse 15. for there is one Body (visible)
one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, Ephesians.
4. 4 5. and one body Catholic, into which all are baptized, Jews and
Gentiles, 1 Cor 12. 12, 13.

8. It is false that there is no Church which Christ in his Gospel has
instituted -- but a particular visible Church, that meets in one place all of
them: for Christ has sanctified and cleansed with the washing of water by the
word, a Catholic Church, which he shall present as a glorious Church, without
spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. and perfected body (visible) when we all
meet in the unity of faith, Ephesians 4. 11, 12, 13.

9. That this instituted Church is to meet together all of them, Our brethren
in the large description of the only instituted Church in the New Testament
make no mention of infants, as do the seven Churches of Anabaptists, almost in
the same terms. Propositions concerning Church government by the Assembly at
West. An. 1647.
even the whole Church for the administration of the holy ordinances of God, to
public edification, 1 Cor. 14. 27. is a manifest debarring of Infants born
within the visible Church, from being members of that Church, which Christ in
his Gospel has instituted, etc. for they are neither capable of convening in
one place every Lords day, nor of public edification by prophesying, as is
meant. 1 Cor. 14. 23. cited by them. How they defend Infant Baptism, who make
them incomplete and unconfirmed members, let them see; the learned, pious, and
grave Assembly at Westminster provided better, that particular visible Churches
members of the general Church were made up of visible Saints, viz. of such as
being of aged professed faith in Christ, and obed^ence to Christ, according to
the rule of faith and life, taught by Christ, and his Apostles, and of their
Children, Act. 2. 38, 41. Act. 2. v* ult. compared with Act. 5. 14, etc. There
is not one word of Infants in this large description of instituted Churches of
the Gospel, and to it, in all, the Anabaptists subscribe, yea, the seven
Churches have, upon the matter the same description of the visible Confession
of faith of the 7. Churches, called Anabaptists, An. 1645. and An. 1646. Art.
33. which Church is a company of visible Saints, called, and separated from the
world, by the Word and Spirit of God to the visible profession of the Gospel,
being baptized unto that faith, and joined to the Lord, and each to other by
mutual agreement (Church Covenant, say our Brethren) in the practical enjoyment
of all ordinances commanded by Christ their head. Art. 36. Independency of
Jurisdiction is asserted. As also Art. 42. Art. 34. The whole body of men and
women are the Church which Art. 36. has power to choose an* call Elders. And
Art. 42. to cast out any member.
Church, without one word of Infants.

Mr. H. That Church is here, Matthew. 16. meant, which is built Page 216, 217.
upon the Rock Christ, by the visible confession of Peter, as explicated
immediately before; but the invisible Church is not built by a visible
profession, such as Peter's was. The second part of the assumption is clear by
the opposition between visibility and invisibility. The proposition is proved
by the meaning of the words, Thou have made a confession of my self a Rock,
and therefore are called (...), and upon my self so confessed, will I build my
Church.

Ans. The proposition is not true in his sense, the assumption most false, the
conclusion both untrue and unjustly expressed: for the visible single
congregation is not here meant, and I will build my Church congregational, in
its frame, upon the Rock by this See Hist. Magdeburg. vol. 1. cent. 1. l. 1. c.
4. page 119, 120, 121. cent. 1. l. 2 c. VII. p. 404. Histor. Magdeburg. vol. 1.
l. 11 c. X. page 423, 424. Celeberrima est confessio quam de Christo, tum (...)
de suo, tum reliquorum Apostolorum nomine, edidit. Pa. 211. Ob. 4. M. H.
Teaches that the Church is builded on the rock by the intervening of an
hypocritical profession.
confession. Except Mr. H. the place had no Author, no Divine, or any other for
this sense, so destructive to the text. Therefore there has been some
trepidation of mind upon the pious man. After many thoughts (says he) floating
in my mind, what might be the meaning of our Savior, etc. And after many
thoughts, he could not find a way to answer Mr. R. his Arguments, but by a
Popish Exposition, for B^llarm. lib. 3. De Eccles. c. 13. brings this place to
prove that the visible Church shall never fall away. So the Jesuits of Rhemes,
1 Timothy 3. 15. cites the same place. D. Fulk answers, every true Christian is
builded on the same Rock, which is Christ. So Cornel. a L^p. Matthew. 16. the
visible Church cannot err: To the proposition Mr. H. yielded. That the Church
to whom the Keys are given, may receive the Keys by the intervening of an
hypocritical confession, or profession of Christ, such as is in Judas and
Magus. So the proposition is false, to wit, that Church is here meant which is
built upon the Rock Christ, by the visible confession of Peter so explicated;
for it is explicated to be a visible confession.

1. Sometimes true, sometimes hypocritical.

2. Sometimes it is expounded to be the confession only of the male-Church,
excluding women.

3 Of the male Believers of a single Church void of Pastors: while the world
stands, such a visible confession as may be false, and lying is no means of
Christ to build the Church of men and women so upon the Rock Christ, as they
shall persevere in saving A hypocritical profession Mar. 16. is never intended
by Christ to be the means of building believers upon the invincible rock,
against which hell cannot prevail, as Mr. H. says. Mr. Ainsworth Can. 2. 14.
the rock whither this Dove the Church was now fled, seems most properly to
mean faith in Christ, as Mat. 16. 18. wherein she hides her self, for fear of
Gods wrath for her sin. Iuni^^. My Dove that dwells in the secret decree of
Election, tanquam in rupe inaccessa, as in an impregnable Rock.
says; so as the gates of Hell, and the temptations of the World, the Devil
and the Flesh shall never prevail against them. The only internal and effectual
way of building men upon the Rock, is the sincere real believing on Christ,
coming from the revelation of the Father of Christ, Mat. 16. 17. And the
external building upon the Rock, is by the preached Gospel; this is also
Popish, for by a lying profession none are builded upon the Rock Christ.

2 The Scripture makes being builded upon the Rock, all one with being builded
upon God, the Rock of salvation. So the door of the Word is the house built
upon the Rock, Matthew. 7. 24. the spouse is the Dove that dwells in the clifts
in the Rock, in the secret places of the Stairs, Cant. 2. 14. for which see the
Interpreters in the margin: the believing Ephesians are by says built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, as lively stones, Christ being the
chief corner stone, and made the habitation of God, not through visible
profession, but (...), by the spirit, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22.

3. It may make any to tremble, to see pious men do such violence to the word,
for he tells us this or that particular congregation may fall away, but the
universal congregation, or Church, existing in the particular Churches falls
not away. Orthodox Divines, The Church builded upon the rock cannot be the
congregation, but the invisible Catholic Church made visible. Hieronymus.
Contra Luceferan. ingemuit totus orbis and Arrianum se factum esse miratus est.
Hilarious. contra Auxentium. Bellarm. de eccles. l. 3. c. 1. Gregor. de Valen.
Tom. 3. p. 8. Eccles. jam. omni tempore esse visibilem Stapleton. Relect c. 1.
quest. 3. art. 1. page 33. Azorius. Moral. instit. par. 2. l. 5. c. 21.
Rhemens. in Mat. 5. Calvin. Institut. l. 4. c. 8. D. Willet. Synopsi. Papismi
2. contr. Genes. 4. 3.
and Mr. R. grants that the visible Church does not fall. The just contrary is
taught by our Divines, that the Catholic Church shall never fall away; but
there was a time when Elias complained, he only was left; The Council of
Selencia and Arminium condemned the Nicene faith: Hieronymus, as also Hila^ius
complain, that the Arrian heresy had overspread all the World, and that
mountains, woods, lakes and prisons, in which the Prophets mourned, were more
safe then the towns. Bellar. Valentia, Stapleton, Azorius, say the Church is
ever visible, as a City on a mountain, D. Fulk answers the Jesuits of Rhemes,
Calvin, Willet, and ours say, that the Catholic Church all the world over can
never totally fail, because they are by faith builded upon the Rock, but that
the frame of a particul^r congregation Independent, is a building upon the Rock
Christ, never man dreamed* and that the gates of Hell cannot prevail against
the visible frame of a single congregation, is wild Divinity.

4. Calvin, Swinglius, Bucer, Marlorat, Pareus on this place, Calvin. Quorum
singuli sunt Dei templa. Ainsworth, Ps. 18. 2. Two names of a rock are here;
S^laugh, a stony rock or clif, and Tsur, a strong or sharp rock.
Perkins De praedestinatione, D. Twisse extend this to all believers, of whom
(says Calvin) Singuli sunt Dei Templa, Every one is the Temple of God. Now it
is clear, that the building on the Rock, signifies the building of persons in
the faith, not of the society, as a visible society and frame external: hence
all who are builded on the Rock Christ by a firm faith, do trust in God, and
can say, 1 Samuel 2. 2. Neither is there any Rock like our God, and so every
single man so built, may say, God is my Rock, Psalm. 18. 2. It is often a title
of God himself (says Ainswer t) Psalm. 18. 13 46. Blessed be my Rock, Psalm. 92.
16. Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 18, 30, 31. Psalm. 71. 3. Psalm. 42. 9. Ps. 62. 7. 2. He only is
my Rock and my Salvation, the Rock of Israel, 2 Samuel 23. 3. Now how ordinary is
it, that God is the Rock of his Saints? and insolent and dry when Mr. H. must
say, my God is the Rock of this institution of a single independent frame? And
whereas persons are set upon a Rock, that this new institution is builded That
there is a promise made of the gates of hell not prevailing against the frame
of independent congregations, or against persons, such as Magus, Judas (it may
be) in that frame is an abusing of the Word, never heard of until M. H. first
forged it.
upon the Rock by the hand of Christ; and whereas persons are tempted by the
ports of Hell, but being upon their Rock they are kept, to say institutions are
tempted, but being upon their Rock, they are kept, is new and insolent
Divinity. If it be said, the persons are built by Christ in this Church-frame
of Independency, they believing and professing sincerity, it is almost the same.

For then 1. the persons in the very frame are kept in the Thus said also the
Donatists, August de unit. Eccles. c. 9. Cum libero arbitrio homo creatus, and
si vult, credit in Christum, si non credit -- noluerunt homines perseverare,
and defecit omnibus gentibus Christiana religio, excepta part Donati.
frame, so that the ports of Hell shall not demolish the visible frame, they
sincerely believing; but since the promise is made to all that sincerely adhere
to their profession, and fulfill the condition, shall all such godly
incorporations, as by persecution and malice of Satan, and the ports or
strength of hell are dissolved, and all godly and visible Saints, who by
banishment, exile, or violent death, are pulled away from visible membership,
be thrown off the rock Christ? And does the gates of Hell prevail against such
believers? If it be said, yet in a spiritual sense, such are eminently and
satisfyingly made members of a more glorious society, even of the Church
triumphant, as the promise of the fifth command, Ephesians. 6. of long life is
fulfilled to an obedient gracious son, who dies young; and so here: I am sure
it will not be found, especially in the New Testament, that the Lord ties a
promise spiritual of perseverance in grace, and deliverance from the prevailing
temptations of Hell to any single visible Church-frame.

But 2. the building on the Rock, and deliverance from the prevailing
temptations of Hell, by this exposition is made by the grant of Mr. H. to the
visible profession that may be in Judas and Magus; and is it to be believed
that Christ promises with his own hand to build upon the rock Magus and Judas,
who are as essentially stones of the building, and whose acts of the Keys are
a^ valid as these of sincere believers, so as the gates of Hell shall never
prevail against these sons of perdition? So Mr. H. expounds it.

3^ Many Martyrs faithfully perform congregational duties, yet does not Christ
make good this promise, for when members are dissolved by banishment, they are
thrown off the rock. That which by our Savior is set down, as contrary to
their comfortable union with, and building upon Christ their rock, is being
foiled with the Temptations of Satan and Hell, and being thrown off the rock,
like the Hypocrite, Matthew. 7. who is the house builded on the sand, for the
strength of a war City, as Calvin notes, and Pareus, were in iron gates and
bars, Psalm. See the M^gdeburg. vol. 3: cent. X. c. 4. p. 104. 106 Leo in Natali
Apost. Petri and Pauli, Sermon. 2. Et dabo tibi claves, etc. tran siv it quidem
in alios Apostolos vis istius potestatis, sed non frustra uni commendatur quod
omnibus ^intimatur; Petro enim singulariter hoc creditur, quia cunctis
Ecclesiae Roctoribus (non ergo populo) formal s^st fides and confessio qua
christum filium Dei viuentis ag^^vit pr^p^^tu.
127. 5. Deuteronomy. 3. 5. and so by this interpretation the Lords dissolving of a
Church, which often is a work of mercy, and putting of his children to an
honorable condition of Martyrdom, and glorifying of God by suffering and
scattering of his Church, as Acts 8. 12. must be a throwing them off the rock
Christ, and a prevailing of the ports of Hell against them: contrary to the
scope and intent of Christ in the Text.

6. It is a most uncomfortable doctrine, that men and women builded on the Rock
Christ, and chosen to salvation, have only right, by this so expounded Text, to
union with Christ their Rock, and victory over the gates of hell, in so far as
they are inchurched covenant ways into such an independent corporation; when
the Saints builded upon the Rock, and persevering by the grace of God, contrary
to all the machinations of hell, may be scattered, 1 Pet. 1. 2. wander in the
mountains and deserts, Heb. 11. 38. and have no certain dwelling house, 1 Cor.
4. 11. and sojourning visible Saints, and be not so much as visible members,
and it is cruelty to say such are no members of Christ's visible body, but
(...), without, and not builded on the Rock.

7. Mr. H. grants a man may give Petors confession, par. 1. Way of the Churches
of (...). E. c. 1. sect. 2. page 2. Hookers Surv. par. 1. chapter XI. page 203.
c. 6. page 62. and men may be scattered stones, visible Saints, and yet
through some opinion concerning the visible Church, be members of no such
congregation; are they for that not builded upon the Rock? and Mr. H. brings
this interpretation. Salve ^^liore judici^, by stress of argument.

2. As to the Minor; But the invisible Church is not built by a visible
profession upon the Rock, as Peter was. It is most false; for there is a
twofold invisibility, and twofold visibility.

1. Such as in the election of God only, and are not called yet, are invisible,
as Saul persecuting; such indeed are not actually built upon the rock by
visible profession, as Peter was.

But 2. Peter and all sincerely professing Christ, as Peter and the other ten
are both the invisible Church, in so far as sincerity Two sorts of visibilities.
of faith, and love is only in the heart, and known infallibly to none, but to
God, and to the man himself, who has received the white stone, the new name,
Rev. 1. 17. and also they all such are, and may be built by the same visible
confession of Peter, real and sincere (for of a sincere visible and audible
confession only as real and saving our Savior speaks, Mat. 16. as Mr. R.
holds) upon the rock. I grant there may be degrees of real sincerity, more or
less in men and women, but the same in nature, The same Peter is both an
invisible Saint, in regard his faith was known to God, and he really blessed;
and also he was a real visible professor by his confession that was audible and
visible to men.
and sp^^io, that is in Peter is in women, by which they are built upon the
rock, and so they are invisible members in the latter sense, and are also built
visibly and really upon the rock, by Peter's faith coming out in a real visible
confession, and the invisible Church in this sense is also the true real
visible Church; and a visible confession or profession, is either real, or
hypocritical and seeming, that it is real of which the Text speaks Mr. R.
proves, because from it Christ pronounces Peter really blessed.

2. Because it was taught Peter by the Father of Christ, and not by flesh and
blood; Mr. H. contend^ that it may be seeming only. I desire he or any for him,
may prove it was seeming only, or may be seeming only; yea, it was exclusive of
Judas the Traitor his confession, for he knew nothing of the revelation of the
Father, nor was he blessed as Peter, nor is it our Saviors purpose to praise
and commend hypocrisy, Mat. 16. and therefore there is not truth in that which
M. H. says, that there is a Visibility so expounded is not contrary to
invisibility. Arist. de Repr. Sophist. l. 1. c. 4.
contrari^ty or opposition between visibility and invisibility. So expounded,
the opposition is not (...), nor (...), as Aristotle and Ramus both require;
and therefore it is granted, that the house of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. in which
Timothy was to behave himself right, was the visible Church of Eph^sus, and the
other Church Presbyterial; but that this cannot consist with invisibility is
most false, it destroys the ministry and faithful Apostles and Page 217.
Pastors calling, who are sent to gather into Christ all the invisible members
of Christ's mystical body, and to make them visible professors.

And whereas he says, that this direction of Paul to Timothy; was to continue
to all succeeding officers to the end, and that in all particular charges given
to them, is truth seen through a cloud.

1. This direction in these Epistles was to continue to all succeeding
officers; Ergo, the laying on of hands, and ordaining Mr. H grants a succession
of officers and keys to the end of the world.
watchmen and Bishops; and this direction appointing Elders, faithful men able
to teach, and the rest belonging to the Keys must b^ g^ven to officers, not to
the male Church.

2. Here is some succession of godly Pastors to the end, to all Pastors and
Elders with such qualifications, as a Bishop must be blameless, etc. 1 Timothy 2.
Deacons must be such, etc. the direction is giv^n to all succeeding officers to
the end: why not rather to the first proper subject of the Keys to the
male-Church?

3. That 1 Timothy 3. 15. The house of God is the pillar and ground of truth, and
the body of Christ; for the perfecting and edifying whereof, Ephesians. 3. 12. Christ
gave Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, 10. 11. is the single
particular independent Church (Salvo m^liori judicio says Mr. H. in his
conjectural modesty) is contrary to all Scripture; and this is the very Church
builded upon the rock, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail; and
upon this account hearken to Mr. H. his It is a com fortless doctrine, that
this or that congregation, or this or that believer may be thrown off the Rock,
and may fall from saving grace, ^ough the congregation universal shall continue
on the Rock.
distinction.

Mr. R. propounded an argument never yet answered to prove that the Church
builded upon the rock cannot be the single visible congregation, against
Papists and Socinians, and our Brethren.

That Church is here Mat. 16. understood, against which the gates of hell shall
never prevail; but against the visible independent congregationall (the seven
Churches of Asia now are fallen away) Church, the gates of hell has prevailed.
Ans. This or that particular Church or congregation may fall away; but there
must be a Church universal existing in its particulars, this or that Church,
which Christ will have while the world continues, Ephesians. 4. 11. D. Ames. medulla
l. 1. c. 31. 37.

Ans. To begin with what Amesius says, its utterly impertinent: Ames. Medul.
lib. 1. c. 31. De Ecclesia mystice considerata. Cap. 32. De Ecclesia instituta.
Mr. H. his Exposition of Matthew. 16. 18. infers the apostasy of real believers.
Ames. Coronis art. 5. de perserver. arg* 2: page 413, 414. Si damnatio sola
fidelium per has portas intelligatur, tum consistere potest haec promissio cum
totali defectu Ecclesi^ militantis, nihil enim sponderet militantibus
(Ecclesiae Catholicae membris, ut ex seri^ discurfus) sed solis desunctis.
Socinus in praelect. Theolog. c. 13. p. 71. Si tamen placeat eos qui in
praedictis locis in lib. vitae a constitutione mundi scripti esse dicuntur,
satis est ostendisse ibi non de^certis quibusdam hominibus agi, sed de hominum
quodam genere. Page 72. Verum nomen alicujus scriptum esse (...) libro vitae,
non significat eum nulla ratione prorsus interire posse.
The title of that Chapter is of the Mystical Church, the members of which can
never fall away, but must be until the end of the world, as the title of the
next Chapter is of the instituted Church; yea, Am^sius says, this place Matthew.
16. is a special promise made to those built on a Rock, to the Militant
Catholic Church, and to real believers only, not to hypocrites. Mr. H. by
this teaches the Patrons of the Apostasy of the Saints, a distinction useful
for their Error. So cinus says, The places which says, They are saved who
are written in the Book of Life before the world was, do not speak of some
particular man th^^ or that, (as Mr. H. this or that single Church may fall off
the Rock) but some kind of men, and therefore Mr. H. renders this a
comfortless doctrine, which Christ makes a singular bulwark of Faith and
Consolation to single persons, Peter, Mary, who believe, and are built upon the
Rock, that such shall never fall away; but this or that congregation of some
few persons, though true and real believers, may and do fall away. This is the
downright Apostasy of believers.

2. This strongly savours of the Jesuit Ruiz. his Necessitas vaga (though Mr.
H. hate Doctrine and Way, when his sharp Henric. Wolfing. lib. de offic. homin.
Christ. p. 6. 3. Decretum electionis, communiter loquendo, necessario refertur
no^ ad certas aliquas personas, sed ad certum hominum genus qualitate aliqua
obedientiae vel inobedientiae praeditum.
engine sees them) when a thing is necessarily to fall out, in, upon, or about
the kind of men, but not in, or upon this single man; as it is infallible and
necessary that there be war and be peace, and that there be husbandmen and be
sailers, but God determines and bows the heart of no single man to be a
husbandman rather than a sailer; he might say to be a King rather than a poor
Beggar. This kind of necessity is against the providence of Gods special care,
as to great things, as to Kingdoms, Dan. 4. 32. so to all smaller things, the
stirring of a Sparrows wing, Mat. 10. 29, and 30. the hair of the head, the
growing and withering of a gourd, Jonah 4. 6. the motion of a worm eating the
gourd; which confused providence, Suarez, Cumel, Suarez in opus. lib. 3. de
auxil. c. 17. Lib. de Praedest. c. 13. number. 4, 5. Lib. 3. de Praedest. c. 1.
Cumel. variar. disp. tom. 1. p. 360. Ledesma. 1. 3. q. 22. art. 9. page* 173.
Ledesma, forsake as shameful.

3. The particular Independent congregation is either built upon the Rock
unmoveably, by a promise of the Gospel, as no Divine can deny, that the grace
of perseverance (if such a grace, as it must be, be granted, for by Nature men
persevere not) is given by a Gospel-promise, or by no promise. But men
persevere Mr. H. holds the vaging necessity of Did. Ruiz, and some other
Pelagianising Jesuits, that this or that man may fall away, but God has
confusedly decreed that some there shall be who shall never fall away, and so
sides with Arminians and Socinians. Remonst. Apol. Non promittitur Ecclesia^
semper mansura^ Ecclesiam, sed tantum Ecclesiam qua Ecclesia est, semper
mansuram invictam a morte and condemnatione. Socinus in Miscelan. p. 262.
Quamdiu vera Christi Ecclesta fuerit, fieri non posse, ut ab ipsa morte atque
inferno (Mat. 18.) quidquam detrimenti patiatur. Did. Ruiz de mont. Jesuita
tom. de provid. tract. 2. disp. 8. sect. 1. number. 5, 6. Plurimae sunt per quarum
disjunctivam indeterminatione^ vagari potest infallibilitas and necessitas quae
nullam illarum rerum determinat, sed tantum in confuso and universali numero.
6. necesse est ^niant scandala, veruntamen vae homini per quem eveniunt
scandala! ubi Christus Dominus aperte significat necessitatem vagari per varias
personas, and varia scandalorum genera indeterminate; nec enim necesse est, ut
per hunc hominem fiat, nec ut hoc and non aliud scandalum fiat. Porro haec
necessitas non est sola and nuda indigentia mediorum ad finem, sed etiam
infallibilis consecutio effectuum ex causis efficientibus ita dispositis.
without any Gospel-promise, as the Sea ebbes, the Wind blows, which yet cannot
be said, if a promise there be, then when this particular Church falls away.
Now Mr. H. grants the Apostasy of this or that particular Church of Ephesus
from the Rock, and the prevailing of the gates of Hell against the single man
or Independent Church of Ephesus: for he says, the place Mat. 16. The gates of
h^ll shall not prevail, etc. is to be meant of the Church Congregational
existing it its universal nature in its particular Congregations, then he must
mean, that some one single congregation of Ephesus or S^, may and do fall off
the Rock, which is a clear Apostasy of the Saints: for it cannot be said this
or that single Church shall fall away so, being they pray and watch. For,

1. That is the very thing which the Arminians and Socinians say on this place,
that the Church Mat. 16. 18. remaining and persevering a true Church, remains
unconquered by death and condemnation.

2. Praying, and persevering in praying, and watching thereunto, Ephesians. 6 18.
is a great part of persevering; and so persevering is promised upon condition
of persevering: and therefore Mr. H. must betake himself to a more unthrifty
shift, and quit the place Mat. 16 and so gratify Arminians and Socinians, who
say, that it proves not the perseverance of the Saints; and so must say, that
the building of the Church upon the Rock is the Lords continuate act of forming
single societies upon the Rock Christ, giving them victory over Hell. So that
he miscarries and ^^lls from his intended end, in keeping this or that single
man or Church upon the Rock, but yet obtains his principal end in keeping the
universal nature of man, and of an Independent Church upon the Rock. A more
confused providence than ever Pelagius or any devised, and a singular
gratifying of Jesuits and Sociniam.

3. If the keeping of believers (...) Saints upon the Rock Christ, so that the
gates of (...) shall (...) prevail to throw them off the Rock, and put those
that once were justified, and by faith built upon the Rock Christ, in a state
of condemnation, be referred to the De^rce of God, then must God have made the
same general confused De^r^^, That some by saving faith built upon the Rock
Christ shall persevere, and some shall not persevere; but yet so, as God has
decr^^d a visible single Independent Church one or many there shall be, until
all be gathered in to meet in the unity of the faith. But

1. This is a Decree confused and general, so as the number M. H. his
exposition of Mat. 16. 19. infers a great confusion in the decrees of God.
of the saved and kept upon the Rock, shall be indeterminate in the Decree of
God, whatever it be in the prescience of God: But he who has numbered in his
Decree drops of water, rain, and dew, the blasts of wind, the stars by their
names, Isa. 40. 12. Prove. 30. 4. Psalm. 147. 4. Job 38. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and
39. 1, 2, etc. must in his Decree have fixed all the Churches, and all
Churchmembers, men and women, old and young, who shall be kept on the Rock, and
preserved by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5* 2 Timothy 2. 19.

2. What Popish trepidation and trembling of conscience Mr. H. his distinction
of necessity infers the uncertainty of a believers salvation, and destroys
his peace, joy, comfort, etc.
must it breed, that such as once were built upon the Rock, may be thrown off,
and the gates of hell prevail against them? but some in the general nature of
Independent Churches shall abide upon the Rock against all the strength of
hell, until the second coming of Christ. But whether this can be a
Gospel-comfort or not, that Christ builds the universal nature of Independent
Churches upon the Rock; but though I be built upon it, whether I shall be
thrown off it or no, I have no assurance from the promise, Mat. 16. 18.

5. If this or this individual congregation be built upon the Rock, so as they
cannot fall away, as Christ promises, Mat. 16. It destroys the faith,
consolations, promises and certainty of the number saved.
then all congregations must also continue upon the Rock, for a promise of
perseverance made to all in Christ, must be su^e to all that seed, and to all
single congregations of that kind, if David, Solomon, and all single persons
justified may fall away, then may all the justified fall away, nothing can be
said in the contrary, but that the society may leave off to be a Church, but it
follows not that they fall from the state of Justification. Ans. That is, they
fall from Church membership only, but remain believers. Ans. Nay, they fall
from the Rock Christ, and the gates of hell prevail against them; and so by
Mat. 16. must fall from saving grace. But it were cruelty to say, that such as
are scattered and broken out of membership by persecutors, and that for
righteousness, that such were fallen off the Rock Christ, and that the gates of
hell did prevail against them.

6. All built upon the Rock are to believe their own perseverance, it being a
promise of the Covenant of grace, Ior. 31. 35. and 32. 39, 40. Isa. 54. 10. and
59. 21. Mat. 10. 27, 28 and so to believe, they being once built upon the Rock
Christ, they shall never fall away, as the promise is, Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33,
Hos. 2. 18. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Ioh. 14. 16. Psalm. 125. 1. Ioh. 4. 14.

7. Promises of perseverance and of saving grace, as being built on the Rock,
are made to the seed indeed, Psalm. 89. 29, 36. 2 Samuel 7. 12. Isa. 59. 21. but
never in the universal Generick nature to a visible society, but to single
persons and individual men, Ioh. 4. 14. Ioh. 11. 26, 27. Ior. 32. 39, 40. the
abstracted nature is not capable of the love of Election, of free Redemption,
that is made to single persons.

8. So shall the number of the chosen and saved not be wri^ten, but unsure and
dubious.

LIB. IV. CHAP. I.
The Congragation in its abstract nature is not the first subject of the Keys.

Mr. H. page 218. THE Key* as we have heard, is a power delegated from Christ
to disponse and administer the holy things of his House.

Ans. Why then give you the dispensing of Some certain officers not unofficed
people are to be Judges and Porters under the N. Testament.
the holy things of God, given to Aaron and his sons, and the keeping of the
charge of the Lord, and the judging of his House, and the keeping of his
Counts, given to the High Priest Joshua, and, in his person, prophesied to the
given to the officers of the New Testament, Zech. 3. 7. to any unofficed men?
and whether does not the Lord prophecy in the new Temple builtunder the
Messiah, Ezekiel 44. (for its neither the first nor second Temple spo^ of (...))
that New Testament-Levites (no question not the unofficed brethren) should keep
the charge of the Lords holy things, and should be porters to keep the doors of
the Lords sanctuary, to hold out the uncircumcised in heart and flesh, v. 8, 9,
10, 11. as Paul says, 1 Cor. 12. 29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are
all Teachers? are all New Testament-Levites?

Mr. H. What is meant by the Catholic and visible Church, I cannot know by Mr.
R.

Sometimes he seems to cast the Catholic visible Church upon the general
nature of a Congregation.

Ans. It but seems so, and to only Mr. H. to no living man else.

Mr. H. To what principal subject has the Lord (says Mr. R.) given reason,
and the faculty of discoursing? Is it to Peter or John? No, its for and to the
race of mankind, Lib. 2. p. 291.

Ans. Ergo, God has given the Keys to and for a single The Lord has given
the keys to the Catholic guides, as to the first and formal subject and to the
Catholic integral visible Church, as to the object and end; not to the
independent congregation, at M. H. says.
congregation of 40 or 50 visible Saints; that is none of my Logic: but, Ergo,
to the Catholic guides all of them, as to the first and formal subject, and to
the Catholic visible Church, as for the principal end and adequate object.
Here is plain enough expression, 1 Cor. 12. 28, God has placed in the Church
first Apostles, etc. Sure the Lord never meant to place Apostles, whose flock
was all Nations, Mat. 28. 19, 20. as fixed members and pastors of your
Independent flock of 40, which is no more countable for their doings to any on
earth but to Christ only, in a juridical way, than the Pope.

Mr. H. Sometime Mr. R. his expressions seem to intimate an O^cumonick Council,
or a Representative Catholic Church, sometime a Catholic visible, as it is
totum integrale, of an integral nature.

Ans. Both these, with Protestant Divines, I own; the one, as the first
subject, whether convened in a Synod, or scattered, I shall, God willing,
declare; the other as the object and the end of the Keys.

Mr. H. We say a congregation of visible Saints covenanting to walk in the
Ordinances of the Gospel is the prime and original Page 219, 220.
subject of the power of the Keys; we understand it not of this or that
individual congregation, as though they only had it, and none but they, and
they had it firstly, and all of them; but because its a congregation of such.
This is our Saviors meaning, Mat. 16. I will build my Church, taking a visible
congregation of visible covenanting believers, as that which is a pattern and
samplar (as I may so speak) which leaves an impression upon all the
particulars, as common to all, and is preserved in all.

Ans. If the Church congregational as congregational, not as this or that
congregation, be built on the Rock, then this or that congregation must of
necessity be also built on the Rock. If man as man be rational, then so are all
individual men, Peter, John, Anna; if the congregational Church as such, be
built on the Rock, then this or that congregation, etc. must be built on the
Rock. Quod conveni^ (...), convenit (...). But this presently Mr. H. recals,
This or that visible Church may, does, and will fail. But this or that visible
congregation partakes of the common nature of a congregational Church; and what
reason this Church more than this should fall off the Rock, since the promise
is made to the congregation in its common nature? then of necessity the Church
must have the promise upon some other account than as the congregation in its
common nature.

Mr. H. Each particular congregation is complete and independent Page 221^
for the exercise of all acts and dispensations belonging to a congregation or
Church, without any reference to any other congregation, because they are
distinct species, which firstly and equally participate of the nature of the
genus, or the general nature of the Church.

Ans. 1. Then are there no clamours raised against you by M. cotton of the
Keys, c. 6. p. 25.
those who say, It is most unjust that 10, or 30, or 40 should be an
Independent Male* Judicature (as if others had no souls) countable only to
Jesus Christ for their administration.

2. By Mr. Cotton his true principles, they are not independent within
themselves to exercise all acts belonging to a congregation; for Synods not
only have power to give light and counsel in matters of truth and practice,
but also to command and enjoin the things to be believed and done.

1. If then the Synod has a share of the Keys, the single congregation must be
too narrow a first subject of the Keys, especially when the Synod as the Synod
has the power of the Keys to command the Churches as the Churches, and several
congregations. 2. So the necessity of being circumcised or not circumcised, if
we would be saved, Act. 15. must belong to a congregation, and to all the
congregations of Anti^^h, of Jerusalem, etc. then the Lord Jesus has not given
a power independent to any single congregation, to exercise all acts and all
dispensations belonging to them: for sure they cannot determine in a matter
belonging to other Churches, and more belonging to other Churches than to
themselves, because of the multitude of concerned Churches, but they must no
less impose upon the consciences of other Churches, if the same seem good to
the holy Ghost, and to them only, (otherwise its a bastard determination) then
if they should determine it contrary to the knowledge of their own Church
congregational, and members thereof.

2. Mr. H. takes the word Congregation and Church for all one, against the
Grammar of the holy Ghost, who takes the The word (Church) is not taken by M.
H. according to the Grammar of Scripture.
word Church even in the New Testament, for the collection of believers,
agreeing in one Faith, one common R^dem^tion* common Savior, common hope of
Glory, though they be (...) a congregation that meets in one place, Ephesians. 5* 23,
25, 27, 29. and 1. 22. Col. 1 18. H^b* 12. 23.

3. The reason why they are independent in the exercise of all acts and
disp^^sations belonging to a Cong^gation or Church, to wit, because they are
distinct* species and Churches different in nature, is most fr^volous; for
beside, that the reason is false, except Christ the Head of one congregation be
different in nature from the same Christ the Head of another congregation, and
their Faith, Baptism, Hope of their calling, be different in nature; whereas
they are all one in nature, in all the whole Catholic Body, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5,
6, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Ephesians. 5. 23, 25, 29. Iudo ver. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 17. They are as
distinct species and Churches, different in nature, in regard of pastoral
preaching, Way of the Churches of N. N. c. 1. sect. 1. pro. 1. p. 1, 2. I^ as
unlawful to communicate in seals, and hearing pastoral preaching in another
congregation than that which is proper to the member of an Independent
congregation, as to submit to their Jurisdiction.
and par^aking of the same seals, as the Brethren teach, (if any difference of
this kind be) as they are different in nature in regard of censures; and so as
it is unlawful, by their way, to one of this congregation to submit to the
foreign and extrinsecal Jurisdiction of other Churches, (as they call it) so
its as unlawful to submit to pastoral preaching, and the seals tendered by the
foreign authority of other Churches, because if the Head Christ, and power
juridical be peculiar to one congregation independently, so must pastoral
preaching and the seals be to the same Church; and a member must be as much
restricted to their own officers only for acts of office, since they are set
over them by the holy Ghost, as our Brethren say, from Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5 2.
Philip. 2. 25. as they are to hear, Matthew. 18. that Church only in acts of
Jurisdiction. The Brethren are obliged to show a difference, or to yield to the
Argument.

Mr. H. A particular congregation is species specialissima, which Page 220.
has in it the nature of the Churches in general, and of the species or kinds
of Churches, are complete without the Class^s.

Ans. Let the congregation be complete, as species specialissima All single
congregations are complete only in some respect, but differ not in nature and
specie among themselves.
in its kind, yet in extension of power its not complete; for we hold, that
Classis, Synods, Congregations, differ in nature, and that every one of them,
yea the whole integral Catholic visible Church are all species specialissima;
and Mr. R. grants they differ only in more or less extension of power: and
therefore Jurisdiction is firstly in them all, as the heat is firstly in the
whole body of the fire, not firstly in this or that quarter or portion of the
Element.

CHAP. II.
The Arguments of Mr. R. for the first Adequate and Catholic subject of the
Keys are vindicated from the unsatisfying replies of Mr. H.

MR. H. The Apostles (says Mr. R.) stand in the room of the whole Catholic
ministerial guides, when they revealed the Keys.

Ans. The Apostles in that commission were extraordinary persons sent to all
the world to lay the foundation of the Gospel, by an Apostolic power; and in
this sense they have no successors, nor stand in the room of any.

Ans. If the Apostles represent none in this sense, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15.
John 20. 21. Go and teach, etc. whose sins ye remit, etc. Then none succeed the
Apostles to teach, baptize, remit, and retain sins; Pastors then must do these
without a commission from Christ, or these ordinances must cease.

2. Mat. 28. John 20. he sends the Apostles, and says, behold I am with you to
the end of the world, in preaching and baptizing. The Apostles Mat. 28. 19, 20
Joh. 20, 21, 22. When they received power to preach and baptize, did represent
all ordinary teachers to the end of the world, or then ordinary teachers want
all calling. Annot. of the English Divines, Mat. 28. 29. I Will uphold you and
your Successors in the ministry at all times, without intermission. Calvin. in
Locum. Usque ad consummationem] haec particula denotat non solis Apostolis esse
dictum, quia non in unam aetatem, etc. Beza, alloquitur Ecclesiam.
But the* Apostles do not live to preach and baptize to the end of the world;
Ergo, that ministerial presence of Christ must be promised to some represented
by the Apostles. So the English Divines, Calvin, Beza, Diodati, as Apostles
gifted with power of working miracles, etc. they represented none, nor had they
any successors. So Mat. 28. the Pastors have the power of the Keys and of
office given them, page 210.

Mr. H. To that Church (says Mr. R) has Christ given, as Mr. H. c. 12. pa. 1.
page 214. 225.
to the first subject, the ordinances and ministry, which he prin^ipally
intended to perfect, to gather, and to bring to the unity of faith. But he
principally intended to perfect, to gather, to bring to the unity of faith, by
these ordinances and ministry, the whole Catholic visible Church, and
secondarily this or that congregation.

Ans. Mr. R. lib. 2. p. 248. professedly disputes for a Church invisible, to be
the first subject of all ordinances, Christian privileges and officers.

Ans. Mr. H. halfs my words, how Mr. R. makes the invisible Church such a first
subject is abundantly declared.

2. These are not to me contrary; for the Catholic visible Church, which the
Lord intends and decrees to bring to glory* The Catholic integral visible
Church which Christ intendsto save, and the Catholic integral invisible church
are the same, and d^ffer but in accidents But M. H. his Church Catholic
visible and invisible, in many persons, differ as Elect and Reprobate.
is both the invisible chosen, and really believing Church, the Church
Mystical, and also the Church Catholic visible, fed by the visible and audible
ministry of Apostles, Pastors, etc. only in that place I deny that body, Ephesians.
4. 12. to be visible in Mr H. his sense, as he makes his congregation visible,
of which Magus and Judas are members; and therefore Mr. H. in vain alleges,
that those whom Christ purposes to bring to the unity of says etc. Ephesians. 4. 11.
are such who certainly shall be saved, and are true believers, and it is
undeniable, ordinances and ministry in their saving fruits, are given firstly
to true believers, if we regard the Lords intention, as I ever teach.

Mr. H. Mr. R. teaches that the intendment of Salvation, and the giving of
Ordinances and Ministry keep not equal pace each with other. So the Arminians
(says he) teach lib 2 page 248. but that God does intend principally to bring
the whole Catholic visible Church, that consists of Elect and Reprobate, to
the unity of the faith, etc, is false.

Ans. Repeat my Argument as I frame it, and the flubble is blown away: To, and
for that Church, as the subject and object and end, has Christ given as to the
first Church, the ordinances and ministry which he principally intends and
decree, to bring to the unity of faith, and to salvation:

But he intends and decrees to bring to the unity of says, and to salvation,
by these means, only the whole Catholic visible Church, and that mystical
Catholic body of it self invisible, but made visible by a calling and
inviting ministry of Apostles, Pastors, etc, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. for the Lord
gives for the loved world, John 3. 16. for the Catholic visible Church,
sanctified by the word and baptism, Ephesians. 5. 25. for his sheep, John 10. 11. for
all his scattered children, John 11. 52. for the whole world, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
Christ and Apostles, Pastors, Ministry, Seals in their substance principally,
and all these for this or that, or these real believers secondarily. Mr. H.
leaves out these words of mine, first to, and for the Saints, and so perverts
my Argument, and frames another of his own for mine, which I own not.

9. If that proposition be utterly untrue, These whom Christ M^. H. must side
with Arminians and Socinians, who ^ach that God intends to save many who are
never saved. Remons. Syn. Do^drac. Art. 1. p. 7, 8. Remonstran. Confess. c. 9.
Collatio Hagiens. p. 83, 84. corvin. contr. Tilen. p. 105, 106, 154, 398, 399.
Episcop. disp. 9. Th. 5.
intends to bring to the unity of faith, are such certainly, as shall be saved:
Then must Mr. H. side with Arminians, who say that grace is common to all, and
that God by his antecedent will intends to save all without exception, Elect
and Reprobate, but the Reprobate break that intention and decree of God. So the
Arminians.

3. Says he, It is undeniable that Ordinances and Ministry are not given first
to real believers.

Ans. It is undeniable that Ordinances and Ministry are given first to real
believers, upon a purpose and intention to save them, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. and that
all privileges of special note in the Mediator Christ, promises, ministry,
seals in their fruit, are given according to Gods gracious intention, to, and
for only the invisible Church, as I demonstrate, and not to and for Mr. H. his
visible congregation, whereof Magus is a member, and according to my
principles, the intendment of salvation from God, and the giving of ordinances
and ministry, first, according That is false that Mr. H. says that the whole
visible Church, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, which Christ intends to bring to glory, does
consist of good and bad.
to that intendment: secondly, in their saving fruit, as Mr. R. demonstrates,
go with equal pace.

3. That God intends to bring the whole visible Church of real believers, to
the unity of faith; for visible and invisible in my sense are not contrary, but
the whole visible Church Catholic is both invisible, being known to God only,
and visible also, being called by a visible and audible ministry, according to
the purpose of God. As Paul, Romans 8. 28. being a body perfected and gathered by
the ministry of Apostles, Pastors, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

And 4. It is undeniably false, which Mr. H. says that the whole visible
Church consists of good and bad, Elect and Reprobate; for this Catholic
visible Church and body, Ephesians. 4. 22. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Colos. 1. 18. consists
only of elect ones and real believers: but Mr. R. will not undertake. So much
for Mr. H. his Catholic congregation, of which Magus and Judas are visible
Citizens: and such a Church is not the first and proper, Armin. Resp. ad art.
5. p. 102 Armin. Anti-Perkins p. 57. Remonst. Syn. Dordra. Art. 3. 4. p. 8, 9.
16, 17 Remonst. conf. c. 17. sect. 2. Cat^ches. Ruttoviensis c. 6. page 210.
and principal subject of ordinances, promises, seals, ministry in their saving
fruits, except Mr. H. will side with Arminians and Socinians in this point; who
teach that God intends grace and salvation to all, but many are not saved, and
so the intention of God fails.

Mr. H. But what is all this to the present controversy, that to the guides of
the Catholic Church Christ has committed the keys, as to the first subject:
we argue thus.

To that Church which Christ principally intends to bring to the unity of the
faith, Christ has given the power of the Keys, as to the first subject. But
Christ does not principally intend to bring to the unity of faith, etc. and to
gather the ministry of the Catholic Church; therefore to the ministry of the
Catholic Church has he not given the Keys, as to the first subject.

Ans. This is not to the controversy, concerning the first Due ^ight of Presb.
c. 9. sect. 9. Page 242, 243.
subject of the Keys, nor did I bring it in upon that account, but the
question is concerning the constitution of a visible Church, in which I deny
that the visible congregation, o^ our brethrens visible Church, of which Judas
and Magus are as essential members, and their Church acts as valid, as Peter
and John the visibly and really believing Apostles are, or their Church acts
are. I deny (I say) such a congregation to be the first subject of the styles,
properties, privileges of special note, of promises, seals, officers in their
saving fruits in the Lords intention, and have demonstrated that the Catholic
invisible Church is only the first, principal and proper subject of these, and
that our brethren mistake the nature of the visible Church, I mean in all the
dispute the integral Catholic visible Church militant: otherwise Divines take
the Catholic Church, for these that have been, and now are glorified, and
shall be, and are not yet born, and that now are; but none of the two former
are capable subjects of the Keys.

2. The proposition is not mine, nor the argument: the Keys are given (say I)
to the guides of the Catholic visible Church, as to the formal subjectum,
first and proper, and are exercised by them, by the consent of the people, men,
or women; nor should any new act of Doctrine be passed, or weightier points of
discipline in Assemblies, until the people hear of them, the keys are given
to, and for the whole Catholic Church of believers, as the object and end, for
the gathering them in to the unity of faith, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. and as this
visible Church falls under the intention and decree of God to be saved, they
are one and the same persons with the invisible Church, as the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. and 12. is taken for both the invisible body.

It is 2. taken more largely, as the Catholic visible body comprehends all
that hear, and profess subjection to the Gospel, elect and reprobate, and the
Lord gives a ministry, seals, and visible membership to all, and every one of
this body; to Esan, to Jacob, to Judas the traitor, as to Peter a believer, not
to bring all and every one of them to the unity of faith, and to the
acknowledgement of the Son of God, but for other unlike ends, finibus
disparibus, to save some, to make others inexcusable.

Mr. H. If all ministerial power (says Mr. R.) be given to a congregation (as
our brethren say) under the name of a flock of redeemed Page 22^. ^17.
ones, as the body of Christ, Acts 20. 28. Colos. 1. 18. Then it belongs to the
Catholic Church, for these titles agree first to the Catholic visible Church,
Colossians 1. 18. Ephesians 1. 25, 26. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. and so
they come to our hand.

Ans. The Catholic Church admits of a threefold apprehension.

1. As it implies a covenanting congregation of believers.

2. As it represents the whole, ut totum representative, an Oecumenick Council.

3. Ut totum integrale, as it is the whole Catholic Church spread all the
world over, if Mr. R. mean the first, we agree, but the guides cannot be the
first subject, for the Catholic Church, and the guides are different. The
second part Mr. R. grants, that the ministerial power of the Keys is given to
a congregation under the name of the flock, etc. Hence his cause must needs
suffer shipwreck, that the Keys are given to the ministry of the Catholic
Church.

Ans. That the first member of your threefold apprehension has any warrant in
Scripture, or sound D^vines, is a mere apprehension. I desire the Reader to
consider the Catholic Church.

A^ 1. It implies a covenanting congregation of believers; The Catholic Church
congregational is a new fancy, void of the word and all reason and unthority of
Fathers, Doctors, Divines, etc.
give a warrant from Scripture, sound Reason, or Divines for that. The
Catholic Church is the whole body militant on earth, excluding none; but a
congregation of covenanting believers excludes all Churches on earth, except
forty or fifty persons.

2. The Catholic body organical of man, includes all the body and organs of
it, head, eyes, mouth, tongue, feet, etc. Now what sense is here? the Catholic
organical body of man admits of a threefold apprehension.

1. It implies the congregation of five fingers combined in the hand, and the
hand is predicated of this or that hand: and so is the Catholic body of the
whole Catholic organick body of man. Or to come to a politic body, the
Catholic body of England admits of a threefold apprehension.

1. It implies the congregation of all the City of York covenanted together,
and the City of York is the Catholic body of England, which is predicated and
affirmed of this or that City of York. No man speaks so but only Mr. Hooker
that I know. Since the world was, no man can say a single congregation, take it
either in the common nature of a congregation of a 1000. or for this or that
congregation, that a congregation is the Catholic Church, no more then the
hand is the Catholic organical body of man.

2. Mr. R. grants (says he) that the ministerial power of the Keys is given
to a Congregation under the name of a flock, etc.

Answ. Read my words, if I deny not that, and speak only according to the
grant and confession of our Brethren.

2. Only hypothetically, if all power Ministerial be given to a congregation
(by our Brethrens confession) under the name of a flock of Redeemed ones, etc.
then it belongs firstly to the Catholic Church, i. e. to the congregation, I
never dreamed that a congregation was the Catholic Church, and I should be
crazed in judgment if so I had spoken. And how How the Keys belong to the
Catholic visible integral Church as to the object, and to the Catholic
Ministry and officers as to the formal subject.
the Keys are given, or belong to the Catholic integral body as the object and
final cause, to the Guides of the Catholic Church as the first formal subject,
I often declare: and what shipwreck or breaking of board is here, let the
Reader judge. I difference between the Ministers and the Catholic Church by
this means: but that Mr. H. has said not one word to my Arment. If power,
privileges spiritual be given to the congregation as the redeemed flock and
body of Christ; then must power and privileges be given first and principally
to such a company to which these styles of The Redeemed of Christ, The Body of
Christ agree first; but to be the redeemed of Christ, to be the body of Christ,
to be his redeemed ones, agree first not to the Church of Ephesus, nor to any
particular Church National, Provincial, Presbyterial, or Congregational, but to
the whole Catholic Body, Ioh. 3. 16. and 10. 11. and 11. 52. 1 Ioh. 2. and 2.
and when Christ is called the Head of the Body, Ephesians. 1. 22. Coloss. 1. 18. I
shall judge him scarce worthy the name of a Divine. I cannot expound the places
of a single congregation, (...) Ephesians. 1. ^2. Col. 1. 18. the holy Ghost speaks
of that Body, which is the fullness of him, who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. and
of the Body of which Christ i^ Head, as the first begotten of the dead, and of
the whole body reconciled by the blood of the cross, if it be said, the
congregation in its common nature is the first subject of the Keys, for it
contains all the Catholic Church.

Ans. It contains no women, aged children, servants, nor sojourners, nor
dismembered visible Saints, and therefore the congregation Independent, in any
sense is a narrow and impertinent subject of the Key; and this is shipwreck
really to the cause of Mr. H. as for that, that the Church, Cant. 6. is a
congregation, The Church that is one, Cant. 6. is not a congregation in any
sense that can meet in one place.
in general, and that the Church is one there genere in kind, its against the
Text.

1. The congregation is not one, but has threescore Queens, fourscore
Concubines, Virgins without number, who are integral parts of that one
Catholic Church, ver. 8. but essential parts of a congregation, in any sense
they are not, but Churches in nature different: If these were species, then
every one of the threescore must be that one only Church, for genus
praedicatur de specie. But it is sure that the innumerable Virgins, that is,
believers, members of the Church, who with chaste love adhere to their only
Husband Christ, Cant. 1 3. that is, such as are chosen and called of God (says
Ainsworth on the place) and Ainsworth contradicts M. H. Cant. 6.
faithful (whether whole Churches, as 2 Cor. 11. and 2. or particular persons)
cannot be every one of them that one only Church Catholic, for then every
single Church should be the only one Spouse of Christ, ver. 8, 9.

3. To that Church, I mean, for their salvation and good, has Christ given the
Keys, which is the complete Spouse of The congregation is not the complete
Spouse to which Christ bears an adequate relation of husbandlove, as to his
redeemed ones
Christ, and to which Christ bears the adequate and full relation of the love
of Redemption, Ephesians. 5. 25. Ioh. 3. 16. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. Job. 10 11. of love of
justifying and washing, Rev. 1. 5. and 5. 4, etc. But neither the congregation
this or that, nor the congregation that exists ut genus in specie (a^ most
illogically Mr. H. says) is the complete Spouse of Christ, nor does Christ bear
the full and adequate relation of the love of Redemption, of Justification,
Sanctification, to the congregation in any sense. For.

1. This object of love takes not in the visible Saints sojourners, dismembers,
as said is, to whom Christ bears a love as to chaste virgins.

2. Nor is the love of God in choosing, effectual calling, justifying the
ungodly; carrying them on to persevere to the end, terminated upon societies
visible, as visible congregations, for so he should love all the Reprobates,
Judas, Magus, who are all visible Church Members: But its certain Christ loves
none of these with that adequate love of Redemption, nor with marriage-love, as
he does his beloved Spouse, Cant. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10. and 6 4, 9, 10.

3. Not is that love of Redemption terminated upon persons only upon the bare
relation of Church Members, for Christ takes them not into the Kings Chambers,
Cant. 1. 4. to his banqueting house, Cant. 2. 4. nor draws he them after him by
his powerful grace, Cant. 1. 4. Ioh. 6 44. nor blesses he, or embraces them,
his left hand being under their head, and his right hand embracing them, Cant.
2. 6. nor does God teach them, Ioh. 6. 45. nor ingrave his Law in their heart,
or give a heart of flesh, and a new heart, Ier. 31. 33. Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36
26, 27. only in the capacity of visible Church Members, for he bestows this
love upon the Jailer, upon Saul, upon the Eunuch, and upon many thousands,
before they profess as members; yea, and upon thousands in the bosom of the
Church of Rome, who out of weakness (though that be their sin) dare not profess
the Gospel: Then it must be false, that the nature of the Church, and of those
spiritual privileges that belong to the congregation in general, or in this or
this congregation; and that the relation of Christ as Husband, King. Head,
Seeker of the lost, Good Shepherd, and of his Redeeming love, is broader than a
visible congregation, in any sense Mr. Hooker shall take it, and is no ways
commensurate thereunto. And so not one of my Arguments but stand in force.

CHAP. III.
Some further Considerations of the place Matthew. 16.

ANy sense, according to Mr. Hooker, can hardly be put upon The place Mat. 16.
Upon this rock will I build my Church; and, The gates of hell, etc. is torn and
abused by Mr. H.
that, Upon this Rock will I build my Church. For,

1. The question is, Whether they do any thing to inchurch themselves upon the
Rock; for sure they are active in professing, 2. In suiting membership, 3. In
covenanting: Then must Magus and Judas, by acting the part of hypocrites, build
themselves upon the Rock. Wild Divinity again!

2. Christ's act of building is either absolute or conditional: if absolute,
then says Christ, I inchurch you upon the Rock, whether ye believe or believe
not; but Scripture never tells us of Peter, Chrysostom. hom. 55. Matthew. 16.
(...). Hill. de Tri. l. 6. Aug. in Joh. 1. tract. 10. Christ's act of building
men upon the Rock either absolute or conditional, cannot stand with Mr. H. his
new gloss of Mat. 16.
or any built upon the Rock Christ, but by real sincere faith. If Peter's act of
faith be conditional, the condition must be either sincere faith, or mere
profession; if the former, we stand strong, Mr. H. is at a loss: for there is
no promise of real union with the Rock, and perseverance, but to such as are
living members in Christ, Ioh. 15. if the latter, then says Christ, I I
promise to you, Judas, Magus, real union with the Rock; or, Upon this faith,
(says Chrysostom; so Hilary, so Augustine) so you play the hypocrites
egregiously, and seem to believe. Now this shall be non sense.

3. It cannot be said, I promise to build all in a Church Way, so they believe
sincerely. For,

1. The ports of Hell and Satan should not prevail against persons to strip
them of Church Membership, contrary to experience.

2. The promise is made to persons that confess, as Peter; but many real
believers and visible professors have been put to death, and are never made
Church Members this way; and many real believers in the Church of Rome never
profess, and many Church Members, and Churches of visible Saints are dissolved
through persecution.

Again, there is a name and room promised in the House of God, Isa. 56. but not
upon condition of hypocritical, but real believing.

Obj. Judas was not made an Apostle upon condition of faith.

Ans. True: a man may be made an officer, and his acts valid, and yet the man
no sound believer.

Q. Should a man be admitted a Church Officer who is not judged a real convert?

Ans. The Scripture is sparing in submitting conversion or regeneration to the
authoritative determination of men, yet the equivalent of this is said.

1. If Timothy must commit the Word (...), to Officers must be visible Saints
before they can be admitted.
faithful men, who are able to teach others, as 2 Timothy 2. 2. And if

2. The Elders and Pastors which Titus is to admit, must be to his discerning,
beside negatives, not self-willed, not soon angry, etc. also lovers of good
men, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful word, etc. Tit. 1.
5. compared with v. 7, 8, 9, 10. Then must the real holiness of officers be
known to Timothy and to Titus.

3. If the Apostle will have Timothy to try Bishops and Deacons also, and that
experiencedly, that they be vigilant, sober, patient, grave, no novices,
humble, holy, etc. the way that metals are tried in the fite, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2,
3, etc. so the word is, Luke 14. 19. Iam. 1. 12. 2 Cor. 13. 5. and will have
him lay hands suddenly on no man, but deliberately, 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22. Then
surely the Apostle supposes that they may be known to be such.

4. If the Apostles do charge the multitude, who had no judicial authority to
look out from among them, seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost,
and of wisdom, Acts 6. 5. to be Deacons, then Luke supposes that that might be
answered, We cannot know whether men have the holy Ghost or no. The second Book
of Discipline of Scotland, cap. 3 page 81. The qualities in general requisite
in all them who should bear charge in the Kirk, consist in soundness of
Religion, and godliness of life, according as they are sufficiently for forth
in the Word of God. Now its not to be supposed, that in a Book of
Church-policy, our Reformers speak of godliness that is invisible, and known to
God only; and so the Acts of the Assembly of the Kirk Assembly at Glasgow,
1638.
of Scotland. And the cause of the sudden declining of the best Churches, and
why Nazianzen complained so much of the corruption of Synods, as Sozomen,
Theodores, Socrates, Ruffinus, Histor. Magdeburg. tell us, was, Because the
Churches take not that care, that Ministers be savoury and gracious; from the
Steersmen all Apostasy and rottenness begin. O if the Lord would arise and
purge his House in Scotland! As for Church Members, they ought to be holy; and
though all baptized be actu primo members, yet such as remain habitually
ignorant after admonition, are to be cast out, and though they be not cast out
certainly, as paralytick or rottened members cannot discharge the functions of
life: So those that are scandalous, ignorant, malignant, unfound in the faith,
lose their right of Suffrages in election of Officers, and are to be debarred
from the Seals. Nor can we defend our sinsul practice in this: it were our
wisdom to repent of our taking in the Malignant party, who shed the blood of
the people of God, and obstructed the work of God, into places of Trust in the
Church, State, and the Army, contrary to our Covenant, they continuing still
Enemies.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Church-Representative, and its power.

MR. H. We have dispatched the first member of the controversy, Survey, par.
1. c. 13. p. 229, 230.
That the power of the Keys does not appertain to the Guides of the visible
Church; take it as totum genericum, or universale.

Ans. The first member is so dispatched, as the power of the Keys is by Mr. H.
dispatched and banished out of its due seat and subject, and lodged in the
congregation of redeemed visible Saints, sometimes only unofficed Brethren,
sometimes the Church of visible Saints, confederate men and women.

2. No man of ours (let him be named, if Mr. H. or any for him can name him)
ever said, that the Keys appertain to the guides of the visible Church, taken
as totum genericum and universale. For the Guides of the visible Church is, to
all our Divines, the Guides of the Catholic Universal Church, made up as an
interal Body of all Churches, National, Provincial, Presbyterial and
Congregational all the earth over. And to make this integral Universal Body
Genus, and the congregational Church Species, and Genus praedicatur de specie,
is, as if this were our Logic, The Church of Boston is the whole integral
Church of all the earth, made up of National, Provincial, Presbyterial
Churches. A Monster!

Mr. H. There be two things, wherein stand the qualifications of members that
are Commissioners: 1. Gifts and fitness. 2. Delegation, which is the formale,
as that they are sent by the Churches. The Churches, if they follow the
pattern, must send, beside Pastors, Teachers and Elders, learned and holy men,
that may personate and represent the whole Church. This is made the hinge and
casting difference betwixt us and Papists, whereby our men vindicate the
liberty and power of the Brethren, for all have definitive voices, not the Pope
and his Proctors only.

Ans. How can Mr. H. speak of a pattern of Oecumenick The unofficed Brethren
are not by our Divines those that have a decisive voice in Councels. A new
question between us and Papists. Mr. H. par. 1. c. 13. p. 230. The paths to
these general Councels have been so long disused that they are almost grown out
of sight, and as he sometimes speaks in a like case, the highwayes are
unoccupied. Page 232. By the space of. 300 years after our Savior, there was
not the name of an Occumenick Council heard of in the world Whittaker cont. 3.
q. 3. c. 1. de Council. Nostra vero sententi^ est non solos praelatos habere jus
definiendi in Conciliis, sed homines quosvis idoneos (non ait laicos) eligi
posse. Willet Synops. papis. cont. 3. gener. q. 3. p. 125. What an absurd
saving is it -- that the Bishop is the only Pastor. The Fathers of Basil. Who
doubts but the government of the Church is committed to others than only
Apostles? Prof. Leyden in Synops. purio. Theolog. disp. 49. th. 29. Verum tamen
ab iis (Laicis pi^s) in publica hac act one consilium and a bi^ium potius quam
suffragium requiritur. Vid. th. ^1. C^lvin l 4. Inst. (...). 1. Romano
pontifici and ejus satellitibus totum deferunt. Com. Act. 15. v 12. Plebis
modestia h^nc colligitur, quod postquam Apostolis ac Reliquis Doctoribus j^m ge
misit, nunc quoque subscribit little decreto, pastorum Tyranni^ est excludere
populum. B^us loc 43. q. 21. Jus -- Ecclesiis -- conscio and comprobante grege.
Vid. q. 23. Non exclusis L (...). etc. T^en. Syntag. de Council. disp. 1. q. 18.
p. 619, 610. Qui solis Episcopis sententiae dictionem. vindica^, iis tum
Apostolici Concilii, Act. 15. 6. Tum Nicaeni and Constantinopolitani primi
authoritate refelluntur -- Neque negari potest quin de causa fidei ad omnes
pertineat dicere qui prophetae sunt dono and vocatione, 1 Cor. 14, 32. See
(...). Theolog. Christian. (...). 1. c. 28. Piscat. loc. 23. the 29. On the
contrary are the Rhemist. on 1 Timothy 5. sect. 13. Bellarm. de Council. lib. 1. c.
19. Cornel. a Lap. Lorinus, Act. 15.
Councels, and claim kindred to our Divines against Papists? ^or Mr H. mocks
such Councels. 2. Mr. H. cannot name the man of our Divines, except
Separatists, who draw nigher to Socinians and Arminians in these points, than
to our Divines, who 1. Ever taught, that the male-Churches of a congregation,
are the only Churches who send Commissioners to an Occumenick Council? which
Mr. H. says has neither warrant in Scripture nor in Antiquity for 300 years
after Christ. 2. The controversy between Papists and our men, was, Whether
only Bishops soli Praelati, say Whittaker, Willet, Professors of Leyden,
Calvin, Bucanus, Tilenus, Windelin, have a decisive voice, and ought not also
Pastors, Doctors, Elders learned and holy, to have a decisive voice in Synods?
And whether the people should be excluded from debating, reasoning, consenting;
for Papists debar Laics as profane, and say, If such Beasts touch the
Mountain, and meddle with holy things, they are to be thrust through with a
dart. But Mr. H. his hinge of a question is, Whether only unofficed Brethren,
members of the male congregation, are the only members of an Oecumenick
Council, or with them officers, but as sent by those male-societies, otherwise
they want the essential form of members, according to our Divines judgment? He
is a great stranger in the Writings of our Divines, who so guesseth at a new
question, though I judge Mr. H. has read them diligently. See what the Jesuits
of Rhemes, Bellarmine, Cornel. a Lap. Lorinus and others, if ever they dream of
such a hinge of a controversy.

M. H. The representative body is but a part of the Catholic Church, not the
whole of it, and represents the whole -- what the commissioners do by their
delegation, it is all one, as if the body did it; the Keys cannot then be
firstly in it.

Ans. It is a mistake wide enough, there is a twofold representing.

1. The Apostles in receiving the Keys, Matthew. 16. John 20, Matthew. 28.
represented all officers, even those not born, but they had no commission from
unborn men. And so August. Sermon. 13. de verbis domini. Chrysostom. homil. 55. in
Matthew. 16. Hieronym. l. 1. contra. Iovian. and our Divines, Calvin, Pareus,
Luther, Melancthon, Willet, etc. say, that the Keys in Peter, who represented
all the Apostles and faithful Pastors, were given to all Ministers. Now if Mr.
R. say that the Keys were given first to this representative body Apostolic,
let Mr. H. or any man beat him with strong arguments, and that is a good
revenge.

3. These whom the Churches, (not the male-congregations, as Mr. H. says) send
as Commissioners to a Synod, are not to be looked Mr. Cotton Key. Two sorts of
Representatives not considered by, Mr. H. Commissioners neither carry the
peoples conscience to the Synod, not does their Commission give them a new
office.
upon.

As 1. If the Churches were resolved aforehand how far they will follow them;
for why then (says Mr. Cotton) do they send to the Synod for light and counsel?

2. Neither as if they were sent to carry the faith and consciences to the
Synod, and the people in and through them did teach Synodice, and the people
must follow their determination, be it right or wrong. And so it is a wide
mistake, to say what Delegates do or say, it is all one, or the like reason
(says Mr. H.) as if the Represented did, or said it. For if the Synod say the
Gospel is not the word of God, the Church did not say either personally (for
that is impossible) or legally the same: only the Churches send them to pray
and enquire the mind of God from his word, and engage they shall follow them,
in as far as they follow Christ.

Nor is delegation the formalis ratio of determining synodically, it is only a
necessary condition of determining, and of synodical judging.

Obj. But Mr. R. says Amen to this distinction of Mr. Parker.

Ans. True; these two, fitness and gifts, together with a commission, make a
man a commissioner and messenger of the Church; but delegation makes him not a
formal Definer and a Judge: nor do the Churches send them as officers, but as
such eminently able and faithful men, who have hazarded their lives for the
cause, as Act. 15. 25. and they determine as such eminently holy and able
officers; their delegation is a thing of mere order, because all cannot be
sent, nor does it create them of new officers, nor yet such eminent officers,
for they were both these before, only their delegation puts them in an actual
orderly capacity to determine formally, Ut approximatio ligni aridi ad ignem
non est formalis ratio comburendi.

Mr. H. Mr. R. l. 1. p. 305. to 309. runs all upon this, the power Par. 1. p.
231, 232.
of the keyer, by order of nature, is only in the Catholic representative
body: but the power of the Keys was before there was any Representative some
300. years, when there was no Oecumenick Council, and since the Churches give
their power and officers to the Assembly, they had that power before the
Assembly. Due Right of Presb. Keys of the King d. c. 7. p. 47, 48. The whole
body of al church guides is the first subject of the power of the Keys in its
latitude of that power, and the first subject of such a special power is a
Synod.


Ans. Read from c. 10. sect. 10. and p. 289. to p. 346, 347. where I speak of
the Catholic Church. I say, only that such a synodical power of the Keys, as
is dogmatick, especially for light and peace, as Mr. Cotton speaks, is first
by order of nature in the Oecumenick Council: the doubting and contending
Churches cannot bind; Ecclesia dubitans non docet, Ecclesia errans non judicat,
Ecclesia contendens non liga^n, on solvit, for the doubting, the erring, the
contending of Churches are no ordinances of God, and erring and contending
Churches cannot heal themselves; and therefore the healing power is seated by
Christ's appointment in the synodical Church, which is more diffused and
stronger, as is clear, when the Churches of Antioch and Judea are broken,
ren^and sick, the wisdom of God, Act 15. has appointed that these should meet
in a Synod of the select and choicest parts, Apostles and godly Elders; Ergo,
the healing power of the Keys must be first in them.

2. Mr. R. runs not, but ass^rts lently, that power of the keys in binding and
loosing, and in opening and shutting heaven in the latitude of preaching, and
censures, Mat. 16. was not before Christ gave it to the Apostles, the then
Representative of all the faithful guides to be in the Church christian to the
worlds end, and this grant was made to Peter and the Apostles, not as to such,
private men, Simon, such ^ishers, but by evidence of Scripture truth.

2. The testimony of all sound Antiquity.

3. The judgment of Protestant Divines.

4. Canons of Counsels.

5. The Doctrine of sounder ancient Schoolmen and Popish Doctors, Occam,
Alen^is, Almain, Gerson, Bon^venture, etc. not only not 300. years after, but
before Christ's death, and confirmed before his Ascension to heaven. That ever
Mr. R. said that the power of the Keys in their latitude of binding and loosing
was in an Oecumenick Council, a Representative of formally sending Churches,
and a body of formally sent Commissioners, is utterly denied, and no where to
be seen in any book that ever he wrote.

Such as cite him at random would remember (3) that I teach that the power of
the Keys, 1. In its latitude is first given to the Apostles, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Mat. 16. 18, 19. John 20. 21, 22. Mark 16. 15. Act. 18. as the only then
Catholic representative body, sustaining the person of all officers to the end
of the world, and so the first formal subject of the power of the Keys in its
latitude, is not either the congregation or congregational Eldership, nor the
Presbytery, or Synod, all these are but parts, and to make a quarter, or a part
of the body of the Sun, the first and adequate subject of light, and a quarter,
or a part of the body of the Element of water the first and adequate subject of
the cold and moistness, since these qualities are kindly in the rest of the
quarters and parts of the body of the Sun, and the body of the Element, were
bad Philosophy. So the adequate first complete formal subject of this power
must be the integral Catholic body of the guides, as existing in their several
Churches; for this power is as kindly and natively in the guides of this
Church, as in the guides of that Church, and equally in all.

2. The power of the Keys as this power synodicall is considered either in the
breadth of synodical power, and so to condemn A power synodical is but a part
of the keys, and was not before a Synod had being.
Catholic errors and heresies is in an Oecumenick Council, and where the local
distance of visible Churches is greater and wider, the external visible
communion in being edified or scandalized is less, and less use there is of
censures. A General Council being only necessary for the optimum esse, the
most Catholic union and peace of the Catholic Church: and that such a Council
is an ordinance of God Mr. Cot. proves from Act. 15.

3. As the power is narrower, it becomes narrower then Ecumenical, and
descends to National, to Provincial, to Presbyterial, to Congregational; and
all these are parts only.

4. Though the Churches send Officers to the Synod, and have some power of the
Keys in their kind before the Synods have being; yet Mr. H. can hence conclude
nothing of his purpose against me; for it follows not, Ergo, the
male-congregations have the complete power of the Keys in its latitude, before
the Synods have being; nor does it follow, that congregational Inferior
churches confer not properly a superior power to the churches, ^y have a
synodical power by the institution of God, Act. 15.
Churches, or Presbyterial have that complete power, before Synods have being,
nor do they confer (if we speak accurately) a synodical power of the Keys, they
only send messengers who are materials of the Synod; but the synodical power is
in its parts scattered in the Churches of the Province and Nation, as Immes of
Gold in diverse parts of the Earth; and the synodical power comes from the
institution of Christ, who promises the holy Ghost, and fulfils his promise, as
Mat. 28. 20. compared with Act. 15. 28. Nor can the scattered Churches bring
forth of themselves any synodical power of the Keys when they are met in a
Synod, the promise made to such as are gathered together in his name, does the
business; and therefore that is soon blown away. It is unpossible that a proper
quality can be either in nature, or time, before its subject the gives it
being: but the power of the Keys was 300. years before there was any General
Council in the world. For this proves only that some certain power, to wit,
formally synodical, cannot be, until the Synod be.

2. Grave Divines judge the Synod, Act. 15. to be a General Council; but though
it were not so, it differs not in nature from a General Council, and so must
partake of its natural qualities, as the natural properties of a man are in a
same man. Now beside that, Christ gave the complete power of the Keys to the
Apostles, be sent them as his Father sent him, as a Prophet to remit and retain
sins, Joh. 20. to be a teaching and baptizing ministry, Mat. 28 20. which he
never gave to the unofficed To define in Councels is an act of officers. Mr.
Dickson, Expos. Mat. 28. v. 19. doct. 6. Par. I. p. 232, 233.
male-Church. Christ also appointed an Assembly with them in Galilee, and
kept it, Mat. 26. 32. Mat. 28. 16.

Mr. H. To define in Councels is no proper work in officers.

5. For so says D. Ames, no Pastor of the primitive Church, and few of the
after ages should have fulfilled their Pastoral charge.

2. That which is common ^o the Brethren is not proper to Pastors.

3. Whitak. It Is open popery to take it from Breath ^n.

Ans. Ames is miscited, he states the question, whether only Bishops have
decisive votes. Though it were proper to Bishops and Pastors, yet it may be
(says Ames) communicated Ames. Bellar. E^^rvat. To. 2. c. 2. An soli praelati
majores, i. e. Episcopi habent jus suffragii ordinary, ex privilegio and
consuetudine etiam Cardinal. Abbates. Bellar. Affirmat nos negamus. Ames. To.
2. c. (...). Th. 1. p. 4. Si esset proprium Episcoporum and Pastorum, nihil
prohibet quin possit cum alii, Theologis praesertim Ministris (...) Deo
institutis communica^i. Calv. Act. 15 6. Gu^lth. Act. 15. 22. Calv. sic non
enim dicit Lucas totam Ecclesiam congregata^, sed eos qui doctrinae and judicio
pollebant, and qui ex ^atione officii hujus causae legitimi e^^nt Judices;
fieri quidem o^est, ut coram plebe habita su^ri^ disputatio: sed ne ad
tractandam causam vulgus promiscue fuisse admissum putemus: Lucas diserte
Apostol os and Presbyteros nominat. Gualther. ibid. homil. 103. Non ita
dominium and imperium sibi vindicarunt (Apostoli and Seniores) ut populum ab
eorum cognitione excluderent ^ive arcerent, quae ex aequo ad totam Ecclesiam
pertinebant -- in populo modestia est -- quod veritati omnes libenter cederent;
haec Gualther. Bullinger. Act. 15. 6. convenerunt Apostoli] palam hoc loco
Admonemur ad Apostolicos viros pertinere rerum ad fidem quaestionem. Bez^. Act.
15. 1^. Multitudin is autem nomine intellige non totam Ecclesiam utpote
quaen^ndum esset tota Advocat^, sed totum Apostolorum and Sensorum coetum, ut
v. 6. -- unde apparet quae sit yera legitimae and Apostolicae Synodi ratio, etc.
to other Ministers of God.

2. It is not a Pastoral, but an Official act that we contend for.

3. It is a poor question, for if learned godly men be chosen, if they be not
Doctors and ruling Elders, they should be such.

4. The Martyr has a learned discourse, 1 King. 12. De Schism^te, and has
nothing of the question: but from Act. 15. he condemns Papists, who exclude
Laics from Synods, for Constantine subscribed the sixth Synod, Basilius the
eighth Synod; nor is it Popery, except Calvin maintain Popery, for he gives to
the people consenting, to the Apostles and Elders judging: and so does
Gualther, nor does Whitaker call it popery to seclude Laickes from defining,
but from speaking, discerning, consenting. I wonder that Mr. H. is so confident
in this matter.

Mr. H. Arg. 3. If the power of the Keys belong firstly to the Oecumenick
Council, then it belongs to all others by virtue of that, risibility agr^es
first to man to Richard, John, not as these individual men, but as they have
the nature of man: hence there can no power of the keys (as ord^nation,
excommunication, etc) be put forth but by virtue of an Oecumenick Council
giving in their influence first to that work; which is contrary to the evidence
of Scripture, and the experience of all ages. The proposition is proved by the
rule of (...), if none have this power, but only this subject, then this power
can go no farther then this, for this (...), and (...), require.

Ans. (...). Mr. H. wrongs the Reader, who sets not down my answer to this
argument: for p. 299. I say, the power of the keys is not given to the
Catholic Presbytery, as to the first subject, to be a mean of edification in
an ordinary way but only in an extraordinary and occasional way in these
things, which concern the power of jurisdiction belonging to the whole
Catholic Church. By Extraordinary, How the whole body of Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, Elders are the first immediate subject of the
whole power of the Keys.
I mean not that which is against, or above a particular law of God, but that
which rarely falls out. Hence I never make an Ecumenical Council the first
subject of the power of the Keys in its latitude, as man is the first only
subject of risibility, the element of water of cold and heat, for so as only
man is risible, and Peter visible for man's nature, so only an Oecume nick
Council should firstly and principally excommunicate and ordain Ministers: but
I say the just contrary of this, to wit, that an Oecumenick Council is only
the first and principal subject of that synodical power, or of that certain
power, or special power that belongs to an Oecumenick Synod formally convened
as such, and so to this or that Ecumenical Council, because of the common
nature of an Ecumenical Council.

Yea, This special power of the Keys is but a part, or a certain kind and
species of the power of the Keys in some rare and extraordinary things that
belong to the Catholic Church. But we are now disputing of the first seat and
subject of the power of the Keys in general, in the latitude of binding and
loosing, opening and shutting the gates of heaven by preaching and censures.
And I deny expressly that an Oecumenick Council is the first subject of the
power of the Keys in this general. And so Mr. H. fights with a shadow. Non
concludit negatum. So my Simile is never touched by Mr. H. as page 305. The
light is first in the whole body of the Sun, as the first and prime subject of
light; yet supposing now the received opinion of Astronomers, that the Sun does
exceed the quantity of the Earth 167, it does not follow, that this or that
part of the Sun has no light in it intrinsecal, but that which is derived from
the whole body of the Sun, for then this or that part of the Sun should have
light derived to it (extrinsecally) from some other.

Now the power of the Keys is in the whole Catholic Body of Apostles, Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, all the world over, as they act respectively in Congregations,
Presbyteries and Synods of all sorts, so that one part of the Catholic
integral body of the Catholic Church, for example, has not that power of the
Keys due to them, derived from the Presbytery to the congregational Eldership,
or from the Synod derived to the Presbytery, and so forth, by either ascending
or descending: But when Christ gave the whole power of the Keys to the body of
the Apostles, Mat. 28. 19. and 16. 19. Ioh. 20. 21, 22, 23 Mar. 16. 15. they
were the Body Representative (I never call them an Oecumenick Council) and did
immediately represent any Apostles to be chosen, Matthias, Paul, Evangelists,
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, that were to be, even to the second coming of Christ,
and he promises his Ministerial Spiritual presence to them all immediately,
Mat. 28. 20 Go teach and baptize -- lo, I am with you always, (administering
Word, Seals, Censures, according to the Rule) even to the end of the world. Now
the Apostles were not to live preaching and baptizing to the end of the world,
therefore the promise must be made to them all, though not yet born. Now we
read not of deriving of any power to Synods, Presbyteries, Congregations, by
mediation of Churches, for Christ instituted Synods, Mat. 28. 16. Act. 1. 12,
13, 14, etc. and 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 15. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, etc. and that immediately he instituted Presbyterial Churches, Act. 2.
and 4. 9. and 5. 21, 42. and Churches congregational to meet in one place, 1
Cor. 11. 17. And as one part of the Element of water (suppose we make 24 parts
of all) has not natural moistness and cold from the other 20 parts, but has
it as intrinsecally, without the intervening influence of the other twenty
three parts, as they have: So the Presbyterial and Congregational Eldership
have as primarily, intrinsecally, immediately in their sphere and orb the Keys
due to them, according to the proportion of the associated body, as the whole
integral-Catholick Presbytery and Church has, whether in an Oecumenick
Council, or out of it.

It is then a wide mistake in Mr. H. to tell us, If an Ecumenical Council be
the first subject of the Keys, (as it is not) that there can be no act of power
in ordaining of Ministers, in excommunicating of delinquents, but by virtue of
an Ecumenical Council giving their influence first to that work. For if the
meaning be (as it must be) that a General Council must prove an act, and put
forth some actual Mandate, commanding such a man to be ordained an officer,
such a delinquent to be excommunicate, else the Churches cannot proceed: for to
take Mr H. his own comparison, Richard or Joshua cannot be a man, or apt to
laugh, except the abstract nature of man give in his influence to the work. And
since Mr. H. and his Brethren make the male-congregation M. H. Survey, par. 1.
c. 11. p. 186. Way of the Churches, c. 1. sect. 1. pro. 3. M. Cotton keys. c.
7. p. 31.
abstracted from this or that congregation, the first formal subject of the
whole power of the Keys, what influence (I ask) does the so abstract
congregation give to the work of Ordination and Excommunication in a particular
congregation? Abstracted natures do not send abroad mandates to all the
congregations all the world over, before they can ordain, censure, or
excommunicate. If it be said, this agrees to the nature of a congregation in
general to ordain and excommunicate, but there needs no other actual influence
of a command to come from the congregation in general to this individual
congregation for their using of the Keys. True, there needs not, by the like,
that any mandate pass from the Oecumenick Council in general, to this or that
individual Oecumenick Council in the exercise of its Synodical acts.

But (says Mr. H.) if the Oecumenick Council be the first formal subject of
the power of the Keys, then inferior Courts cannot ordain nor excommunicate
without a warrant, and actual command from them.

Ans. This is feeble: for beside that the Oecumenick Council Inferior courts
may use the keys without any influence of a command from a general Council.
is not at all any such formal first subject, as is said, its a naughty
consequence; for though power of life and death be in King and Parliament as in
the first subject, it follows not that an inferior Judge or free City cannot
put to death notorious Traitors and Murderers all England over, without the
influence of some actual Mandate from King and Parliament to the putting to
death of every Traitor. So when Christ gave power of Word, Seals and Censures
to the Apostles, as representing all officers, (say we) or as representing all
believers (says Mr. H.) it follows, that officers and the male-Church cannot
administer Word, Seals, Censures, without the influence of a new actual command
from the Apostles, who did represent all such to whom Jesus Christ gave the
Keys, by this arguing of Mr. H.

Nor does Mr. H. his first deduction follow, that if a General Council be such
a subject (as it is not) that therefore the existing Though a general Council
^xist not, yet ^he use of the keys cease not in inferior courts.
of such a Council is as necessary as the well-being of the Church. For a
Parliamentary power is necessary for England, yet suppose by war, and other
invincible impediments, a Parliament could not meet for diverse years, yet
neither power nor exercise of Justice do cease. So here Synodical power may be,
and by the care of the Lord of his House, is continued in lesser Assemblies,
though such Councels exist not. But 2. the Antecedent being true, the
Consequence is null.

Nor is the power of the Keys in its latitude, as is said, either firstly or
only, and so not perfectly in this Council, but firstly and intrinsecally in
the whole integral Presbytery all the earth over.

Nor is it necessary that this General Council, though it were the first
subject of the Keys, always attain all its end in the use of the Keys. For the
male-Church void of Pastors cannot attain all its end, to wit, the pastoral
preaching, the dogmatick and official sentencing of delinquents, the right
tendering of the seals, yet is the male-Church the only formal subject of this
power to Mr. H.

Mr. R. said well, that a General Council can hardly excommunicate Hardly can a
general Council excommunicate a National Church.
a whole National Church: for it could hardly be known to them, but many are
not obstinate in the National Heresy and Scandal, who through weakness and
fear of persecution dare not confess. And its enough that a National Church may
be declared to be no Church: as Moses removed the Tabernacle, and pitched it
without the camp, Exodus 33. 7. and Paul turned away from the blaspheming Jews
Acts. 13. 45, 46. and yet neither the one nor the other is the excommunicating
of a National Church, for the word of the Covenant remained in the Nation of
the Jews, after Paul and Barnabas turned from them, and preached to the
Gentiles, Iam. 1. 1. Heb. 1. 1. and 3. 6. and 10. 25. 1 Pet. 1 1. 1 Ioh. 1. 1.
and 2. 1, 2. Nor is our Brethrens new censure Non-communion of Churches, as our
Brethren use it, is not warrantable.
of non communion of Churches so warrantable. For,

1. The removing of the Candlestick seems to be a judgment inflicted only by
Jesus Christ; and they who declare such a society to be no Church, must have
the warrant of Christ going before, and really removing the Gospel. For if the
Word, the contract of marriage, and seals, remain there in their substance,
they can only (the profession thereof not ceasing) declare them an impure and
corrupt Church, but not to be no Church.

2. The doctrine or practice of a Church may be erroneous, hurtful See the
paper of Accommodation at the Synod at Westminster, anno 1644. Sept. 13.
and destructive to holiness, as that of Pergamus and Thyatira, and they defend
it; and yet remaining sound in other points, they cease not to be a people in
covenant with God, and they cannot be declared no Church, and the Ministerial
acts of baptizing invalid, and to be reiterate, as is clear in the Church of
the Jews, though Idolatrous, and in the Scribes and Pharisees, corrupt the same
way in practice and doctrine, whom Christ commands to hear, Mat. 23. 1, 2.
far more for a sinful act of Jurisdiction, leave they not off to be a Church.

3. How can it be clear to a sister-Church, that there are not there, the
Church being above a thousand, or many Churches, (for many Churches may be
unchurched as well as one) a few names that out of weakness only are silent at
the sinful doctrine and practice of the Church.

4. Its hard to say the Church of Rome, in which there are the matrimonial
Tables, the Old and New Testament, valid Baptism, and Salvation to a covenanted
people by the fundamentals preached, is no Church, though communion with such a
Whore be unlawful.

Mr. H. If the Churches refuse the sentence of Excommunication Par. 1. c. 13.
p. 234, 235.
inflicted by the Court O^cumenical, it can never prevail to attain its end.

Ans. Ergo, its unlawful. It follows not, the Churches, the Excommunication
attaineth not its end always; Ergo, is not lawful. M. H. so, Nor does the Gospel
ever attain its saving end; Ergo, its not the Gospel.
person excommunicate refuse to abstain from the society of one excommunicate,
and excommunication hardens and humbles not; Ergo, its unlawful: So the Gospel
is the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16, a Rock of stumbling, 1 Pet. 2.
8. and prepared vengeance, 2 Cor. 10. 6. to some; Ergo, its not the Word of
God. Many such consequences have been drawn, to make Mr. R. his way odious to
the godly. But I desire to contend for truth.

Mr. H. To the Ministry and Catholic Guides of that visible Church, has
Christ committed the Keys as the first subject, to the which he has given his
Word, Ordinances, Sacraments, Ministry primarily. This is Mr. R. his in
terminis determinate conclusion beyond all gainsaying. But to the Oecumenick
Council, as the Representative of all Churches, God has not primarily given
his Ministry, Word, Sacraments, Ordinances; then an Oecumenick Representive
Church has not the Keys given to it as to the first subject. The Assumption
only needs proof. 1. There was no such Council for 300 years after Christ. 2.
Councels consist primarily of Pastors and Elders; then must Ministers be sent
to feed Ministers. 3. Word and Seals are not primarily attended in Councels,
but scanning of controversies.

Ans. 1. I complain of unfaithful repeating of my words. The title is not of
Oecumenick Councels, but chap. 10. sect. 10. page 289. Of the communion of the
visible catholic Church. To the Proposition I answer; To the Ministry and
Guides of that Catholic visible Church has Christ committed the Keys, as to
the first subject, unto which he has given his Word, Ordinances, Sacraments,
Ministry primarily.

This neither is conclusion nor principle of mine, but a same Mr. H. sorc^^
upon Mr. R. a proposition as a principle in terminis beyond gainsay, which was
never in M. R. his mind nor book
and curtailed proposition of Mr. H. My words are these, cap. 10. sect. 10.
page 289.

To this Church catholic visible has the Lord given a Ministry, and all his
Ordinances of Word and Sacraments principally and primarily, and to the
Ministry and Guides of this Catholic Church visible has the Lord committed
the Keys as to the first subject, and for the visible Church catholic,
including also the invisible Church as for the object and end, has he given
his Ordinances and the power of his Keys; and the Ministry and Ordinances are
not given to this or this congregation which meets ordinarily in one place.
So the Proposition which I own from these words, must be this.

To the Church catholic visible as to the first subject primarily, and as for
the l^st end and object, has the Lo^d given all his Ordinances, Word,
Sacraments, Ministry. This is mine in terminis. And this also: To the Guides
of this Catholic Church, not of a single congregation, has the Lord committed
the Keys as to the first formal subject, but for the Church catholic visible
and invisible, as for the end and object, that they may be saved.

But Mr. H, his proposition is not mine, he devised it himself, and its false,
gainsaid by Mr. R. to wit, To the Guides of that catholic visible Church has
the Lord committed the Keys as to the first subject, unto which he has given
his Word, Ordinances, Sacraments, Ministry primarily. For,

1. I know no Guides of any Church on earth, to whom the Lord has given the
Seals primarily, for God has given the Seals primarily to his chosen people,
to the Guides secondarily, as they are visible Saints.

2. I know no Ministers of any Church to whom the Lord has given the Ministry
primarily: its a senseless saying.

3. I refer it to the Reader, if such a senseless proposition can be drawn from
my words. The Catholic visible Church is neither the subject, nor first
subject, but the object and end for which the Keys are given to the Ministers
and whole Officers of the Catholic Church visible and invisible. Yea, I
demonstrate by many Arguments, that believers are not the subject of the Keys.
I say indeed, not the visible Church whereof Magus and Judas are members, is
the prime subject, but the invisible Church is in the Lords intention such a
subject of all Ordinances in their saving fruits: but then the first subject is
all one with the object and end of God in Predestination.

2. The Assumption is granted, but Mr. H. his probations are naught.

1. There was no General Councels the first 300 years after Christ.

Ans. Mr. Simpson, and other grave Divines say, the Council Simpson, Cent. 1.
c. 1.
at Jerusalem, Act. 15. is more worthy the name of an Occumenick Council, than
the Councels of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon.

2. Such a Council is not the first subject of the Keys, but only of the
Synodical Keys in such a General Council, of the Keys Catholic dispensed.

3. The Apostles, the Representative of all the Guides of the Church, may well
stand for a formal Council Occumenick.

4. The long want of General Councels, through providential The want of genesis
Councels through providential impediments proves not that they a^e not
Ordinances. English Divin. on Hos. 3. 4. Diod. Hos. 3. 4. Iun. Hos. 3. 4. Nam
ex quo Israelitae in Assyria^ fuerunt deportati per Shalmanasarem, id est, ab
anno sexto Ezekiae ad Christu^ incarnatum fuerunt anni quasi sexcenti
octoginta. Partus com. ib. Zanch* com. ib. Dissenting Brethren in their Reasons
against Synods, 2 arg. p. 120. The same God that suits his providence to his
institutions, would not have failed in what is the most sovereign remedy of all
other, that it might have been existent in all ages, as we see his promise was
to the Jews, to keep their land when the males thrice a year went up to the
General Assembly at Jerusalem.
impediments, can no more prove them to be no Ordinances of God jur^ which
ought to be, than if one should say, Circumcision, and the Passover, and
Sacrifices, and an Ephod, are no Ordinances of God. For it is thought by the
learned on Hos. 3 4. Israel was without a King, Sacrifice, Image, Teraphim,
Ephod, from the sixth year of the Reign of Hezekiah, when Salmanasser carried
away the ten Tribes, until Christ was crowned King, to wit, six hundred and
seventy five years. See the English Divines, Diodati, Iunius, Pareus. Zanchins
on the place: By this it shall follow, that Circumcision, the Sacrifices, Ephod
then are no Ordinances of God, for if they were (say the Dissenting Brethren)
institutions are suitable to providenoes. When ye go up to Jerusalem, no man
shall desire your land. Then if a General Council were an Ordinance of Christ,
the Lord should suit his providence to a peaceable meeting of the Churches in a
General Council. But so from the sixth year of the Reign of Hezekiah in Israel,
Sacrifices, Priests, Ephods, the Kingly power shall be no Ordinances of God,
for even till Christ these were not in Israel; and by this profession of the
Gospel, and congregational Churches were not at all. And should not the Lord
have framed the like providence, that professors of Christ meet in daylight in
congregational assemblies? For as the Lord made a special typical promise, when
the males go up thrice a year to Jerusalem to worship, the Nations were not
permitted of God to desire their land: So must the like promise of providence
suiting with the profession of Christ be in the New Testament, the Heathen
Emperors shall not desire your lives. Now the plain contrary providence is
foretold by our Savior, Mat. 10. 17, to 25. Luke 21. 12, to 18. Ioh. 16. 1, 2.
and the Lord must, by this, fail against his Ordinance of professing Christ
before men. When in the persecution of Flavius Domitian, Eusebius. Eccles. hist.
l. 5. c. 1. Bucolc. Index. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 25. Epiphan. cont. haer. Tertul. de
Cor. milit. in Apolo. Cario, l. 3. Monar. 4. How loose that is, that
providence must suit with institutions.
an. 96. of Trajan, an. 108, so many Martyrs were killed, as Eusebius says;
and Plinius 11. the Deputy was smitten in conscience with their number and
patience. So multitudes suffered under Antonius Pius; and in the time of
D^cius, an. 250. there was no congregation, no Eldership. Many suffered under
Nero, many under Maximinus. So Eusebius. l. 6. c. 28. under Valerian, an. 259. who
killed Pastors and Professors; as Eusebius, l. 7. c. 10, 11, 12. especially
godly Cyprian. Now sure the Lord had as sweet and comfortable a providence
suiting with the glorifying of his Name, and advancing his Gospel by the death
of so many Witnesses, as if he had suffered them to meet in congregations, to
meet peaceably, none desiring to take away their life or land, as in Isreal's
day, for their meeting to serve God in congregations. And its an overturning of
the Ordinances of God in the New Testament, in which there is not given a land
flowing with milk and honey, and a promise of a temporal typical providence,
that they shall be free of persecution in following Church-duties, and public
Worship congregational, which is not existent in all ages: Nor says Mr.
Ruthurfurd, that Ministers are given to Ministers primarily, but as they are
members of the Body visible, and chosen of God, Ephesians. 4.

CHAP. V.
Whether the Congregation as the Congregation does excommunicate a delinquent?
or is it the Catholic visible. Church which excommunicates?

MR. R. his meaning is, that the congregation excommunicateth The Catholic
Church excommunicates antecedently, when a particular Church excommunicates:
but the Catholic Church has not, nor puts forth a deliberate act of
citing, accusing, condemning before the particular Church act any.
not as a congregation, by a power which by order of nature is first in it
self, but by a power which by nature is first in the whole Eldership; but yet
not by an act coming from the privity, knowledge and conscience of all the
whole Catholic Body of Officers all the world over. And so I grant, that the
Catholic visible Church does not anteced ntly excommunicate, leading
witnesses, and summoning, and accusing, and sentencing the person before the
congregation; as when Norwich puts a Traitor to death, the State of England by
the Law common to all England, in and by Norwich puts the man to death: Nor
does Norwich as a single Corporation (though neither simply as a
Representative) but acting as a part of the Body of England. And the whole
State does this antecedently:

1. Because the City does this by the same power of Law common to all England:
quae sunt communi^ra sunt priora.

2. Norwich puts this Traitor to death, not as an enemy to that single
Corporation only, but as a common enemy to the whole Kingdom.

3. The City does this by an innate power, as an integral part of England, for
the peace and safety of the whole Kingdom: yet does not the whole Kingdom
knowingly exercise an act of deliberate judicial authority in this; for the man
is put to death without the privity and knowledge of the whole Kingdom.

I used the comparison (to cosen the inconsiderate Reader (says Mr. H.) I
hate cousening) The left hand cuts off the finger of the right hand lest it
infect with a Gangrene the whole body, acted by the natural instinct, and
innate desire of self. safety, which is in the whole man. But (says Mr. H.)
the chief officers are not at the mind and will, and the other Churches as the
whole man: but the rest of the brethren are as the whole man, who have an
intrinsical power for the safety of the whole congregation, to cut off an an
infectious member.

Ans. Nor is the comparison to be strained; I shall only desire it to be taken
as Mr. H. says. Its true, the left hand does not cut off the contagious
finger, but the whole man, deliberate will and reason consenting thereunto; and
the finger is cut off, not by the power of the left hand only, but the
intrinsecal power of the body.

And it is so exactly in a particular congregation, the chief officers, as the
mind and will, and the rest of the Brethren as the whole, have an intrinsecal
power from Christ to remove an infectious member.

Ans. They have a power to remove him (says Mr. R. in his The comparion of
cutting off an infectious member from the whole Catholic visible Church, is
strained by M. H.
comparison) not from that congregation only, but from the whole Catholic
Body: As the left hand cuts off the contagious finger, not from the right hand
only, but from the whole body. It wrongeth Christ to say, he has given so
selfie and narrow a power, to liberate only a body of 10 or 20 Independent
members from the contagion of scandal, but not to free five thousand, and the
associate bodies round about: Let them perish, Christ has given no Organick or
Church-care to the congregation toward them all (says Mr. H.)

2. The comparison is not exact. When the fraternity excommunicates all their
officers, where is the mind and will then? for they excommunicate their own
mind and will.

3. Mr. R. never meant the comparison should hold in this, That the Catholic
Church, as mind and will, should put forth acts of deliberate reason --
antecedently to cite, accuse, sentence every delinquent in an Oecumenick
Council, or some Catholic Judicature, and to excommunicate all Delinquents,
before ever the congregation cite them. With diverse arguments he refutes an
antecedent excommunication, as if I held any such thing. So Mr. H. loves to
prove strongly what Mr. R. never denied.

But Mr. H. speaks nothing to my Argument, if the m^n be cast out, and bound on
earth, he must be bound only on that tract of earth where twenty Independents
are.

But 1. Church binding in heaven, and the guiltiness of the scandal is alike in
all places, and often more infectious to others, if it be a taking heresy,
then to their own congregation.

2. Who shall persuade that our Saviors sense is so hampered? Let him be to
thee as an heathen, Mat. 18. 17. as thee only, who art a member of the
congregation whereof he is a member; yea, as touching Church binding, neither
is he a known guiltless visible Saint to all Churches on earth. It is nothing
but a naked evasion to say he is consequently cut off from right to ordinances
in all other congregations, for because one species of corporations has
condemned a man (says Mr. H. page 236.) it follows not, that therefore all
have condemned him to imprisonment perpetual, or the like.

Ans. Yea, what one City does in punishing a Malefactor by Law power, common to
all England, that same all England He who is excommunicate in one Church is
antecedently excommunicate in all.
does in law: for twenty Sons have by the same Law and Authority of the Fathers
right of twenty Tables of twenty Families of the Father. One is for sedition
against his Father cast out of one Family, whereof he is a fixed member; the
other nineteen, though they know nothing of the fact, and do never actually
cite him, yet do legally, and by the Law, and the same very will of the Father,
that rules them all, cast him antecedently out, or concomitanter; or then
another Law must appoint the other nineteen Families to cast him out. So the
same right idem numero, that Peter has to Christ and Ordinances in one Church,
he has it in all; and that same act of the Keys administered according to the
rule of the Word, in one Church removing that right, removes it from him all
the World over.

3. Visible Saints by this shall not be the same spiritually politic body,
visible, being of diverse congregations: contrary to Scripture, expounded by Mr.
H. and Mr. Cotton, we being many are one body visible, and visible of twenty
congregations, partaking 1 Cor. 10. 17. (...). Excommunication by consequence
is no excommunication at all.
of one bread and body of Christ. Now by this, as a finger cut off Paul, is not
a finger cut off John, for John has all his ten fingers entire, and Paul has
his nine fingers only: So also if Thomas disobedient he cast out of only his
own congregation, he is never cast out of Church-right to Christ, and
ordinances in the rest of the congregations; for excommunication by
consequence, is only a declaring by witnesses (as Mr. H. says page 242.) that
the man is cast out of his own congregation. Now the declaring that Paul's
finger is cut off, is not a cutting off of his finger, that is impossible. Far
less is it possible, that the declaring that Paul's finger is cut off, can be
either a declaring that Peter's finger is cut off, or that that declaring is a
cutting off of Paul's finger, or a cutting off of Peter's finger. Therefore
Peter's being cast one of his own Church-right, and Church only, is no casting
of him out of other Churches, or real removing of his Church-right to
ordinances in other Churches. For that which was never really removed, and
Peter once had, it must remain with Peter yet: now Peter was never a member of
any congregation but of one; then membership to another congregation cannot be
taken from him.

4. A member is cast out as really scandalous; his adultery obstinately
continued in makes him be deprived of Christian fellowship with Brethren as
Brethren: Ergo, he is deprived of the Christian fellowship of all Brethren. For
(...) follows upon (...).

And 5. It is thus confirmed; his visible scandal is a Church-offence to one of
a Sister-congregation, and is apt to bring a Church-contagion to these of
another congregation, who are (...), one body with him at the Lords Table; and
therefore are they now to look on him as an Heathen. But who put him in that
state, if he be not really and formally cast out A strange exposition of that,
he that hears you hears me; which follows from Mr. H. his way.
of that body, when his own Church excommunicates him?

6. He that hears not the Church, hears not Christ, and he that despises any
Pastor sent in the name of Christ, despises Christ, Mat. 10. 4. Luke 10. 16.
John 13. 20. Now if this stand good, one that despises his own Pastor only,
and his own congregation only, though he despise all the godly Prophets,
Pastors, and soundest Churches on earth, despises not Christ nor his Father
that sent him; nor is he first in foro Dei, bound in Heaven, and guilty before
God, nor deserves he to be excommunicate, for he has not failed against that,
He that despises you despises me. For that is true only when any despises
their own Pastor, or their own congregation. And if so, then when one is cast
out, and judges an heathen for not hearing of his own Church, he is not
heathen in Heaven, and in foro Dei, as touching his communion with other
Pastors and other congregations.

7. Peter before he was excommunicated, had a real right to the Lords Table in
all Churches on earth, and so a sort of membership and visible communion with
all these Churches. Now if by the act of excommunication in his own Church,
this right be not taken from him, then must it be taken from him by all the
Churches: and so all the Churches must excommunicate when one excommunicates:
and by the like, all must admit one into membership, when one admits into
membership.

Mr. H. The Sister Churches (Mr. R.) receive members of other Churches to
communion, by an intrinsecal Church power.

Ans. By an authoritative Church power we can enjoin our own members to come to
the seals, or else censure them; but we cannot so deal with others, if it shall
seem good to them to refuse.

Ans. This only follows, that the congregation has a larger Church power over
their own members, both to censure them, if they come not, and positively to
admit them, if they come: but Mr. H. must confess that the congregation admits
strangers of other congregations, by a mere private power, and by no Church
power, which is gross Erastianisme, and makes it arbitrary to one single Pastor
to admit some to the communion, as he pleases, and some not.

2. By no Church power is the Sacrament tendered to strangers of another
congregation; so may the Minister give this Mr. H. allows of private Communions.
seal to a stranger in his chamber, which is a private communion, for there is
no authoritative Church power required to give it to some. Whereas Paul says,
it is a privilege of the Church, coming together to eat the Lords Body, 1 Cor.
11. 17, 18, 21. 1 Cor. 10. 17.

3. This Supper must be given to our own Church members by Church authority; to
strangers by no Church authority.

4. It is by accident that the congregation cannot compel strangers to come to
this seal, for in Collegio the Elders of the congregation may jointly with the
rest of the Presbytery censure these of another flock, who altogether refuse
the seals.

5. Mr. H. grants that a congregation excommunicates in the Page 240.
general nature of a congregation. Well then, the general nature discourses in
man; and so does a Church in an Island excommunicate; Ergo, that Church
proceeding according to the rule of Christ, casts the man formally out of all
the congregations on earth.

Mr. H. adds, yea the neighbor Churches are (says Mr. R.) to Page 241, 242.
exercise the punishment of avoiding the excommunicate person as an heathen,
which follows from a power which is no ways in them; what conscience is here?

Ans. A good conscience, if we may carry our selves to a scandalous m^n so
d^clared by two or three witnesses, as we avoid his company; far more upon the
testimony of a whole Church, are we to avoid his company.

Ans. Then nothing is left to the neighbor Churches, but is he excommunicate
or not, by one only congregation, they had no hand in it, only they must
believe the man is rightly cast out, upon the word of five or six of the
male-Church, who are both Judge and Party. This is what I said. A declararation
of Excommunication is no Excommunication. And then must the congregations about
with the mere judgment of discretion, which women have, eschew the man as a
Pagan.

Obj. By Mr. R. his way, you have the testimony of the Church only which did
excommunicate?

Ans. Yea, place is left to many Churches and Synods to judge: this is another
matter, then four of the male-Church that are both Judge and Party, who declare
he is cast out.

Mr. H. One classical Church excommunicates not antecedenter. But a man in the
confines of two Presbyteries is excommunicated by the Presbytery only of which
he is a member, says Mr. R.

Ans. What ropes can tie the consequent with the antecedent? What Mr. R. has
said of the antecedent excommunication of the Catholic Church, is plain by the
former discussion.

CHAP. VI.
Whether there be a whole Catholic integral visible Church?

MR. H. The Catholic Church has sometimes such a respect a^s totum integra^e,
an whole integral Catholic Church. So A^es.

Ans. D. Ames maintains that there is not only such a respect, but that there
is a Catholic integral Church; and he Survey par. 1. c. 14. p. 243. Ames
Medul. l. 1. c. 32. These. 5. Ecclesia igitur particularis respectu commanis
illius naturae quae in omnibus particularibus Ecclesiis reperitu, est species
Ecclesiae in genere, sed respectu Ecclesiae Catholicae, quae habet rationem
integri, est totum ex aggregatione variorum membroru^ ^ingularium compositum,
at que adeo respectu ipsorum est integrum.
never dreamed, nor any learned man of Mr. H. his Catholic Church affirmed of
this or that congregation, and is as much as to say, Norwich is Catholic
England. The Catholic Church of Angels and men in all ages, all times, all
places, is not that integral Catholic visible Church which we make the subject
of the Keys.

But this integral Church militant, as existing in diverse ages, is That there
is a Catholic integral militant Church.
before the congregation in the Lords intention, as the Lord intends the
organick body of man, and not a hand only; and a complete world, not a nation,
not a City only; so his design is not for this or that congregation, but for a
world of visible Churches, a whole seed, a willing people, Psalm. 110. who is
flowing to the mountain of the Lords house, Isa. 1. 1, 2. his flock and
scattered sons, Isa. 9. 7. under the government of Christ by the Word, Seals,
Censures, Luke 1. 32, 33. make them in their times, and places, all the world
over, visible by profession, calling, gathering, feeding, Ier. 33. 31, 32.
Zech. 8. 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Psalm 72. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. Rev. 11.
15. Psalm 22. 27, 28. John 15. 52. And the congregations come in here as
secondary parts and parcels of Christ's great visible flock. Mr. H. denies this,
and it is, as if a man would say there be two hands, ten fingers, two feet,
head, eyes, ears, etc. but should deny there is an whole organick body; or as
one should yield there are rivers, floods, fountains, seas, but deny there is
such a thing as the integral element of water.

2. This integral militant body is before the congregation, in Arg. 2.
the relation of a Spouse that has breasts, and brings ^orth children, Isa. 54
1, 2. Cant. 3. 4. Cant. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4 Cant. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7 etc. in the relation
of a body wrought upon by a Ministry, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13,
14, 15. the congregation is but his Spouse and body secondarily, (...). Some
congregation of seven or ten, where all may be of the stamp of Judas and Magus,
is abusively called the Spouse.

3. In duration and stability, there is a Church gifted with a Arg. 3.
Ministry, having the Keys of the Kingdom built upon the rock, against which
the gates of Hell shall not prevail, Mat. 16. 17, 18, 19. enduring as the days
of Heaven, which is so as the object of our faith, Isa. 59. 21. Psalm. 89. 28,
29 etc. Ier. 31, 32, 33, etc. they are also a visible sheepfold of Jews and
Gentiles, John 10. 16. the building of God, the planting of the Lord, Isa. 61.
3, 4, 5, 6. Mich 7. 14, 15. and 5. 4, 7, 8. and the congregations little
companies in mount Zion.

4. There is a Church integral militant, visible, and in its Arg. 4.
choicest part invisible, to whom as the subject, and for whom, as the end and
object, are given the covenant, word, promises of life, ministry, seals,
censures, in their saving fruits, as before is said, Ier. 31. 31, 32, etc. Ier.
32. 38, 39, 40. Psalm. 132. 11, etc. these in an inferior way the congregations
have and enjoy.

5. The whole and complete work of the spirit in the Ministry Arg. 5.
and Word, is terminated upon the Catholic integral militant body. Isa. 5. 20,
21. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, etc. and the congregation has the waterings thereof in
a lower way.

Mr. H. You cannot demonstrate out of Scripture, that there is Page 244, 245.
such a thing in the New Testament as a Catholic visible Church. Mr. R. says
the subject, 1 Cor. 12. 28. is a Catholic visible Church, not a politic body
under one head, the Pope; but the Catholic body of Christ mystical, as visible.

Ans. The Catholic invisible body as visible, I conceive not; to consider a
body invisible as visible, is a contradiction, as if a man would say, I
consider whiteness as blackness.

Ans. 1 Cor. 12. is neither meant of a politic body, under the Pope. Arg. 6.


2. Nor a General Council:

3. Nor of a Catholic visible body, that meet in the same place. Such is not
found under the new Testament, whence he must mean that under the Old
Testament. There was a Catholic Way of the Church of N. (...). c: 1. sect. 1.
p. 1, 2.
visible Church of the Jews that meets in the same place at one time, as the
Brethren take a visible Church, which is unpossible to be demonstrate in either
Old or New Testament.

2. Mr. H. has from me no such expression, as to consider Mr. H. supposes by
no Logic, that the same body of Christ cannot be both invisible, and in
another respect visible.
an invisible body as visible, though it be no contradiction, as is blackness
and whiteness in abstracto. If Mr. R. had said, visibleness may be considered
as invisibleness, Mr. H. should have better Logic; why is it a contradiction?
The mystical body in common (says he) is the invisible body. True, and the
mystical body is both invisible, being the really chosen of God, and the object
of our faith, and the same invisible Church which shall be presented without
spot or wrinkle before the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 27. and the same Church and body is
sanctified by the Word, preached and professed, and washed with Water in
Baptism, v. 26. and so visible. And Ephesians. 4. the body which shall come to the
unity of faith, and to the perfect man, the Stature of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. is
the mystical, and savingly believing body, and so invisible; and also the body
of Christ gathered by the ministry visible, and edified by the word preached
and professed, is v. 12. the same body, and must be visible, for Apostles and
Pastors preach to the visible Church. A child in Logic can conceive, the same
politic body savingly believing to be invisible, and also savingly professing
what they believe to be visible. So the twelve Apostles, Act. 6. are both real,
and so invisible believers, as no man doubts (Judas being in his place) and the
Scripture in it, Mat. 19. 27, 28, 29. Luke 12. 32. Luke 22. 28, 29, 30. and he
is not worthy to be refuted, who denies the same twelve Apostles in another
respect to be visible professors, visible preachers of the Gospel. So Peter, as
touching his soul, is invisible and immortal, as touching his body, visible and
mortal. I cannot help it, that Mr. H. conceives this to be a contradiction. I
observe (says he) that Mr. R. puts visible in an equal latitude with mystical.

Ans. Add to the observation, that in this I take not visible What way M. R.
puts visible in an equal latitude with mystical, what way not.
for Mr. H. his visibility, which agrees to Magus and Judas; but that sincere
and honest visible profession, that for the most part is in the Catholic
integral militant redeemed body, and mystical, well near of an equal breadth
and latitude. Not but that there may be, and are many believers members of the
mystical body, who have little or no visible profession. But it is enough to
assert as truth, that one and the same body is both invisible, mystical, and
the saved body, and also visible, and clothed with a real sincere profession;
and that both these agree to the Catholic integral militant Church. Though I
deny not, but that there be many hypocrites in this great body, whose
ministerial acts are valid. But the Catholic visible Church in that latitude
is not then both subject, object, and intended end of all Ordinances. And I
speak now of it.

Mr. H. I cannot think that Mr. R. takes the Catholic Church for the whole
integral body.

Ans. It is mistaking charity of me. Mr. H. that Church is meant 1 Cor. 12. in
which God sets teachers, helps, ordinary officers, firstly, v. 28. But God sets
not such in the integral body; for they are set by the election of the people
in particular congregations, Acts 14. 23. and 6. 5. Tit. 1. 5.

Ans. This is my own argument, but not rightly formed; that Church is here
meant, in which the Lord has respectively placed first Apostles -- and
Teachers, both Extraordinary and Ordinary Officers. But God has not set
Apostles fixedly and firstly over congregations, they being organs of the
Catholic integral body, and are sent to preach to Heathen (who after were
Churches. As it is said, Jacob served for a Wife, to be married, not married as
yet) who could not choose the Apostles as their pastors.

2. Workers of miracles were not chosen by a single congregation, no^ such as
had the gift of Tongues, 1 Cor. 14. 22. Tongues are for a sign to them that
believe, not to them that believe Calvin. B^za in loc. Pareus. Pet. Martyr. Nec
Corinthii cum ^ideles (professione, non Ethnici) essent, dono linguarum
indigebant. Piscator. English Divines. Diodati in loc. Estius in loc. Cajetan.
Page 186. A congregation only cannot be meant 1 Cor. 12. 28. but also the
Catholic integral militant Church.
not. See the Divines on the place. Miracles and Tongues were to persuade
unbelievers, and were not firstly set to congregations, nor could have any
imaginable election and call from them.

3. The places, as elsewhere is said, prove not any thing to the point.

Mr. H. Arg. 2. In what Church Pastors are firstly set over them, they have
firstly and primarily pastoral power in dispencing acts of ruling and
preaching: But ordinary Teachers have not this over the Catholic visible
Church. Congregations may justly refuse to hear other Teachers then their own;
but their own may preach to them, though they refuse to hear.

Ans. Every word is censurable. 1. Apostles were (...), firstly both in regard
of dignity of Office, and of Apostolic Universality, sent to all Nations to
preach, not to a single congregation to exercise pastoral acts firstly over it,
as fixed Pastors.

2. By a catholic Church Mr: H. means (sed suis musis solus canit) a
congregation. Now if the Apostles be firstly set in the congregation in
general, they must be secondarily set in this individual congregation; then
must the ordinary Teacher be set before the Apostle, who was often his sender,
in the individual congregation.

3. The Proposition is false: A pastor may tender the Lords Supper to hundreds
of a sister-congregation; but Mr. H. I hope, will not say that a pastor is set
over, and firstly over hundreds of another congregation. The Antecedent and
consequence are both Mr. Hookers.

4. Its false that ordinary Teachers have not power to exercise pastoral acts
to those of other congregations. Nor is it proved, they cannot exercise
pastoral acts over them, because they cannot censure them. Its an illogical
consequence, ordinary to Mr. H. The Apostles, both as Apostles, by miracles and
the gift of Tongues, plant Churches among the Heathen, and as pastors they
exercise ordinary pastoral acts to the Heathen, in Pastors may exercise
pastoral acts toward many whom they cannot censure or excommunicate.
planting and preaching the Gospel to them, but they could not draw out
Church Censures against the Heathen, yet remaining Heathen, because of the
incapacity of the object, they could not cast them out who were not yet within:
1 Cor. 5. 12, 13. but this they could not do not through want of pastoral power
over them.

5. Its false, that other Churches may justly refuse to hear other Teachers
than their own: For if their own be sick and dead, or if other Teachers have an
earnest suit and desire from their own officers and some one of the
congregation, they most unjustly refuse to hear, and come under the guilt of
despising Christ in despising his Messengers, as Mat. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. Ioh.
13 20. except the sense be, He that receives not his own congregational
pastor, receives not me, otherwise not. A strange and new sense!

6. If the flock refuse all their own pastors to hear them, as being ravening
Wolves, they unpastor them, and recall the official being, which our Brethren
say they gave them in election, and so unjustly refuse to hear them; and they
cannot justly preach to them, who so refuse to hear, for they justly refuse, a^
Mr. H. teaches.

Mr. H. God must either (says Mr. H) have pl^^ed in all the Par. 1. p. 247,
248.
Church Catholic, Apostles, Teachers, which we say, or then in some part of it
only. And what is that part which is excepted? Surely he intends not salvation
to that part of the Church in the which he sets no Teachers.

Ans. At the common nature of a Corporation exists in all corporations; so the
congregation-nature exists in this or this congregation -- So if the nature of
a Corporation be common to all, and the King has set Major and Common Counsel
in all and every Town: Therefore the Major of one Town may rule in another. So
all States set Generals, Colonels, Captains in the Army. The King sets
Constables in all towns, Sheriffs in all counties: Because Constables are
common to all towns, therefore a Constable may exercise his office in another
town.

Ans. 1. The Argument must run thus: As the King has set in England the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal, the Lord Chief Justice, the Sheriff, the Constable in
every County and Though the rulers of one City cannot fixedly govern in
another, yet its not consequent, therefore a Pastor cannot act as a Pastor in
diverse Churches.
Town; so has God set in his Church, that is, in the congregation, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then
gifts of healings, etc. But the King has set in England the Lord Keeper, the
Lord Chief Justice, the Constable in every County, in every Town, how many
Great Seals, how many Lords of Chief Justice should then be in England? And do
not our ^ound Divines condemn in Papists the Argument from civil Government,
and honor due to persons in the point of the government of Gods House, and of
adoring of God in Images? He is a stranger to Bellarmine, Valentia, Suarez,
Vasquez, Tanerus, etc. and to our Divines, Reynold, Chamier, Calvin, Bucanus,
Tilenus, Daneus, Chemnitius, Luther, etc. who knows not this.

2. Neither major Proposition nor Assumption have any truth: for has God set
the Apostles, the planters and framers of Churches out of heathen societies, in
no Chair, but fixed them to a congregational Pulpit only? The Apostles have
care of all things, 2 Cor. 11. 28. command Schismatic Churches, 2 Cor. 10. 8.
plant and lay the foundation of Churches, as wise Master Builders, Acts 16. 12.
13, 14, 15, 16. and 18. 7, 8, 9, 10, 1 Cor. 3. 6. 11. appoint new offices in
the Church, Acts 6. 6. God has not every way se^ted officers in his Church, as
the King has placed Underjudges in the State.
Now if God have seated the Apostles in such a way in every congregation, as
ordinary Teachers are, then the Apostles proper place must be only to water
and confirm visible converts, and members of a fixed and framed congregation;
where then are the Apostles Letters Patents to build, to plant, to lay the
foundation?

3. When its said, as it must be, or it comes not home, the King has placed in
England the whole integral body of the Kingdom of England, the Lord Keeper, the
Lord chief Justice, the Constable, as he has placed in the Church Apostles and
Teachers in the whole integral Church: These extraordinary and ordinary
officers it cannot be meant, the King has placed a Lord Keeper, and a Lord
chief Justice in every Town and City of England; so neither has the Lord
placed an Apostle in every congregation upon the same account, and he who is an
Apostle in one congregation, can no more be an Apostle in another, than a Major
of one City can be a Major in another: and it must run so; The State has
placed a General, Colonels, Captains in their Armies, i. e. in every particular
society of the Armies, and so every company must have a General, therefore has
the State set Generals, Colonels, Captains in their Armies in the plural
number. Now the State has set but one General over all the Army, as the Church
is but one.

4. If the Argument run thus: As the Major of Norwich Let M. H. answer whether
the Major of Norwich may lawfully do justice upon one of York, who is oppressed
by his fellow-citizen of York, as the pastor of Boston may tender the L. Supper
to 20 of the congregation of Hartford. Here the parallel is broken, I judge.
Way of the Churches of N. E. c 6. sect. 1. p. 103. Mr. Cotton of the keys, c.
5. p 17. M. H. Survey.
may not rule as Major of York; so neither may a pastor in one congregation
teach and rule as a pastor in another congregation. This is utterly false: and
its an Argument like this, As God has confined Rulers to one society only in
the civil State, so has he confined the officers of his Sons House: one word
of Scripture to prove this should silence Mr. R. Its not lawful to devise
parallels between the Civil State and Christ's Kingdom. Suppose all the Majors,
Rulers, Citizens of all the Cities and Towns in England had the same divine
right to command in all the Cities and Towns in England, and that these Majors
were Rulers equally and in common to all those Towns, and that it were a matter
of providential Order, not of Divine Jurisdiction, that A. B. should be fixed
Major of Norwich, and C. D. fixed Major of York, and so forth: then if C. D. by
providence should be at Norwich, he might rule as a Major at Norwich, or any
Town or City of England, as well as at York: and so is here the matter; a
called pastor is a pastor, and may act pastorally, and dispense the Seal of the
Lords Supper to those of another congregation, say our Brethren, and so to
another whole congregation; for there is the same reason in both.

So all visible professors have the same divine Church-right to the same Christ
the Head:

2. To the same Gospel and Covenant of grace: (for d^stinct Church-covenants
are men's lawless inventions, as used by our Brethren.)

3. To the same Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10. 17.

4. To the same eternal life So Mr. H. shall gain nothing by this, but lose:
for there is no such right civil, common to civil Rulers and civil Citizens.
One Town has City privileges that no other Town in the Kingdom has.

Mr. H. Right of Jurisdiction flowing from office-call, a Pastor has not, save
in his own congregation.

Ans. There must be one call or other for a Pastor to exercise his office: but
a new office, or new right of jurisdiction There is some call required for a
Pastor to put forth pastoral acts, but no new office, no new right of
jurisdiction.
other then pastoral, which he received in ordination, is not requisite for a
pastor to act as a pastor. Yea, he sins against his office-charge and talent,
if in all congregations he do not preach the word, be instant in season and out
of season (not at Ephesus only, for an Evangelist, such as Timothy was, not an
ordinary fixed Teacher) if he do not reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all
long-suffering, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. The danger of perishing of souls, or the
absence, or removal of the Pastors by death, is a fit call of God, though the
greater part of Sardis love not to be rebuked.

Mr. H. God has set in his Church, i. e. in the congregation existing in its
particulars, Apostles, etc. and therefore all congregations The place 1. Cor.
12. 28. God has set in the Church, is not meant of only Mr. H. his
congregational Church.
are here intended.

Ans. 1. By this God has set Apostles, Miracles, in the single congregation,
whether as Apostles, or as Pastors, if the former, speaking with Tongues,
working of Miracles, which are for unbeleevers and heathen, 1 Cor. 14. 22.
shall be officers or gifts ordained for visible Saints converted. By what
Scripture?

2. Though the Church exclude not the congregations, but in some respects
include them; yet it is a body called Christ mystical, v. 12. to which Christ
is head by influence of his spirit, and brings no small consolation to us, as
Beza, Calvin, Pet. Martyr, who make this the Catholic Church.

3. Whereas Mr. H. his single congregation of Magus and Judas can hardly stand
under the weight of that denomination.

Nor 4 can it well be said, that great Apostles, Prophets, workers of Miracles,
such as speak with Tongues, are eyes and ears fixed in single congregations;
for this is such an organical body, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Never
Interpreter, neither Occumenius, nor Augustine, nor Beza, Calvin, Martyr,
Pareus, nor Beza on 1 Cor. 12. 12. Adeo (...), Ecclesia tota nihil aliud sit
quam unus Christus; quoniam videlicet, totum corpus mysticum a capite
denominatur. Calvin. Locus plenus eximiae consolationis -- ut Christus nolit
tantum in se, sed etiam in membris suis censeri and recognosci -- vocat
Ecclesiam complementum illius, Ephesians. 1. 23. Pet. Martyr. Hoc corpus vivit
spiritu Christi, and hac de re praeclarum habemus fidei articulum quo Ecclesiam
Catholicam confitemur. Occumenius. Ibid. Ita Christus multa quidem habet m^mbra
(nempe singulos fideles) unum vero corpus -- perfectum ergo Catholicum. Pareus
in loc. Minus videtur fieri posse, ut tam diversae sortis, na ionis,
conditionis homines in unum corpus coeant, and tamen per unum Spiritum Christo
omnes uniuntur: ut sit in tanta diversitate intima societas and Communio
Sanctorum, ubi cunque locorum habit^nt. August. De unitat. Eccles. c. 4. Totus
Christus caput and corpus est -- sponsus and sponsa duo in una carne. English
Divines, An. 27. All the faithful wheresoever they are, make but one whole
body. You Corinthians are not the whole body, but members only, neither all the
members, but a part only.
judicious Papists, Victorinus, Carthusian, Estius, Cajetanus, expound it, as
Mr. H. of a single congregation, but of the Catholic Church (says Martyr) of
men of all nations (says Pareus) though they dwell in diverse places of the
earth (says Pareus) this is the mystical body (says Estius) membra autem
omnes fideles, the members are all the faithful. He proves (says Cajetanus)
omnes Christianos esse unum corpus Christi, all Christians (behold the
Catholic Church) to be the one body of Christ, because they are all begotten
into one Spirit by Baptism.

4. The Church here is the Church all baptized into one body, whether Jews or
Gentiles, whether Bond or Free, which all drink the same drink in the Lords
Supper. Mr. H. In all these congregations are comprehended both Jews and
Gentiles, for the whole nature of the General is comprehended in the
Particulars. Well; and the Spirit that is in all the body must be one Genere,
and the drink in the Lords Supper must be one Genere, and so must the Christ of
which we partake be one Genere Hence there being many species and kinds of
congregations different in nature, there must be many Christ's different in
nature, many Spirits, many Bodies, many Lords Suppers different in species and
nature, of which we partake. Who ever heard in the Church of Christ many
Christ's, many Baptismes?

Yet Mr. H. makes many congregations so different in nature, as he that has
right to Christ, Seals, especially Baptism, has no more right to Christ,
Baptism to his seed, censures in another congregation, then a Turk has.

5. Its absurd that Jews and Gentiles are all baptized unto one single
congregation. We do not think that the Apostles (ad Ioh. Baptist) baptized all
the thousands, as tried converts, into visible framed Congregations, whom they
b^ptized, Mat. 3. So the Brethren. We think the contrary. Nor can such dream,
as that these thousands so baptized can be warrantably obtruded as a platform
of discipline upon the Churches of Christ.

5. This (we are all one) must be in the head Christ, and by faith really
apprehending Christ; yea, as the Father and the How absurdly our Brethren say
we are one body, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
Son are one, John 17. 21, now not only members of an Independent congregation
are so one, but also all believers of a Province, of a Nation; yea, all that
shall believe in God, through the word of the Apostles, John 17. 20. and all
given of the Father to Christ: who shall behold the glory that the Father has
given to Christ, John 17. 24. and who abide in him as branches in the Vine
tree, John 15 4. Except we say no Believers, even dissolved Members, and such
as live in the Church of Rome by faith, and yet are afraid to confess, are not
one with God, by faith, because they are not members of the single congregation.

6. No more can it be said, we are all one, as touching the nature of
Ordinances and Seals, so we believe. But so Judas, Magus, and a congregation of
these is the body of Christ their head. Give Scripture for that.

2. Not the single Congregation only, but also all these of diverse
congregations. who eat one bread, being many, are one body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. by
our brethrens grant.

3. This is an union by institution, conditional, and actu primo: but the Text
speaks of a real union by faith and the spirit, 2 Cor. 12. 13.

7. By this interpretation, when Paul says the body is one, he means a
generick body; and the particular congregations are subjective parts, suitable
to the whole: Now it is unconceivable to know how congregations are eyes, and
ears, and organs to congregations, except there be an integral whole body,
which they deny: nor do we think that congregations are organs, in the sense
that Apostles or Teachers are organs How many congregations make one organical
body, and are organs and members of the same.
to watch officially over congregations: but otherwise the Elders of
congregations are official organs, and overseers to the associate congregations.

2. It is only an elegant Allegory, and holds only in the particulars for
which it is brought, especially in organical care and sympathy, to be grieved,
and suffer with suffering members, and to rejoice with the honored members, 1
Cor. 12. 26. Romans 12. 5, 15.

And 3. Congregations are visible members one of another, in regard of eminency
of gifts, holiness and zeal. As Paul, 1 Cor. 19. 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 11. 28.
James beheaded, Acts 12. John was eminent for suffering, Rev. 1. what Eusebius,
Jerome, Cent. 1. Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. l. 3. c. 32. Hieron. Cato Scrip. Eccles.
say of James the Son of Alpheus called Iustus, thrown over the Pinnacle of the
Temple, Simon of Canaan crucified under Trajanus: prove they dying for the
truth, not as Apostles, but as eminent witnesies, edified by their gifts and
zeal the whole Catholic Church. Peter and Paul were martyred at Rome, Andrew
crucified in Achaia, Matthew beheaded in Ethiopia, Bartholomew in Armenia,
Simon Zelotes in Britain. The eminency and learning of the Martyr Cyprian,
Athana^ius his soundness in the faith against Arrians, Epiphanius against the
Heresies of Nazia. in laud. Athana. Histor. Magd. Cent. 4. Socrat. l. 5. c. 6.
Ru^^in. l. 1. c. 9. Theod. l. 5. c. 8. Sozo. l. 6. c. 32. Congregations in
their eminent parts are organical parts of the Catholic integral visible
Church.
his time, Nazianzen against the Heresy of Apollinaris, Basilius against the
Heresy of Eunomius: Hilarious, Ambrose instrumental against Arrians, Augustine
against Pelagians, Donatists: and huge multitudes of famous instruments through
the Catholic Church, prove, that they were not eminent as members only of a
single congregation, but that congregations in their eminent members are
organs, members and parts of the Catholic integral Church visible. For all
these were more visible in their times, for the good of the Catholic body,
then of a part or single Independent congregation.

8. Organs as organs are only and principally for the proper functions and
operations and good of that body whereof they are organs only, the eye to see
for that body: and should the eye of John see for Peter, Paul, and thousands of
individual men, it should not be the eye of Peter only: no more can Apostles
who see for all the Churches, Mat. 28. 20. Gal. 2. 7 8. 2 Cor. 11. 28. Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 13. and such as have the gift of Tongues and Miracles to speak to all
Nations in their own language, for the planting of the Gospel, be set as eyes
and organs, to see and watch for a single congregation where the Gospel is
received and believed already, and where ordinarily they speak one language.

9. The absurd inconsistency of Mr. H. is clear in his interpretation; All the
members of the body being many, are one body, that is, one genere, for the
genus exists and acts in the particular kinds, page 247. So Paul must teach us
Logic, and oneness Metaphysical here, (...), which Scripture teaches us not.
Sure, here it is not taught, for the oneness here is in Christ, v. 12. (...).
in one Spirit of Christ, v. 13. in one common office of love, to work every one
for another, and the use of another, v. 14, 15, 16. in one sympathy and
fellowfeeling of affection, that one member suffer and rejoice accordingly with
another, v. 26.

10. Ver. 21. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee. By Mr. H.
his interpretation, one Church Independent of Boston can say, I have no member^
need, no organical-need of Hartford Church, and so the gloss of Mr. H.
contradicts the holy Ghost. It will not help what our Brethren say, One
congregation One congregation has member-need of all the congregations; (...),
they are all one body ^ble.
has need of another, for rebuking, teaching, counselling.

1. For a Papist, an heathen Idolater stands in need of a Christian to rebuke
and convince him of his Idolatry, but its no member-need such as Paul means;
for Papists, heathen Idolaters, and a sound Christian, are not fellow members
of one and the same visible body of Christ baptized by one Spirit, of which
Paul speaks, ver. 12, 13, 14, 15 etc. John blind has need of Thomas his
eyes to lead him, but that is not memberneed, or vital body-organical-need, for
then the eyes of Thomas should be organs and members of John; its only
extrinsecal need. So that yet every congregation must say to another, I the
congregation of Boston have no need of thee my sister, or of any congregation
on earth, in the sense of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor 12. as one member of the body
has need of another, the head of the feet, for I am a complete Independent
body, having no memberneed of any sister Church on earth.

2. If one congregation stand in member need of all the congregations of Jew
and Gentile baptized unto one body, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22. to
tender the Supper upon occasion to them and their members, as Scripture, 1 Cor.
10. 16, 17. and our Brethren teach; and stand in need of the Church-praying,
Church-praising, Church confirmation by pastoral teaching of eminent Teachers,
and of Church suffering, etc. by Martyrdom and otherwise; Then must that
congregation be a visible member with all visible congrega^ions on earth, and,
by good Logic, all the congregations on earth are one integral catholic
visible Church.

11. If the Apostle here condemn a Schism and Rent, not from one single
congregation only, but from the body of Jews and Gentiles baptized into one
Spirit, ver. 12, 13. and 25. from the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 5 20. from all
Churches, Jude v. 19. and commend union with all Churches, because of one
Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. then he supposes they are one
Body. Cyprian B. of Carthage, Cornelius B. of Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43. Socrat. l. 2.
c. 38. Parum abfuit, quin co^dunarentur. Aug. de unit. Eccles. sive cont.
Petilianum, t^m. 7. Quaestio inter nos v^rsatur ubi sit Ecclesia, utrum apud
nos, an apud illos, quae utique una est, quam Majores nostri Catholicam
nominarunt, ut ex ipso nomine ostenderent, quae per totum orbem est. Optat.
M^livit. adv. Parmenianum Donatist. l. 2. Ecclesia est una -- eam apud vos
solos esse dixisti; Ergo ut in particula Africae. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 13.
sect. 14. Pet. Mart. Com. in 1 Reg. 12. Disp. de Schismate, page 101.
Rome, justly excommunicated Novatus, denying mercy to them that fell: Ergo,
those great Churches made one visible body, and the Novatians were not
Schismatics, because they separated from one single congregation; but, says
Socrates, they hindered the Churches from union. Augustine and Optatus Melivit.
and the Fathers make the Donatists Schismatics in separating from the
catholic Church, and denying there was any Church but their own in one part of
Africa. See Pet. Martyr learnedly disputing about Schism; and Calvin. See Aug.
and Opt. Melivitan.

12. Its true (says Mr. H.) of all congregations, that the members do and
should care one for another.

Ans. And this (12) I bring for one Argument, if this gloss of Mr. H. remove
all member-care and all organical-care of suffering and joy, such as is betwixt
the members of the same body, from congregations toward all other
congregations, as toward their fellow members, and limit member care, and
member fellow-feeling, to only members of the same congregation: then this
gloss must contradict the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 26. And whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it: for this gloss says, I the Church of Boston, complete
and independent within my self, care not with member care for all the
congregations on earth, though they utterly perish; nor do I rejoice with the
fellow-feeling joy of fellow members, at the honor and spiritual good of all
the congregations on earth. Sure this doctrine cannot One congregation is to
suffer and rejoice with a fellowfeeling of membership at the weal and we of
all congregations on earth; Ergo, all the congregations on earth make one
Catholic integral visible body.
be of God, which is so contrary to Scripture; for that was not typical in the
Old Testament, that the members of the Jewish Church should sorrow and rejoice
with members of that covenanted Nation, as with those m^mbers of the same body;
as David, Psalm. 19. 2. and 122. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8 and 119. 63. Moses, Exodus 2. 11.
Heb. 11. 24, 25. Mordecai and Esther, Esth. 2. 1, 2. ver. 15, 16, 17. cap. 21,
22. and the captive people, Psalm. 137. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and Jeremiah, cap. 9. 1,
2, 3. Ezekiel, cap. 9. 8. and 11. 13. Daniel, cap. 9 16, 17, 18, etc. but we
are not to mourn with those that mourn, nor to rejoice with those that rejoice,
as Romans 12. 15, with a fellow-feeling affection, as with members of the same
visible body, though their weal and woe be most visible to us, as their Church
and Saintship is, except with those only who are members of the same
Independent congregation, for they are not of the body of which we are members:
as the body of Socrates feels no member pain when the finger of John is cut off.

7. There is a body to be gathered into the unity of faith, Arg. 7.
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, a body to be glorified, Ephesians. 4. 13.
Now this is the Catholic Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. proves an
integral Catholic Church visible.
and the Lords end why he gave Apostles, Prophets and Doctors, till we be all
glorified; and this Church is visible, because gathered and edified by a
Ministry, they are the visible Church which is fed by Ministers.

The Church built upon the Rock, against which the gates of Arg. 8.
hell cannot prevail, can be no single congregation, for the gates of hell
prevail against the single congregation; therefore it must be the Catholic
Church which only continues to the Matthew. 16, 17, 18, 19. proves a Catholic
integral Church.
end. And this Church is visible, for to the Ministers thereof are the Keys
given to open and shut the Kingdom of Heaven by the word preached, seals and
censures, Matthew. 16. Ergo, there is a Catholic integral militant Church
visible.

If Christ reign by the preached word, seals and censures, over Arg. 9:
the Kingdoms of the World, Rev. 11. 15. over the Nations, Isa. 2. 1, 2. Psalm.
2 8, 9. Psalm. 22. 27, 28. Psalm. 96. 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 97. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
Psalm. 98. 7, 8 9. Psalm. 99. 1, 2, 3. and have a visible government in the house
of David, Isa. 9. 7. over the earth, Isa. 11. 4, 10, 11. from sea to sea, Psalm.
72. 8 etc. then is there a Catholic integral visible Church: but the former is
true.

Obj. All our Divines say it is a Popish tenet, that the Catholic Church is
visible: our Divines acknowledge no Church visible, but only a particular
Church.

Ans. Mr. Hudson a learned and godly man reaps so cleanly, In what sense our
Divines affirm or deny the Church to be visible: The Church which is catholic,
in regard of time, and of all ages, and of places, and nations, is not visible,
nor is it ever visible, i. e. conspicuously glorious before men, as learned Mr.
Hudson.
that I shall not cast any sickle into his field, no^ is there need.

1. The Papists contend for a catholic visible Church, to set their man of sin
over it: this Church includes (some of them say) Purgatory, and Heaven, and
Hell, of both which he bears Salmeron in Matthew. 16. 19^ Cornel. a Lap. Dat ergo
ipse indulgentiam defunctis, non per modum juridicae absolutionis, quia
defuncti illi non sunt amplius subditi, sed per modum suffragii. Bellarm. De
purgato. l. 2. c. 15. Justi defuncti sunt membra hujus corporis. Bellarm. De
purg. l. 2. c. 16. Bellarm. De notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 4. Prima nota est, ipsum
Catholicae Ecclesiae and Christianorum nom^n. Ibid. Pacian. ad Sympronian,
Dicit nomen Catholicum convenire capiti principali, and trunco illius arboris,
unde multi ^an^^ va^ temporibus excinduntur.
the Keys. Salmeron, Cornel, a Lapide, they may be loosed that are under the
earth by Keys, as members of the body. He gives (says Cornelius a Lapide)
pardons to the dead (invisible members indeed) not by way of juridical
absolution, for the dead are no longer subjects on earth, but by way of
suffrage. B^llarmin proves from Pet. Cluniacens. that the dead in Purgatory are
members of the catholic Church. And the Pope (says Bellarmin) as the chief
dispenser of the treasures of the Church, may bestow upon those in Purgatory,
bona opera poenalia quae in Thesauro sunt, the good works of the godly done by
way of suffering. In this the Catholic Church cannot be visible.

2. The Papists contend for a catholic Church visible, such as we believe to
be the catholic Church in the Apostles Creed. So Bellarmin makes the name of
Catholics, and the name of Christians all one, and the catholic Church a tree
from which, through diverse times and ages, branches have been cut. And so must
be, as Rodericus de Arriaga, Catholic, extending it self Roder. de Arri. To.
5. tract. de fide disp. 7. sec. 3. Est Catholica, hoc est, communis,
universalis; extendit enim se licet diversis temporibus, ad totum mundu^. Ad.
Tanne. De fide, spe. disp. 1. q. 3. dub. 3. n. 75, 76. Vincent. Li^inen.
Tann^rus Jesuita Tom. 3. Quod ubique, quod ab omnibus, quod semper -- de
universalitate temporum ad finem usque mundi, a primo sui exo^tu perpetuo --
Ps. 88. 30. Ponam in seculum seculi semen ejus, and universalitatem locorum
Scripturae -- Ps. 8. Dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam. Alb. Pighius
Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae, l. 1. c. 1. page 2. Una and universalis, nullo
certo loco, nulla regi^ne and patria, nulla Gente, natione aut populo, nullo
denique tempore conclusa, circumscripta aut determinata. Whitaker de Eccles. l.
3. ad Duraeum, fol. 69. Catholica Ecclesia non modo nostrae aetatis finibus
circumscribenda non est, sed ipsos quoque Patriarchas, Prophetas, Apostolos,
Sanctosque omnes qui vel sunt, fuerunt, vel futuri sunt, complectitur; haec
Ecclesia ex singulis horum temporum Ecclesiis constans est visibilis^ nihil
minus. Anton. Sedeel Respons. Ad fidei quam vocant professionem a Monachis
Burdega lensibus factam, A^. 1585. etc. Ar. 60. page 5^3. Si Ecclesia Catholica
significat ve^os sideles and electos, qui fuerunt, qui sunt, quique futuri
sunt, oportet istos Monachos miro oculorum a cum^ne praeditos and
perspicuitate, si cernere possint Ecclesiam Catholicam -- necessario igitur
constituendum est discrimen inter Ecclesiam Catholicam and Ecclesiam visibilem;
nam Ecclesiae visibiles sunt particulares, ut erant Apostolorum tempore
Ecclesiae Corinthio^um, Ephesiorum -- in his solent esse Hypocritae and Reprobi
non pertinentes ad hanc Ecclesiam particularem. See D. Willet 2. Gene. Contra.
q. 1. par. 2. page 67. Pareus in Ursin. q. 54. Art. 2. page 303. Tilenus
Syntag. dis. 14. d. 1. These. 36, 37. Professo. Leid. in Synop. Pur. Theol. dis.
40. th. 8. Parts hujus Ecclesiae (...) consideratae statuunt Pontificii tres,
unam laborantem in purgatorio, alteram triumphantem in coelis, tertiam
militantem in terra, etc. Th. 9, 10, 11. praes^im Th. 26, 27, 28, 30, 32, 33.
all the world over in diverse ages and times. Ad. Tannerus, The Church is
called Catholic for the Universality of the Doctrine, and the Universality of
Time, from the beginning of the World to the end, enduring ^or ever; and for
the Universality of the Place. Now they make the Pope the head and chief Pastor
of this Church catholic. D. Whitaker says, the catholic Church contains not
only the Church of our time, but the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and all
the Saints which have been, are, or shall be to the end; and is this Church
which is made up of the Churches of these times visible. These Monks must be
exceeding sharp sighted (says Anton. Sadeel) who see this Church, and see the
Apostles and Martyrs in Heaven.

3. Nor has Mr. H. cause to cast this signification of visible, that it is
taken for conspicuous and glorious. Nor is it worthy the refuting, that he
^aith that Bellarmin distinguishes visible and conspicuously glorious; for he
must split a hair of the head, as to its latitude, who can distinguish
Bellarmins fifteen notes: many of his own side reduce them to a fewer number.

2. Conspicuity of glory is but visibility in such and such ways, Conspicuity
of glory is visibility.
as amplitude and multitude all the world over; visibility in glory of
preaching, of working miracles, and victory over their enemies, and external
prosperity, which are things most visible, and not done in a corner.

3. Their own men speak not, but as Mr. Hudson does, the Jesuits of Rhemes An.
3. on Matthew. 5. explain this conspicuity, The light of the World, and City on a
Mountain, and Candle upon a Candlestick, signifies the Clergy and whole
Church, which must needs be visible to the World. See how D. Fulk and Mr.
Cartwright answers them. Malderus a Bish. Antwer. profess. Lov. in 22. de
virtu. Theol. de Obj. fidei disp. 1. A^. 10. q. 3. The Catholics yield that
the Church is not ever aeque conspicuam, alike conspicuous, Res. ad 3. Habet
tamen suas proprietates visibiles, It has its visible properties, true
miracles, works of holiness, antiquity, visible succession, perseverance on the
rock: and this is all one as to be conspicuous and visibly glorious. Gregor. de
Valentia Tom. 3. in 22. disp. 1. q. 1. de Obj. fidei punct. 7. 6. propriet. p.
142, 143. The Church is not adeo conspicua, that it may be seen with the eyes,
but yet it may evidenter omni seculo conspici, be evidently in every age seen,
known, and pointed out by the finger, as a City on a mountain, Matthew. 5. as the
Sun in the Heaven, Psalm. 19. And disp. 1. q. 1, punct. 4. page 78, 79. he
proves the glory of miracles, and other the like, make the Church of Rome, and
not of Sectaries (as he names us) to be visibly known to all the world. And
Tannerus Tom. 3. de fide, spe, q. 1. dis. 3. dub. 3. n. 85. Insignibus
quibusdam notis inter omnes alios coetus eminet, its conspicuous and glorious
above all other societies, by these properties, that it is One, 2. Holy, 3.
Catholic in Doctrine, Time, Places. And Causabon. in Epistola ad Cardinalem
Baronium. Olim Ecclesia Catholica similis civitati supra montem positae nullo
pacto dubia erat, sed nota omnibus, perspicua, certa, long lateque per orbem
diffusa, sub Imperatoribus florens, quorum dominatio ab ortu ad Occasum, a
Septentrione ad Meridiem porrigebatu^ -- at distractionem imperii postea secuta
est distractio Ecclesiae Catholicae, ex illo tempore Ecclesia Catholica non
desiit esse quidem, sed minus illustris esse coepit. So Iunius disp. Theolo.
43. Th 11. It may be there is no particular Church public nota, publicly
known on earth, but that all have losed their external splendour. And what this
differs from conspicuity and glory let Mr. H. or any man show: and what glory
and conspicuity is in the Christian Churches, and what Sea-ebbings and flowings
that glory has, read (though all be not to be believed which some say) Philip
Nicolai. l. 1. de Regno Christ. etc. Bellarmin de notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 7. Io.
Gerard. to. 5. de Eccles. Buc. loc. 41. q. 7. page 459. Ratione adjunctorum
cacholica Ecclesia est invisibilis, quae vera tantum Christi membra, seu
electos -- complectitur. Id^i^^o vocatur invisibilis hominum tantum respecta.
Quia vera fides, quae est differentia constitutiva Ecclesiae (fides vera in
coetu non in uno homine) and per quam Ecclesia est id quod est, in cord sita
est, and proinde invisibilis -- and nisi a Deo (...), certo cognosi no^ potest.
A^to. walaeus Magnus Theologus Tom. 1. locor. Comm. de Eccles. page 43.
Ecclesia invisibilis vocatur Catholica, and comprehendit omnes ve^e ^ideles,
qui per totum orbem terrarum Dei oculis conspicui sunt; vocatur vero
invisibilis, quia universalitas fidelium nulli homini est conspicua. 2. Quia
fides and ipsa regeneratio quae est ^uj^ Ecclesiae (...), ab hominibus videri
non potest. Ursinus, quo non est major in Theologo^um cho^^, Catech. q. 44. Ar.
2. Joan. Piscator, loc. 23. de Eccles. These 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Magnus
Colvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. Refertur ad omnes electos Dei, in quorum (...) sunt
etiam qui morte defuncti sunt. Sec. 3. Coet^^u ad amplexandsm eam unitatem
nihil opus est Ecclesiam ipsam oculis ce^re, vel maribus palpare, quin po^i^^
co quod in fide sita est, admonemur nihilominus cogitandam, dum intelligentiam
nostram praeterit, quam si palam appareat, etc. lib. 4. c. 8. sect. 7, 8, 9
etc. wind^linus Christ. Theo^. 1. c. 28. Th. 16. page 578, 579 Luc. T^ Pater
loc. 16. art. 3. n. 4. Quid sit Catholica, page 426. Froneisc. Iunius. The.
Theo. disp. 43. th. 4. Cumplectitur ergo haec Ecclesia Catholica omnes universe
homines in coelo and in terra, qui fuerunt, sunt, and futuri sunt illius
vocationis divinae and grat^o^ae participes, The. 8. Cum potior pars in coelis
triumphans sit, a conspectu hominum remota sit, tota haec Ecclesia visibiiis
nobis esse non possit; quinimo quaslibet particulares Ecclesias ad eam
paucitatem posse redigi, ut non sit aliqua Christi vera visibilis Ecclesia
mundo in terris public nota, eam vero interdum externum suum splendorem
amittere, hominum oculos latere -- asserimus. Chemnitius exam. Conc. Trident.
c. 6. can. 7. page 285. Catholicum Vincentius Lirinen. recte definit, quod
semper, quod ubique and ab omnibus similiter observatum fuit -- neque enim
caput a membris, hoc est, Christum ab Ecclesia, and principalia membra; hoc
est, Apostolos cum sua doctrina and exemplis a reliquo corpore Ecclesiae
resecare debemus, quando de catholica seu universa Ecclesia lequimur. Joan.
Gerhardus tom. 5. de Eccles. c. 11. number. 151. Hujus catholicae Ecclesiae caput
est Christus, membra omnes vere credentes, sive in coelis jam dum triumphent,
sive in terris adhuc militent -- hujus proprietates sunt, quod sit Sancta, quod
invisibilis. Hieron. Zanchius, tom. 7. de Ecces. c. 3. Est fidelium coetus. c.
5. omnes particulares Ecclesiae sunt una and eadem Christi Ecclesia. c. 7. ar.
1. sub hac universali visibili Ecclesia continentur privatae and particulares,
seu illius parts, etc. See Turrianus in 22. de fid. spe. de Eccles. disp. 15.
dub. 1. disp. 14. dub. 1. dub. 2. Roder. de Arriag. to 5. sect. 4. sect. 5.
Bellar. to. 2. de Eccles. Mil. l. 3. c. 12. De pontisic. Romans l. 1. c. 10.
Phil. Gamach. to. 3. disp. de Indulg. c. 3. de protestate applicand: Thesaurum
Ecclesiasti. Gregor. de Valent. in 22. tom. 3. de fid. spe. disp. 1. q. 1. de
obj. fidei, p. 7. sect. 26. sect. 27. sect. 28. Suarez. tom. de. fid. spe.
disp. 9. sect. 8. n. 1, 2, 3.
c. 11. sect. 5. n. 184, 185, 186. Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. c. 24. Cyprian. de unit.
Eccles. Tertullian. contra Iudaeos c. 3. Vega. in opus. de fid. and oper.
praesertim. c. 3. Acosta Jesuit. de procuratione Iudorum salutis.

4. Its not to be passed, that our Divines condemn a visible Our Divines deny
popish visibility of (...) catholic visible body under the Pope, but not the
visibility simply of the catholic church.
catholic Church only under one Pastor, the Bishop of Rome, the ministerial
head and catholic Pastor of Pastors over all the catholic Church on earth,
and taking upon him to be Pastor of Pastors: yea, and the Church of Rome is
perpetually visible, and (says Valentia) the Pope is the only head of this
catholic visible Church. The Heretics (says Suarez) deny in the catholic
Church (subjected to the Pope, as the visible head) proprietates ullas
visibiles, any visible properties by which it may be known from the Churches of
Satan. And therefore the Church must be invisible -- and therefore they deny
omnem externam hierarchiam Ecclesiae, caput visibile, regulam fidei animatam
and visibilem, all the external sacred order of Prelates, the visible head, the
living and v^sible rule of faith. That visibility of a head catholic^, and
visible body under that head we profess that we deny. Now that the Pope should
be the only Pastor of a Church, which by no possibility he can see, and that he
is the only feeder of such a flock, to him invisible: Suppose he had the eyes
of Argu^ ten thousand times, is that visibility of a Church catholic, of a
Church Diocesian, which we deny and detest? but we deny not, but teach that the
Church is visible in a right sense.

And 1. we teach that the catholic Church militant on earth is visible in its
parts, though it be not in its whole bulk and body all at once visible, as
Amesius, who also is in some points Ames. Medulla Theol. l. 1. c. 32. Th. 1.
Ecclesia quae in terris agit, quamvis non sit tota simul visibilis, in suis
tamen partibus est visibilis.
for this new way of Independency. So the whole body of the Heaven in both the
Hemispheres is visible when enlightened with the Sun, yet is not the whole
Heaven all at once visible to any man living So the whole element of Water is
visible, not all at once, and yet is so visible in its parts, in the parts of
the Sea, Rivers, Floods, as it were nonsense to say such a part of the Heaven,
and of the Sea, as in day light is obvious to our eyes, were simply invisible,
in that sense, that we say the mystical body of the catholic Church of sound
Believers is invisible, and believed, but not seen.

2. Therefore the Church catholic is 1. considered as comprehending all the
families in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians. 3. 15. Of the catholic church, and the
three Scriptural acceptions of the Word.
Heb. 12. 22, 23. Col 1. 20. this is the most large catholic Church consisting
of elect Men and Angels.

2. The catholic Church is that company of redeemed men for whom Christ died,
and it contains all that have been, are, or shall be, that are clarified and
presented without spot or wrinkle, sanctified by the washing of water by the
word, Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands love your Wives, as Christ also loved the Church --
27. that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, etc. and to this is
the place Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. referred. For which see Calvin, Beza, Zanchius on the
place, and especially solidly learned D. D. Boyd of Trochrigge, learned and
sharp Mr. Paul Baines in their learned Commentaries on Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. Hence
Augustine, It contains all the sanctified ones. But we do not now contend with
Papists concerning the catholic Church in August^ de Catech. c. 20. Cives sunt
omnes sanctificati homines qui fuerunt, and qui sunt, and qui futuri sunt.
its latitude of these two acceptions.

As 1. Whether the Elect Angels, and the Glorified in Heaven, and these that
are to be members of the catholic visible Church, but are not yet born, are
visible members?

2. Whether the Pope be visible head, and have the power of the Keys to feed
with word, censures, and seals, the Elect Angels, the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Martyrs, etc. who are now preferred in glory?

3. Whether the Church catholic in that latitude containing such noble
members, can err in a general Council, or out of it, or can err in
Fundamentals, and cease to be a Church? As to the latter acceptions, our
Divines condemn Papists, who tell us that the Pope is the visible head of the
visible catholic Church: we say we believe there is a catholic Church, but
visible it is not. And neither Mr. Hudson, nor I, nor any of ours do dispute
for a catholic integral visible Church, or for a catholic body of Presbyters
and Officers that are, have been, and now are glorified, and shall be born, as
if they were the first formal subject of the Keys. Mr. H. loses his time in
blotting paper to make us dispute any such question, and to bring in popish
inferences against us in that.

But 3. there is an integral catholic visible Church, to and Confess. of the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, An. 1063, 1644 1645, etc. c. 25. And the
large Catechism of that Assembly, page 91, 92. Synopsis purio. Theol. per. 5. 5.
Theo. professores in Academia Leydensi disp. 40. de Eccles. page 567. pres. th.
27 33, 34. The catholic Church is diverse ways visible.
for which Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, etc. The Lord has given all
his Ordinances, as by succession of ages it existeth on earth. See the accurate
Confession of Faith. See judicious dispute of the Professors of Leyden by
Anton. Walaeus worthy to be read of all, in which they solidly observe, that
many confound the particular Church, and the visible, and invisible, and
universal Church which are indeed to be distinguished, for the universal
integral Church is in its own way visible.

1. In its parts, as is said before.

2. In the community of profession of the same faith, both in preaching,
confession, and writings, so that it has no sense to limit visibility to one
single congregation, as our Brethren do. For our eyes may as well see two
congregations, and many to be visible Saints, and to worship in a Church Way
the same Lord Jesus, as we see the members of our own one congregation.

3. Whether Synods be for counsel and advice only, as our Brethren say?

Or 2. For pastoral teaching, and dogmatick determining of truths, for
edification, as Mr. Cotton contrary to his Brethren teaches.

Or 3. For jurisdiction: it is against common sense, to deny that the integral
catholic Church is visible in Synods, whether Occumenical, or National, or
Provincial; For the representative is as visible as the congregation. And
whereas our Divines say, that the Church is invisible, because faith which is
the specific and constitutive form of the Church, is invisible, and known only
to God the searcher of hearts; they are not so to be expounded, as if this were
their argument to prove that the catholic Church is invisible, and the
congregation only visible. Our Divines argument to prove that the catholic
church is invisible, is not because faith is only believed, and not visible.
Nor do they use such an argument for such a conclusion; for the true faith of
a congregation is as invisible and known to God only; yea, the faith of one
single member is as latent and invisible to the eye of sense, and more latent
then the faith of the whole catholic visible Church: for faith is persuaded
there is a visible Church, for the Scripture says, that Christ has a seed:
but the Scripture says not that this or that man, or that this congregation
has saving faith. Its true, the profession of the catholic Church is, because
of the universality, of Saints remoter from our senses, and so less visible;
which hinders not that to be true which our Divines say, that in time of great
persecution, the Churches knew not one another, as says Augustine, who also
compares her to the Moon, which August. de baptism. contra Donatist. l. 6. c.
4. August. in Psalm. 20. Fuilb. Ans. to the Rhemists, Rev. 12. An. 2. Cartwright
Ans. to Rhemists, Rev. 12. An. 5. Beda hist. l. 5. c. 22. Omnes Ecclesiae per
orbem unam Ecclesiam faciunt.
is often ^id, as in the time of Elias. And Ierom tells that the Christian
World sighed under Arrianism. The Pope by cruel wars banished those called
Waldenses, Albigenses, Pauperes de Lugduno Picardi; until Wickliff rose there,
was (says D. Fulk) about the time of 350. years, great darkness. See
Cartwright. Nor is it possible for Mr. H. to prove, that when our Divines do
say, particular Churches are visible, that they mean Mr. H. his particular
Independent congregations only: he is a great stranger in our Divines writings,
who knows not, that from Matthew. 18. Tell the Church, they prove that a general
Council has juridical power to censure Peter, or the Pope. Since learning was,
it was never counted a point of popery (except all our Reformers be Papists)
which Mr. H. cites from Turrianus, if it be spoken in Thesi (but he applies it
to the visible body under the Pope in Hypothesi) for it is but what Beda and
others say from Scripture, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. But as Papists in Thest speak soundly
in the attribute of Omnipotency: so here, when in Hypothest applying the
Doctrine of Omnipotency to their In what sense some of ours say the Churches in
the primitive times were congregational. See Didoclavius i. e. Mr. Calderwood
in altari Damasc. de Episcoporum gradibus, c. 2. p. 39, 40. item de Episcopi
potestate extensiva. p. 282, 283 Item quod Episcopus and Presbyter sint ejusde^
ordinis, p 298, 299, 300 D. D. To. Bodius a Trochoregia Com. in Ephesians. c. 4. v.
11. p. 504 M. Bains Diocesian Trial. Eusebius. hist. l. 3. Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians.
Eccle. Tertull. in Apol.
miracles, to Transubstantiation, to Adoration of Images, they vanish in vain
speculations. Nor can we deny, but some of our own have gone too far: one in
saying, that the Churches of the Apostles were not so numerous, but they met
all in one place, and that the Church of Alexandria, Hierapolis, Jerusalem,
were congregations that met in one place: they would explain their mind in that
point more circumstantiately, if they were to speak thereof again. But their
purpose is in the point of Prelacy to prove a true conclusion of P. Bains, that
the Scripture gives no warrant to a Diocesan Church, that is, to 60 or 100
congregational Churches to be fed by Word, Seals and Censures, by one little
Monarch called a Prelate: whereas the Church fed so, as is said, is a single
congregation meeting in the same place, (...).

2. There cannot be an ordinary exercise of the Keys by the weekly converse of
the Officers of 80 or 100 Churches so many miles separated one from another.

3. Its true, Eusebius in diverse places calls the Churches of Alexandria,
Hierapolis, etc. Par^^cias, congregational meetings; and Ignatius writes to the
Church of Ephesus, that they should convene (...); and Tertullian says, the
Churches of his time met in one body. All which is true of the Churches
distributively. But Cyprian shall resute them, who says, the Church of Carthage
was one congregation. Scripture, Reason, Fathers, shall quickly speak against
them, who shall say the Church of Rome, of Constantinople, were one
congregational Church under Cornelius and Chrysostom.

CHAP. VII.
Ordination, not Election of the people, gives the essentials to Officers. 2.
The method and order of Ordination and Election. 3. The place 1 Timothy 4. 14.
touching the laying on of hands of the Presbytery, is opened. 4. The necessity
of laying on of hands. 5. Designation to a certain flock is not essential to a
Pastor.

MR. H. Ordination, according to the mind of Mr. R. and Mr. H. Survey, par. 2.
c. 2. con. 2. p. 52, 53. Mr. R. his order of ordination before election hinders
not ordination to give the essentials to the call of officers.
his method, as preceding the Election of the people, does not give the
essentials to the outward call of a Minister.

Ans. Ordo causandi non tollit ipsam c^^salitatem. If Plate say the soul was
created before the body, this will not prove but body and soul are essential
causes of man. So because Ordination administered Mr. R. his way and method
gives not the essentials to a Minister; this by no Logic can cashier
Ordination from an essential cause thereof.

Mr. H. Luke says, Acts 6. first they chose Steven, ver. 5. then the Apostles
laid on hands, ver. 6. if not any but those who are elected by the people
should be ordained, and all such who were so chosen could not be refused, then
to ordain before choice, is neither to make application of the Rule, or a
communicating of the Right in an orderly manner. But the first is plain, the
Apostles would not take that sovereignty in ordaining Elders, therefore they
would not allow their Scholars to arrogate to call so, Acts 14. 23. When they
had created them Elders in every Church, (the Geneva, When they had ordained
Elders by election of the people) and prayed, and fasted, they commended them
to God, etc. then the officers had a full call, and a full night to the
execution of their office before laying on of hands, which is not necessary;
and must not the setting in order things amiss be done by Titus, i. e. the
Officers and the Church also? Tit. 1. 5.

Ans. 1. Luke says not they were elect called officers with See D. Bilson,
Perpet. Gover. c. 7.
a full call and full right, before the Apostles laid on hands: for Mr. R.
says they were chosen, that is, nominated as godly men before the Apostles
laid on hands; as David and Saul were both chosen, set apart by God before
unction and choice of Formal and complete election is later than ^^dination.
the people, but they were not formally chosen Kings, having full royalty,
while as yet the people knew them not from other men: but the seven men were
not formally and completely chosen as officers, before ordination, and so had
neither right, nor official full right to be their Deacons, while the Apostles
ordained them: for this Rite (say Beza, Bullinger, Calvin, Gualther, Diodati,
English Divines) used in Sacrifices, was used in creating Cypr. l. r. Ep. 4.
alias 68. Leo Ep. 87. c. 1. Calvin. Acts 6. Praescribunt autem Apostoli quales
deligi opo^reat -- atque hoc inter tyrannidem and confusam licentiam est
medium, ut nihil quidem agatur nisi ex consensu and approbatione plebis.
Gualth. in ioc. Totius Ecclesiae consensu and authoritate Diaconi electi sunt.
of officers, (...), ver. 3. to choose is a far lower word, as Cyprian says,
it notes Pl^bis approbationem: Leo, con sensum plebis: Calvin, the approbation
of the people. What then is the Apostles and officers part? Authority official
there must be, laying on of hands (says Mr. H.) was not of necessity required:
yea, but its safer to believe the holy Ghost, it was done; then it was no
unnecessary complement, the cup was given to the people by the Apostles, 1 Cor.
11. True, (say Papists as Mr. H.) it was not of necessity required. 2. (Though
there be a wide difference in the matter) if none should be ordained but those
only that are first chosen, (as formally and completely as their fixed (...))
then election goes before ordination. Mr. R. denies the connection, and desires
Mr. H. to prove it: yea, the contrary follow^; Ergo, the people cannot
appropriate the man to be their fixed officer, nor consent he be theirs only
(and this to me is only formal election) until he first be ordained an officer.
The sick man cannot choose A. B. to be his Physician, until he first be a
Physician, nor can a Scholar choose C. D. to be his Teacher of Philosophy,
until C. D. he first a Philosopher.

3. The Assumption is false: But all such who are so chosen The people cannot
choose A. B. to be their fixed pastor, until A. B. be first a pastor.
could not be refused; then must the Elders be necessitated to lay hands on
Nicolaus, though they know him to be the head of that unclean Sect, of which
Epiph^nius, Ir^s, D^roth^^s, T^rtullian judge him to be leader: Why? the people
have chosen him, then the Elders must lay on hands suddenly on an heretical
Teacher, a Wolf: Why? they cannot refuse him (says Mr. H.) for, The people
has chosen him. What tyranny of conscience is here?

4. This calling of the Deacons, and consequently of all other officers, if we
suppose that the office was instituted (as now it was) by Mr. H. his way, might
well have been without either presence or acting of either Apostles or officers
(for says Mr. H. there was no necessity of laying on of hands) by the only
multitude, and I require one Scripture for the calling of one officer without
the concurrent acting of Apostles and officers, by the sole people, and can
show warrants for the presence and acting of Apostles and officers in the
calling of officers, especially those Acts 1. 15, 23. and 6. 6. and 14. 23.
Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3,
10. Revel. 2. 2. ver. 20. Acts 20. 28, 29, 30. and 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.

5. Be it as the Geneva reading says (as it is not) yet as Mr. M. Lazar.
Seaman of Ordination, arg. 1. Diatribe, p. 14. Stephan. in Thesauro. Mr. Leigh
in Crit. Sacr. in N. T. Bals. and Zonar. Can. 1. Apost. See Calvin Instit. l.
4. c. 3. sec. 15. Beza An. in Act. 14. 23. Ames. Bellarm. Enerv. tom. 2. l. 3.
p. 98, 99. Non negamus Paulum and Barnabam suffcagia sua tulisse, sed solos
illos negamus tulisse.
Seaman well observes, and Calvin says it also with Beza, the officers had
their official votes, and are said (...), as Stephanus, Mr. Leigh, Theodor.
Balsamo, Zonaras and Bellarmine grants it; and it proves, that the only people
created not officers, Ergo, by neither this place, nor by any other Scripture,
could they give them full right to their office. See Amesius and Calvin. Hence
if the officers by these places have suffrages and votes in ordaining of
officers, as why should the holy Ghost bid prophets separate Paul and Barnabas
for such a ministry, and command Timothy to lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5. 22. but on faithful men, that are able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Tit. 1. 5, 7, 8. if officers have no official work in creating officers, but
only to choose them, which any brother or woman may do? then it is not needless
that officers concur to create officers; and if it be not required of necessity
that they concur, it must be idle work both here and in the cited places, that
they concur, but because they did concur. I have as good reason, that the
peoples concurring in choosing was needless, though they did choose, as Mr. H.
has cause to say, the officers concurrence is needless in ordaining, though in
truth the Word of God require both as necessary.

Lastly, For the setting in order things, since these must be things of
jurisdiction also, we say juridical acts by no Scripture are ascribed to the
whole Church, except by the Church be understood the Church of Rulers, the rest
only consenting: which is our mind.

Mr. H. Arg. 2. That place 1 Timothy 4. 14. favors not Mr. R. for ordination by
officers, (...), 1. Notes gracious dispensations accompanying salvation, Heb.
6. 9. or freely given gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 9, 28. 1 Cor. 7. 7.

2. It notes offices, Romans 12. 6.

3. The grace of free justification, Rom 5. 15. Now its rather meant of grace
out habilities which Timothy received by way of prophecy, by which he was
fitted to that extraordinary work of an evangelist: the office is not first
attended, but the gifts with an eye to the office.

1. Its harsh; forget not the office that is in you: a man is more fitly said
to be in the office, an office is adjunctum adhaerens, not qualitas inhaerens.

2. The parallel place is 2 Timothy 1. 6. stir up the gift which is given thee by
the laying on of my hands: a man is not said to stir up his office.

Ans. There is nothing here to weaken Mr. R. for 1. it The place 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, etc. is opened, and M. H. his mistakes
thereof removed. See Bilson Perpet. Governm. c 10. page 128, 129.
was spare time to leave out more necessary significations of (...), the gift,
and to seem to put upon some a dream of giving the grace of justification in
the blood of Christ, by prophecy, by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.

2, (...), by, is not prefixed to the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery:
but (...) is prefixed to the laying on of hands: neglect not the gift given
thee by prophecy, then he adds (...), with (not (...), by) the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery. So that with Mr. H. his leave, Timothy received no
gracious hability by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, as far as
this Text speaks, so that the prophecy was extraordinary, 1 Timothy 1. 18. and
the gift might be so also, and the laying on of the ^ands of Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
was of another nature, and there he uses (...), and this was known to be
extraordinary, for the giving of the Holy Ghost, Act. 8. 17. which Magus
affected, v. 19. It is true (...) is put for (...), but rarely, Act. 14. 17.
(...), Act. 13. 17, So the laying on of Stephanus in Concor. in voce (...).
Beza, An. Act. 13. 17. (...) pro (...). Act. 13. 1, 2.
the hands, may be ordinary, and the gift given by prophecy, as Calvin, Beza,
Paren^, Piscator, D^i, Cruciger, the gift declared to be given thee by
prophetical revelation, 1 Timothy 1. 18. as Paul and Barnabas were sent to the
Gentiles by the command of the Spirit. So Paul exhorts Timothy neither to
neglect the one nor the other, so neglect not, but (^s D^) exercise carefully
thy calling of an Evangelist, revive and strengthen the gifts that thou have
received, especially since thou have received imposition of hands from the
College of Elders.

2. It is harsh (says Mr. H.) Forget not the office in thee. Didoclavius told
him thus, but what then? A man is said in our Didoclavius, Da. Calderwood. in
altar. Damasc. c. 4. page 158. Ista phrasis (donum Presbyterii vel
Presbyteratus quod est in te) durior erit.
language to be in office; but its both new, and will but poorly prove,
therefore it is harsh in the Greek, and it is known there be harsh phrases in
both the Septuagints, and in the New Testament, and that neither of them is the
most pure of that language, and there is a heavenly eloquence in all Scripture.

Mr. H. Whether by Elders be meant, the Elders of many, or of one congregation,
I could never learn. Didoc^. 160.

Ans. Then this place shall say nothing for the Eldership of an Independent
congregation; to which Mr. H. gives after an official power dogmatick, and
doctrinal, to hear witnesses and pronounce a sentence of excommunication, which
the congregation can no more oppose, then the word of God: and I hombly desire
another place for such a new Judicature: for sure men and women both have the
judgment of discretion to oppose all errors.

2. There was a College of Elders, Act. 1. and Act. 6 and Act. 13. and Act.
21. At the ordaining of officers, and weighty affairs Mr. H. can by no
Scripture warrant to us an Eldership of one single congregation, as we can give
a proof of many, yea, a College of Prophets, Pastors, and Elders of many
congregations at the ordination of Officers.
of the Churches either must Mr. H. warrant by Scripture, that there is such a
like Judicature in every Independent congregation, which (say they) may consist
of seven (and that is unpossible) or that he shall be at a low ebb to prove
such an ordination of officers in their Churches as is in the Word.

As for imposition of hands; to me it is commanded in the Word, where the right
way that it be not done (...), suddenly, is charged upon Timothy, before God
and his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22. yet not so as it must be so
necessary, necessitate medii, as it must be a null, and no ordination where it
is wanting.

2. It must be a Rite of designation of the person to the office, but no
Sacramental Rite of obsignation of grace, as Papists make it a Sacrament.

3. Mr. H. fails, who makes it no command contrary to 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22.

4. This place 1 Timothy 4. 14. so streights Papists, that Bellarmin Menochius in
loc. Presbyt. majorum, i. e. Episcoporum. Bellarm. l. 1. de Cler. c. 15. Nobis
verior videtur Graecorum expositio, qui nomine Presbyterii intelligunt chorum
sive coetus Presbyterorum, id est, Episcoporum. Ita and Lyran. Cajetan. Com. in
loc. Manuum impositione] ad significandum p^urium sacerdotum concursum.
Vatablus in loc. Intelligit electionem qua a Presbyteris, i. e. senioribus
Christianis Timo^^aus est electus. Maldonatus in manusc. Citato a Cor a Lapide.
Notat per Presbyterium ordinem sacerdotalem. Cor. a Lap. in loc. Verba
(Vatabli) sapient Haeresin. Estius Com. in loc. An soli Episcopi, an etiam
simplices Presbyteri concurrant, etc. Res. modum hunc ordinationis omnibus
Presbyteris esse communem constat ex Can. 3. Concilii 4 Carthaginensis. Quod
and palam significat Synodius Tridentina Sess. 14. c. 3. Vide Bellarm. de Cler.
l. 1. c. 15. Tilen. in Paraenes. ad Scotos. Calderwod. Altar. Damasc. c. 4. p.
159.
makes the Presbytery a company of Bishops; and so Cor. a Lap. But Cajetan.
Vatablus, Maldonat. Estius, are more equitable to the Text then Mr. H. Lyran.
makes the Presbytery to be Bishops.

Mr. H. To give the essentials to Timothy an Evangelist by imposition of hands
of Presbyters that are inferior to Evangelists, that are superior and
extraordinary, is beyond the power of Presbyters.

Ans. The same is objected by Papists, and by Prelaticals, as Tilenus and
others. What? will Mr. H. determine whether Timothy was ordained by the
Presbytery an Evangelist (for in that case his argument which he borrowed, has
Nerves) or a Presbyter? for some prelatical, men say, he was twice ordained:
nor can his argument stand, except upon the popish pillar; A great Apostle or
Bishop cannot be blessed by a lower Presbyter. So that the Presbytery that laid
hands on Timothy must be Bishops or only Apostles: so say the Jesuits,
Bellarmin, Menochus, Cor. a Lap. So Lyranus. See the answer of Didoclavius.

2. His own men, say the Brethren, that are lower then Officers, make, unmake
Officers; the people, Act. 1. (say they) have a hand in creating, that is, in
choosing Matthias (for that There is not a contradiction between a mediate and
immediate call.
is their creating) an Apostle. Ananias laid hands on Paul, Acts 9. Prophets,
on Paul and Barnabas, to undergo an extraordinary charge to preach to the
Gentiles, Act. 13. Mr. H. here as often devises a contradiction, that then the
same call must be both mediate and ordinary, and immediate and extraordinary,
says he: but if mediate be taken (as it must be) for that in which men have an
intervening hand, there is new Logic, but no contradiction. Parker says,
there is of man something, Park. de polit. Eccles. l. 3.
and much immediately from God here, as the peoples praying, and casting of
lots in Matthias his calling, and yet he is an immediately called Apostle. So
in Paul's call, Act. 9. in the call of Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.

2. Its now absurd to say that an Evangelist, an Apostle, is lower then a whole
College of Presbyters. See worthy Mr. M Gill^. miscel. quaest. c. 8. page 103.
Gillespie.

What means Mr. H. to object that as a paradox which Mr. R. says, A. B. is
made a Pastor indefinitly, and the Pastor of such a people only? and here is a
new contradiction also, for A B. is made a Physician indefinitely, habitu, actu
primo, to all, and by choice, and compact, he is made a Physician fixedly only
to such a corporation: so is the Pastor A. B. Here is as poor a shift, the man
expounds Scripture in his own congregation as a Pastor, but in another, or in
his own house, as a gifted man. Let Surv. par. 2. c: 2. page 63.
him answer his own words: ever whom a Pastor has no power, ^ver such he can
do no pastoral act, for that is an act of principal power: But to administer
the Supper of the Lord to these of another congregation is a pastoral act, and
that a pastor may do to these of another congregation. So Mr. H. so Mr. Cotton,
Greg. Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. puncto 7. sect. 41. Rob. Baron. in appendic. tra.
5. de authorit. Eccles. c. 15.
so their own Discipline save this contradiction. Its too nea^ popery to
preach, in the chair the Pope cannot err, as a private Dostor he may err: So
when a man preaches as a pastor to the congregation, the members can no more
oppose him then they can oppose the word of God; and when they hear the same
man expound the same Scripture in his family, they are no more to submit to his
Doctrine, though the same which he spoke in the chair, then he is to submit to
their Doctrine: for he preaches as no Pastor in his own house, but as a gifted
man, says Mr. H.

Mr. H. Ordination and Election (says Mr. R.) are all one by the brethrens
way. Mr. H. Ans. We never said they were all ones

Ans. True, you never said it, but you say that election gives all the
essentials to an officer, and destroy ordination, and make election to be all,
and so you make election all one with that which to us is ordination, and that
is Mr. R. his meaning.

Mr. H Election rightly ordered by the rule of Christ gives the essentials Par.
2. page 66.
to an officer.

Arg. 1. Pastor and people, shepherd and flock are relatives, but relatives are
mutual causes one of another; a pastor before a people choose him, is a husband
without a wife. See Amesius.

Ans. 1. Pastor and flock, i. e. a single congregat on (for this only Mr. H.
means) are not adequate Relatives, for a Pastor is referred to all members of
other congregations to whom he is The relation (...) a fixed Pastor to his own
single congregation, proves not at all, that their choice made him a Pastor.
a Pastor, and to whom he may tender, as a Pastor, the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.
17. and is granted: Ergo, a pastor is a pastor to multitudes of members of
other congregations, who never chose him: so that a man that has but sipped on
Logic, a^ Mr. H. must thus argue, a pastor chused and made a pastor is
relatum, and referred to his own single flock, all and only choosing and making
him a pastor: in which there is no sip of truth. He is not a pastor to them
only, as is said, for he acts as a pastor.

2. Dogmatickly, sure and what he says in the Synod binds not, only because
it is Gospel; but (says Mr. Cotton) also because Keys of the Kingdom, c. 6.
page 15.
it is taught by a Minister, for his calling sake: (as Christ, who so receives
you, receives me) the associate Churches, who never made him a pastor.

3. Nor are all his flock, whom yet he feeds with Word, Censures, and Seals, to
wit, women members of the flock, and children, and servants, the far larger
part of the flock, three for one, the choosing correlate: poor souls they are as
passive in acts of jurisdiction to make and unmake Pastors as brute sheep; nor
can the argument be from feeder and fed simply, sheep as sheep made not their
shepherd, but from feeder and the fed choosing, creating and marrying their
feeder and husband; and should not Mr. H. say as true, Solomon is a married
husband to three hundred women, and yet two hundred fifty of them had no
causative influence, gave never consent nor oath to accept him as their
husband. So neither can the Pastor be referred to two hundred and fifty women,
aged children, and servants, as a part of his flock creating him a husband and
feeder; for the fifty males did make him a Pastor, and they only.

2. Amesius says, the man made a pastor without a flock, is a husband without
a wife. And the Prelates did wickedly in so doing, for they were but hirelings
going up and down to preach for hire, whereas the work requires a fixed
labourer to every corner of the Vineyard: but its non causa pro causa, and no
sip of Logic, Ergo, every Pastor is so referred to his own flock, as husband
and wife, so mutual consent made him a husband to them only, and a Pastor to no
other, and them a spouse and wife to him only. But should the Church loose some
men from their fixed charges, and send them to visit and water many planted
Churches with the word and seals, these men should be lawful and edifying
Pastors, not husband without wives. See Amesius, who proves Classis and Synods
to be lawful from, 1. The law of Nature. 2. From common Equity. Amesius Theo.
Medul. l. 1. c. 39. th. 23. Par. 1. p. 95, 96


But to return to what I had almost passed. If the laying on of hands be no
specificating act of an office, because it is used in other performances, as in
the sending of Paul and Barnabas to preach to the Gentiles, Act. 13. Then shall
water not be essential to Baptism, nor drinking to the Lords Supper, nor
blessing Sacramental in that Supper, because in Levitical Washings, in the
feasts Sacred, in the Passover, in praying for a blessing to the Word
preached, all these were used. Its loose Logic, A genere ad speciem, the
question is not of laying on of Its bad Logic, a genere ad speciem, imposition
of hands is used in many other things: Ergo, this imposition of hands is not
necessary to ordination of Officers.
hands in general, but of a certain kind and species of laying on of hands by
way of prayer and designation. Mr. R. knows there be diverse kinds of laying on
of hands.

2. Nor do I say that the Rite is essential to Ordination, but of the necessity
of before.

3. Suarez and Stapleton so argue with Mr. H. from an extraordinary command.

1. The spirit speaks from Heaven, Act. 13. Separate me Saul, etc.

2. The Lord names two men.

3. He designs their work: There is here no election of the people, says
Calvin. So Mr. H. Paul was called to be an Apostle before, Act. 9. and this is
for me. Though they were Apostles Calvin. Nulla hic electionis ab Ecclesia
mentio, quia vocatio prorsus divina erat. Stapleton, in Antidot. page 409.
Suarez. Tom. 3. in 3. par disp. 34. sect. 1. Non esse tune Saulum, vel Barnabam
ordinatos, vel Presbyteros, vel Episcopos and impositionem manuum esse tantum
deprecantium. Calvin. in loc. Solenni Ecclesiae subscription^ obsignari jubet.
Gual. in loc. Consecrationis Symbolum fuisse. So Diodati. D. Willet Controv.
gener. 16 q. 1. August. De Baptism. l. 3. c. 16. Confess. Bohem. c. 14.
Confess. Wittenberg c. 35. Book of Discipl. of Scotland, l. 2. c. 3. Synops.
pur. Theol. disp. 42. th. 31. Mr. Seaman treats of ordination, page 71, 7^.
Diodati. English Divines Annotations, [Separate me] Paul and Barnabas to be
held in equal degree, and intallible authority with the rest of the Apostles.
Paul was not called to be an Apostle, Acts 9. nay, not until Acts 13. that is
the error of Mr. Robinson Justific. of Separar. page 296.
before, the Lord will not have us to think imposition of hands a needless toy:
but the wise Lord will have their calling by this solemn subscription of the
Church, to be sealed, says Calvin. as by a solemn Symbol of consecration; so
says Gualther, and Mr. H. is mistaken: we use imposition of hands, as both the
Bohemian and Wittenberg confession teach; and its not to be found in the Text,
that grace was given to Paul and Barnabas thereby, but that it was used as an
ordinary R^te with praying, as the Presbytery does, verse 3. And when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. See Mr.
Seaman. Yea, suppose it be granted that Saul was an Apostle before, Act. 9. Yet
1. he was not such a designed Apostle, to wit, of the Gentiles until now. 2.
Nor did the Church their part until now, that they laid their hands on them. 3.
The English Divines and Diodati think they were not owned by the Church as
Apostles until now. And I humbly doubt if they were called Apostles until now,
Act. 13.

Mr. H. If a pastor may have all his essentials without a certain flock, then
may he be a pastor without it: As the Ring is completed in the Goldsmiths shop,
its ready for any buyer.

Ans. Mr. Best and Mr. H. both make the difference, That the Apostle is a
pastor to all the world, but the pastor is ^^ed to a certain congregation. Then
have they answered themselves; The Apostle has all the essentials of a true
pastor without a certain flock: Here is the Ring in the shop ready for all
congregations. Now the Apostle and ordinary pastor differ not essentially as
pastors in the latitude of preaching to all congregations, and to one single
congregation, as the acts of preaching the same Christ, and of baptizing in an
Apostle, and in an ordinary pastor, are of the same species and nature. Mr. H.
and Mr. Best will have them to be pastors different in nature; why? then but
their Gospels and Seals, the formal objects of their calling, must differ in
nature, as indeed they make pastors of diverse congregations to differ in
nature, and so as many congregations different in nature, as many Gospels
different in nature. The pastor is tied (says he) to a certain congregation,
out of which he is not to exercise pastoral acts. But is not the Apostle a
pastor, and an excellent one to preach and tender the Seals, as well as the
pastor? 2. Why says he not, (as he ought, if he speak suitably to his own
principles) It is not lawful for him to exercise pastoral acts without his own
congregation, for its adultery so to do? and so its adultery to him to tender
the Supper to those of another congregation, contrary to Mr. H. and his
Brethren. Survey, par. 2. c. 2. p. 65. Mr. H. makes many pastors, many
congregations, many preached Christ's and Gospels and Seals to be different in
species and nature.
Nor can be open and shut the doors of the Kingdom in pastoral preaching to his
own flock, and to twenty of other congregations, except one and the same act of
preaching pastorally be a valid pastoral act to his own flock, and twenty times
no valid pastoral act, but an act of a gift or Christian counsel which an
unbaptized Pagan (so he have a talent and utterance) or a woman in a private
chamber may also tender. We may without offense crave a warrant from Scripture
for such an unheard Novelty. Yea, it ought to be proved, and not nakedly told
us, That this congregation is essential to this A. B. their own pastor; for
this or these sick persons are not essential to this Physician.

2. Paul preaches the Gospel, administers the Seals an hundred times to an
hundred formed visible Churches; do these pastoral acts vary their nature into
an hundred new species and natures, because all the hundred Churches are
different in species and nature? and must there be hundreds thousands of
Gospel-seals, Keys of the Kingdom, all different in species and nature? for so
our Brethren vary Churches.

Mr. H. We allow of no Pastors ordained without a certain flock (says Mr. R.)
I reply (says Mr. H) Quid verba sudiam, cum videam facta? for if a pastor may
have all his essentials without a certain flock, then he may be pastor without
a flock.

Ans. Mr. R. allows no individnum vagum, nor a prelatical Deacon made a pastor
by the Prelate without any flock, nor knows our Church of Scotland any such.
But I have before shown, there may lawfu^ly, and to edification be Ambulatory
and ^^inerary shepherds sent both to feed and gather, or plant Churches.

2. A pastor may have all his essentials without a certain flock belonging to
his essence: A man has his essentials without aptitude to laugh, which follows
his essentials; and Snow has all its essentials without whiteness: yet I say,
I neither allow nor can yield that there is a man existent in the world, but he
is apt to laugh, nor Snow existent but it is white. But it follows This or this
flock is extrinsecal to the essence and nature of a pastor; yet is it naughty
Logic, Ergo, the Prelates do right, and the Church ordinarily do lawfully
create pastors without flocks. A Synod of N. E ought to ordain so many Pastors,
lay hands on them, and pray and make them Pastors to the Americans, for
planting Churches there, so the Americans profess their willingness to hear.
not hence, that when the Church calls men to the exercise of their pastoral
calling, that they may lawf^lly ordain them all to labor in no certain flock,
sure that would hinder edification, but will never prove that this flock is so
essential to A. B their pastor, as the wife to the husband; or that A. B. is
married to this flock only, as A. B. is married to this wife only, and to
none other, so as A. B. commits adultery if he celebrate the Lords Supper in
another congregation nor his own. Nor will it follow, that it is intrinsecally
unlawful for a Synod of New England to send 24 gracious youths understanding in
the Language, ordain them pastors by laying on of hands of the Elders, and by
fasting and praying, instruct them to go and act as pastors among the Savages,
preaching and baptizing; and their warrant is Act. 13. and here are pastors
without certain flocks. If any Act. 13. say, the Spirit gives a special command
there, and names Saul and Barnabas, but its not so here: I answer, There is
without question something extraordinary, Act. 13. nor are we with Seekers (too
much ^ortified in their way by our Brethrens Doctrine) to wait for the Lords
naming from heaven John, Thomas to be preachers in such a place. But to me

1. The nearness to the Savages, 2. The knowledge of their Language (as I
suppose) 3. Their weak desire, or the professed not hating of the Gospel, were
equivalent to a command from heaven, Go preach to the Americans, and that in
the capacity as proper pastors.
Mr. H. A Pastor is only a Pastor of that flock (says Mr. R.) over which the
holy Ghost has set him, by the authority of his Church; but yet so, as when he
preaches to the other congregation, he cease not to be Pastor, howbeit not
the Pastor of that flock.

Ans. We are then agreed: If a Pastor be [ONELY] only a Pastor to that flock,
then is he not a Pastor so any beside, then can he do no pastoral acts to them.

Ans. Great words are often small and weak Arguments His A pastor is the only
fixed and appropriated pastor of his own flock, so as he is a pastor to all
congregations on earth where by divine providence he shall be.
last answer (says he) yields the cause wholly -- We are then agreed. Mr. R.
is not a whit agreed with either Independency or the present question. If the
Pastor be (Only) only the Pastor (fixed, proper, actu secundo, in the
exercise of calling pastoral) to that flock, then is he not a Pastor (actu
primo, habitu, occasionally to act pastorally) to any beside. Its false, and we
are distant the whole breadth of a contradiction. If a Physician be only a
fixed Physician to Colchester to attend their sick, by a compact between him
and the City, then he cease to be an occasional Physician to any sick in the
country, when the health of the Inhabitants of that City can permit, so as he
can exercise no acts of a Physician to any beside: It follows not at all to be
a pastor occasionally to all Churches, and to be a fixed pastor ordinarily and
by covenant to this flock, are most consistent.

Mr. H. That which the communion (so Mr. R.) of sister-Churches requires to be
done, that pastors lawfully may do (Mr. R. ought in conscience to do.) But that
a pastor as a pastor may officiate (to other congregations and their members,
(says M. R.) this the communion of Churches require in the necessary absence
of the pastor, to defend the flock from Wolves. The Assumption is denied, and
left wholly destitute of proof. Supply may be lent, in such cases, by Christian
counsel, and by mutual consociation of advice, though there be no expression of
Jurisdiction, nor can we be said to take away communion of Churches, where God
has granted no right of communion.

Ans. Mr. H. cuts and divides my Arg. for it has a demonstration of the truth
of the Assumption. Christ has established the communion of Saints, and of all
Saints in specie, and of Churches in Church-praying one for another,
Church-praising one for another, Ephesians. 6. 18. praying always with all prayer --
(...), for all Saints: but Churches as Churches M. H. destroys the communion of
Churches as Churches, and destroys his own and his Brethrens principles. Way of
the Churches of N. E. c. 6. sect. 1. p. 103. We admit members of other
congregations to the Lords Supper with us, for we look at the Lords Supper not
only as a seal of our communion with the Lord Jesus, but also of communion
with his members, and that not only with the members of our own Church, but of
all the Churches of the Saints.
are Saints. Mr. H. gives us the name of communion of Saints by advice and
counsel, which is the communion of Pagans and Saints; for Saints owe Christian
counsel and Christian advice to Pagans and Idolaters. And Mr. H. gives us this
goodly Divinity, God never granted any right of communion between Churches
therefore it cannot be taken away. Hence one congregation owes no more
Church Communion to another, than to Pagans; contrary to their own express
Doctrine: for if the Brethren hold a communion of diverse members of diverse
Churches in partaking of one Lords Supper at the same Table, then must they
hold a communion of Churches as Churches. But the former they held, as the
words cited clear.

Mr. H. If Ministers (says Mr. R. in his second Arg.) may labor to convert
unbelieving strangers, and to add them to their flock, that they may enlarge
Christ's Kingdom, then may they exercise pastoral acts over and above others
than those of their own charge. 2. Diverse congregations are to keep visible
communion of exhorting, rebuking one another.

Ans. Those that were no officers, but dispersed, yet preached the Gospel, Act.
8. Apollos no officer edified those that believed, Acts. 18. 27, 38. that these
may be done where no pastoral acts are, is evident.

Ans. Mr. H. is pleased to answer my Arg. The proof is added where no need is,
that which is feeble, false, that has no shadow of truth, to wit, the
consequence is not at all confirmed, nor any attempt made to that purpose. Its
well known a fixed pastor in his A pastor as a pastor preaching to his own
flock, may convert some of his own and of other congregations, and administer
the Lords Supper to both.
own Pulpit preaching to his own flock, has in the same act been instrumental
to add to his own flock real converts. Let the Reader judge what truth it
has, that in the same numerical single act of teaching, the man acts both as a
pastor, and as no pastor, but as Apollos a private man only, as Mr. H. says.

2. Whether it be feeble or no that a pastor tenders the Lords Supper to one of
another congregation (which he may lawfully do, say our Brethren Way of the
Churches of Chapter in N. E. c. 6. sec. 1. p. 103. Mr. H. Survey, pa. 2. c. 2. p.
65.
) as a pastor; if he tender it as a private man, I know how feebly Mr. H. and
all Anabaptists and Socinians can defend this: Then there is a real truth in
this, that a pastor may exercise pastoral acts to others than to those of his
own charge.

3. It seems to me feeble, though the instances of the dispersed who preached,
Acts 8. and of Apollos, Acts 18. as private Christians, and as no officers,
were granted (which to me is false) therefore when a pastor in one and the same
Sermon and words, preaching to his own flock, converts one of his own flock and
one of another flock, that be acts as an officer, and opens pastorally the
gates of the Kingdom of Heaven to the one, and acts as no officer, as not sent
of God, but as a private man to the other: (except Mr. H. maintain the Socinian
sending to preach) I see not how Mr. H. can here expede himself.

4. Mr. H. will not say all that were scattered Act. 8. (for What sort of
preachers the scattered disciples, Act. 8. were.
they were all scattered, except the Apostles, ver. 1.) did preach the Gospel,
for there were of them women, ver. 3. then some of them only preached. And if
Mr. H. say they were not officers, Mr. R. says they were officers, and that the
extraordinariness of their condition, supplied the want of a Church calling,
and let Mr. H. but attempt to bring a proof for it.

5. If nothing extraordinary was here, let Mr. H. or any for him vindicate the
place Act. 8. from Anabaptists, who allege the same place Act. 8. to destroy
the standing Ordinance of the Ministry: and read the judicious Tractate of
the Ministers of London, of Mr. Collings.

6. I had rather believe Oecumenius and Chrysostom, who judge Apollos to be a
Minister; and far rather follow Gualther, (...) Gualth. in Act. 18. homil.
Dioda. An. Act. 18. 27. through grace] this may have relation to Apollos, who
by his authentical Ministry called grace, Romans 1. -- did much advance the
Christian faith. Calvin. Com. in Act. Potens in Scripturis] docet hic locus,
debere potentes eos esse in Scripturis quibus docendum est in Ecclesia.
Diodati, and Calvin, who ^each, that Apollos was a renowned Minister, the
Successor and Colleague of Paul at Corinth, 1 Cor. 3. 6. Mr. H. not caring for
these Lights, without warrant of Scripture determines Apollos no officer, and
so do many Anabaptists with him.

7. Nor is there any disease in my third Arg. for take away Church-rebuking,
and Church comforting, and pastoral acting of officers toward fellow-Churches,
as Mr. H. expressly and in terminis does, and turn all those into Christian
counsels and advices, which Christians out of Church Order, and women owe to
those that are no Churches, even to Pagans: And you

1. Take away all communion of Church-talents, and Church-gifts and graces, for
the edifying by Word or Writ sister-Churches.

2. You destroy all pastoral and official gifts to sister-Churches in extreme
necessity of ravenous Wolves raging among them: for a pastor as a pastor must
be able to convince gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. And suppose the officers of
the Church of Sardis were sick and imprisoned, there is taken away all
communion of pastoral talents to convince Arrians, Nicolaitans, the Disciples
of Ebion and Cerinthus, or to strengthen and heal backsliders.

3. The sister members of the mixed congregation, as private Christians in their
closets and houses, may pray for their sick sister, but it is unlawful for the
Church to put up any Church-prayers or Church-rebukes, let them perish a
thousand times: Is not the Lord offended at this wicked selfishness?

But Mr. R. says, That one congregation has no power over another, Page 64.
nor one Classis over another.

Ans. He bids at all, that two parallel members, two parallel Churches as
perallel, are coordinate, and have no power juridical to excommunicate one
another, for then one member John may excommunicate Thomas, for ex
communication and juridical Court-power is not exercised by the Church as the
Church, for then all and every Church had power juridical of excommunication,
which Mr. R. will not yield, but it is exercised by such a Church as has power
over its own members subordinate not coordinate: But this is nothing against
me; for Church Power is wider than Iuridical power to excommunicate:
Church Power Church Power is broader and larger than juridical power.
includes Church-preaching, Church-hearing, Church-praising, Church-rebuking,
Church-exhorting, Church-comforting, Church-tendring of the Seals. But
Church Power of excommunicating i^ but a branch of all these. As also this is a
wide mistake in Mr. H. that he thinks, if a pastor have right to administer
pastoral acts, there he has pastoral power to challenge his right, and preach
there where there are fixed pastors all Page 64.
the land over; nay, he must for the actual exercise of his right have some
providential call, as is clear Christ says, Go teach all Mat. 28. 19.
nations, baptizing them: that gives to Peter, John, yea all the Apostles, Paul
and others, right to be pastors to all the earth: Yet it is clear, that for the
actual exercise of that right, there is required a special call of God for the
place; as

1. Peter and John could not preach to Samaria, while God disposed so that the
Apostles sent them, hearing that they had received the Gospel, Acts 8. 14, 15.
Nor Peter preach to the Gentiles,

2. While he was warned by a Vision, Acts 10. 20. and 11. 12. Nor

3. Could Paul and Barnabas go and preach to the Gentiles: Nor

4. Peter and Paul go, the one to preach to the Jews, the other to the
Gentiles, while they had a warrant from the Spirit so to do, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3,
etc. Gal. 2. 7, 8. Nor

5. Could Paul forbear to go to Bithynia, and go to Macedonia to preach the
Gospel, Act. 16. 7, 9, 10, 11, 12. without a warrant from God. Upon the same
ground, though a pastor called by the Church to be a pastor, and be chosen by
such a Though one be a complete pastor to all Churches actu primo, yet the call
of God is necessary for the exercise thereof hic and nunc. Page 66, 67.
flock, be by his Ordination made a pastor to all congregations, yet for the
actual exercise thereof, he must have a call, or some choice or desire of the
people ^o preach pastorally hic and nunc, and even as the Apostles, who were
called by Christ, Mat. 28. 19. to be pastors to all Nations, yet could not hic
and nunc, actu secundo, exercise their calling, but by direction of the Spirit,
as is said.

And all congregations (says Mr. H.) may justly deny hi^ leave to administer
either seals or censures among them, and yet he is a complete officer.

Ans. Its a dream to say, a particular Classis or Presbytery has called him,
and yet they refuse him leave to administer seals and censures among them; that
is as much, as, They have called him, and they have not called him. We now in a
constituted Church, contend not for one who is ordained by the Church a pastor
to all Nations, as Mat. 28. without an eye to a certain society, country or
flock, either as an Ambulatory pastor (as is said, for the care of spreading
the Gospel is not dead with the Apostles, as Seekers truth) or as an ordinary
fixed pastor, and Whoever has a pastoral power to preach to the people, has
not a juridical power to censure them.
their obstinacy to whom he offers the Gospel, hinders him not to be a complete
officer, as is clear Mat 10. 13, 14, 15. Luke (...). 51, 52, 53. Mat. 2^. 3, 4,
5. Act. 13. 44, 45, 46. and 17. 32. and 18. 6. in many who refuse to hear and
receive the Apostles, who yet are the complete officers and Ambassadors of
Christ. Nor is it true, that whoever has a pastoral power to preach, they have
also a juridical power to censure the refulers to hear. The Brethren will not
stand to this by their own way.

Mr. H. The people may put a pastor out of his office, if scandalous Page 68, 69.
and heretical; Ergo, they give him the office. The Antecedent is proved, Mat
7. 5. Phil. 3. 2. Beware of false teachers, beware of dogs. Mr. R. They may
reject him from being their pastor, but their power reaches not so far as to
reject him from being no pastor.

Ans. Then a species may be destroyed, and the general nature remains: he is
not their pastor, and yet he is a pastor in general; Thomas or John is
destroyed, and yet the general nature of Thomas or John remains safe.

Ans. If Independent Government depend upon no better Logic than this, (as too
much like stuff I meet with in reviewing this Review) I trust it shall not
stand. For

1. Christ, Mat. 7. 15. speaks not to a single Independent congregation as
such, which he must do, if Mr. H. dispute as a Logician. And the Argument must
be thus:

Whos^ are commanded to beware of false Teachers and dogs, they may
authoritatively depose officers. But women are to beware Mr. H. his Logic is,
we are to beware of false Teachers, Ergo, the congregation may depose their
officers if ^eretical and scandalous.
of false Teachers, and to try the spirits, and to beware of justification by
circumcision, Phil. 3. yea, those that are of other congregations, and single
persons, children and servants, and all Christians who are not to judge rashly,
Mat. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. all who are to pray earnestly, ver. 7. all who are to
choose the narrow way to heaven, v. 13. and to know Teachers by their works, v.
16. all who are to worship God in the Spirit, rejoice in God, have no
confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 2, 3. and thousands beside the male-Church of
a single congregation, are to do all these, and women are not to receive false
Teachers into their house, 2 Job. 10. 11. are to beware of false Teachers. Did
Mr. H. believe a judicious Reader would, or Mr. H. should pass his judgment of
such toys as these?

2. To be a fixed pastor to this flock, is no species of a pastor, but a mere
accident; nor to be a pastor habitu to all the congregations To be a pastor to
all congregations, by Mr. H. is most mistakingly made a genus, and for the same
man to be a fixed pastor to he a species.
on earth, a genus to A B. but to be a pastor habitu to all congregations, is
and makes A. B. as individual a pastor, as to be a fixed pastor makes him an
individual pastor. A Rudimentary in Logic would not say, the same individual
pastor could be a genus to himself, as homo is genus (homo is species he ought
to say) to Thomas. So when an accident is removed, such as fixedness of the
pastoral calling to the congregation of Boston, Mr. Cotton remains a pastor:
Else I might say, When Thomas is no more a Physician to sick John, for sick
John is dead, Thomas leaves off to be a Physician to any other sick person on
To be a fixed pastor to this or that flock, is a mere accident, not a species
or kind of a pastor, not to be a Pastor habitu to all congregations, can be
genus to such a Pastor, as Mr. H. says.
earth: So Thomas is destroyed as Thomas, (whereas a poor accident only to be
a Physician in actual exercise to sick John is only destroyed) and yet the
general nature of Thomas is still safe and maintained. The like answer is due
to that which he calls a fundamental Rule, sublato uno relatorum tollitur
alterum. A man would say Logic and Reason were turned upside down. Thomas is
no actual Physician to John now dead, and that relation between Thomas and the
dead man is gone: Ergo, Thomas himself, as a man, and his other relations to
all other sick persons who call for his medicinal labors perish. Reason and
Logic should perish in the man who should so argue.

Mr. H. If a person or Presbytery have Ministerial power, they Par. 2. p. 70,
71.
must execute it in their own persons and places, they cannot delegate any
supernatural power, or saving quality, or habit to another -- the mystery of
iniquity in some measure has eaten into the Presbytery. They have taken power
to ordain before election, and make indefinite Pastors, and have taken all
power from the people.

Ans. 1. The issue is, the male-Church only has this power, to make and unmake
officers: and they have of late, being not the fourth part of that which they
call the only visible Church of Redeemed Ones, taken all power of Censures, so
Presbyters may delegate messengers of the Churches.
that the rest have no consent, which is a popish domineering over their faith;
whereas we hold, the Church not consenting, Censures are not to be drawn out at
all: here is more popery and bratish domineering over the consciences of the
officers in point of Heresy, to speak nothing of diverse points of Popery,
Anabaptisme, Socinianisme that goes along with this way.

2. That the Churches cannot delegate a power to Paul and Barnabas their
messengers, to determine in a Synod according to the Word, can be denied by
none, but such as deny Synods, contrary to Act. 15.

3. Nor knows the Scripture any rule from civil Corporations, who both make
and choose David and Saul Rulers and Kings, to infer that the male-Church cannot
preach nor administer seals, but they both create and choose Spiritual Officers.
We may long call for Scripture to prove this, but in vain, it is a Tradition
that we must believe, because so say our Brethren.

Nor is it Episcopacy for Timothy and Titus to ordain Ministers in a joint
society (in collegie) (Episcopal Monarchy in Pope and Prelates.) Nor is it to
ordain Pastors indefinitely, when it is done both with consent of the flock,
and in reference to a certain flock. Its true, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit. 1. 5. there
is no mention made of a Presbytery, nor is there mention there of a
congregation: but Timothy cannot preach in season, and out of season 2 Timothy 4
1, 2. nor can he rebuke before all these that sin publicly, but in the
congregation, 1 Timothy 5. 20. So neither can Timothy his alone prove the Deacons,
1 Timothy 3. 10. for the Apostles, Acts 6. did it not, nor would he (...) a
prelatical Monarch, his alone lay on hands, and call to the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5.
22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. for the Scripture says a College did it, (...) 13. 1, 2, 3.
1 Timothy 4. 14. and Papists have the same ground (but it is groundless) that the
Keys were given to Peter only, Mat. 16. and there is no word of a Presbytery:
and Christ says, John 21. thrice to Piter only, Love thou me? feed my sheep.
And there is no word of a College of Apostles: but our Divines with Ier^m,
Cyprian, and the Fathers, say, equal power of See and beware of D. B^^son of
Perper. Government, c. 12. page 208. he abuses both Scripture and Fathers.
Tilenus, jam deficiens paraenes. ad Scotos, page 10. Dunam. Conc. in Apoc. 2.
Beza in Apo. 2. Reynaldus lib. Apocryph. praelect. 62. See Tilen. Syntag. disp.
26, ^7. Bucan. loc. 43. q. 39. Professor. Leydens. in Synopsi purioris
Theologiae disp. 42. these 31. Jus Pastoris eligendi est penes Ecclesiam (ausim
dicere non marium solum) ac proinde plebi commun^ cum Presbyterio, jus
ordinandi soli Presbytetio proprium. Cyprian. Ep. 68. Videmus de divina
authoritate descendere, ut sacerdos, plebe praesente, sub omnium oculis
deligatur, and dignus atque idoneus publico judicio ac test^monio comprobetur.
feeding, and power of the Keys was given to them all at a Synod, Mat. 28. 19,
20. Ioh. 20. 21, 22, 23. Acts (...). 8. and the same objection Prelates mo^e.

Nor shall we be against Iunius, Melanctho^, Whit^aker, Danaeus. The jus and
right of ordination is in the Church, as in the virtual subject, to wit, in
Elders and people. (But our Brethren must have a sole male-Church of Brethren.)
But we may well say, the calling in concreto, is that which these Divines mean^
so Melancthon says, the calling contains jus ^ligendi, vocandi, ordinandi.
Other Divines speak more accurately, as the learned Professors of Leyden, who
beyond all doubt follow Cyprian.

Mr. H. These, in whose power it is whether any shall rule over Mr. H. Surv.
pa. 2. c. 2. p. 72, 73.
them, or no; from their voluntary subjection it is, that the party chosen has
right, and stands in possession of rule and authority over them. It holds not
which Mr. R. says. Now ordination is an act of jurisdiction, such as to send
an Ambassador, but that an Ambassador consent to go (such as is election) is no
act of jurisdiction, for a Father to give his Daughter in marriage to one, is
an authoritative act of a Father: but for the Daughter to consent to the choice
is no act of authority.

Ans. True, consenting gives n^ power, but the peoples giving of the pastor
authority ever them, their calling, and by willing subjection, delivering up
themselves to be ruled by him in Christ i^ an act of power. That is false whith
Mr. Ball and Mr. R. say, If the people could virtually give being to Pastor and
Teacher, then they might execute the office of Pastors and Teachers: for
Aldermen ch^se the Mayor Soldiers the General, yet none of them can execute
the office of Mayor and General.

Ans. 1. The proposition is printed in other Characters, and has nothing found
in it, nothing of Scripture or reason to prove it, and is a needy begging of
the question.

Those in whose power it is whether any shall rule over them or no, etc. Mr. H.
seeing himself widely out, durst not assume. But it is in the peoples power,
whether any rule over them or no, etc. This the assumption must be, or the
argument is nonsense: Its not in the peoples power, whether any rule over them
or no. More wild Divinity is scarue heard of, it must then be in men's power,
whether there be Rulers, Apostles, Pastors, Teachers in the Church; and
Government, or none at all but A^archy and confusion: but a Divine institution
was never in the power of people; but Christ Jesus (...), gave, instituted, and
ordained Apostles, Pastors, and Officers in his house, Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12.
28.

2. The proposition is false and never proved; That their voluntary subjection,
whose it is to choose officers, gives formally and causa^iv^ly right of ruling
to the chosen. I thus resort it, to show the falsehood of it; Then the sick man,
in whose power it is to choose Thomas to be his Physician, and no other man, he
gave causatively right and being to Thomas to be a Physician.

Then 2. he in whose power it is to choose John and no other, to build him a
house: he in whose power it is to choose Richard to be a School master to teach
his Son, and no other Schoolmaster, That these in whose power it is that any
should rule over them, or no, from their voluntary subjection it is, that the
party chosen has right, and stands in possession of rule and authority over
them, is most false, yet a principle to Mr. H. Yea, there is a voluntary
subjection to the Ministry sent in general, Isa. 52 7. Romans 10. 14, 14. Matthew.
10. 14, 40, 41. Act. 2 37. Act. 16. 30. and to every ordinance of God in
converts, Act 9. 6. Act. 10. 32, 33. Matthew. 9. 9, 10, etc. but it follows not
therefore such give a being to their ordinances. There is a difference between
being a Pastor, and being a fixed Pastor to this people.
he gave causatively right and being to the party John, so chosen to be a
Mason, and to the party so chosen, Richard, causatively right and being to be a
Schoolmaster. Nothing more false, John was a Mason, Richard a Schoolmaster
before their chusers were born. Nothing follows, but the sick man's choice made
Thomas a Physician, not simply, but to him only: and so must we say of the
other two, and multitudes of other examples. And ^o nothing follows from Mr. H.
his argument, but only this flocks choice gave him causatively right and being,
not simply to be a Pastor (ordination of the Elders, Act. 6. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 5. 22, etc. did that) but to be this flocks fixed Pastor: for we must
distinguish betwixt a Pastor and this peoples Pastor, a Pastor actu primo, and
a fixed Pastor in the second acts and exercise of his calling, hic and nunc, to
this people, as touching their formales rations, if our Brethren will give us
leave, if not, we value not; Scripture and good Logic are for us.

3. Mr. Ball and Mr. R. say not in several places, yes, no where, that the
people may preach and baptize, if they give causatively being to Pastor and
Teacher: but the people may then do and perform as high acts official and
juridical. To the impertinent instance of Aldermen and Major, I have answered.

4. It is but ^nsis and gladius that is in the reply; for the peoples
delivering up themselves by voluntary subjection to be ruled by him, gives him
no more being and right to be a Pastor, but only right to be their Pastor
(which is accidental to their calling) then the sick man's voluntary subjection
of, and delivering up of his body and health under the Lord and Creator of
life, to Thomas a skilled Physician, to follow all his medicinal injunctions,
gives causatively being to Thomas to be Physician, whereas he was a Physician
many years before.

Mr. H. Ordination is not an act of supreme Jurisdiction, but Page 74.
of order rather. It gives not being nor constitution to an officer, but is
rather the admission and confirmation of him in his office.

Ans. That is said, not proved; if it be an act of order, and commanded of God,
a^ where the regulating of a thing, that it be not done (...), rashly, is
commanded, there the thing it self is commanded, 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Then your ordinatihn by the sole male Church void of all officers, and calling
of What being ordination confers. See Book of Ecclesiastic Discipline at
Geneva. M. DCXXX. page 65, 66.
officers without officers (a thing without example in the Scripture, except
where God calls immediately) wants an act of order commanded of God, and that in
an ordinary way; for your way is, in ordinary the Church is before the officers
and gives being to the officers.

2. If ordination be but an approbation of the officers, who have already
being, and not necessary that ordination should be where there is election of
people, then it shall be strange, that there were officers at all; the calling
of officers we read of in the New Testament (who yet need not be there, but are
ex superabundanti, present) as Act. 1. Act. 6. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. Act. 14. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 14 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 10, etc. and no
where is there vola vel vestigium, of a command or promise to the Church
destitute of officers, to call and give being to officers, nor any practice of
the Apostles for it. And I am so far from owning such a Logic as Mr. H. puts
upon me, The Church have not received power of excommunicating all their
officers; Ergo, they have not received that power, a^ neither thing, nor words,
are in my mind, or book. But I The specific acts of calling men to the
Ministry ascribed to Ministers, but never in Scripture to unofficed brethren,
prove our ordination.
provoke all the Brethren for a warrant, or shadow of a warrant, by precept, by
promise, by practice in Scripture for a Church void of officers, that has
power to call and give being to officers, or admit in, or cast out members, or
perform any Church worship.

3. Let it be considered, if Christ have given any jurisdiction at all, it must
be in calling and in giving being to the officers of Christ's visible Kingdom:
but the specific acts of giving being to the officers are to set men over the
work, Act. 6. 3. (...), to separate and set apart for the calling, Act. 13. 2.
to prove (...), before they be put in the Ministry, whether they have the
requisite qualifications or not, 1 Timothy 3. 10. to lay hands on men for the
office cautelously, 1 Timothy 5. 2^. to commit the charge to faithful men, able to
teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. are ascribed to Elders, to Prophets, to
(...).
Pastors. Show me the like ascribed to your Church wanting officers. Mr. R. his
comparisons of an Ambassador, etc. must stand then till you answer these often
proposed Arguments.

It is weak, that Mr. H. that the Elders of Ephesus was congregational. Page 86.
Mr. H. answers not my Arguments on the contrary, nor touches them.

2. Its most weak to say. Dath Paul exhort the Elders, when they are assembled
in the Classis to watch against rav^ning Wolves, or did they not this in their
special charges? As if a Judicature of civil Watchmen, a College of Physicians
were not both alone, and in their respective Assemblies to watch over the City
and the sick.

Mr. H. When Churches were compl^ted with all officers, that Page 82, 83.
then ordination was acted by a College of Pastors, there is nothing in the
Text says any such thing.

Ans. The homogeneal Church yet wanting officers (says Mr. H.) is complete to
create and call its officers, and a^ Independent in an Island without officers,
and has that power, Par. 1. c. 8. page 89, 90, 91.
and no word of precept, or promise, or any such practice for such a Church
creating their officers. Paul should have bid them use their power of
ordaining, as the twelve Apostles, Act. 6. hids them use their power of
choosing. And Paul should not have charged Timothy to usurp ordaining of
officers, where there was a Church in an orderly way, being the first formal
subject of the Keys to do it. And Mr. R. gives instances, where the Elders are
commanded to ordain, and lay on hands, and says this command or practice is
not to be found in the Word, in the hands of the people.

My fourth Argument stands, because every twelve in a family, Page 89. There is
an Independent Church in a family.
is an homogeneous Church. True (says Mr. H.) but they watch one over another
by family rules.

Ans. That is a begging of the question; for a family combination has all the
essentials of a Church combination, if the Church be taken for an homogeneal
association, and wants only the name: for they cannot watch over one another,
as touching seals, and no more can any homogeneous Church of diverse families so
watch over one another.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether Covenant-right to Baptism be derived from the nearest Parents only,
or from the remoter, the Grandfathers.

MR. H. It belongs not to any ^d ^^ssors, either nearer or Surv. par. 3. 6. 2.
Conc. 2. page 13.
further off removed, it is from the next Parents, (...), and firstly to give
Covenant right of Baptism to their Child (...) when I say Pred^^^ssors near
e^r further off, I include and comprohend all, beside the next parent -- Now
covenant right agrees Augustine dreamed not that Baptism is only right
administered in a single congregation, but in the Catholic congregation, or
Church. Contra Donatistas de Baptismate, l. 1. c. 11. Non iis, itaque dicimus
nolite dare (Baptisnium) sed nolite in schismate dare -- nec iis, quos videntur
baptizaturi, dicimus, nolite accipere: sed nolite in schismate accipere --
ubicunque (vel in hae, vel in illa congregatione) invenit (baptismum) non
hominum, sed Dei esse cognovit, etc.
not to all other for them, nor can the P^ (...) this (...) out the next parent
(in Church covenant) who is the adequate^ ^^s^ of deriving these privileges

Ans. 1. When Mr. H. says, it belongs not to remote Parents (...), and
fistly to convey Covenant right to the children, he would make the Reader
believe that remote Parents have some causative influence, but not primary, as
the first subject. But the truth is, if the nearest parent be the adequate
cause of conveyance (as ^e says) then shall he not leave any influence at all
to remote parents.

2. It is not the nearest parent as visibly in the covenant of The nearest
Parents, while they are made the only conveyers of grace, the Church covenant
of men is preferred to the covenant of Grace.
grace, but as visibly in Church Covenant Independent wise, by Mr. H. his
Doctrine: for (says Mr. H. ibid.) the next parents can give the privilege and
title to Baptism, without any help of the pred^^^sso^.

Hence 1. more weight is laid upon the Church Covenant Ans. to the 32 quest.
ans. to the 10 quest. p. 28, 29, 30. Ans. to 32 qu. to (...) qu. p. 7, 8. in
which they prevaricate. Ans. to 12 qu. p. 39, 40. Ans. to 6. page 21, 22. Ans.
to 7. 22. 23. Ans. to qu. 10. q. 10. p. 28, 29.
than upon the Covenant of Grace; and the Traditions of men are heightened above
the Gospel and command of God. For suppose that Judas, Magus, Iezabel, who are
under the Church Covenant, be never discovered, nor judicially cast out, they
convey covenant-right to Baptism. But

1. These of approved godliness and visible Saints, who cannot in conscience
submit to their Church Covenant, are secluded from the Seals, and their seed
from Baptism, as the places in the margin clear, and Magus and Iezabel their
children are admitted to Baptism for the new Church Covenant, and others,
famously known to be godly to the Brethren of the congregational way, and who
bring sufficient testimonial with them, (as their own words are) though the
testimonial be from private Christians; yet because the testimonial is not from
a Church, a Church known to them to be under a Church Covenant either
implicitly or explicitly, are not admitted to Church-ordinances, and so neither
their seed to Baptism.

2. Godly so journers known to be such, and visible members broken off from
Church Membership through no sin or scandal The woeful evils of making the
nearest parent the only conveyer of covenant right to the children. See Tostat.
Abulens. in Exodus c. 34. in v. 6. Genesis 9. and 10.
in them, but either through violence of persecution, or some stroke of
judgment, as Pestilence, that has scattered them, and removed the Elders by
death, can have no Baptism to their children, though they be visibly in the
Covenant of Grace, yet the seed of Magus and Iezabel, upon the sole account of
the Church Covenant; so that opus opera^um, the deed done, the want of the
formality of their membership, without the contempt, reigns here as in Popery.

3. Then by this they cannot have a wedding garment to men's discerning, who are
not inchurched their way.

4. They are not in the Covenant of Grace, nor the visibly called of God. Nor

5. Members visible of Christ's Body, but as Pagans and Publicans, who are not
thus inchurched in the nearest parent, and their seed unclean and Pagan-seed.

6. Then the seals were never administered according to the Rule of the Gospel
until the Independent Churches arose.

7. Nor can Egypt, Assyria, the Kingdoms of the world, be the Kingdoms of of
the Lord, and of his Son Christ, as Isa. 19. 25. and 2. 1, 3. Rev. 11. 15.
except only in the nearest father and mother inchurched by the
Church Covenant; The ^^ed of the Gentiles and their offspring blessed of the
Lord, Isa. 61. 9. their seed and their seeds seed. Isa. 59. 21. the enduring
seed of Christ, Psa. 89 29, 36. Isa. 53. 10. Genesis 13. 15. Isa. 45, 25, by our
Brethrens way are but only the nearest sons and daughters The covenanted seed
so often mentioned in Scripture, must be only the children of the nearest
parent believing, the rest must be Pagans. Ans. to quest. 7. page 22. If you
can give us a sufficient answer to take us off from that Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.
etc.
of the only nearest father and mother in Church covenant. So Christ is not
David's seed, for David was not (I judge) his nearest father according to the
flesh. When it is said, the seed of the godly is blessed, Psalm. 37. 26. his
seed is mighty on earth, Ps^^. 12. 2. it must be only his nearest sons and
daughters, not the thousand generations, Exodus 20. And when it is said, Praise
him all ye seed of Jacob, Psalm. 22. v. 23. none are then invited to praise God,
but the nearest sons and daughters of the nearest parents: for our Brethren
(from whence is the marrow of Mr. H. his Book) tell us, the 1 Corinthians. 7. 14.
seems to limit the foederal sanctity or holiness to the children, whose next
parents, one or both, were believers -- for if we go one degree beyond the next
parents -- we might baptize the children of all the Turks, and of all the
Indians: and if so, all the huge multitude of sons and daughters coming in to
the Church, that make an eternal excellency, Isa. 60 4 15. and the joy of many
generations, who shall inherit the land for ever, v. 21. to whom the Lord shall
be an everlasting light, v. 19. shall be the children only, whose next
parents, one or both, are believers. But we think the second Command, Exodus 20.
takes the Brethren off that Scripture.

8. And such ups and downs, and leaping like Locusts and Frogs from earth to
water, and from water to earth, has not been heard: for how often are
Independent members in the Covenant of Grace, and Christians, and out of it
again as Pagans, and their seed Pagans, and their seeds seed Pagans? If all the
fastening of an everlasting covenant to a Kingdom, be only nearest parents, and
if they break the Charters of Heaven, all Covenant-mercies are cancelled to the
seed, and the seeds seed.

9. If we speak with Scripture, the adequate cause of covenant The adequate
cause of covenant-love from fathers to children is free grace.
love to fathers and sons, is the free grace of God, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. and 10. 15
2 Samuel 7. 23. 24. Luke 1. 50, 68, 69. Ephesians. 2. 4. the conveying subordinate
cause, is sometime a family, as Abraham, not as a physical parent only, to
convey the covenantright only in the direct blood thread or blood-line from
parent to child, but as both Physical and Moral, or Oeconomick parent; for
Abraham gets the covenant-charter given to him, and not only to his
blood-seed, but to strangers and servants born under him, to the sons of his
servants, Genesis 17. 7. 12. Its given to Cornelius and his house, Act. 10. 48.
and 16. 33. sometimes to Samaria a great city, Act. 8. to Macedonia, to a great
kingdom: Exodus 3^. I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham. Now Abraham
was not their next parent: Deuteronomy. 10. 11. He gives the land promised to the
fathers. Luke 1. 72. He saved us, to perform the mercy promised to our fathers;
v. 73. to remember his holy covenant; v. 74. The oath which he swear to our
father Abraham. Acts 2. The promise (v. 39.) is to you, and to your children:
What? only to your nearest children? yea and to all that are afar off even as
many as the Lord our God shall call. 2 Cor. 6 16. I will be their God, and they
shall be my people; The covenant that the Lord will be our God, must extend
further than to the nearest seed.
according to that, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17. 7.
Either must this fail in the New Testament, or we have no more right to the
promises made to Abraham, then the children of Pagans have; for if their
nearest parent believe. they have covenant right, but that is but a yesterdays
charter: yea, though the children do worse, and corrupt themselves more than
their fathers, Judge. 2. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 29. 25. Ezekiel. 2. 3. yet if they repent,
Lev. 26. 42. then I will (says God) remember my covenant with Jacob, and also
my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember, and
I will remember the land -- I will not cast them away, etc. Nor is this a
Tempore^ ^^rcy only, (...) Ezekiel. 38. 24, 25. 1 Kings 11. 32. and 8 19. (...)
Kings 19. 34. and 20. (...). Psalm. 132. 10 Isa. 37 35. Now if the Parent
nearest be the adequate cause, the mercy is not conveyed by David, o^ for
David's sake, as the Scripture says, more than to the wildest Pagan. And that 1
^or. 7 14. must be meant of the farther off children, as Romans 11. 16. If the
root be holy, so are the branches; he means the branches to be graffed in
again, v. 23. the branches beloved for the fathers sake, v. 28. far off
branches, not yet ingraffed again, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come
in, v. 25, 26.

Mr. H. In the place Exodus ^0. the Lord ^ies not himself to a law, but walks in
breadth, as best be^^om^ his Wisdom; so ^e eximes some from the threatening, and
withhelds the expression of his love from others.

Ans. The expressions of the Lords love and mercy, is one thing, (the Lord
uses the latitude of sovereignty here) and the extending of covenant-mercy to
the thousand generations, is a far other thing.

2. When Mr. H. says, that the Lord withholds the expressions of his love from
others in the thousands mentioned, if he mean the expressions of his
covenant-love, (as he must, what is this from contradicting the words of the
Text? Calvin (whom Mr. H. Calvin. Instit. l. 11. c 8. sect. 20. Promissio de
propaganda in mill generationes Dei misericordia, quae etiam frequenter in
Scripturis occurrit, and in solenni Ecclesiae soedere inseri^ur, Ero Deus tuus,
and feminis (...) post ^e. Perkins in 2 Com. ^^lv. ib. Quia non perpetuam hic
figere regulam voluit legislator, quae suae electioni. deroga^et.
misciteth) says, its meant of covenant-mercy to be propagated to the thousand
generations, according to that, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Now
neither Scripture nor Calvin ever meant by seed, the nearest seed of the
nearest parent only: Quod D^ gratia (inquit Calvin) in fam^ p^orum aeterna
resideat. Perkins is as clear in this. I wonder that Mr. H. was not afraid to
cite these worthy servants of God, for an opinion so repugnant diametrally to
the letter of the Scripture: and

10. To the longanimity and patience of God. For an earthly Prince making a
covenant of grace with a man and his family, were it grace and gracious dealing
to cut off all his posterity for the fault of only the nearest parents, so as
all the rest of the blood-line should be to him as damned Traitors and Rebels?
And

11. It close everts the liberty of God in his free election of grace; for does
not Scripture and Experience teach, that the Lord never sent his Gospel to a
Nation, but he had there among them his chosen ones, both of the seed of the
Elect and Reprobate, Acts 18. 9, 10. and therefore the Nation called of God by
the Gospel, is also the chosen of God, and the loved of God, according to the
most precious part: So the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. and 10. 15. Ephesians. 1. 1, 2,
3. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. Psalm. 132. 13, 14. 15. and 147. 19, 20. Now if he should
e^^t off men from the covenant for the real defection of the only nearest
parent, he must remove the Gospel for the same defection, and conclude himself
that he should not choose to life the children of some Reprobates, contrary to
Scripture: and its as great a wonder to me, that Mr. H. should claim to
Zanchius for this opinion, Zanch. tom. 4. l. 1. de secundo Praecepto, cap. 14.
p. 375. Unde etiam apparet, non esse verum, quod quidam ex hoc loco colligunt,
nimirum ^orum parentum, qui a foedere exclusi sunt, propter suas, scilicet,
iniquitates, and def ctionem a Deo) eorum etiam liberos exclusos esse; pugnat
hoc non solum cum aeterna electione, ut dictum est, sed etiam cum promissione
facta, Abrahae, 17. ero Deus tuis, and seminis tui post te, in generationibus
sempiternis promissio fit Abrahae and semini ejus, ergo eorum qui a semine
Abrahae, nemo a foedere hoc excludebatur, etiamsi ex proximis parentibus impiis
and idololatris natus esset; ratio est, quia intermedii patentes impli
continuationem foederis in liberis non impediebant -- Romans 11. Quid enim si
quidam non crediderunt, etc.
for he expressly refutes it.

Mr. H. They who imitate the sins of parents may expect plagues, they that
follow the obedience of faithful parents may expect mercies.

Ans. Its impertinent; for such as follow the sins of parents are none of the
thousand generations of them that love God, not the latter, of them that hate
God.

2. Though both these be true, Mr. H. must prove that mercies promised Exodus
20. are covenant-mercies derived from the nearest parents only, else he says
nothing for his own cause.

Mr. H. The mercies here promised are not all the particular blessings and
privileges that the parents were possessed of. Israel wanted circumcision
forty years in the wilderness, and in the time of the Judges, and in the 70
years captivity they wanted sundry privileges they enjoyed under David and
Solomon; the mercy here must be grace and glory.

Ans. 1. This is for me: But when Mr. H. would have Infants of nearest parents
excommunicated, to be excluded both from Baptism and Covenant-mercy, and have
them in the case wholly with the Infants of Pagans, they must be excluded from
grace and glory; else Mr. H. must show, with Anabaptists, some way of Salvation
of Infants who are without the covenant, and so have no share in that only
precious Name by which men are saved.

2. I hope Mr. H. will not say, Israel wanted circumcision in the Wilderness
for the sins of their nearest parents only; there was a physical impediment;
the Lord, who loves mercy better than sacrifice, would not have Infants wounded
in that ^earisome journey: Nor was it for their nearest parents Idolatry only,
but because they and their fathers from Egypt until that day, Ezekiel. 2. 3.
rebelled, they were deprived of this other privilege.

3. Mr. H. must prove, that the people in the Wilderness, in Ps. 85. 8, 9, 10.
Heb. 3. 17. Judge 9. 19. Ezekiel. 2. 3. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15, 16.
the time of the Judges, a stiff-necked generation, who did worse than their
fathers, despised, mocked and killed the Prophets, were all of them visible
converts, a generation of lovers of God, and such as kept his commandments.

Mr. H. This being the meaning, as Calvin, Zanchius, Junius, Perkins, what
inference can be made for the conveyance of the right of Baptism from remote
parents to children, I know not; for how does this agree to children to love
the Lord, and keep his commandments, who are not yet capable, being not come to
years to put forth such acts?

Ans. I shall not invite Anabaptists to triumph in pulling this Mr. H. denies
covenant right to baptism to Infants, as Anabaptists do, because they do not
actually love and obey God.
Argument for Infant Baptism from our Divines; for if the words must be
expounded of actual love to God, and actual obedience in Infants; so that, if
Infants be not capable of actual love and obedience to God, the covenant-mercy
must be broken off in all Infants who die before they can come to years to
actually to love the Lord, and keep his commandments; And if the flux of
covenant-mercy be suspended, while Infants come to be capable to actually love
God and obey him; where then shall be covenant right in the males of the Jews
to be circumcised, and in the Infants born of covenanted parents under the New
Testament to be baptized? For the Argument, if any be, must be thus:

To such as cannot actually love God and keep his commandments for want of age,
there be no covenant-right to Baptism Yea, Infants of Turks come to age, if
they actually love and actually obey God, and by faith lay hold on his covenant
the Lord extends mercy to them, I^ 56. 4, 5, 6, 7 thin infants have nothing by
nearest or remote parents, but what they have without them. Survey, par. 3.
(...). 2. p. 15, 16.
conveyed. But this want of age and capacity to love God and actually obey him,
is in all Infants in Old or New Testament; except Mr. H. mean, that nearest
parents can supply the want of capacity, and infuse actual understanding to
Infants, that they may actually love God, and keep his commandments, which
remote parents cannot do, which is a mystery I am yet to learn. But to the
Reader it is clear, that Infants have no right to Baptism until they come to
years to actually love God; Ergo, they should not be baptized until they be
converted. But again, no Anabaptist teaches, that any are to be baptized by
covenant-right from parents near or remote, except they personally believe and
profess actually: and the very like Mr. H. says.

Mr. H. Where shall we stand if a thousand generations have interest in
Baptism? Then the children of Turks cannot be excluded, for some of them are
found between us and Adam.

Ans. Is not this to cavil at the Lords words, not at us? so they set this
Conjecture down as a part of their Discipline; Its not above 66 generations
from Noah to Christ, -- and if Gods mercy to a thousand generations may fetch
in the children of excommunicated Way of the Churches of N. E. c. 4. sec. 6. p.
87.
persons, the same promise may fetch in all Turks and Infidels at this day. But
I pray you are Turks such as love God and keep his commandments? are not Turks
avowed enemies to Christ and the Gospel Covenant? and so for many generations
have deserted the covenant and visible Church, so that they are no visible
Church, the Lord having removed the Candlestick: Can this be said of children
born in the visible Church, either of the Jews or of Christians professors,
because their nearest parents are extreme wicked or excommunicated, since they
are yet born in the visible Church where the Candlestick is? shall the children
be cut off from circumcision, since the Lord for Abraham, for David's sake, for
the holy Roots sake (not the nearest, who were most unholy, and cast out, Romans
11. 7.) gives circumcision and Church-room to the branches, Romans 11. 16? And if
the child of nearest parents excommunicated be born in Way of the Churches, ib.
c. 4. sect. 6. p. ^8.
a believers house, or resigned to a believer, to be brought up as his own, he
is to be baptized, say our Brethren; but the being so born, hinders not the
child's cutting off from the covenant. Where then is his covenant-right to
baptism? Its either from his remote parents, which we say; I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed: or from his nearest excommunicate parents. This latter
Mr. H. denies: or from the Believer, in whose house he was born. If so, we
shall not contend, then the covenantright is not broken and removed, because
the nearest parents are excommunicate. Some parental covenant-right is conveyed
to this Infant, which is not conveyable to the Infant of a Turk.

2. Mr. H. has the words of the second Command for his party: for, i^ the
nearest parents excommunication deprive the children of all covenant-mercy and
right to the seals, the words should be false, and the Lord should be less in
showing mercy, in extending it to one generation only, to the nearest children
only, for their nearest parents loving of God, and keeping of his Commandments,
and more abundant in severity of justice, in visiting the sins of the Fathers
upon the Children, unto the third Mr. H. his exposition of the second Command,
overturns the gracious intent and sense of the Lord in both threatening and
promise.
and fourth Generation of them that hate him. But this turns the promise and
the threatening of the Command upside down, for mercy is so extended to Fathers
nearest and nearest Children, and punishing justice to four, and the command
extends mercy unto thousands, and justice to only four Generations. Now two
Generations, as they are fewer then four, so are they far more fewer then a
thousand Generations: as also, if mercy extended to a thousand Generations,
only be upon condition, they imitate their godly parents (says Mr. H.) by
loving (actually) and obeying (actually) his Commandments, especially that of
the truth of his worship, then is mercy not extended to the nearest one
generation of Infants; for it is certain the nearest one generation of Infants
cannot be yet capable (says Mr. H. with the same Surv. par. 3. c. 2 page 16.
breath) being not come to years to put forth such acts of actual love and
obedience in worshipping the true God, as he has commanded in his word: and if
mercy be not extended to one generation, nor Covenant-seals to Ishmael, for
Abraham's, nor to Esau for Isaacs sake, contrary to all Scripture: the Lord
shows not mercy to thousands of generations, because not to one generation. And
so again, the promise of mercy is destroyed, for the condition of actual love,
and of actual obedience is physically impossible to all sorts of Infants, both
of Parents loving or hating God.

And 3. the sweet and merciful proportion is destroyed, for God punishes
Infants Children of Achab, of the Am^lakites, of Jeroboam in the cradle, though
these Infants be as incapable to bow the knee to Idol gods, or to imitate the
Idolatry and actual abominations of their Fathers, as the Infants of godly
parents are to imitate the actual love and obedience of their parents: and yet
the Scripture and experience teach, that justice proceeds to four generations
against the one: And Mr. H. denies that mercy goes along to the thousand
generations with the other, because poor Infants on the breast cannot bow their
knee and pray in faith to God, and do the like acts of true worship, as their
godly parents do: and yet Mr. H. fathers his meaning upon Calvin, Zanchius,
Iunius, Perkins.

Mr. H. The next parents being excommunicate, cannot give to the child the
right which they have not themselves. Par. 3 page 18.


Ans. I grant, because they are not the sole and adequate cause of conveying
covenant-right to the children. But where then (says Mr. H.) shall we stand,
how shall it be conveyed to remote parents? The answer is easy, so long as the
nearest children When, and how the posterity are cast off.
of excommunicate parents are born in the visible house, where the King yet
dwells, and the golden candlestick is not removed, the children are heirs to
the remote parents, the children are followed with covenant-mercy, passing by
the nearest parents: (says the Lord) for my servant David's sake, 1 King. 11.
32, 34, 36. he would not destroy Judah for his servant David's sake, 2 King. 8.
19, 2 King. 19. 34. 2 King, 20 6. for the promise is not laid down in the hand
of the nearest parents only, but in their hands with whom first God signally
covenants, as with Abraham, David, with the three thousand baptized, Act. 2.
39. and their children, and all that are afar off, and as many as the Lord
shall call with the seed, with Samaria and theirs, Act. 8. so long as a calling
Gospel is there: This shall not fetch in the Turks. How will Mr H. with so
short a good night of Christ break off the longanimity of God to the seed for
their nearest parents, if they break a new congregational covenant? Yea, if by
persecution, and through no sin of the nearest parents, they be broken out of
congregation-state, presently the Candlestick is removed from the seed, and a
bill of Divorce sent to the whole race, and they banished out of the house, and
declared Pagans. O Scriptureless cruelty, to make God to break the covenant
first, the parents continuing in covenant-obedience and suffering for Christ!

Mr. H. Men of approved piety in covenant with God visibly, are to be admitted
to the seals (says Mr. R.) but (says Mr. H.) gracious men be pertinacious.

Ans. Pertinacy in a scandal marrs approved piety; but because they approve not
your way, are they therefore pertinacious?

Mr. H. To be a member of the visible Church in general, and Par. 3. page 20.
have no particular existence of membership in any particular congregation, is
a fancy, as to say there is a part of manhood not existing in John, Thomas, or
any Individuals.

Ans. Mr. H. fancies there is a promise of continuing on the Rock made to the
congregation in general, and yet this or that congregation falls off the Rock.

2. Mr. R. his Church-general is no abstract generick nature, but an individual
integral Catholic body, existing in all the earth; and one is baptized a
member to all congregations jure, and exists and dwells in one only: as a man
may have right to all City-priviledges, and yet may reside, and actually enjoy
only the City privilege of London. Mr. H. imagines that our Catholic integral
Church is genus, and the Congregation species: and if so, the Church of Boston
should be the whole integral Catholic Church, and the little finger the whole
body of John.

CHAP. IX.
A new device of Mr. H. his two sentences, the official and dogmatical sentence
of officers, yet not concional, nor juridical, and another juridical of the
male-Church, is examined.

MR. H. It is the office of Rulers dogmatically to discover the mind of God,
and the mind of Christ, in convincing by witnesses Par. 3. c. 3. page 41.
the offenders, and preparing the cause. And the brethren have no more power to
oppose the sentence of the Censure thus prepared, and propounded by the Elders,
then they have to oppose their Doctrine, for the Elders may preach it as the
word of God, by virtue of their office.

Ans. 1. Scripture tells us nothing of two sentences.

2. Two Judicatures which lead witnesses. Two new Judicatures, one dogmatical,
or official by the Officers, another Juridical by the male-Church, must be an
unwarrantable (...) (...)


3. Two sorts of binding Judges. This then is will worship.

2. No Scripture tells us of leading of witnesses to convince Delinquents
concionally, by way of preaching, Old or New Testament, not Mr. H. must here
speak, Rev. 2. 2, 14, 20. Acts 15. Matthew. 18. 1. 1 Cor. 5 1, 2. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
and elsewhere we read of but one juridical censure by the whole Court, and of
one sentence: If he h^a^ not the Church, etc. they are not Apostles but liars,
Rev. 2. 2. Iezabel should not be suffered to teach. Who can dream that these w^
first concluded dogmatically, or ought to have been so c^ded by the officers in
one Court, and then were concluded juridically by the male Church?

3. These words, T^^l the Church, whether must they be then, t^ll the Officers,
that they may dogmatically determine, or tell the male-Church that they may
juridically determine? and yet, one of these bear the name of the Church, by
our Brethrens way.

Or 3. Tell the Church of Redeemed ones, which is their only Church. The first
is our Church of Rulers, which they cannot endure: the other two cannot subsist.

4. Who gave ruling Elders a joint power to preach juridical sentences, which
must bind the unofficed brethren as the preached Word of God, for they have no
calling to labor in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17? and how can they
preach, except they be sent, Romans 10. 14, 15?

5. How can rude and unlettered men, who labor not in the word and doctrine,
by virtue of their office dogmatically resolve deep points of Heresy, more
than unofficed brethren, and predetermine their conscience? should the ruling
Elders lips that way preserve knowledge? and should they as the Messengers of
the Lord of Hosts, with the pastors, carry the Word of God so binding others?
What they do in Synods is a far other thing, for there they act juridically
rather than dogmatically, and jointly with Pastors and Doctors.

6. This sentence must lay bands upon the consciences of the male Church, so
that there is nothing left to them but to obey; and can obeying and submitting
to the Word leave any room to judging in an authoritative way? sure, by this
they must either hear and believe after a popular judging, or then reject, and
so must women and children of age; and what place then is left to juridical
sentencing by the Elders or Brethren? yea, so the Churches freedom of judging
is none at all, when the Church may no more oppose that dogmatick sentence,
than they may oppose the Word of God in the mouth of their officers? and what
greater power can be given to any, then what is given to this Independent
Eldership?

7. When there is a contradiction between the two sentences, which of the
Judicatures must be supreme? If the dogmatick be supreme, they may dogmatickly
determine, that the fraternity ought to be excommunicated for opposing the Word
of God in their sentence; and who can excommunicate an Independent Church? And
again, when the Elders themselves turn Wolves, who then can give out an
official and dogmatick sentence against them? that must be wanting: and has
not the like of this brought forth among Brownists reciprocal excommunications?

CHAP. X.
Of Synods and their Power.

MR. H. Synods are necessary for union in the Churches: In the multitude of
Counselors there is safety, Acts 15. Prove. 16.

Ans. Union in truth and peace among Churches, say these Churches, must make
one visible Body; then ruptures, rentings, Union or division among associate
churches, say the associate churches, must make up one visible body.
scandals, must say there is in this body visible, a necessity of Government
and Jurisdiction must be incident to that visible body, which they deny: for
this union must be a professed union, to speak and think the same thing, Phil.
2 2. c. 4. and this is visible union; and so they must meet, not in their
members (that is unpossible) and here is a visible Church meeting, (for Civil
it is not) debating, advising about matters of government of the House of God.
So strong is truth.

Mr. H. There are associations of diverse sorts, Classis, Synods, Survey, par.
4. p. 2. par. 1. c. 13. p. 230, 238. Reasons of the Dissenting Brethren, page
118, 119, 120. Surv. Par. 4. c. 1. p. 6.
Provincial, National, Oecumenick.

Ans. 1. A general Council is before mocked as a nothing, and the Brethren
bring arguments against the being and nature of Synods, Commissioners,
Representees: The contrary is here asserted.

Mr. H. The acts must it is (says Mr. R.) (...) Ecclesiastic Decrees.

Ans. Ambignity, darkness: to bind as a part of Scripture, is 1. That which is
contained and clearly deduced from Scripture. Or 2. that this act of decreeing
issuing from the immediate revelation and assistance of the Spirit, makes that
which is decreed to be Scripture: in the former sense acts tie as good advice
and counsel only; in the latter they tie not as Scripture.

Ans. No man (I do not say its done consulto) more darkens. I brought three
members to clear the matter. Mr. H. leaves Mr. H. his mistake as touching the
burdens of the acts of Synods, which is, that they tie the conscience only as
the godly counsels of women tie men. M Cotton of the keys, c. 6. p. 25.
out the third, and darkens all: for acts of Synods lay on bands neither as
formal Scripture, for they come not from the immediately inspiring Spirit, nor
yet only as clear and infallible deductions from Scripture, for so the counsel
of a woman Abigail, infallibly deduced from the sixth Command, laid a burden
upon the conscience of David. And this is all the tie that Mr. H. gives to
Synods, they tie as godly counsels of women and servants. But Mr. R. and so Mr.
Cotton, gives a third member, they lay burdens on the consciences of the
Churches, not for the matter only, as the godly advice of women, but formally,
as from the Ministerial Authority of the Commissioners. And this power Mr. Tho.
Goodwyn and Mr. Ph. Nigh give to all Ministers Preface to the Treatise of the
Keys.
over their congregations: So as these three shall be Judges of Mr. H. his
great mistake in this distinction. Hence two contradictions are here: Mr. H.
gives no power to Synods, but power of advising, such as women over men. Mr.
Cotton offends at that, and says, that Synods have a Ministerial power over
the Churches. In the former Mr. H. leaves his Brethren, and sides with
Socinians and Arminians. And Mr. H. shall Socin. contra Gabr. Ementropium, c.
1. p. 7. Socin. Res. 11. ad Resp. Andr. Volam. Nullis deinceps hominibus, etc.
Smalcius Ref. lib. de Error. Aria. 1 c. 1. p. 6. Qui vult sensum Scripturae ab
illis peti, qui post Apostolos vixerunt, dum hoc facit, tacit deserit Scripta
Apostolica, etc. Epist. ad 3. th. 8 disp. 26. th 10. disp. 32. th. 1. Remonst.
Apol. c. 25. fol. ^94. fol. 282, 283. Armin. disp. 58. n. 3.
confess the weakness of this distinction, if applied to doctrines delivered by
Pastors to the flock; for they neither bind as women's godly counsels deduced
from Scripture only, not do they bind as immediately inspired formal
Scripture.

2. The first and formal subject of the power of the Keys is the male-Church of
the congregation (says Mr. H.) yea, not that only, says Mr. Cotton, a part
of the power of the Keys is in a Synod.

The Dissenting Brethren gave in a Paper to the Committee Paper, anno 164^. S
p. 13. The dissenting Brethren of the famous Synod at ^estm their judgment of
Synods and Presbyteries.
of Accommodation at Westminster concerning Synods, etc.

1. At these meetings, let them pray, and expound Scripture, resolve difficult
Cases of Conscience.

2. They may dogmatickly declare what is the will of Christ in these cases: and
this judgment ought to be received with reverence and obligation (...) from an
Ordinance of Christ.

3. If the doctrine or practice of any Congregation be erroneous, hurtful, or
destructive to holiness and peace of that, or of other congregations, they are
bound to give an account thereof to the Classis or Synod.

So we owe a reason of our hope (...), to every one, women and Magistrates that
are scandalized, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32.

4. The Classis and Synod may examine, admonish, and in case of obstinacy
declare against that congregation.

1. This is but toward an offending Church. 2. A brother or wom^n may declare
against, or withdraw from obstinate offenders, though not as from a Church.
5. The Classis or Synod may judge of any who deserve excommunication.

6. If the particular Eldership refuse to do their duty, the Classis ought not
only to withdraw communion from them, but also to exercise the sentence of
excommunication themselves.

This was refused by some; but its a great testimony from Adversaries for
Presbyterial Government, only it wants Scripture.

7. In the case of an appeal from an unjust sentence, the Classis may repeal
(they say not, by the power of Jurisdiction, for a Christian woman, a Martyr,
repealed the Acts of Trent) the Mr. Baily in his vindicat. ann. 1655. p. 48. If
Synods have no jurisdiction, heretical Elders of a congregation (as he solidly
says) Arrius, Macedonius are safe from all censures to the worlds end.
unjust sentence, if the congregation be obstinate.

8. The Classis or Synod may ordain Ministers for congregations that have not a
sufficient Ministry.

In all this (except the sixth) much is yielded, and nothing is yielded. For

1. Every godly counselor, man or woman, as a counselor, by the fifth Command
is above such as are counseled, being honored to carry the mind of God, as a
private messenger of God, beside that the counsel for the matter binds the
conscience: So David says to a woman, 1 Samuel 25. 32. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me.

2. They insinuate a distinction of erroneous doctrine hurtful to holiness, and
some erroneous doctrine not hurtful to holiness; whereas he who commands us to
be holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. commands all sound opinions in
fundamentals, or all revealed truths; nor can it but be hurtful to holiness, to
have erroneous opinions of God and Christ, such as Socinians, Antinomians and
Familists, and others have.

3. They do not with Christian candor set down their mind concerning Synods
and Classis, as they call them, nor confirm what they say by Scripture.

Mr. H. If a heathen turn a member of the Jewish Church, he Par. 4. p 7. 8.
is by Mr. R his way, by the Law of Nature to submit to Jewish ceremonies,
because every-member of the corporation must be under the Laws of the whole:
This shall make every Law positive to be the Law of Nature.

Ans. Not so: Its the Law of Nature in general, that the It is the Law of
nature that the part be ruled by the where in the general, and not in every
particular.
whole rule the part, but it follows not, Ergo every member is to submit to
every positive Law of the whole, though most unjust, the member is t^ submit to
every Law of Nature commanded by the whole: The little finger infected with a
Gangrene, is to submit to the whole man, that it be cut off for the safety of
the whole body, but its against particular nature that it be cut off, but most
suitable to universal nature. So in the general, its natural for the creature
rational to obey the Creator; but it follows not, but its a mere positive Law
that Peter give his life for the Gospel, when God by a positive command calls
him to it; and the Law positive, if Divine, i^ not contrary to the Law of
universal Nature. Mr. H. frequently in such purposes slips.

Mr. H. The division of a Nation into Provinces, of a Christian Province into
Territories or Presbyteries, is either a device of man, or a Divine
Institution. The division of a Christian Nation into Provinces, territories and
Presbyteries, is neither a device of men simply, no^ simply a divine
institution, but a mixed ordinance.


Ans. If a device of man be taken for an act of Christian prudence, it is then
neither simply the one nor the other, but mixed of both; for a device of man is
taken in an evil part, for an unlawful forgery, as 1 King. 12. 33. Hos. 13. 2.
Psa. 106. 39. and so whatever is an act of Christian choice, is not a device of
man.

Mr. H. That which is acted by one, and may be altered by another Prince, is a
device of man. But such is the division of a Nation into provinces.

Ans. That which is in question is not concluded, the division of a Christian
Nation into Presbyteries and Provinces according to local bounds and
Mathematical inches, is alterable; and so a congregation Independent of 350,
rather of 349, or 360, is alterable, shall it not upon reason be an alterable
device? The quantity of water in Baptism, of wine that every one drinks at the
Lords Supper, how long the pastor shall preach, two hours or three, are
alterable, as to the quantity, by men; but for that the Ordinances of a
congregation, of water in Baptism, are not devices or forgeries of men, that
there should be such associations of Provinces, of Territories, for convenient
feeding, Page 6, 7.
governing, and Mr. H. granted for counselling, Mr. Cotton for command and use
of the Keys yields also; so the question shall not be of the subject, but of
the power and of the bounds, where acts of free choice of rectified reason for
civil ends also have place. But the Conclusion is naught. So, That which is not
in the Word (says he) is a device of man. I assume, the Par. 4 p. 10.
frame of the meeting house for congregational Worship, the number, names,
trades, callings of members, the quantity of Mr. H. his mistake of individual
moral acts and the mixture in them.
water in Baptism, the quantity of Bread that every one eats a^ the Lords
Supper, are no more in Scripture, than the Territories or bounds of
Presbyteries, yet are they not for that humane devices.

Mr. H. It is doubtful that all our singular actions (as Mr. R. says) are
mixed, for eating and drinking must be for Gods glory, and Omnis actio in
individuo est moraliter bona vel mala.

Ans. If Mr. H. doubt of this, Ames, Didoclavius can speak D. Ames fresh suit
against D. Eurg^s. Didoclavius altar. Damasc. c. 9. p. 495, 496, 497. Hieron.
Ep. ad Aug. in Epist. August. 11. Bonum est continentia, malum est luxu: i^,
inter utrumque indifferens ambulare, capitis naribus purgamenta projicere --
Scotus in 2 did. sen. 7. q. unic. Thom. 1. par. q. 103. q. 13. art. 8.
Lombard. 2 did. 40. Durand. l. 2. did. 40. q. 1. not. 6. Siactus sequatur
rationem deliberatam, sic impossible est aliquem actum esse indifferentem, sed
necessario quilibet est bonus vel malus moraliter -- quia ordinatur ad finem
debitum a ratione deliberata. Gregor. de Valent. Tom. 2. disp. 2. q. 13. de
bonit. and mali^. act. hum. puncto 6. Omnis actio a deliberata ratione, (non a
sola imaginatione, ut cum qu^s fricat barbam,) p^ocedens, est individuo aut
bonus, aut malus secundum circumstantias; Quia vel habet finem debitum, vel non
debitum.
to it. There is such a thing as an action indifferent, as Augustine says, or
rather Jerome, that is neither good nor evil, but it is not a humane action
properly, as to spit or purge the nose. But see all the Schoolmen, Scotus,
Thomas, Lombard, and all that writ upon them, and you shall never read this
new Axiom, Omnis actio in individuo est moraliter bona v^l mala. Durandus
indeed, and the Schoolmen say, that every act individual which follows
deliberate reason, is necessarily either morally good or evil. See Greg. de
Valentia.

2. For the mixture of our actions; its clear there is something physical in
eating at the Lords Supper, as the word has not set a rule concerning the
physical quantity of Bread and Wins, so there be not too much, for it is not to
feed the body, nor too little, for it must work upon the senses. And there is
in praying, preaching, the tone, the accent of the organs, of the voice, and
their motion: so that we eat and drink for God, and soberly and seasonably, is
moral, and squared by the word; but a man sins not in eating quickly or lently,
in the house, or in the garden, or sometime in his bed, sometime at midnight,
upon necessity.

Mr. Hooker errs not a little. in calling the acts of the Synod, Act. 15.
Councels, such as godly men and women, who are not Apostles and Elders, may
give to others: for counsels are not burdens laid upon the people and Churches,
by the wisdom and authority of the Holy Ghost.

2. By Apostles and Elders, who sharply rebuke the pressers of circumcision, as
subverters of the souls of people.

3. Neither are they indifferent advices, which they might reject, but these
they could not reject, without despising God and the Holy Ghost, the very thing
that the Lord says, he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me: which cannot be said
of a counsel of the Heathen man to a Christian. It is (says Mr. Cotton) an Mr.
Cotton Keys of the Kingd. c. 6. p. 23. Synods have more then power of
counselling.
act of the binding power of the Keys, to bind burdens, as Acts 15. 27.

4. The Decrees of no properly so called Church on earth are called (...), the
Decrees of Apostles and Elders. Mr. H. calls them only Advices and Counsels: is
it not safer to believe Luke, Act. 16. 4. then Mr. H? But a Synod is never
called a Church, say they; this is but to contend for names; for the word
Church, (...), is three times, Act. 19. 32, 39, 40. given to a civil meeting:
and Mr. H. will not have it given to bodies meeting for the affairs of the
Church of Christ.

Mr. H. Where there is no delegation of messengers by mutual consent, there is
no right of jurisdiction, decrees only bind the Churches who send them.

Ans. Antioch, Act. 15. 2. and Jerusalem sent messengers, therefore two
Churches, at least were sent, and were bound; as Absents from the Synod are
tied to obedience.
for delegation, we shall speak hereafter of it.

2. If they ought to send, and stand in need of light and peace, and send not,
they are the same way tied, that some hundreds absent, when Iezabel is
sentenced and excommunicate, are obliged to withdraw from communion from her,
though they were not present to consent to the sentence.

Mr. H. Its no prejudice to the care and wisdom of our Savior, that the
punishing of the congregational Throne be reserved to God Page 60.
only.

Ans. When scandals between congregation and congregation, and members of
diverse Churches are greater in number and It suits not with the wis dom of
Christ that no remedies should be for a scandalous Church.
offense, and necessity of edifying and scandalizing greater, his wisdom must
provide for the more rather then the less.

Mr. H. If when a Church offends, I must tell a higher, then must I at length
tell an Oecumenick or General Council.

Ans. General Councels being more abstracted from infecting scandals of
conversation, are rather doctrinal Remedies: nor are censures the ordinary
possible adequate way of removing of Scandal. The Word and Censures exercised
in the Catholic integral visible Church, in parts integral is the adequate
cause.

Mr. H. If every man be allowed his appeal to an higher, then also to a General
Council, then for many hundred years, while the appeal be discussed pendente
appellatione, the appealer cannot be censured.

Ans. We allow only just appeals in case of oppression, to relieve the
oppressed. What appeals we allow.


2. In difficult cases, Deuteronomy. 17. which rarely are such as call for a general
Council, in case of general defection in point of Doctrine, such may be; and
the inferior Churches, that truth suffer not, are to declare for the truth.

2. We allow only what men jure may do.

3. The argument supposes that we approve a towering up of appeals, even to a
General Council, as a liberty of every member, whatever unjust prejudice be in
it: and that every such appeal may stop the actings of Christ's visible Kingdom
and called Pastors. Christ has given no power to sin.

Mr. H. Its a wonder, that because Churches may rebuke, yea, Christians may
rebuke Heathens, though not in a Church way, that therefore the Synod has a
power of jurisdiction -- Paul rebuked the Athenians, Acts 17. A (...) these
acts of Church communion?

Ans. My argument is not a genere ad speciem, sed specie ad genus. These
convened in the name of Christ by the Holy The juridical power of Synods is
concluded from Acts 15. and their Church Way of rebuking, etc.
Ghost, who (...), with one consent, by way of suffrage and judgment. (...),
Act. 15. 9. and 21. 25. rebuke perverters of souls, Act. 24. 28. and lay on
burdens and commands, (...), to observe, Act. 21. 25. and keep such things, and
(...), to abstain from such things, Act. 15. 29. and give Decrees, by which the
Churches were established in peace and truth, Act. 16. 4, 5. these have power
to excommunicate the refusers of such acts, according to Matthew. 18. for Paul
and Barnabas were scandalized, and complained to the Church of Antioch. Act. 1.
who sent them to complain to a Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. 2, 3, 6. and these
who in a Church Way determine against perverters of souls have juridical power:
if therefore these men had done the contrary, and had refused to hear the
Church, or Churches convened, and should teach these decrees came not from the
holy Ghost, were they not to us as Publicans and Heathens? Yea, and wh^^ more
could the Church of Pergamus, and that of Thyatira Independent (...), say our
Brethren, do in making acts against such as h^ld the Doctrine of Balaam, of the
Nichola^ against Iezabel, Rev. 2. 14, 15. 20. If they should after prctice and
practice such impure doctrine, but declare them perverters of souls, and charge
others to keep no fellowship with them? and shall all be but a rebuke, and such
a counsel as one private man gives to heathen? and sure Paul's rebuke of these
at Athens, Act. 17. though it made not up the rebuke of a Church, yet Paul
rebuked them not as a private man, or as a godly woman may rebuke Idolaters,
but formally as a Pastor. And Paul and Barnabas as Pastors removed the
Caadlestick, and turned to the Gentiles, Act. 13. and unchurched the Jews,
which no private men could do. So the prophesies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
against Babylon, Persians, Tyrus, etc. as they made not the people to be
Churches, so they came not from private men, but from the immediately inspired
Prophets; and such Prophets of Divine authority these are proved to be from
these Prophesies: So the juridical Church Authority of the Synod, by Whitaker,
Calvin, Beza, and hosts of learned Divines, is concluded from Act. 15.

Not is it my mind, that the Jews did excommunicate the Of the Samaritans, and
their ^eligion, See Tostat. Abulen. in 4. Reg. c. 17. qu. 24. Joan. Wolph. Com.
in 2. Regn. c 17. v. 24, 25, etc. page 346. The Jews deservedly excommunicate
the Samaritans. Weemes Christian Synag. par. 7. Diatr^. 147. Origin. To. 4. in
Joan. receperunt tantum, scilicer, libros Mosis. Epiphanius haer. 9. Joseph.
ant. 11. c. ult. Quando res Iudaeorum erant prosperae, se Iudaeos, alioqui
Assyrios se dicebant: Iudaei convitium jactantes, Samaritanum appellabant. Ita
Hieronym. Epist. ad Algas. 4. 5. Joseph. l. 13. antiq. c. 14, Religione
corruptiss^ crant Samaritae. Carol. Sigon. de Rep. Hebr. l. 1. c. 3. Ex
Iosepho, Ephraimitas praedicarunt se, Iudaeis ab Antiocho Epiphane asflictis,
Samaritae perterriti, se non Deum (Iudaeorum) sed Deos colere asseruerunt, nec
se Israelitas, sed S^doniosesse dixerunt, and Templum ipsum Iovi Cretensi se
dedicaturos esse professi sunt: atque ita praesentem armati B^gis iracundiam
eluserunt. August. in iocum Joan. 4. Omnino vasculis eorum Iudaei non utuntur.
Samaritans so formally as a single delinquent is excommunicate: nor do I
defend the superstition by Mr. Io-Weemes, and Jewish Doctors in the manner of
excommunicating them. Its sure, the Jews, the true Church deservedly renounced
Churchcommunion with them. Origin, Josephus, Car^lus Sigonius, and others, tell
us they were most corrupt in their Religion, 2 King. 17. and though Augustine
say the Jews so abhorred them, that they would not drink water out of any
vessel of the Samaritans; and Christ refutes that, seeking water to drink from
the Woman of Samaria. Yet since Christ says, Ioh. 4. 22. Ye worship ye know
not what; we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews; he evidently,
as Mr. R. said, justifies the substance of the excommunication, which is all I
intend: let their fooleries pass.

Mr. R. grants one Church has not power over another.

Ans. True, but one associate with many has power.

Mr. H. A man may separate totally from a Church, and from an assembly of
Turks; but for one man to excommunicate, were a pr^fanation of the Lords
Ordinance.

Ans. A single person could not separate from the Church of the Jews, though
they had not a few corruptions, Mat. 23. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 8. 4. no single person
can lawfully be a member of a Turkish Church, how can he then separate from
such?

3. The Church of the Jews (and salvation was of the Jews, Ioh. 4 2^.) was not
one man; therefore their excommunicating of the Samaritans is not hence
concluded to be null.

4. But when the sounder part, though fewer, separateth from the major part,
and the major part makes manifest defection from the truth, and professed cause
and covenant.

And 2 carry along with them the body of Atheists, and malignant opposers of
pure Religion, and wicked men.

3. And that the fewer and sounder part have the collective part of the godly,
and generality of such as make conscience of their ways with them.

And 4. That major part is again and again warned and (...) go on to hold out
and cast out, as far as they can, all, not of their sinful way, though in their
conscience they in other things judge and prosess them to be sound and godly:
in that case I judge the fewer part the Church, and their censures valid: for
the promise is made to such as meet in the name of Christ, Mat. 18.

Mr. H. If all common affairs that concern many congregations (says Mr. R.)
were managed not by one congregation, The acting of Apostles in things
belonging to many Churches, wi^h the Churches concurrence, proves that a Synod
has Church power.
but by the suffcages, (...), Act. 15. 25. Apostles, Elders and select
Brethren, then Synods and their Church Power most be lawful: but the former is
true in the choosing of Matthias, Act. 1. and the treasury of the Churches, and
call^ng of their Deacons, Act. 4. and 6. are disposed by a Synod of Apostles,
with consent of the Churches. Paul instructs a Synod or meeting of (...) at
Ephesu^ in their duty of feeding, Act. 20. and Act 11. Peter gives an account
of his going in to the Gentiles, to a meeting of Apostles and Bre^, (...).
(...), 4. Its true, in the choosing of Matthias, something extraordinary there
was, that the Apostles could not do as Pastors, but as Apostles: as Apostles
they appoint two, v. 23. God only could limit the call to two certain men, all
the Pastors and Churches on earth could not do that: and as Apostles, v. 24.
they pray for the directing of the lo^: and Act. 6. as Apostles by the
immediately inspiring authority by which they writ Scripture, they appoint a
new office of Deacons, which was not in the Church before: but they do most of
the rest by the Churches going along.

Mr. H. There is no Synod in these.

1. There be no delegate Commissioners. 2. No gathering of members by common
consent. 3. No disputing. 4. No common determination.
Ans. Neither the first nor the second are essential to Synods, if they be
persons in public authority they have a material delegation; a formal
commission is a matter of order; nor were the last two wanting, not to say
where the matter is plain, shall it lose the nature of a Synod, because it
wants doubtsome ^diations?

But Mr. H. and Mr. Cotton are obliged to give an instance scriptural beside
the question: we have Act. 15. a meeting of Apostles, Elders, Brethren,
exercising by the grant of Mr. Cotton and the 7. dissenting Brethren some
specific Church^^cts of A Synod acting some specific acts of a governing
Church, may act all the rest of the acts of the Church.
synodical, pastoral, authoritative teaching and commanding of more
congregations then one: Ergo, they have power to exercise juridical acts: for
if Peter may exercise one specific act of a man, let us suppose to play the
Musician, the Astronomer, to number things numerable, to admire, to laugh, no
man can deny but Peter then must be a man, and has power to discourse and
argue. So if a Synod, as a Synod can exercise one specific act of a Church,
being convened in the name of Christ, a reason must be given, why a Synod has
not the essence of a Church to exercise all the specific acts of a Church. A
Synod is not a congregational Church; Ergo, its no Church, est incons. a
negatione species, etc.

Mr. H. Peter gives an account of his fact, Act. 11. to the Jews, Peter Acts
11. gives an account to the Apostles.
who doubt of the lawfulness of his conversing with the Gentiles: but here is
no Synod.

Ans. Yea, the Jews, (...), Syrus, Chrysostom, Syrus. Chrysostomus, Valde
offensi expostulabant. Epiphanius haer. 28. Beza, alter carunt. Gualth. in loc.
homil. 67. Atque semper eam in Ecclesia veteri consuetudinem fuisse cernimus,
ut Episcopi ab Episcopis sese judicari and corrigi paterentur. Calvin. ibid.
Sponte Ecclesiae judicio se: submisit. Lorinus, Cornelius a Lapide in loc.
Summus pontifex non imperiose refutat, -- non dicit -- vestrum est obedire,
etc. Act. 21. Paul submits to a Synod of Elders.
they accused Peter before the Apostles. Epiphanius thinks C^rinth^s set them
on work, Beza, they chid. Its like, says Gualther, the Apostles did not
understand this; but they accuse no^ Peter. But Calvin well observes, Peter
willingly submits himself to the judgment of the Church, and renders an
account to the Apostles and Church: and what is that but a Synod? Mr. H. his
answer is one with that of the Jesuits Lorinus and Cornelius, that he gave out
of humility an account to the people, not to the Apostles, for he was above the
Apostles.

Mr. H. Act. 21. The Elders were occasionally (...), they prescribe nothing ^o
Paul.

Ans. It seems Calvin takes up the mind of Luke (...), for he says, Hence we
may gather, when any serious business was to Calvin. c. 2^. Colligere licet ex
hoc loco, quoties tractandum erat serium negotium, Seniores convenire folitos
fuisse, etc. Gualith. homil. 138. In Ecclesia ordine certo opus esse -- nihil
enim privata authoritate agit, etc. Lorinus, Corn. a Lap. in loc.
do, the Elders were in use to assemble, and Paul does nothing in the Church of
other pastors (^aith Gualther) by his own private authority, but gives an
account to the Ministers. B^ says, this was the fourth Council; Lorinus, no,
for there were no v^tes asked (says he) no debates, etc. Corne^^us a (...)
also denies it was a Synod, and says it was but a meeting that saluted Paul.
Mr. H. ownes their opinion for his own, and calls it only an ^^easional
meeting. But say that it were so (as all synodical meetings, both that Act. 1.
and Act. 6. and that Act. 15.) it will not conclude it to be no Synod.

2. The saluting of Paul was a Christian formality of courtesy; but Paul in
the Synod, v. 18, 19. gives them an exact account, (...), singula ordine (says
(...)) particularly what God had done among the Gentiles: which is a business
of the spreading of the Gospel through the habitable world, and they show their
judgment of Paul's carriage toward the Jews, and the ceremonies were not fully
expired to them, and toward the Gentiles, they confirm the act of the Synod,
Act. 15. businesses worthy of a Synod.

Mr. H. Independent Government is deficient (says Mr. R.) Surv. par. 4. p. 32.
because now when Apostles are not, all the means of public and pastoral
propagating the Gospel to other Churches, and to the heathen, are confined to a
single congregation: whereas the Elders thereof can act nothing as officers,
and the members can act nothing in a Church Way without that one congregation.
This Argument of That proposition of Mr. H. Those whom pastors cannot judge,
over them they have no pastoral power, is many ways false.
mine is not answered by that of Mr H. Those whom pastors cannot judge, as
being without to them, because of another congregation, and heathen, over them
they have (...) pastor-like power. For the Proposition is most false: Pastors
cannot excommunicate those of another congregation, or heathen; Ergo, they
cannot teach them as pastors. It follows not, ex negatione speci^i, non
sequitur negatio generis: This is not a man, therefore this is not a living
creature. So

1. A single pastor, he alone cannot excommunicate an offender of his own
congregation; for one man is not a Church, Ergo he cannot preach as a pastor to
this offender. The consequence is most false, and contrary to Mr. H. for he
has no other proper pastor on earth but he. So weak is M. H. his present
Proposition.

2. Paul and Barnabas preach as sent pastors authorized both by God, and the
laying on of hands, and praying of the Prophets at Antioch, Acts 13. but they
have no power to excommunicate the Gentiles, who are yet no members of the
Church, nor baptized. Paul, Acts 16. 15. is sent to preach to Macedonia,
without their choosing him to be their pastor; and yet Paul could not cast out
those that were no members until they should be member. If it be said, that
Paul and Barnabas preached to the Gentiles not as pastors, because not chosen
by them, but as Apostles, this is well near nonsense. For,

1. Apostles as Apostles essentially are Catholic pastors, not private
Teachers; and so Apostles preached as men, not sent of God, nor yet of men,
whose Baptism was neither from heaven, nor from men.

2. Why not pastors? because not chosen by the people? that is, men only can
make properly so called pastors, but God cannot. Whither go we!

3. Are not all pastors either Apostolic or extraordinary or ordinary the same
pastors in nature and essence? except acts of preaching Christ and of Baptizing
differ in specie and nature, as they flow from Apostles, and as they flow from
ordinary men, which were to make Ordinances, the Gospel, the Seals, of
different nature, better or valid, or worse and less valid, as they come from
Apostles, or from ordinary pastors. Strange Divinity (...)

3. By this Doctrine of Mr. H. the Gospel must be propagated to the world, and
Churches planted among heathen,

1. Either by Apostles, which are not now, and shall gratify Seekers, or by
pastors as pastors, which we say, and Mr. H. and his gainsay: or

2. By private men, or by pastors as private men gifted. Private men as private
men, and as no pastors, are made by M. H. the only spreaders of the Gospel to
heathens. Hieron. in verb. Qui usque ad consummationem seculi se cum
discipulis. futurum promittit, and illos. ostendit semper esse victuros, and se
nunquam credentibus recessurum. Chrysostom. in verb. Ut ex omnibus Gentibus
Ecclesiam, id est fideles and sanctos mihi congregetis.
But 1. are private men successors of the Apostles, to plant Churches among the
heathen? What Scripture for this? Is that Promise, L^ I am with you to the end
of the world, left by Christ to private men? Sure that Promise is made to the
Apostles and their Successors, in all acts of their pastoral preaching, either
in planting or watering: So he shows (says Jerome) that the Apostles shall
ever live in faithful pastors to succeed them, both in planting Churches, that
ye may gather to (...) my Church and Saints (says Chrysostom) out of all
Nations. Now by Mr. H. his way, the Lord promises thus: I will be with you,
and all faithful pastors in preaching (when the Apostles are dead) to their own
formed congregations; but I promise no presence nor Ministerial assistance at
all to pastors ordinary, when they preach in another congregation than their
own, or when they preach the Gospel to heathens, and those that are not yet
Churches of Christ, for then they act not as pastors. Then must either private
Christians, or some new kind of officers that are unknown to the Word, and are
neither Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, nor Prophets nor Doctors, be the only
planters of Churches among the heathen: and where is there Scripture for that?
Or then this Promise of Christ's presence must be made to private men. But have
not some private men brought the Gospel to heathens? True: but now we dispute
of the only fixed ordinary spreaders of the Gospel to other congregations and
heathen societies, since the Apostles are now dead; ye^, and we find that the
Lord gave a sort of new calling to the Apostles touching those to whom they
were hic and nunc to preach, as Peter and John are called to Samaria, Acts 8.
Peter to Cornelius and the Gentiles, Act. 10. Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13. to
the Gentiles, Paul to Macedonia, not Bithynia, Act. 16. Now is there nothing of
this in the ordinary pastors, but private men must be heirs to these Apostolic
warnings from God.

4. It must follow, if pastors be now so confined to one congregation in all
pastoral actings, then all pastoral care of Apostles for vacant Charges, for
planting of new Churches, relief of the poor, removing divisions etc. Act. 1.
and 6 and 4. 35. and 11. 1, 2. and 15 22, 23, 24, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 28. Act. 8.
14. and 21. 18. and 20. 38. and 13. 1, 2, 3. were temporary and Apostolic
stirring^, not pastoral duties now, but such as died with the Apostles; which
is contrary to the wisdom of Christ.

Mr. H. If government by Independent congregations be insufficient, because it
authorizeth not persons to be pastors over pagans, Par. 4. c. 37.
government by Synods is sick of the same disease.

Ans. We judge the essence of a pastor not to stand in the The essence of a
pastor is not in their call and suit to whom he is sent.
call and choice of those to whom they are pastors; for it makes Paul, Barnabas
and the Apostles to be no pastors to the Gentiles and to the heathen, to whom
they preach, and makes the Apostles as Apostles to be no pastors.

2. Synods from Act. 15. and Act. 13. may lend men authorized Evangelists are
now ceased as well as Apostles.
with pastoral power to heathens to spread the Gospel, and private men as no
pastors, but as private men, are intruders authorized by Mr. H. for they have
no promise, such as pastors have by Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 17. Ier. 1.
6, 17, 18. to plant Churches among the heathens, nor is there a warrant to say
that Evangelists are ordinary officers left by Christ to plant Churches.

If Richard Hooker have any ground from Eusebius or Scripture Rich. Hookers
Eccles. Polit. l. 5. sect. 78. p. 421, 422. Eusebius. l. (...). c. 34.
for Evangelists now, or in Trajans time, he must show that they have the gift
of Tongues: for how could Evangelists be fellow-helpers to preach the Gospel to
the Churches planted by the Apostles, if they were not an extraordinary office
only? See those Divines in the margin, and my learned and dear Brother Tilen.
Syntag. dis. 19. th. 38. Apostolorum vice, ubi res poscebat, fungebantur.
Profess. Leyd. in Synops. purior. Theol. dis. (...). these. 17. p. 605. Bucan.
loc. Com. 42. q. 45. Calvin. Com. Ephesians. 4. Apostolis proximi erant Evangelistae,
and munus affine habebant. Bullinger. ib. In plebe potissimum e^udienda. Zanch
Com. ib. Apostolorum Comites -- non immediate mi^^^ -- sed assumebantur. D. To.
Bodius a Trochoregia Com. Ephesians. 4. p. 493. Apostolorum Comites modo huc, modo
illuc missi, modo re vocati ab Apostolis, extraordinarii.
M. George Gillespy, Miscel. quest. c. 7. If the Church should send any to the
heathen any way rip^ for the Gospel. these could be no other than ordinary
pastors to them.

I omitted that of Mr. H. There is nothing Act. 1. but any one might have done.

Ans. If he mean, that any one private man might have chosen Apostles, he
speaks wonders; if he mean Peter might have called Matthias to be an Apostle,

1. Its without practice, that Apostles could call Apostles.

2. It follows not therefore it was not a Synod. Paul did more in writing
Scripture, than if alone he had penned the decrees, Acts 15. and 16. 4. But Mr.
Cotton and all his Brethren will deny M. H. his Consequence; Ergo, there is no
Synod at all, Act. 15.

Mr. H. If the Apostles by extraordinary power cared for the poor, Acts 4. Ergo
there was a Synod.

Ans. The Antecedent is not mine, but false.

2. There was no doubt but ordinary pastors might oversee the Poors goods of
many Churches.

CHAP. XI.
Of the National Church, and the lawfulness of a National Covenant.

MR. H. The greater authority of the politic whole body Par. 4. page 38, 39,
40.
(says Mr. R.) should help the weaker parts, 1 Cor. 12. 23, 26.

Ans. Its true: but there is no National Church under the New Testament to help
the congregational Church, nor are Churches Christian now in Worse ^ase than
the Church of the Jews, for they had a High Priest and a National Worship, at
which they were to meet three times in the year.

Ans. That there is an integral Church Catholic, which is The Church of the
Jews was no more pe^se, and kindly, but only accidentally a national Church,
then any kingdom under the N. T. is a national Church.
more than National, is proved.

2. Our Brethren allow the association of many Churches for help of counsel:
and the Proposition that is granted by M. H. is as true, for Church help, as is
said, associated Churches could not yield, for union in peace and truth, except
they made one visible body united. Natura conjugatorum hoc ^vincit.

3. Visible and professed covenanting with God, makes a visible Church, Gen 17.
7. Deuteronomy. 7. 6. For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God; Deuteronomy. 10 15.
Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers, (Abraham, Isaac, as a covenanted
seed and Church, Genesis 12 1, 2, 3. and 17 6, 7, 8, 9.) to love them and their
seed after them. Now the seed of Abraham visible covenanted, Surv. Par. 1. c.
5. p. 5. p. 59. arg. 5. The Church was visible when there was no seal, neither
circumcision ^o. (...).
by M. H. his confession was a visible Church, before they had an High Priest,
or a Temple, or a National Worship in Abraham's house, Ergo, the High Priesthood
and National Worship was accidental to the visible Jewish Church. If it be
said, Ye^, but they were in Abraham's time a congregational Church. Its
answered, Yet then Priesthood, Temple, and National Worship differenced not the
Church of the Jews from the Church of the Gentiles. Our Brethrens Argument in
this, is of the same stamp with that of the Murderers of Steven, Acts 7.
Steven all along in his Apology refutes them, and ^aith, the Jews were a true
Church in Egypt, when they had no Temple, no Ceremonies, no National Worship,
but by faith only rested upon the promises. So Calvin, Gualther, Bullinger,
Brentius, Marloratus, Beza, contend, that Steven his Apology had been
impertinent, if this Calvin. Com. Act. 7. v 6. Interea commonefiunt Judaei
fuisse Ecclesiam Dei (etiam Nationalem) alibi quam in terra in qua degebant,
fuisse electos patres in populum peculiarem and sub fide tutelaque Dei
protectos, antequam staret Templum, vel instituti essent externi legis ^s, haec
ad generalem cautionis scopum pertinent. Gualth. in Act. 7. homil. 45. in v.
16. Ideo mortuos in Aegypto ut constet illos in ^a Religione diem ob^^sse quae
nullis externis ceremoniis nitebatur, sed in sola fide, etc.
had not been his scope.

2. They were a visible Church in Egypt multiplied above an hundred
congregations, Exodus 1. 9, 11, 15. more in number than the Egyptians, and the
Lords covenanted Church, Exodus 3. 6, 7, 8. and 6. 7. 8. obliged to sacrifice to
God, Exodus 8. 29. and did eat the Passover, and were circumcised in Egypt,
Exodus 4. 24, 25, 26 and 12. 1, 2, 3, etc. when as yet Aaron was not consecrated
High Priest, and there was no Temple, nor any National Temple-worship thrice a
year at that time in the world.

3. When Priesthood, Temple-National-worship thrice a year, sacrificing are
removed, Judah remained in the Babylonish captivity, the visibly covenanted
people of God obliged to pray to him with their faces toward the Temple, 1
King. 8. 35. Dan. 6, 10, 11. and this is no more one National worship, than the
hearing of the Word, and receiving the Seals of the N T. are one National
worship to all the Protestant Churchmembers in Scotland.

4. That which is common to Gods people of the Jews, and to Egypt and Assyria,
and the people of God in the Gentiles, is no distinguishing character
differencing the Jewish Church, as National from the Christian Church as not
National, Quae sunt communia ^a non distingunnt. But to profess, say and swear
by the Lord, and give him public Church-worship, agree to Egypt and Assyria,
and to Kingdoms and Nations of the New To swear a covenat agrees to all
Kingdoms coven^nted visibly with God, as well as to the Church of the Jews.
Testament, as to the Jewish Nation; as Isa. 2. 2. It shall come to pass in the
last days, (under the New Testament) v. 3. that many people shall go, and say,
Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us of ^u ways, etc. So Isa. 19. 25. God shall
bless thus, saying. Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my
hand, and Israel my inheritance. Which the seventh Angel declares to be
fulfilled in the New Testament, Rev. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of this world are
become (the Kingdoms) of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever. So is the same, Psalm. 2. 8, 9. and 22. 27, 28, 29. and 72. 8, 9,
7. and 97. 1, 2, 3, 8. and 99. 1, 2. and 110. 1, 2, 3. Mal. 1. 11. Isa. 19. 16.
and 55. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 35. 1, 2, 3, and 60. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 62, 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 6, etc. Ier. 23. 6, 7. Zech 13. 8, 9. Nor will it help a whit, to say, O
but the Kingdoms visibly covenanted under the New Testament, have not all one
Temple, nor one National Worship in the way of the Jews. Its answered, That was
accidental to the visibly covenanted Nation; for as a visibly covenanted Nation
they the same way worshipped the same God in their Synagogues, and in a
Church Way as a Church-Jewish, as we worship God in a Church Way in one single
congregation. Temple-worship agreed to them not as a visible Church, but as
such a special paedagogical visible Church.

5. The being a National Church in that sense, to wit, typically A National
Church differs not in nature and essential causes from a National typical
Church.
National, does not essentially difference the Church of the Jews from the
Church of the Gentiles, as to the internal parts constituent of a visible
Church. For

1. Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 9. of the Gentiles, what the Lord of his people
Israel, Exodus 19. 5, 6. said, But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, (for he writes to visible professors then
dispersed, as Beza and others, and the Text evinceth) a peculiar people, that
ye may show forth the praises (in public Church-profession, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. by
Hearing, Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. ^1. and visible feeding of the flock by called
Ministers, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. eschewing false Teachers, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. etc.
and receiving messengers, Sylvanus and others, sent to you to water the planted
Churches, 1 Pet. 5. 12) of him who has called you out of darkness to his
marvello^^ light.

2. The Jews and Gentiles are made one catholic Church, the partition wall now
being broken down, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. Isa. 6. 3. and 61. 4, 5, 9. and
62. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 54. 1, 2, 3, 4. and have communion in visible Ordinances,
Isa. 66. 10, 11, 12. Zech. 14. 16, to 21. Isa. 49. 6, 7, 18, 19, 20.

3. The Churches of the Jews and Gentiles have the same Head and King in them,
reigning in the same Ministry and Word, Hos. 1. 11. Ephesians. 1. 21. and 4. 11, 12,
13. Col. 1. 18. saved by faith, and the same grace of Christ, Acts 15. 8, 9,
10, 11. and 10. 42, 43. Heb. 11. 1, 2, 3, -- 1 Cor. 10. 3. They did all eat the
same spiritual me^t, 4 and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they
drank of the same spiritual Rock, and the Rock was Christ.) Here our Brethren
argue from the constitution and matter, visible Sain^s, as Mr. H. frequently,
and the same formal cause, the Church covenant in the Church of the Jews, when
it seems to make for them; and when the government makes against them, then
they reject the argument from the Jewish Church.

6. What agrees to the Church of the Jews as a Religious society, to keep peace
and Religion in purity, and to purge out offenders, and agreed to them in a
moral, and no typical consideration, that agrees to us also. But National
Assemblies and National Engagements for Religion, agreed to the Jewish Church
in a moral consideration, as it cannot be shown there was any thing typical in
that Assembly at Mizp^h, Judge. 20. but to cognosce of the public wickedness in
the matter of the Levites concubine. The revenge was indeed civil, but the
Assembly, for a scandal which made Religion to be evil spoken of, was a
Religious Meeting, for no such folly should be done in the Israel of God. And
the meeting of the whole congregation at Shilo^ in their Heads was Religious,
to condemn the new Altar, as was reported, set up by the two Tribes, Josh. 22.
12, 13, etc. And the Assembly of Israel at Mount Carmel, 1 Kings 18. procured
by Elijah, was to prove that Jehovah was the Lord, and for the keeping of
Religion pure. And the Covenant that Joshua made with the people, and that
which Iehoiada made between the Lord and the people, that they should be the
Lords people, Josh. 24. 25. 2 Kings 11. 17. and that the people swear under
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15 8 9, 10, 11, 12. were morally binding Covenants, prophesied to
be under the New Testament, Isa. 44, 5. and 19. 21. The Egyptians shall vow a
vow to the Lord. So Zanchy. There was indeed a thing temporary, and some
typicalness in the manner of the punishing the breach of it, See M. Robinson
justif. of Separat. p. 145, 160, 161. who widely argues the Church of the Jews
being National, having one High Priest, one Altar, etc. being now done away, is
not our Rule. See page 162, 163, 164. Ans. We argue from the nature of the
Jewish Church in gene al as National in Egypt, in the Wilderness, as Gods
people in covenant as we and our seed are, before they had a Temple and an
Altar, etc. yea, the synagogue worship was a sufficient Church-worship,
whatever M. Robinson say, Eusebius de vita Constant. l. 3. reckons it to be an.
333. Tom^s of the Councels. Hist. Magd. cent 4. c. 9. Theodoret. l. 1. c. 30.
and alibi c. 17. c. 35. Socrat. l. 1. c. 27. and 32. l. 2. c 8. and 20. Sozom.
1. c. 7. l. 2. c. 16. l. 3. c. 5. Ruffia. l. 1. c. 5. and 6, etc. l. 4. (...).
6. D. (...) 3 Genesis Controv. concerning Councels, p. 120, 121. M. Patr. Symson,
c^^^. 4. c. 4. Review of the Council of T^^^t in Prench, translated an. ^638.
by Gen: (...). D. Fulk Ans. to the Rhemists on N. T. Act. 15. An. 4. An. 5. p.
289, 390, 391, 392, 393. T^o: Cartwright his answer to the same Rhemists, Act.
15. An. 4, 5, 6, 7. p. 293, 294, 295, 296. Whitaker de Conciliis.
Diut. 13. 15, 16. and 7. 24, 25, 26. but that ceremonial kind of punishment
did not belong to the essence of National covenants, and therefore makes not
the National covenant to be typical, and not morally binding to Christians, no
more than Mr. Hooker will say, that the Law of punishing capitally false
Prophets seducing to Apostasy, and diverse other Laws to which something
typically did belong but accidentally, does not, as touching their substance,
obliges us Christians. So were also Councels morally binding to us, and
consequently Engagements and Subscriptions to them and their Act^. Nor can any
say, but upon the supposition that Christ has appointed officers for his
house, but it was a moral duty, not typical (the Rule Acts 15. and 6. and 21.
and 13. going before) and warranted by the Law of Nature; That the Nicone
Council about anno 327 should convene against Arrius denying Christ to be God
equal with the Father, and by the Emperors authority: And that in the Council
of Constantinople about ann. 383. Macedonius denying the holy Ghost to be God,
should be condemned: and Nestorius affirming two persons in Christ, ann. 434.
and that Eutyches holding one Nature to be in Christ after the Incarnation, and
so confounding the Humanity and Divinity together, should be condemned in the
Council of Chalcedon ann. 454. See for more of this, Authors cited in the
Margin, and their judgment of Councels.

7. How shall Egypt, Isa. 19. 25. Assyria, ibid. be a covenanted Nation to God?
by our Brethrens way, they must be a covenanted Nation only in parts, as
members of an Independent congregation; and so none shall be visible
Covenanters with God, as Isa. 19. but their visible members.

Mr. H. To covenant with God is a free act, no Prince can compel a Nation to
swear a covenant National.

Ans. Then a Prince cannot compel a single man baptized, to hear the Word, nor
a Minister to do his duty, to preach or feed, for these should be free acts in
order to God, nor can a Judge by this compel a single man to witness the truth;
for swearing should be a voluntary act of worshipping of God: but a Pr^nce and
State can compel people to do a known duty of adhering to the worship of God, 1 Chronicles. 15. which they in circumcision undertook before to do, which duty ought
in foro Dei, to be willing.

Mr. H. An oath to keep Gods commandments (says Mr. R.) is a part of the third
command, Psalm. 119: 106. we are to contend for the faith, Jude (...). 3. and
profess God before men; that which binds a man morally, binds a Nation. Ans.
David's ^aking an oath, was upon lawful grounds, to a lawful thing: but National
Churches, and National Covenanting are now abrogate.

Ans. Then a desire to preserve Religion which is called in question in the
Land, and to transmit it safe to posterity, be a lawful ground, as it is, and
to continue Religion be a lawful thing, and to remain the Lords people, we have
these two, which by Mr. H. made David's taking of an oath lawful: Ergo, so must
our National Oath, by Mr. H. be lawful.

2. That a National Church meeting all in one place at once Our
nationalcovenant is sworn by Independent Churches in single congregations apart.
to worship God, is abrogate: we say, the Church of the Jews was no such
Church, nor contend we for any such national Church. But if a National Church
swearing a covenant to worship the Lord in sincerity, in parts, in several
congregations be abrogate; then suppose all England were visible Saints, and
all molded in single Independent congregations, it were unlawful for all the
members to swear their Church Covenant: why? all National Churches are
abrogate, says Mr. H. but is not here a National covenant, such as we desire
granted by Mr. H.

2. We contend not for a whole Nation meeting in one place A national oath is
lawful under the New Testament.
to swear. But sure all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem were all
baptized of John, Mark 1. 5. and all Divines grant there is a religious vow and
covenant in baptism. Here is such a National covenant of all the Land of Judea
as we contend for, as lawful under the New Testament.

3. Suppose the Turk came with a huge army against Britain with fire and sword,
to kill old and young, except we will deny Christ's Gospel, and our Baptism: Mr.
H. by his way thinks it Judaisme for the Prince and Parliaments, to command all
between sixty and sixteen to rise in arms, and to swear an oath to King and
State: that we shall confess Christ before men, and stand by the Gospel and
fight to the death, and die a Nation of Martyrs, before we yield to that
Turkish Tyranny. Why? a National oath is Iudaisme: for as a man is to confess
Christ before men, Mat. 10. 32. so far more a Nation when called thereunto.

2. To take a covenant should be a free Ecclesiastical act. no Prince can
compel to National Oaths: Its my prayer to God Par. 4. page 40. See Dan.
Chamier. in loc. Com. l. 6. c. 7. page 286. in Baptismo voveri Deo. Lombard. l.
4. did. 38. Com mune votum, quod in baptismo faciunt omnes. Zanchius Tom 4. l.
r. in 3. praecept. these. 1. th. 2. page 635, 636. th. 4, 5. Et seq obligatio
jurandi interdum oritur ex ipsa naturali lege; ut reveletur veritas and lis
finiatur, and glori^icetur Deus, (...). 6. See Deuteronomy. 6. 13. To fear God and
swear by him are conjoined. See Sotus. l. 8. de Justit. q. 1. art. 2. c. 4.
Suarez de Relig. tom. (...). de Juranient. l. 3 c. (...). number. 6. page 420.
Suarez de Religione tom. 2. tract. 6 de votis l. 1. c. 2. page 47^. number 6.
lnepte votum numeratur inter hujusmodi legalia vota sunt antiquiora lege Mosis,
ut patet in voto Jacob. Genesis 28. -- and Gentiles naturali lumine voveban^, etc.
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 7. praeceptum non ^abeo, etc. Hieron. Epist. 151, ad
Algasiam q. 10. Votum ^^se p^ssionem Deo factam leg^ naturae and gratiae
consonam.
that our Brethren in New England, be not compelled to quit Christian Religion,
as we in Scotland were thralled to embrace Popery by the domin^ering power of
Prelates. And shall it be Judaisme for Protestant Nations to swear the like, if
the man of sin should blow the trumpet, and raise all the Catholic Romans i^
Christendom, against the Lamb and his followers?

4. If it be lawful for one professor to avow Christ before men, Mat. 10. 32.
Mark. 8. 38. Luke 5. 26. and 12. 8. Rev. 2. 10, 13, 15. shall not Egypt, Asyria
be obliged to set up (as it were) Altars to the Lord, and speak the language of
Canaan, Now that is a professed engaging to avow the Lord: now I might put Mr.
H. to it, and its but an Anabaptist ground, to seek a warant for a National
covenant under the New Testament; for I again desire him to give me a warrant
for a National profession.

2. A National promise to be the Lords people.

3. A National confession of sins, and of leaving of the truth.

4. A National petitioning for grace to avow the truth to the end, and to
transmit it pure to posterity.

5. A National confession of faith, except we argue thus, a single man does
this, a David warrantably did swear, Ps. 119. 106. Ergo, a Nation may do the
like.

5. The examples of the Jews Church are moral, not typical: The oath was not
tied to Temple, Sacrifice, or the like.

6. Its prophesied there shall be swearing, and subscribing to the Lord, and
that the Jews shall renew their covenant to God, I^r. 50. 4, 5. see 1 Timothy 5.
12.

7. An oath is a law-band against back sliding under the New Testament, as
under the Old enjoined in the third Commandment. And there be warrants for
oaths in the New Testament, Romans 9. 1 Phil. 1. 8. 1 These. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 1 23.
and 11. 31. Romans 1. 9. Matthew. 5. 8. It is moral, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Isa.
19. 18, 21. and 45. 23. See Par. Zanchius, etc.

Mr. H. Were the oath lawful, yet not in a private man as in Par. 4. page 45.
Equal strength is not required in all that take an oath of a society.
a Nation, yet it must suit with our strength, that which is helpful to one,
because strong and able to perform, is hurtful to another.

Ans. To swear single life is unpossible, for there is no command binding me to
it.

2. Will Mr. H. say a^l baptized by John, Mark 1. 5. and all their Church
members that swear the Church covenant have a like strength, and all engaged to
be buried with Christ in Baptism, Romans 6. 3. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 27. Col. 2.
11, 12. all Asa and Iehoiadah their covenants had alike strength?

Mr. H. The ground is worse, to wit, that which ties one man, ties a Nation: a
man is not morally tied to keep Gods Commandments; he may live all his life and
never take a private oath, and not sin; if he swear, this is a moral command to
keep his oath, his manner of swearing seems to be private, its but a free will
offering.

Ans. To lay bands of promises and oaths upon a backsliding heart, is
commanded in the third Command, and is not Judaical, It said that a National
covenant is Typycal and Judaical. Mr H. never with his little finger aimed at
any probation. 1. What if I say that a Nation as Israel avow the Lord to be
their God was typical? then no Nation, Egypt, nor Assyria can lawfully under
the New Testament avow him to be their God. National profession has as good
warrant for typicalness (if any there be) as National swearing. 2. National
praying, National praising, National flowing to hear, Isa. 2. National
worshipping, Isa. 66. 20. Mat. 1. 11. Zech. 14. 17 National joining to Christ,
and conversion to him. National submitting to the Lord, reigning in his
ministry, and joining to the true Church, Rev. 11. 15. Psalm. 22. 27. Isa. 60.
1, 2, 3, 4 etc. have all the like ground of typicalness with national
covenanting: A vocal oath commanded mars all, says Mr. H.
Genesis 14. 22. Genesis 28. 20. Psalm. 132. 2. Psalm. 76. 11. Its prophesied as a
moral duty of Egypt converted under the New Testament, Isa. 19. 21. They shall
vow a vow to the Lord, all the Gospel purposes and resolutions spoken to the
Lord in praying, in suiting grace to do duties, confessing sins are so many
Gospel vows laid upon the heart, to do such duties: nor is there a formal
swearing required in vows made to God. And this is sinful omission of a morally
obliging duty, and morally obliging one man: so it obliges a Nation, as
affiirmative precepts do: and this smells of Anabaptism to cry down all
Gospel-vows.

2. The manner of swearing to continue in the professing of faith, when
temptations from the Prince, and Edicts to receive the Mass Book are no more
private and arbitrary vows, then the oath of your Church covenant.

3. Its poor Divinity to say that the free will offerings to the Tabernacle and
Temple were free, that is, arbitrary, so that a man might have lived all his
life, and never been guilty, though all his life he never offer a free will
offering to Tabernacle, Temple, or to the Lord, as a man may all his life never
swear a National covenant, be guilty of no sin; so he may well say a man all
his life may give nothing to the poor, to Hospitals, to maintain the Ministry,
and Schools, and yet not be guilty, for all these are free will offerings. Its
a gross mistake, to say the free will offerings were not commanded, as well as
all sacrifices and other offerings, Exodus 35. 4, 5. Levit. 22. 21. Deuteronomy. 16.
10. they are free, not from a commanding law (I am ashamed of such weak
conceits) but are free in regard of the willing heartiness of givers; and
because the determinate quantity precisely fell not under a command, as in
other offerings, but was referred to the holy freedom of the offerer.

Mr. H. The Rule is uneven, a particular man may engage not to drink Wine, as
hurting his health and soul -- a Scholar swears he will study painfully; a Plow
man he shall labor diligently; shall the whole land be tied to such ^^ths?
yea, the contrary rule holds for the most true.

Ans. A mistaken Rule is soon made uneven; what morally binds one single man,
not as a Scholar, or a Plowman, or such a special professor, but as a
Churchmember, baptized, The Rule, what binds particular men as covenanted
professors, binds morally the Nation. Religion directs how we are to swear by
the Lord, swearing is not a worship (as praying, which was in the state of
innocence) absolutely commanded, but only for truths cause to be cleared.
Suarez. Tom. 2. de Relig. de jus jur. l. 3. c. 1. n. 8 page 420. And we see
moral necessity of being the Lords people, of reformation after backsliding,
Deuteronomy. 24. 3, 12, 13. Of putting ^^ay Idols, of seeking the Lord God, 2 Chronicles.
15. 8, 12. 2 Chronicles. 29. 10. 11. and 30. 12, 13. when sad judgments were on, 5,
6. and because of this, to wit, defection and bondage, they made a sure
Covenant, and wrote^, (...) (...), Nehem. 9. 38. no shadow there is of a type
looking to Christ or to the Church under the Gospel.
circumcised, as a visible professor, as to keep the Lords Commandments, Psalm.
119. 106. to be the Lords people, to continue sound in the faith, to confess
Christ before men, when called to it, Matthew. 10. 32. to seek the Lord God of
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. 2 King. 11. 17. that also morally binds the whole
nation, be it Egypt or Assyria, in covenant with God, when he shall call them
to lay the band of an oath upon themselves, as being tempted by higher powers
to deny the truth, and embrace popery, as was our case in Scotland; and this is
our rule. Mr. H. devises an uneven rule, and would father it upon me. A Plow
man as a special professor swears he shall painfully till the earth: Erg^, all
in covenant with God may swear, be they Kings, Nobles, Barons, Burgesses, and
all the land may swear they shall desert all callings, and only till the earth.
The like is to be thought of the other oath, which often is the drunkards oath,
he shall never drink Wine, and with a spoon he sips till he be drunk: Ergo, all
the Nation may so swear; but I know no such rule. It shall be Mr. H. or any
man's, not mine.

Mr. H. The ends of general Reformation may be attained by Par. 4. p. 42.
the Magistrate, commanding all the Churches in their several assemblies to
attend the mind of Christ, to humble themselves and fast, and if Churches be
corrupt, they may be compelled by the civil power to attend the rules of Christ.

Ans. Its too laxily spoken, he speaks not one word of the Christian Magistrate
or the magistrate godly and sound in says, nor of the rule the Scripture, but
only of the Civil Magistrate, the Civil Power. What if he be a Heathen? what if
he be a Papist, a Socinian?

2. That the ends of reformation may be attained by the Civil The power that
Mr. H. gives to the civil Magistrates in commanding the Churches is undue.
Power only, who can believe? For Mr. H. speaks not one word of the Concurrence
of spiritual power and jurisdiction. Will not Erastians approve this, and say
Church Discipline is needless? Mr. H. says, the end of Reformation may be
attained by the Civil Magistrates commanding, etc.

3. Mr. H. tells us often that Church-duties should be willing free acts, page
40. hearing, fasting, praying, are acted by Ecclesiastical policy, Gods people
are free and wi^^ing; but here they may be compelled by the Civil Power to act
these duties.

M^. H. the Church Power is above the Synod, because the Mr. H. par. 4. page 54.
Churches sent the members.

Ans. It only follows, that the Churches are above the Commissioners, as they
send them, but in actu Synodico and Pastoraliter How the churches are above
Synods, how not.
imperandi, as the Synod pastorally teach, as Mr. Cotton says, and lay on
burdens, Act. 15. the Synod is above them. How the male Church owe obedince to
the dogmatick sentence of Pastors, we heard before.

Mr. H. If the Synod err, Churches have power to call another Mr. H. Survey.
par. 3. c. 3. page 41, 42.
Synod, and pass sentence against them.

Ans. Nothing hence follows, but what I yield, the Churches in their way are
above, and worthier then Synods that err.

Mr. H. A Synod may enjoin a man to believe contradictions, two Synods in two
diverse Provinces may conclude contradictory Par. 4. c. 3. p. 54
things: a man goes to another Province to dwell, he believes a contrary
conclusion to what he believed before.

Ans. In some things of mere order in one country the Sermon Mr. H. will have
Synods to determine contradictions
begins at eight or nine hours, in another Province not while ten: but these
are not contradictory faiths.

2. There is no solidity, but emptiness here, an erring Synod could not jure
determine contrary to the decrees of the Apostles and Elders, Acts. 15. Christ
has given no power to Synod-Assembly, or Churches to conclude lies, in
dogmatick points; the contradicent of a true and sound Decree, deduced soundly
from Scripture is a lie, and came not from the Synod. So Mr. Hooker may condemn
Ministers, Churches, Preachers, Doctors, Assemblies, all who give counsel and
advice, as no Ordinances of God, for the men that are Ministers, Churches, etc.
may sinfully contradict the truth, and lie: but the Ordinance lies not.

Mr. H. In all Synods, but an O^^umenical, its lawful to make an appeal, and
therefore to refuse.

Ans. In no Synod at all following the rule of Christ, is it lawful to appeal;
but that is ever true which our Savior says, Of appeals, they prove not that
Synods may be refused.
he that despises you, despises me. Its a slandering of us, as if we taught
any appeals, but from partial Judges, and opressive sentences.

2. In general Councels erring, as they are not infallible, we may appeal to
another not erring General Council, and to the collective Catholic Church.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Magistrates Power in convocating Synods.

MR. H. It belongs to the supreme Magistrate (the King) Par. 4. c. 3. p. 56.
as peculiar to his power and place, and not to the Church, to enjoin the
solemn and public concurrence of the several persons of the Churches, and to
appoint and nominate whom he will have to consider of those weighty and
doubtsome cases which concern the public professing and practicing of the
worship of God within his Dominions.

Ans. Erastians, and such as make the King the Head of the M. H. gives the
power of convocating and of choosing members of Synods to the King only. Of this
see Becanum in Opuse. tom. 11. de primatu Regis Angliae. Marc. Anton. de
Dominis Archiep. Spalatens. tract. annex. l. 6. de Rep. Ecclesiast. qui
inscrib. Ostensio Errorum Francisci Suarezii Jes. in opuscul. lib. 1. Quantum
Anglica secta a fide Catholic. dissideat lib. 6. de forma juramenti
fidelitatis. Sacellan. in Tortura torti. Rob. Abbots de suprem. potest. Reg.
contr. Bellarm. and Suarez. See Gasp. Scioppius in Eccles. c. 49. p. 160, 161.
c. 48. p. 157. Qui tolerat hae. eticos, lupis cum ovibus commorandi potestatem
facit.
Church, can give no more to the Prince, than Mr. H.

1. By his Royalty he only can convene Synods. 2. He, by that same power,
chooses the members of Synods. 3. Of his supreme Power in controversies we
shall hear.
1. The Apostles, Elders and Church must then be in an act of Rebellion in
convening, Act. 1. to choose Matthias, Acts 6. to ordain Deacons, Act. 4. and
5. to preach the Gospel in the Temple, and convene a Synod, Act. 15. from
diverse Churches, without the knowledge or consent of the supreme power. It
cannot help to say, There was no Christian Magistrate then; for Mr. H. says,
it was peculiar to his power; and proves it afterward, because Arg. 4. page 58.
he cannot otherwise maintain the peace of his subjects. Arg. 5. he cannot give
them protection without this, page 59. But the heathen Magistrate as a
Magistrate is to procure peace and protection to his Subjects, Romans 13. 1, 2,
3. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. So must the Apostles, who gave to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, have laid the foundation of the Gospel upon a rebellious usurping of
that which is peculiar (says Mr. H.) to the civil power and place.

2. The Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Rome, etc. must have convened to Divine
Worship, 1 Cor. 11. 17, 18, etc. without warrant, for Paul rebukes them for
going to law before heathen Judges, 1 Cor. 6.

Mr. H. They may, as Christians, maintain private communion one with another;
and as they be Churches, use that Christian privilege to further their own
good, and promote the work by counsel: for what I do qua Ethicus, qua
Oeconomicus, qua Christianus in private, appertains not to the Magistrate,
except it entrench upon his policy.

Ans. 1. Mr. H. makes all that Christians do as Christians and as Churches,
that is, gathering of Churches, hearing, partaking of seals and censures, to be
private actings not belonging to the Magistrate. Strange it is, that the
convening of the ten thousand Subjects in the same place (as our Brethren say)
belongs nothing to the Magistrate; sure it sides with peace or war. And yet Mr.
H. says, The Magistrate may compel men to Page 42,
attend the mind of Christ, and solemnly to humble themselves by fasting and
prayer. See how these two consist.

2. Its strange to say the Magistrate has nothing to do with M. H. seems to
say it appertains not to the Magistrates to take order with thef^s, murders,
robberies done in private.
what a man does as a moral man, as a member of a family, or as a Christian so
they do these things in private which they do; which is to say the Magistrate
has nothing to do with the Villainies, Particides, Adulteries and Robberies
that men commit in private. And Mr. H. saves not the matter by saying, The
Magistrate has nothing to do with the man, to punish him; I judge in these
capacities, except he entrench upon his policy, that is, except he break his
Laws. But sure, he can punish no man in any imaginable capacity, private or
public, except he break his Laws. Beside that, its neither Law nor Divinity,
to say, that a man intrencheth upon the Magistrates policy, and violates his
Laws, as Ethicus, a moral man, or a member of a family either in private or
public; for more abominable it is to say. He violates Laws, and Whores,
Murders, Robs as a Christian: for Christianity teaches men to deny all
ungodliness, Tit. 1. 11. for he must do all these as malus civis, as a wicked
member of the Commonwealth.

3. I wonder more in what capacity the Magistrate can have to do with
commanding and governing men, if not as they converse morally with men, and in
their families, as fathers and sons, as Masters and servants, and as Christians
who both in private and public may perform duties to one another, or oppress
one another; else the Judge could not punish the rebellious son, the wicked
servant, or the murdering father, and the oppressing Master. Yea, the more
secret that wicked acts are, a godly Magistate does the more resemble God, who
can say, as Job, chap. 29. 16. I was a father to the poor, and the cause that I
knew not I searched out. Nor do men, except extremely flagitious, commit
Villainies, Robberies, Murders, Parricides, Adulteries, but in private: And it
appertains to the Ruler the more to search them out, the more privately that
they be acted. But if Mr. H. mean, that private actings of citizens, of members
of families, of Christians, that are good and indifferent, do not appertain to
the Magistrate, who is an adversary to him in this? Though all good actions
done in private or public deserve praise, reward and protection from the
Magistrate, except Mr. H. expound that Romans 13. 3. Do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same, so thou do good in public only, as
hypocrites: but thou shall have no praise of the Ruler, if thou do good within
doors. Is this good moral Philosophy of Mr. H? But how godly Princes may compel
to external worship, The godly Magistrate may compel. The Bishops of France at
desire sent to Britain Germanus and Lupus from a Synod, to drive away
Pelagianism out of Britain, which they did. B^da Eccle^^hist Angl. l. 1. c. 8.
and l. 1. c. 17. Polonia, Russia, Lithuania, were commanded by Rulers to be
baptized, and quit Idols. Munster Co^mograph. fol. 894 90^. After Scripture,
the practice of Joshua, Josh. 24. 25. of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 3, 4, etc. of
Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17. of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, 6. 2 Kings 18. 4. of
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. See Aug. contr. liter. Petilian. l. 2. c. 86. Aug. contr.
Crescon. l. 3. c. 50. Eusib. de vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 37. Socr. l. 1. c. 34.
Theodoret. l. 5. c. 20. Aug. contr. Epist. Parmen. l. 1. c. 10.
see Margin.

Mr. H. Commission and just permission are all one: A Ruler permits a Finder to
set up a School, he needs no commission.

Ans. If fencing be useful, the Ruler must give him positive Commission and
permission which Rulers give are not all one, as Mr H. says.
protection, as others that do well; else if one kill him when he teaches his
Scholars, the Ruler ought not to revenge that murder, though most
treacherously committed, and say he promised to the Fencer only permission;
and yet its worse to say the Christian Ruler owes to Assemblies, Pastors,
Schools only permission. Paul says, he owes praise, Romans 13. 3. which, with
good ground, famous Interpreters expound to be countenanting, favor,
protection, reward, stipends. And if the Christian Magistrate do but permit
Assemblies to convene, as a very Episcopal man D. Bilson said permissio est a
magistratu, commissio a Christo: What more influence (if permission and
commission be all one) has the godly Magistrate in the public worship
Emmanuel Sa in Aphorismis suis. Episcopus potest procedere contra quemcunque ob
peccatu^ mortale, nisi essen jure permissum, ut meretricum. Par. 4. p. 57.
of God, and Assemblies of the Church, then heathen Magistrates, Ahasuerus, the
Kings of Chaldea, who permitted the people of God to worship the true God,
Esth. 4. v. 16, 17. Dan. 6. v 7, 8. or the Church of Rome have, who by public
Order establish Stews, and permit fornication? See Emmanuel Sa, who says,
Bishops and Priests are by Law permitted to have Whores.

Mr. H. 1 Arg. That a right opinion and worship of God should be openly
professed within the Territ^ and Jurisdiction ^f a State, appertains to them,
as that which comes within the verge and object of the State and policy to
attend. 1. They could not provide that the Subj^ct^ live in godliness and
honesty without this. 2. Nor could be Nurse-fathers to the Church and Religion,
if they should suffer open blasphemy and idolatry to be maintained and
professed. 3. The Kings of Israel did punish such crimes, not as types of
Christ, but by a civil power.

Ans. 1. If the Magistrate have only a permissive power Mr. H. makes the King
the only Lord and Prince of the Subjects faith and Religion. See Bilson Christ.
Subject, par. 3. p. 302. Bills. Chr. Subject, part 2. p. 297. that Princes may
prescribe what faith they list -- is no part of our thought. See Gas^.
Scioppius in Ecclesiastico opposito authoritati Serenis. R. Iac. M. Brit. c.
38, 128. try that. Americani gladio materiali Ecclesiae subjiciendi erant. See
c. 39.
here, as even now he said, how does Mr. H. again exalt the Magistrate as Head
of the Church, to inquire and judge of professions, and of true and false
Religions by his civil power, as after he speaks? If he do this by an
antecedent Magistratical power, as Mr. H. says in the following words; then
has God made the Christian Magistrate as the Magistrate by the power of the
Sword (for the Magistrates power is formally coactive, not suasory or moral,
not Ecclesiastically juridical, to excommunicate) the only Supreme Judge and
Determiner of all true and false Religions; which Bilson disclaims. Henes

1. By his Office he may deny protection and justice to all that are not of his
Religion, and banish them out of his Dominions. Its true, they may say he plays
the Tyrant in that; but yet God has given him the only supreme power, both to
inquire (says Mr. H.) and judge of Professions and Religions, which is true,
and ought to be maintained, which is false, and ought to be rejected. And if
so, the many godly who fled from Old England to New England, because of
Prelatical Tyranny of conscience, did believe that the late King Charles had
power as a King to judge the Service book and Ceremonies imposed upon the godly
in England, yea and upon Scotland also, was the only true Religion, and had
power given him of God as supreme Magistrate, to command all the three Kingdoms
to be of the Kings Religion, or then let them all be banished out of his
Dominions: But is not this to make the King a Pope, and the only carver and
Lord of the Faith and Religion of his Subjects? and so the King, by his Office,
is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, and a Royal Prophetical Teacher, who
watches for the souls of all his people. What Scripture puts the King in such
an Office?

2. Did not the godly and sound condemn such an Headship Forma juramenti ab
Elizabetha. Ego A. B. prorsus testificor and declaro in conscientia mea,
Reginam solam esse supremam Gubernatric^m and istius Regni Angliae, and aliorum
omnium (...) Majestatis Dominionum, and ^ionum, non m^nus in omnibus
Spiritualibus atque Ecclesiasticis rebus vel causis quam temporalibus; and quod
nemo, externus Princeps vel persona, praelatus, status, vel potentatus, aut
facto aut j^re, haber aliquam perestatem, supericritatem, pr^nent (...), vel
authoritatem Eccl^siasticam ^^t spi^itualem in hoc Regno; ideoque plane (...)
^o and repudio omnes externas jurisdictiones, potestates, superiori^ates atque
autho^.
in the Oath of Supremacy, and in the Kings Proclamation; in which he, as King,
commands all to receive such a Religion as he thinks fit, even the substantials
of the Mass, and no Prayers but book-prayers (the other Prayers being fancies?)
And this command is equal to a pastoral or Synodical Decree.

1. Because it comes from the King having no act of the Proclamation by act of
Council of K. Charles I. ann. 1637. to Scotland, printed before the late Book
of Common-Prayer-Our Will is, and we charge you straightly and command, That
incontinent these our Letters seen, you pass, and in our Name and Authority
command and charge all our Subjects both Ecclesiastic and Civil, by open
Proclamation -- to conform themselves to the said public form of worship,
which is the only form which we (having taken the counsel of our Clergy)
think fit to be used in Gods public worship; commanding all Archbishops and
Bishops, and other Presbyters and Churchmen, to take a special care that the
same be duly obeyed and observed, and the contraveners condignly censured and
punished. Sacettanus in Tortur. Torti, page 338. Rex Britan. caput Ecclesiae, 1
Reg. 15. Nonne cum parvulus esses in oculis tuis caput factus es in tribibus
Israel? Book of Canons obtruded upon the Church of Scotland, ann. 1636. c. 1.
and 2.
Church, but only having taken the counsel of his Clergy, and so by civil
power peculiar to his power Royal and place, as Mr. H. speaks, p. 56.

2. Because its the only form of worship he thinks fit.

3. Because he commands it to all Ecclesiastic persons, Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. as the only Spiritual Pastor of Pastors on earth.

Hence if Christ has given such power, its not lawful, without breach of the
fifth Command, to embrace or profess any Religion in a Christian Kingdom,
except it be first instamped by or with the Authority of the King the Head (as
the Chaplain calls him) of the Churches by his Royal Authority. Yea, our Book
of Canons say, that Christian Kings now have the same power in causes
Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings among the Jews had: And are they not then
Prophets by office, and may write Canonick Scripture, as David and Solomon did?
and so we must not, without Rebellion, profess the Faith or the Christian
Religion, but when, and where, such as the King commands us; contrary to Mat.
10. 32. or we are to confess Christ before men, but not except the King teach
and command a confession, and such a confessor?

3. Paul must have told us, Ephesians 4. 11, 12. of the King, as well as of the
Apostle given to edify the Body, and gather the Church, if so be that he is
the only supreme Judge of true and false Religions: And he must be some
spiritual officer, and one who chooses a God and a Religion to his Subjects;
and he must be ^he holiest Subject, who can say, The Kings God is my God. When
I read this, I was sad, to see Mr. Tho: Hooker speak and write like the
Royalist Mr. Rich. Hooker.

4. The Magistrate supreme and inferior, except Mr. H. be an Erastian, is a
member of the Church, and under the Scepter of Christ in the preached Gospel,
and to be edified by the Word, Seals, Rebukes and Censures; for otherwise. He
that despises you despises me; and, if he hear not the Church, let him be as
a heathen; and, Faith comes by hearing, must suffer a strange exception in the
person of the King; he may despise pastors and the Church without guiltiness,
for he is above the pastors, and carves their Religion, and prescribes, as our
cited Proclamation says, the causes why Bishops should excommunicate and
censure, to wit, if they refuse the Kings Religion; and Mr. H. warrants him by
a power peculiar and supreme so to do.

5. We read not that the Kings of Israel and Judah prescibed what was true and
false Religion, but were subject to the Priests and Prophets, who spoke the
word of the Lord: and the Prophets rebuked Kings, as Jeroboam and others, for
intruding themselves in that office. Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon were
Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Isa. 50. 19.

6. The Magistrate is the Minister of God, and bears the Sword to take order
with evil doers, and is Custos and vindex utriusque tabulae, and the Religion
is supposed to be before the Ruler.

7. Its somewhat heathenish, like Numa, Lycurgus, who to procure obedience and
authority to themselves, gave out, that they prescribed what Religion was true,
and that they conversed much with God.

8. All questions and controversies of Religion in the Nation must be
determined, all cases of conscience resolved by this Pope, who only can
determine what is true, and what is false Religion; and the King must be the
Oracle and Priest, with whom only the Urim and the Thummim must be.

9. All fallings against Religion must be Treason against the King: whereas
Kings and people are rebuked, because they hearkened not to the voice of the
Prophets, not because disobedient to the word of the Lord in the mouth of the
King. Either this is to take both the Swords from the Pope, and to give them to
the King, or it is nothing: for without controversy the King bears the Sword
to take vengeance of him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 14. and
whosoever determines by his supreme power, what is true and false Religion to
all the Subjects, must bear the other Sword.

10. M. H. makes out his Assertion thus: Kings could not provide for their
Subjects, to live in godliness and honesty, except they had power to inquire
and judge of true and false Religions. Now this is spoken of Nero and of
heathen Kings, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. But out of doubt, God never made heathens, that
are enemies to true Religion, supreme determiners of true and false Religion:
And if this agree to Rulers as Rulers, as M. H. says, it is peculiar to their
power and place; then all Rulers, Heathen, Christian, high and low, sound in
the faith, and corrupt and heretical, should be carvers of so many sundry Gods
and Religions. But the next Reason is ill and worse, if because the King is a
Nurse-father to the Church, he must be father, and a begetter both of Religion
and of the Church, and because he protects and defends the true Church, then
true Religion must be before him: As also when Mr. H. says, that the Prince is
a Nurse father to the Church, he means, the Independent Church only, so that
he owes no protection to Presbyterians, nor justice to them. And if the
Nurse-fathers care be, that there should be a right opinion and worship openly
professed within his Territories, the Magistrate is to do this no other ways,
but by the Sword, for another power he has not; then must he with the Sword
compel all within his Dominions to be M. H. Surv. p. 4. c. 2. p. 40. Gods
people, who enter into Church Covenant, should be free --
professed members of Independent Churches, else M. H. judges there is some
other sound worship and sound profession: But this compelling of men to be
Church Members, Mr. H. before disclaimed.

Mr. H. does also suspiciously give his sense of Toleration, while he limiteth
the Magistrates power, to the not suffering of M. H. his imperfect sense of
Toleration limited to the non permitting only of open blasphemy and idolatry.
open Blasphemy and Idolatry. But beside open Blasphemy, there is Blasphemy
Pepery in the hesds of it, many dangerous errors about superstructures and
non-fundamentals, are these erroneous opinions professed to be tolerated? Mr. H
says nothing against the Belgic and Socinian Toleration of all Errors, except
fundamentals, which are made few by them, and hard to be known: And what the
Gospel suffers by the Toleration holden Remonst. Apolog. Preface, p. 1, 2.
sect. 24. Confessio seu declaration Remonst. in praefat. Eplse. dis. 28. th.
14, 15. Omnes itaque Ecclesiae, etiamsi in varlis doctrinae articulis perperam
sentiant, tolerand^. Socin. Com. 1. 1 John Theoph, Nicolaides in refut. tract.
de Eccl. c. 2.
by the Independents in England, and swarms of Sects there, is too manifest to
the Christian world. See the Arminians and Socinians in the Margin.

Let the Reader judge of Mr. H. his Reason, The Kings of Israel did punish
Blasphemy and Idolatry, not as Types of Christ, but by a Civil power. Mr. H.
shall not in haste teach us what was typical, what moral. Mr. Lockier and
others make the constitution of the Jewish Church typical, and of another
nature from the New Testament Church; others, not so. But I am afraid our
Brethren augment the Calendar of Typicals, until the Old Testament be well near
laid aside, as many Anabaptists do. The Kings of Israel punished blasphemers,
not as types of Christ, but by civil power. But John Goodwyn will reply, Was it
a civil power morally that belongs to all Christian Magistrates to destroy the
city, in which the Inhabitants are seduced to Idolatry, and that all the
Inhabitants and the cattle be utterly destroyed, and the spoil burnt with fire,
as Deuteronomy. 13. 15, 16? to punish the cattle of Idolaters and Apostates with
death, and burn all the goods with fire, surely must be temporary then. But let
Mr. H. show what is typical in a National Oath: They say, How unjustly our
Brethren argue against a National oath from typicals.
There is no shadow of it in the New Testament. Ans. If the meaning be, there
is no express command, no practice of it in the New Testament, or for it, and
therefore it must be typical.

1. By this Argument negative, this is not in the New Testament, Ergo there is
no warrant for it in Scripture, is fair for all who would casheer all the Books
of the Old Testament as no Scripture; and so that the Magistrate should take
away the life of one that commits Sodomy, Bestiality, murders Father or
Mother, must be typical, and not obliging under the New Testament: for let Mr.
H. show an express command or practice for it in the New Testament. A general
there is, Romans 13. but Socinians, Anabaptists tell us, You must not take away
the life of him who is created according to the Image of God, by Logic and
argumentative consequences, but by express Law.

2. Let it be showed by what express precept or practice in the New Testament,
a rich Son should take in to his house and feed and maintain his Father-in-law,
and his Grandfather, and his Grandmother that are begging.

3. Mr. H. may also press us for an express precept, or practice of a
promissory oath in a private person, as well as in a Mr H. may as well seek an
express warrant for a promissory oath in a private man, as in a Nation in the
New Testament.
Nation; and for a covenant of peace by oath between a Christian Nation, and a
neighbor Christian Nation in the New Testament: or suppose a Christian Nation
should neighbor with a nation that worships the sun, compelling all strangers
that come within their bounds, by death, to deny Jesus Christ, and worship
their God the Sun, there must be an express particular precept for a covenant
oath, for peace to warrant such a paction, that the Heat^ Nation shall kill
none of theirs for refusing Sun-Worship.

4. The particular temptations that may tempt Jonathan to be on his own Fathers
side against David, and might stir David up against Saul and all his seed, were
a sufficient call to put David and Jonathan under the tie of the oath of God
one to another. There were good grounds of the covenant between Laban and
Jacob. And some Nations designed of God should submit, suit peace, and embrace
the Jewish Religion. Was there not cause, why both they and Israel should lay
upon themselves the band of a covenant oath? that both of them should be the
united Confederates of God: and the like National temptations press a Nation
now, when its become the Lords covenanted Kingdom, as Isa. 19. 25. Rev. 11. 15.
which within and without is enticed to receive the mark of the Beast, and his
name on their foreheads, to guard themselves against such snares by a National
oath, not that every one of the Nation, though ignorant, profane, and
malignant, and treacherous enemies to the truth should be admitted in covenant.
And Mr. H. seems to say that promissory oaths of single persons under the New
Testament are not necessary; and (say I) not lawful, if not necessary. For Mr.
H. says, a man is not necessarily and morally tied to swear or vow. And I
believe a man may live all his life and never take a private oath, I say,
private Surv. par. 4. c. 2. page 4^.
betwixt God and himself, to keep his Laws, and yet not be guilty of sin in so
doing.

Mr. H. speaks most mistakingly of the doctrine of vows, Mr. H. great mistake
in the matter of vows.
as if he had not read our Divines.

For 1. Our National vow that we shall be the Lords people, cannot be called a
private vow.

2. If a vow to keep Gods Commandmens tie not morally, and so be not necessary,
it is not lawful; and if so, we must condemn these general vows which one makes
to God in prayer, Psalm. 32. 2. I will bless the Lord at all times, Psalm. 101.
2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. Who can pray in faith to God
in private, but they must engage themselves to General Christians vows to moral
duties of praying, praising, etc. are of eternal obligation, and so bind under
the New Testament. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 5, 6. Professor. Leyden.
in Syno^purior. Theol. dis. 28. de votis these. 15, 16, 17. Tylen. Syntag. dis.
43. de tert: praecept. these. 12, 13, 14, 15. Bucan, 102. 45. q 3, 4. D. Willet
Synop. papismi. 6. Genesis contr. q. 1, 2, 3. Durantus de Ritibus Eccles. Cath. l.
11. c. 34. Gabr. Bicl. in Can. missae. lect. 29.
God to run, if he draw? and what suits an enlarged heart, and strength against
temptations? and who can pray for faith, and perseverance, but they vow new
obedience? ^^d yet Mr. H. says, a man may all his life never vow betwixt God
and himself to keep the Commandments of God, and not be guilty. As for vows
of particular things, vows concerning spare dye^, our Divines, a^ Calvin,
professors of Leyden, Tilenus, Bacanus, teach they are utilia potius quam
necessaira, useful, and in regard of particular temptations, profitable rather
then necessary. Now one National vow is to the whole duties of the first and
second Table, which we tie our selves to perform both in Baptism, in the Lords
Supper, in selfe-judging, in confession of sin.

And 2. To say a man all his life may never be tied to a vow, is to say a man
may never pray, never confess his sins, never speak in private his godly
Gospel-resolutions, and purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord, and yet not be
guilty.

3. This is to make all Gospel-vows to be unnecessary, and will worship under
the New Testament. Whereas Papists tell us in the Mass they make a general vow
of obedience to God. See Durantus and Gab. Biel.

Mr. H. For if the Magistrate were bound to follow the judgment Survey par. 4.
c. 3. p. 57.
of the Churches and Ministry, if they should judge a toleration of all
Religions lawful, or judge the false to be true, he then were bound to nurse
the false Religion, and false Churches.

Ans. 1. No shadow of consequence is here, for neither Magistrate nor people
can be bound to follow the judgment of the Churches or Ministry, farther then
they follow the Rule of the Word, they follow their judgment conditionally,
not absolutely and simply; and it is a great calumny of Mr. Burton How Prince
and People are to follow the judgment of the Churches and Ministry, and how not.
and our Brethren, that we lay bands on the consciences of Prince and people to
follow the acts and determinations of the Church, be they true or false: and
that there is no place left to appeal to the next, or a better informed Synod,
and to the consciences of the collective Church of the godly judicious
professors, and to protest and deny obedience to erring Assemblies. If it be
said, but where is there a Judge to determine whether this or another well
informed Synod, or the conscience of the collective body of the godly be right?
This argument falls with equal weight upon all Judicatures, all Judges,
Parliament, Prince and Counselors with him, and upon all Assemblies; for what
they determine, be it toleration of all blasphemies, or a strictest uniformity
in Worship and Religion, it has no power to bind the conscientious and moral
practices of Prince or people, more then to bind their conscience by this: for
the Fraternity and whole Church is tied to follow the dogmatick determination
of officers, in preaching or in sentencing delinquents without gainsaying:
what the officers decree (says Mr. H.) it is to all as the word of God. But
Mr. H. must answer us, Churches Survey par. 2. c 3. page 41.
and Ministry are bound either absolutely or conditionally to follow the
Judgment of the King, who judges popery is the only true Religion, to which
he can tender protection. If the former, what Tyranny are we under, who must
submit to the Religion of the Prince, or be denuded of all protection, and
exposed to fire and sword? If the latter be said, to wit, that Churches and
Ministry are only conditionally to follow the judgment of the King, so they
find it agreeable to the Word, otherwise not: then it must be false which Mr.
H. said, that the Prince is the only supreme Judge of all true and false
Religions: to say they must either obey or suffer, says, that Christ exposed
all to Martyrdom.

Mr. H. If it be in the Magistrates power lawfully to forbid and hinder, then
it is not in the power of the Churches to do lawfullye for Arg. 1. Par. 4. c.
3. p. 57.
then the same thing should be in the same regard both lawful and unlawful^ and
the rules of providence shall be opposite one to another: but the supreme
Magistrate may hinder any of another Nation to come into his Kingdom, or his
own subjects to go out, otherwise he should want power to oppose them who come
to lay waste the State, and should not have power to require homage of his own
people.

Ans. 1. The probation of the proposition is most false, for The Princes power
over the locomotive power of subjects is a watery and feeble plea for his sole
lawful power of convening of Assemblies.
the power of the Magistrate is not to forbid, or command what he pleases, but
according to the rule of the Word, and the Churches power is the same; if both
the powers be lawful, their objects cannot be contradictory: for God has not
given to two lawful powers any lawful liberty, that the one may command what is
lawful, and the other what is unlawful: for then he should give a power to
command unlawful things, and the command of a created power should make it
lawful, which is blasphemous: this argument falls with weight upon the
Independent way. There is a Iezabel in the Independent Church of Thyatira, and
another Iezabel in the Church of Pergamus, each Church (say our Brethren) has
an immediate Independent The Lord never gave a lawful power to command both
things lawful, and things contradictory to lawful things.
Church Power to excommunicate. Thyatira uses their power and excommunicates
Iezabel which is under them. Pergamus absolves and defends their Iezabel. Both
powers are highest and immediate, and countable to no juridical power on earth:
both are lawful powers. Then must it follow, if it be in the power of the one
Church, to wi^, of Pergamus, lawfully to forbid and hinder the excommunication
of their equally guilty Iezabel and the c^ning of her blasphemous Doctrine:
(for Pergamus absolves their ^l, and commends, and defends her Doctrine as so^d
and ^g) then it shall not be in the power of T^ lawfully to excommunicate their
Iezabel, and condemn he^ plasphemous Doctrine: for it shall follow, that the
same Doctrine must be in the same regard both lawful, and sound, and edifying
(says the lawful power of Pergamus) and (...) unlawful, and unsound, and
destructive to souls, says the lawful power of Thyatira.

2. The probation is feeble and wacery, the King has sufficient power to
oppose wasters of his Kingdom, and to require homage The Princes duty to
preserve peace and godliness makes him not Lord of Church Assemblies, and of
Religion. See Bilson of Perpet. Gov. c. 10. page 150, 151.
of his subjects. Suppose he have not an unlimited power to forbid these of
other Nations and Churches, and his own, to go to a Synod, within or without
his Nation, for the settling of the Churches in necessary peace and truth, if
the Churches must seek liberty and counsel for their souls good, and
edification: nor has he any lawful power from God to hinder his own subjects
to send Commissioners to sound and godly Synods for counsel and synodical
light, more then Jeroboam could lawfully forbid the people to go and worship at
Jerusalem, upon pretense, that they might be persuaded to cleave to Rehoboam
their lawful Prince, and waste his new Kingdom: nor has the Prince an
unlimited and absolute power to exact such absolute homage of his people; nor
such a power over their moving from place: for so the Church Independent of
Jerusalem confisting The Lord of Life has principally in the first Table laid
a law upon our locomotive, and all our actings, to honor and love him first,
and the Prince only secondarily and subordinately to God; if God charge us
first to go to public meetings to honor him, the Prince under pretense of
peace cannot forbid the people to go up to Jerusalem to worship; we are to obey
God rather then man.
of ten thousand, if not more, should have no intrinsecal power to meet for the
public worship of God; but the Prince must have a lawful power to hinder their
meeting, or then the Church cannot have a lawful power to meet; for the
convening of ten thousands, if abused, is as dangerous for wasting of a Kingdom
in its own way, as the convening of a national Synod, is, or may be destructive
to peace.

Mr. H. To appoint such solemn public Assemblies is an act merely civil; Ergo,
the Prince may do it. A civil act belongs not to an Ecclesiastic power. A
right opinion, rectus de Deo sensus and cultus, of God, and a right worship of
God is a merely civil act.

Ans. There is nothing here sound, but evil and worse. Christ ^h given an
Ecclesiastic intrinsecal power to his Church to meet, it being a part of his
free Kingdom, and he himself a free King. Suppose the Princes of the earth
oppose, Ps. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ps. 110. 1, 2, 3.

2. Kings are Nurse-fathers, having a civil, but cumulative power to command
them to meet and assemble, but no privative The Princes power to convocate
Synods is cumulative, not privative to hinder them.
power to hinder them.

3. This proves they may not meet in a single congregation without the leave of
the heathen and persecuting Magistrates, and condemns all the assembles and
Church-meetings of the Apostolic Church as rebellious; for they had neither
allowance nor command of the Magistrate, yea, they were forbidden: and heathen
Rulers as Rulers have power to oppose wasters of their Kingdoms, and so had the
heathen Emperors in the Apostles times, as well as Christian Magistrates have
such a power.

4. A right sense and opinion of God is no civil act. This yet more makes the
Magistrate an Ecclesiastic person.

Mr. H. To call what members of the Synod he pleases to consult about the good
of the Church belongs to the Prince, and their homage requires this,
otherwise he could not maintain the peace of the subject in godliness, for
providence does not require the end, but allows also the means.

Ans. Because the third and fourth Arguments are one, they are here.

1. The godly and sound Prince may call godly and learned Divines where the
Churches are rightly constitute; but when the Churches make no free election of
these Divines, it is neither a free Synod, not are the Divines messengers of
the Churches, nor sent by the Churches, as Act. 15. 1, 2, 3. nor may The
Magistrate may not use what means he pleases, and domineer over Assemblies to
choose members, and convocate them as a Magistrate, to preserve godliness.
Histor. Magdeburgen. Cent. 4. c. 9.
the Magistrate for the maintaining of the peace of the subjects in godliness,
use what means he pleases for that end, but only means prescribed of God,
except Mr. H. can prove that Christ has annexed to the royal Office, a gift of
choosing members of Assemblies, more excellent then is in the Churches, which we
read not. And if 2. this belong to the Magistrate as the Magistrate, then all
Magistrates, Heathen, Arrian, Socinian, Popish (for sure they are Magistrates)
must have this power, and this power only, if it be given to godly and sound
Magistrates, as such, Mr. H. his instance of Herod comes far short of this
power. Read then the Council of Antioch holden by the Arrians under
Constantius. Then must Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, and Julius Bishop of Rome,
who refused to come to that Council, be Rebels by Mr. H. his reason, and deny
homage to the Emperor. For the Magdeburgenses, Sozomen, Socrates, Sozom. l. 3.
c. 5: Socrat. l. (...). c. 8: The Emperors had not that power over assemblies,
which Mr. H. says. Socrat. l. 2. c. 29 30.
tell us these godly men justly feared the Princes siding with Arrians, and the
design of casting out of Athanasius, at the Assembly at Antiochia, Anno 344.
and the altering of the Nicene faith, as fell out: and its known that
Constantius rigorously and unjustly commanded those of the Council of Sirmium,
Anno 356. to recall the two Confessions of Faith, one in Latin, another in
Greek, in which though abstaining from the word (...), (which should not have
been) they gave great glory to the Son of God; yet that they too much inclined
to obey his wicked design, in that he also banished many worthy Bishops,
Liberius Bishop of Rome, Paulinus Bishop Bulling, de Council.
of Triere, Dionyfius Bishop of Alba, Osius Bishop of Corduba, and others,
because they refused to ratify in the Council at Millan, the deposition of
Athanasius, and to alter the Nicene Faith. See Theodoret, Socrates, Sozo^en,
Ruffin. Much more Theod. l. 1. c. 15. Socrat. l. 2. c. 36 Sozom. l. 4. c. 9.
Ruffin. l. 1. c. 20.
of the flexibleness of Constantius in opposing the Council of Ariminum, and in
arming with power Ursatius and Valens to publish the sum of the Arrian Faith,
and to eject sundry Bishops, who refused to subscribe thereunto: and in
gathering a Council in Nica a town in Thracia, which ratified the Arrian Faith,
and called it falsely the Nic^^^ Faith; as if the world knew not then and now,
the difference between Nica in Thracia, and Nice in Bithynia. See Socrates and
Sozomen. Socrat. l. (...). c. 37 Sozom. l. 4. c. 17
Who shall read the Histories shall find, 1. That the Emperors were not Masters
of true and false Religion, as Mr. H. says. 2. That they had not power of
choosing members of the Council. as Mr. H. 3. That godly Bishops refusing to
come to corrupt Councels at the command of the Emperor, were not counted
rebellious, as Mr. H. says.

To the fifth Argument, The Churches need the protection of the Prince in
Assemblies, and are to give an account to any of their The Church is to give an
account of their syned (...) act^ng (...) the Prince, but this proves not, that
the Prince has over the Church any such headship as Mr. Hooker ascribes to
him.
faith and doings, 1 Pet. 3. 18. and far more to the Christian Prince: but it
follows not, that they have no intrin^l power from Christ to meet themselves,
if the Prince refuse to convocate them, as Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah did, for the
Magistrate ought to protect the Independent congregation, and every single
Professor: but it follows not, therefore the single congregation has no power
intrinsecal to meet for Word and Seals, except the Prince who is a persecutor,
give him leave: nor follows it yet, therefore no single member can profess
Christ before men and the Ruler (who often persecutes confession of Christ)
except the Ruler give him leave to profess Christ, and to meet in a Synod: For
Christ has given to his Church, and members thereof, power to worship him in
private, in public, in Church Assemblies, and has laid above their heads no
lawful privative power of Rulers to hinder his people to worship the Lord God,
Exodus 3^ and the Argument retorted concludes against Mr. Hooker. The Prince
has no power under pretense of keeping civil peace to Casar, to hinder actings
of rendering honor to God, contrary to truth, and destructive to the Gospel.

CHAP. XIII.
Antiquity knew nothing of the Mystery of our Brethrens Independent Way.

THe external Society of the Church (say the Magdeburgenses Magdeb. cent. 1. l.
11 c. 4. p. 288. Ecclesiae ve: o^tum externum ex bonis and ex malie omnibus
temporibus esse mixtum Apostoli tradunt, page 289. Paulus in Ecclesia Romana
etiam malos (visibiliter) mixtos ostendit, Romans 16. and in Ecclesia
Corinthiaca^ plurima desiderat, sunt enim intereos contentiones -- idololatrae,
convitiatores, ebriosi, rapaces, 1 Cor. 5. incestuosus -- litigant sub
infidelibus, and damno afficiunt fratres: Scortatores, avari, 1 Cor. 6.
vescuntur Idolothytis, 1 Cor. 8. and 10, etc. Galatae a doctrina Evangelii
defecerant -- fermentum inter eos alii alios devorant, etc. sio in^er
Thessalonicenses, 2 Thessalonians. 3. and Philippenses, 2. omnes quae sua sunt
quaerunt, 2 Timothy 1. Asiani omnes aversati sunt me, etc.
is at all times mixed of good and bad. Our Brethren say of all visibly good,
even visible converts. The Magdeburgenses teach, That after Paul has commended
the faith and obedience, love, sanctification, growth of grace of the visible
Church of Rome, Romans 1. 6, 7. Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Galatia, Gal. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Thessalonic^, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2, 3, 4. Philippi, cap. 1. ver. 5, 6. and the seven
Churches, Rev c. 2. and 3. which are commended highly by Christ; yet in the
same very Epistle, the mixture of visible hypocrites was to be seen among them.

See Fla^. Illy. in Catalogo Testium veritatis lib. 2. page 91, 92, 93.

Pa. Simpson his Centuries, Cent. 1, 2, etc.

Baron^^ Annals, Cent. 1. and sequentibus, ann. 204, 242, 245.

Jacob. Gualterium Iesuitam in Tabula Chronographica, a. 1. seculo ad seculum
17. Sac. 1. ad an. 100. page 153. sect. 3. and sequintibus

See Bernard.

See August. tom 7. contra Epistolam Parmeniani Donatista, l. 1, 2, 3. de
Baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 7.

Contra literas Petiliani Donatistae, lib. 3. Lib. de Unitate Ecclesiae.

August. contra Cresconium Grammaticum lib. 4. Colla. cum Donatistis. Ad
Donatistas post collationem, l. and l. de gestis cum Emerito.

See Cyprian. ad plebem and quinque Presbyteris Schismaticis factionis
Foelicissimi, Epist. 40. vol. l. 1. Epist. 8.

Cyprian. ad Cornelium de ordinatione ejus a s^ comprobata and Foelicissimo,
Epist. 42. vol. l. 2. Epist. 10.

Cyprian. Cornelio, Epist. 45. al. l. 4. Ep. 8.

Cyprian. Antoniano de Cornelio and Novatiano, Epist. 42. al. l. 4. Ep. 2.
Cornelius Factus est Episcopus a plarimis Collegis nostris, qui tunc in urbe
Roma aderant, qui aa nos literas honorificas and ^audabiles, and testimonio
suae praedicationis illustres de ejus ordinatione miserunt, etc. Ib. page 119.
Quod vero ad Novatiani personam pertinet -- Quisquis ille and qualiscunque est,
Christianus non est, qui in Christi Ecclesia non est -- nisi si Episcopus tibi
videtur, qui Episcopo in Ecclesia a s^deci^ Coepiscopis facto, adulter atque
extraneus Episcopus fieri a desertoribus per ambitum nititur; and cum sit a
Chricto una Ecclesia per tolum mundum in multa concorbra aivisa, item
Episcopatus unus, Episcoporum multorum concordi num^rofitate diffusus, isse
post Dei traditionem, post connexam and ubique conjunctam Catholicae Ecclesiae
unitatem, humanam conetur Ecclesiam facere, etc. Mr. H. who cries out against
me, because I teach, that he who is a pastor of one Church, is a pastor of all
the Churches in the earth, may cry out against Cyprian.

See Cyprian. cum Collegis Lucio Papae Roman Ep. 58. al. l. 3. Ep. 1. Cyprianus
ad Stephanum de Martia^o Arelatensi, qui Novatiano consensit, Epist. 67. a^. l.
3. Epist. 13. In all which, this is clear to Cyprian: Episcopatus unus,
quamvisplures Episcopi in Ecclesia catholica, which throws down Mr. H. his way
of a pastor married to one single congregation.

See my Reverend Brother Mr. Baily, Vindication of his D^sswasive, ann. 1655.
especially to Mr. Cotton, cap. 4. sect. 2. page 49, 50.

There was an equality of Jurisdiction in this age among the Churches; but that
these Writers mean not single congregations as such, that every congregation
has power to call and depose officers, I do not concide; for they deny a
supremacy Magdeb. Cen. 11. c. 7. p. 102. Si quis p^ivatos hujus (...) autores
prespi^^at, ^^debit ^m gubernation propemodum (...) si^ilem f^^isse. Singulae
(...) (...) (...) ^em habebant potestatem, verbum Dei pur^ docendi -- excon^^
(...) -- (...) (...) ^ligendi, vocandi, ^r^^nandi and just ^^ssimas ob causas
iterum dep^, (...) (...) S^^odo^ conv^cand^, scholas instituendi and
conservand^, in rebus d^b^^s and (...) ve^ ^um sententias ^ulandl, judicandi,
decidendi: deinde vicin^ Ecclesiae vici^arum, charita^is and aedificationis
studio non prop^er pr^matum aliquem, sed propte^ manda^^m Christi de^aterna
dilectiene, tum in sua necessitate opem implorab^nt: tum vicissim earum curam
gettbant and quasi inspectrices and adjutu^ces erant, ut verbum Dei pure (...)
-- ut vocarentur and ordinarentur p^^ and erud^ti v^ri ad ministerium
Ecclesiae. E^. ex Apollinari^ ait, l. (...). c. 16. Nuper natas doct inas
((...) provinciales aut ple^^que doctores) exami^abant, and
prophanapron^^^abant haeresinque istam reprobantes, Ecclesia ej^^iebant and
excommun cab^.
to the Churches they speak of here (...) (...) Rome. Constantinople; but these
as Mother Cathedral Churches, not as single congregations, claim supremacy, as
here also they ascribe Jurisdiction to associate Churches.

Observe also, that they say the form of Government of the Church, was almost
like to popular Government, not a Democracy it self. It is like in times of
Persecution, the meeting of Christians being early in the morning, at the time
of receiving of heathens to Baptism (in which all the Christians, as well as
the one baptizing congregation, were interessed) and in the Lords day acts of
Discipline have been few The Magdeburgenses tell us from Justinius, from Plinius
his Epistle to Trajan, Magdeb. ce^^. 2. c. (...). p. 8^.
from Eusebius, l. 4. c. 23. as Dienysius Corinthus in that place says they
read the Prophets and Apostles, a pastor exhorted to follow what was read, the
whole company stood up and prayed, and received the Lords Supper, and thereby
obliged themselves to walk as Christians, not to kill, not to whore, etc. By
Doctors and Rulers Ministers were ordained, as the History Magdeb. cent. 2.
(...). page 87. Certo ordi^^ and ^^^^bus pr^fici Eccle^^^^ Doctores and
Gubernatores Joan. Apostolus a ^bus roga^us vicinas ^strat provincias,
consti^^^as^bi a se Ecclesias Episcopis and ministris ornat. Eusebius. 3. c. ^3.
of the Apostle John witnesses, and casting of lots in the election of pastors.
Hence the name (...), the Clergy. No shadow of a male-Church here.

Tortullian shows, that in Church-meetings there were exhortations, Tertul. in
Apol. Co mus in coetum and congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu facta
precationibus ambiam^s orantes: haec vis Deo grata est -- Ibid^ etiam
exhortationes, castigationes, and censura divina; nam and judicatur magno cum
pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu; summumque futuri judicii
praejudicium, si quis it a deliquerit, ut a communione orationis and conventus
and omnis sancti commercii relegeru: praesident probati quique seniores,
honorem istum non pretio, sed testimonio adepti. Magdeb. Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 94.
Ejusdem provinciae proximi quique Episcopi manus imponebant. Athan.
corrections, and divine censures -- and the whole Elders that are approved,
rule in the meeting. Elders (faith he) who have obtained that honor, not by
price, but by a good testimony. Now this being done by the whole congregation
meeting for public prayer, could not be done by the people, and by women,
except consenting: for Tertullian says, De veland. virg. Non permittitur
muli^ri in Ecclesia loqui: sed nec docere nec tingere. Eusebius l. 6. c. 8.
when Origin was ordained Bishop, says, and Cyprian l. 2. Epist. 10. ad Co^n^l.
All the nearest Bishops of the Province came, and laid hands on him prasente
plebe, says Cyprian.

The fourth Age shows what is true and false Antiquity: and whereas there was
in the beginning thereof a sad desolation through the persecution of
Dioclesian; so also there came a change in a glorious manner, most suddenly, by
Constantine. Eusebius l. 3. de vita Constan. mentions the Synod of Nice, famous
like the meeting of the Church in the Pentecost, Acts 2. as the Magdeburgenses,
cen. 4. c. 2. p, 2. say. Now since the Gospel was spread through Europe, Africa
and Asia, as Eusebius and as A^kanafius, from the East to the West: And the
Magdeburgenses cite Julius Firmicus Maternus, Optat. Milevitanus, Basilius,
teaching, that the Church of Christ was all the Julius Firmicus Maternus l. ad
Imperat^res de abolendis Idolo^at^iis Ethnici^: Quis locus in terra est, qui
non Christi nomen possederit (...) qua sol oritur, qua occidit, qua erigitur
septentrio, qua vergi^ auster, ^ocum venerandi nu^nis Majestas implevit.
Basilius Ep. 72.
world over where the Sun did shine, East and West. South and North. Let the
impartial Reader judge, if it have a shadow of Reason, that the Churches who
sent Commissioners to this famous Synod of Nice, were only congregational
Churches.

1. The Magdeburgenses set down numerous and famous Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 11.
Churches in Asia, in Palestine, Caes^rea, Tyrus and Zidon, in Gaza. Arabia,
Syria, Mesopotamia, Pamphilia, Cilicia, Lydia, Phrygia, Bi^hynia, H^llespontus,
Galatia, Paphlag^nia, Cappadocia, Persia, etc. in the Isles in Europe, in
Africa, most of all sent messengers to this Synod: What an Assembly must this
be, if petty congregational Churches sent Commissioners? What house could
contain them? There was

2. A catalogue of Bishops sent to this Synod, before this called Overseers,
and Prapositi by Cyprian, not pastors simply of one single congregation.

3. Eusebius tells of Provincial Synods, and so of Provincial Eusebius. l. 4. c.
7. and 13. Eusebius. de vita Constan. l. 4. Cen. 4. c. 1 and 2.
Churches, which must have sent Commissioners. There was a Synod of Tyrus under
Constantint, a Synod in S^l^ucia. See the Magdeburgenses.

4. The number of those added to the Church, says, that they could not only
be congregational Churches; Theodoret says, that Constantine writes to
Eusebius Nicomediensis, there Theodoret. l. 1. c. 6. In urbe quae nostrum nomen
complectitur, auxiliante Salvatoris Dei providentia, ingens hominum multitudo
sese addixit Ecclesiae: ita admod^^ augescente omnium ibi numere, admodum
dignum videtur, etiam Ecclesias in ea plures construi. Niceph. l. 7. c. 34.
Eusebius. l. 8. c. ult. Imperat. Caesar. Galerius Maxim^nus mo^bo fatal
correptus, e^iam in hac causa indulgentiam nostram extendendam sse putavimus,
ut ruisus Christiani sint, ac domos, (Templa) in quibus convenerunt, sic denuo
constituant, ut nihil contra disciplinam publicam faciant -- Deo suo supplicent
pro salute nostra, pro R^p. proque seipsis. Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 3. page 25.
Congregantur per singulas civitates Ecclesiae, habentur Synodi.
was a great multitude in the Town named from himself added to the Church, so
that they behoved to be divided into many Churches: and who would deny this to
be a Presbyterial Church? Nicephorus says, when Constantine was baptized, more
than twelve thousand men, beside women and children, were baptized, and many
added to the Church. Its apparent, the very nature of Christian Religion,
requires congregational and synodical meetings. Galerius Maximinus having given
toleration for Christian Religion, though he condemned the Religion it self,
incontinent in every city congragations are erected, and Synods or Presbyteries
kept, say the Magdeburgeuses from Eus^bius.

Donatists excuse their separation from the Church, because in Aug. l. de un,
Baptis. c. 14.
communion of the Sacraments mali maculent bonos. August.

For Ordination and Election of Ministers by the votes and laying on the hands
of the pastors, and consent of the people, without the device of a
male-congregation destitute of officers: See the Magdeburgenses, cent. 4. c. 6.
p. 244, 245. who cite Bosil. Epist. 58. ad M^l^t. Th^^dor. l. 1. c. 19. the
Epistle of the Ni^^n^ Council to them of Alexandria, as Th^^doret cites it, l.
4. c. 10. the History of Ambro^^us Mediol^, as Secrates has it, l. 4. c. 30,
etc. says the same. See Magdiburg. vol. 3. cant. 11. c. 6. p. 140. See vol. 3.
cent. 13. c. 6. p. 260, 261.

The Magdeburgenses say, the reason of multiplying of Officers, Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, Lectors, Canons, Exorcists, Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 7. p. 274.
Quemadmodum sub finem superioris seculi caeperunt augeri coetus Ecclesiastici
-- and operae Presbyterorum in plura genera distribui, eo quod pauciores ^^s
efficiendis non essent pares. Magdeb. cent 4. c. 7. de Politia Eccles. p. 290.
See the Magdeb. vol. 3. cent. 13. c. 6. p. 239. Et Magdeb. vol. 3. cent. 13.
cap 7. page 307.
etc. was in the end of the third Age, Ecclesiastic congregations began to be
multiplied.

2. Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, Deacons, Archdeacons in Rome, in
Constantinople, as Sozomen l. 4. c. 2. in Alexandria, as Sozomen l. 7. c. 19.
and Optat. Mil^vitanus l. 1. contr. Parmen. and the 14 Canon of the Council of
Neocaesarea ordains, that in amplu civitatibus, in large cities there should
not be above seven Deacons. Now sense and reason would say, there could be no
ground of appointing such a number of officers, if Rome, Constantinople,
Antioch, Alexandria had been all one single congregation, meeting (...), within
the same walls, and not a large Presbyterial Church.

3. They must be great strangers to Rome, who know not that there were at Rome
many Churches and Meeting-places consecrated to the Saints; and that the Synod
of Nice, as Ruffin^s and Athanasius say, ordained the Bishop of Rome to care
for the Churches of the Suburbs, as the Magdeburgenses say: yet all was called
the Church of Rome. See the Magd. burgenses vol. 2. cent. 5. c. 6. p. 357, 358.

Of the Churches mixture of wheat and chaff, see A^gustins August. de fide ad
Peerum, cap. 43. Nullatenus dub tes aream esse Dei Ecclesiam Catholicam, and
intra eam usque in finem seculi frumento paleas mixtas contineri -- nec pro
malis bonos deserendos, sed pro bonis malos, in quantum exigit fidei and
charitatis ratio, tolerandos, id est, si vel in Ecclesia nullius pe^fidiae
semina spargunt, vel fratres ad aliquod malum opus mortifer a imitatione non
ducunt -- ut ad bonam vitam per Dei misericordiam convertantur. Sic in Epist.
Petil. c. 13. l. de Bapt. contr. Donat. c. 2. Prosp. de promis. and praedic.
Dei c. 7. esse a^eam.
and Prosper, who say, Evil men, if they infect not, must be tolerated, and the
good not separated from, because of the evil known to be such: Otherwise
Donatus and his never taught men to separate from latent hypocrites, which are
seeming and visible Saints; as also they must be tolerated, that they may be
converted.

Augustine asserts a catholic integral visible Church in Ps. 56. Corpus autem
ejus non est ista a^^ illa Eccl^s^a, sed t^t^ orb diffusa -- for the whole
Church, says he, is made up of all the faithful having Christ for their Head.
For the ordination of pastors Magdeb. voi. 2. cent. 5. c. (...). p. 377, 378.
by the laying on of hands of the Ministers and consent of the people, se^ the
Magdeburgenses. So was Chrysosto^^^ ordained cons^nsu cleri and populi
Constantinopolitani, as Socrates l. 6. c. 2. and Sozomen l. 8. c. 2. witness.
So says Augustine, that not the Church of Carthage only, and of Numidia, sed
propinquiores Episcopi, the neare^^ Bishops and Pastors laid on hands. See the
Magdeburg. For association of Churches, see the Magdeb. vol. 2. cont. 5. c. 7.
p. 417, 418. 422, 493.

The Magdeburgenses tell us of famous and celebrious Churches Magdeb. vol. 11.
cen. 6. c. 11. p. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Vol. 3. cen. 10. c. 7 p. 200.
Euagrius l. 4. c. 21. Ni^^ph. l. 18. c. 28. Magdeb. cent. 6. c. 6. p. 161, 162.
Constantinopoli in suburbio fuit Templu^ Joan. Baptistae, ut Nicep. l. 18. c.
4^ Justinianus Imperaror incomparabile Sophiae Templum extruxit, and
pretiosissimis lapillis, and aliis donariis auxit, restauravit etiam Sanctorum.
Apostolorum, delubra struxit in usum vi^orum, soeminarum, puerorum, senum.
Cyriacus. Episcopus Constantinopolitanus ibidem Mariae Virgini Sacellum posuit.
Vide Euagrium. l. 4. c. 31. Sic Hierosolymis varia sunt Templa, ut Magdeb.
cent. 7. c. 5. p. 65, 66.
in the sixth Age in Asi^^, Africa and Europe, in renowned c^^ies, which had
eminent Bishops in them, and new Churches buil^ espe^ially. Iustiman the
Emperor built in Constantinople in Thra^i^ the noble Church of Sophia,
incomparable for magnificence to any in-the world, says E^agr^us and
Nicephorus: And where there be many places of meeting for Worship in great
cities, Constantinopie, Auti^ch, the Church of that city must be Presbyt^rial,
not congregational to sounder Antiquity. That the Church of Rome could not meet
congregationally, the multitude of Churches dedicated to Saints do evince.
Magdeb. cent. 6. c. 6 p. 181. Quod saepe in publicis locis Romae Christiani ad
sacra peragenda convenerint, ^estantur innu^era ^lla delubra (...) Sabellico
expressa, ut Templum Cosinae and Damiani, Saturnii: Vaticanum, Batjonae,
Sop^iae, Euphemiae Marcelli, Pancratii. mention^^^ facit Gregorius Papa
Templorum Petri and P^^li Romae, Agathae -- Caesa^ii Martyris, and Jul^i,
Mariae, Agnetis, and Foelicitatis, Stephani, Andreae, etc.

Its true, many of these Churches (say the Magdeburg^^ses) were built not so
much for the Worship of God, as for Super^: Magdeb. cent. 7. c. 6. page 94.
Ro^na mu^t is Templis e^orna^a fuit: in quae non tam ad cultum Dei, quam ad
superstitiones per^ge^^das conventum est. Magdeb. cent. 7. c. 7. p. 111, 112.
Et cent. 8. c. 7 p. 249, 250. Magdeb. cent. 9. c. 4. page 86, 87. Haymo in Gal.
4. Magdeburgens. Vol. 3. cent. 10. c. 4. page 102. Theoph. in Matthew. c. 3.
Ecclesia multos habet baptizatos, sicut in a^ea, omne quod cultum fuit in agro,
etc.
yet no sober man can say, the Christian^ in Ro^^ could m^^^ in one
congregation, but that many Churches were needful.

See for association of Churches the Magdeburg^^s. That the visible Church is
made up of good and evil, see the Magdeburg, who ^i^e Hayme and others; though
in this and former ages gross corruptions daily grew. So the Magdeburg^^ses
vol. 3. cent. 10. cite Thophylact for the same: and Vol. 3. c^nt. 12. c. 7. p.
457, 458. and cent. 13. c. 4. p. 185.

The Magdeburgenses ascribe the power of the Keys, Matthew. Magdeburgen. cent.
10. c. 4. page 98. Theophyl. in Mat. 16. Theophyl. in Mat. 18. Radulphus. l.
12. in Levit. c. 1. l. 20. c. 5. in Mat. 16. 19. Ausbertus in cap. (...).
Apocalypse. Anselmus in Matthew. c. 18. Excommunicatio sieri debet per os
Ecclesiae, id est, per sacerdotem: Sacerdote autem excommunicante, totum corpus
Ecclesiae operatur. Magdeb. Vol. 3. cent. 11. c. 4. p. 85, 86, Vol. 3. cent.
12. c. 4. p. 181, 182.
16. to Peter, representing Pastors; and for this they cite Theophylactus, and
Radulphus, Ausbertus. Aus^s gives so the power of binding and loosing to the
Priests, E^^^. in Evang. as excommunication shou^^ (...) by the mouth of the
Church, the Priest: for when the Priest excommunicates, the whole body of the
Church acts in him. See the Magdeb. cent. 11. Ausel. in Mat. 18. Qu^r^^
re^^seritis] nec (...) Apostolis, sed ^^nibus Episcopis, Pr^, haec potest as
conces^^ est. See the Magdeburg^nses citing the Schoolmen, Thomas Aqu^^^^,
B^tura, Albertus to this purpose also.

For the notes of the true Church in the dark midnight of Popery, Petr.
Waldensis in France, ann. 1160. taught the same with us: and yet Mr. Hooker
refusing these marks, tells us, Truth is the Daughter of Time, and excellently
does the twelfeth Age agree with the first Age. Of Pet. Waldensis were the
Waldenses, the sincere part of the Church giving ^estimony against the daily
growing corruptions of Rome.

The Magdeburgenses in their Preface to the third volume of their History,
Cent. 10. Sunt autem not^ (...) so^ prop^^^^ (...) ga^manae M^^debur. vol.
(...). Cent. 1^. c. 8. page. 549. De Eccles. a^^. 4 Ecclesiam Christi esse,
quae sincerum Christi verbu^ audiat, and sacramentis ab ipso institutis utatur,
ubicunque locorum ea existat. Magdeburgens. vol. 1. Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 4. p.
127. ex Matthew. 16. Ecclesia est coetus veram Christi notitiam habens, ^amque
profi en^, ornatus potestate clavium regn^ coelorum, page 129. Prima ac
praecipua nota Ecclesiae est verbum sincerum, altera est verus usus
Sacramentorum and clavium; te^^ia, est confessio ac perseverantia.
Ecclisiae Christi, verbi Dei praedicat^^ (...)* (...) (...)* (...)
Sacramentoru^ usus iustitut^^ a Christo (...) (...) (...) studio conjunctus.
These men knew true Antiquity well. H^. W^lif, Jerome of Prague, and the
renowned Martyrs of Christ sealed with their blood the same truth, as Antiquity
witnesses of them. Mr. (...). calls the preaching of the Gospel a common
adjunct of the Church. But we appeal to Antiquity (though the Scripture be
above all) for a warrant of their Church.

Tertul. ad ver. hae^et. c. 22. p. 207.
Tertullian offend^ at such who say the Apostles were ignorant of any thing, to
whom the Lord gave the Keys to open and (...) Heaven, which secre^s the people
know not: and the Apostles d^ that in opening and s^utting heaven, which only
God can b Turtul. pe pud^cit. c. 21. page 618.
(...). Tertul. adver. Gnosticos c. 10 p. 482.
Christ ga^^ the K^ (and per ^um Ecclesiae) to Peter, and by him to the Church.

Epiph^ni^^ Epiph. adver. haer. l. 1. to. 2. (...).
ass^^^^ (...) Universal Integral Church, though the tongues be diverse: and God
keeps carefully his Church spread through all the World, as dwelling in one and
the same house: Epiph. adver. hae^. to. 1. l. 2. hae^. 4^. sive 61 (...).
(...), its not in P^rygia, Cilicia, and Pa^phylia only, but all the World
over. And he cites that of Christ: this cannot be a congregation.

Lactan. de vera Sapien. l. 4. c. 13. p. 282. Sola igitur Catholica Eccl^sia
est, q^a verum cultum retinet, hic est sons verita^^^, hoc est domicilium
fidei, hoc Tempsum Dei.
Lactantius is for our notes of the Church, not for Mr. H. the Ph^yges,
Novatiani, Valentiniani, Marcionitae, Authae piani, aut A^riani, leave off to
be Christians: that then is the only catholic Church, which retains the true
worship of God. Eusebius Pamphil. Eusebius. de praepar. Evangel. l. 6. c. 1^.
(...). 302. G^^g. Nazianz. Ora. 29. in Sanc. Luc. p. 609. Et (...) an^^
lanuginem (...) doc^s, (...) G^^^etra^ ^^nca una, nec denique nautam una
navigatio facit.
The Church is diffused all the world over, East and West, South and North. He
expounds Matthew. 16. the Church upon the Rock, to be the Church from the East to
the We^^, which fills all the World. De prop. Evangil. l. 1. c. 3. page 8. then
its not one single congregation.

Gregorius Nuzianz^nus Orat. ^8. de (...) partis, The people give their consent
only to ordain the Bishop. And this election of Bishops, ibid. page 480. i^ to
be committed to the cleaner part of the people, to sacred Ministers, and to our
Nazarites, and not to the foolish and rash common people, tum eximia ac
purissimae p^puti parti, hoc est, and (...) Ministris and nostris Nazar^^,
quibus vil sol^ vel pot^ssimum (...) (...) illes commitis op^rtebat (sic enim
nun^ Ecclesia (...) esse^) ac non (...) qui opibus and potentia (...)
(magistratees notat) a^^ stultae ac te^erariae plebi. Its clear that Nazianzen
gives a presidency to Teachers over the Church, when K Grego. Nazianz. Orat.
35. ad cla. Episcop. Before 15. Bishops convened by Theodosius the Great,
against Macedonius. Vide Presbyterorum Concilium, canitie and prudentia (...)
natorum, diaconorum mod^stiam atque ordinem -- lectorum moderationem and
conci^^itatem, plebis attentionem -- omnibus supernum Senatum honorantibus.
he forbids that young men, before they have hair on their face, be (...) to
reach old men; and they object (says he) Daniel: but that which rarely falls
out, is no law to the Church, one Swallow makes not the Spring: but election
here by Nazianzen is put for the whole calling of men to the Ministry. The
Church of Byzan^ (...) commended for discipline by Nazianzen. See in the Church
a Council of Prebyters decored with age and wisdom, an high Senate which they
all honored: nor did he in a grave Synod dec^ the praises of the discipline of
a single congregation.

Greg. Nazianz. de compos^ta disserendi tatione. Orat. 7. p. 221, 222. Utique
nec incedit oculus, sed dux est; nec prospicit pes, sed progreditur, deque loco
in locum movet; nec lingua voces excipit, cum hoc sit auditus; nec auditus
loquitur, cum hoc sit linguae -- nimirum imperat ac praesidet hoc (membrum)
illud ducitur ac gubernatur.
Nazianzen has a savory discourse of the order and gifts, and variety of
members in Christ's body, and cites 1 Cor. 12. 28. not of a single congregation.

For 1. he says we are all one body in Christ:

2. He says there are in the Church Apostles, Prophets, etc. the eye walks
not, but is the Captain; nor does the foot fee, but walk, and move from place
to place; nor does the tongue receive sounds, that is proper to the hearing;
nor does the ^ongue speak, but the tongue, etc.

And 3. he speaks of a number of Prophets, of which two or three prophecy by
course, and one Interprets.

Basilius Magnus Nicopolitanis Presbyteris Epist. 10. Tom. ult, (...) ex albo
vest^^ defecis, and (...) unus and alter conseculus est -- (...) adhu^ corpus
vestrum est per Die gratiam (...), Basil. ci^^bus Nicopolitanis disp. Epist.
13. Tom. ult. Dispensationes Ecclesiasticae fiunt quidem per (...) quibus est
illorum cura conoredita, verum a plobe confir^antur.

Basil. Epist. 18. vol. ult. Presbyteris A^tiochiae solicitudinem illam quam
(...) Ecclistis D^, ex (...) (...) -- (...) (...), qui vobis t^tius (...) (...)
charitate^ and affectum expon^i. At the first reading a Presbyterial body over
diverse congregations appears.

Theophylact. Theoph. in Ena^. Mat. 19.
Every one of us is the Church, and the House of God, and if we continue in the
faith confessed, the gates of hell shall not prevail against us, that is, sins.

2. The power of binding and loosing he expounds to be the power of remitting
of sins, which Peter has, and such as have the office (...), of an Oversee^.
Theoph. Mat. 18. 1.
Theoph. If thy Brother offend thee] thy Brother only of the same congregation
whereof thou act a member, says Mr. H^^ker. Nay, says Theophylact, (...),
Theoph. enar. in Joan. 20.
whose sin ye remit]. See (says he) the Dignity of the Priests: for it God who
forgives sins, but they are honored as God. Theoph. enar. 1. Cor. 1. 5.
On these words, we judge those th^^ are within.] Are not (...), Christians
judged by us? but a more terrible Judge shall judge those that are with^^.

(...). origen^ sive Ety^. l. 8. c. 1. p. 101. Non (...) conventicula ^rum
^tur, sed ^tum orbem terrarum dilatata diffunditur. Se^ Isid.: Sent^nti^r.
(...) l. c. 22. p.
Isidorus Hispalens. Episcopus, The Church is called Catholic. quasi (...),
for it is not limited to some countries, as the Conventioles of Heretics, but
spread all the world over. The con^tions of Heretics are only in ordinary, not
catholic, but very rarely. See him (p) elsewhere.

What says these called the Canons of the Apostles deserve, I dispute not;
they Canon Apostol. (...).
allow no Bishop to he ordained without two or three Bishops.

The Council. Genesis par. 1. Council. Nicae 1. p. 310.
Bishops of the whole earth, that is, from all Churches (not congregations,
that was impossible) were at the first Nic^ns Council 318. in number subscribed.

Nicae. Conc. can. 4.
A Bishop should be ordained by all the Bishops of the Province; if that be
heard by three, the rest consenting by their Letters.

Council. genesis par. 1. tom. 2. c. 1^ p. 757.
More then two hundred Bishops in the Council of Ephesus condemned Nestorius.

Among the Articles of Ioh. Wiclif this is the seventh, If a man be duly
contrite for sin, any farther confession is needless. q Conci. Genesis ^om 3 par.
2. Conci. Constable. (...). art. Ioh. (...). 7. page 1570. Si homo debite fuerit
contritus, omnis confessio exterior est superflua.
So our Brethren and Mr. H. his judicial confession before the Church is as
superfluous and scriptureless, before they be admitted and engaged members of
the visible Church.

On the other extremity they fail, who condemn Wiclif his eleventh Article,
that a Minister ought not to Excommunicate, except he know first the man Ibid.
art. Io. Wicclif 11. Nullus proelatus debet -- aliq^em excommunicate, nisi
sciat eum esse excommunicatum a Deo.
to be excommunicate of God.

And Ioh. Hush was unjustly condemned for desending Wiclif in these and the 1b.
p. 1600.
like.

Nor was it a damnable error that Ioh. Hush held, that there is but one
Universal holy Church, as there is but one certain number of men predestinate
to glory. Mr. H^^ker his new catholic abstract congregation divided in so many
thousand little catholic Churches is too near to the Papists in this.

John Hush Mr. Fox his monuments of the Martyrs. tom. last Council of
Constance. K. Henry the V. articles of John Hush page 810, 811, etc.
before his Judges and accusers, often professed that Christ limited not
Jurisdiction and ruling of the Church militant to Peter only, but gave it to
all the Apostles and true Pastors; but never to Mr. H. his male Church. t
Council. Genesis 3. Tom par. 2. conc. Co^stan. ^ess. 15 p. 1600. Universalis sancta
Ecclesia tantum est una, art. 1. Io. Hush.


Theod. Inter. in Psalm. 47. page 137. co. 2.
Theodores judges the Church builded upon the Rock. Mat. 16. not to be a
single visible congregation with Mr. H. which certainly perishes; but the
company of chosen believers builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, who^e corner- stone is Christ. And though this be one catholic
Church divided all the world over, habet domos ase invicem divisas, and is
Theodor. Inter. in Ephesians. c. 2: page 747.
one body, of which Christ is head, one company, one City; which cannot be said
of one single congregation. And Theodor. Inter. in 1 Cor. 12. No^ vos (...),
sed omnes qui in universio orb tertarum credidetunt.
1 Cor. 12. ye are all the body of Christ] not ye only, but all they who
through the whole world believe. Theodoret on 1 Timothy 5. shows that there is
(...), praefectura, a power of receiving witnesses against Elders, and of
examining them before they be ordained.

This Ambrosius 1 Cor. 12. Caput itaque in Ecclesia Apostolos posuit, quia
legati Christi sunt.
Ambrosius shows, making Jews and Gentiles one body having one Baptism, and the
Apostles caput Ecclesiae, the chief members of the Church. As also Ambrosius in
1 Cor. 5. A quo crimine mali docto^es aut d^ssimulabant, aut negligentius
argueb^nt, sicut and Eli Sacerdos, etc.
the Doctors in the Church of Corinth dissembled or carelessly censured the
Incest, as Eli the Priest did his Sons. Then there was a Presbytery to cast him
out. See if Ambrosius, tom. 3: de natali sanct. Apost. Petri and Pauli, ser.
66. l. 16. page 291
Ambrose gives the Keys to Peter, yes, to Peter and Paul only, and to the
Rulers; only he says, inter ipsos (Petrum and Paulum) quis (...) proponatur
incertum. The same (says Ephe. Syrus, tom. 1. de sacerdotio, p. 2.
Ephraim Syrus) of these two.

Greg. Nyss^nus in illa verba, Tunc etiam ipse filius subjicietur, page 110.
Gregorius Nyssenus Episcop. frater Basilii Magni, All we who are joined to one
body of Christ by faith, make one body -- and that he excludes not, but
includes the visible body, he proves from 1 Cor. 12. ye are the body of Christ:
and Ephesians. 4. the body gathered by the Ministry of Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors, etc. which shall be brought to the unity of faith. So Greg. Nyssen. Ut
Petra vitae Christus, etc. page 255.
Christ is the rock of life, and the rock of faith to the Church builded upon
the rock (which admits not Magns, who is not builded upon the rock; as Ioh.
Hush refused a wicked Pope to be head, or member of the Church so built.)

Hieronymus commentar. Matthew. 16. 19. Et tibi dabo] istum locum Episcopi and
Presbyteri non intelligentes aliquid sibi de Pharisaeorum assumunt supercilio,
ut vel damnent innocents, vel solvere se noxios arbitrentur, omnis credentium
turba perveniat. Hieyonym. ibid.
Hieronymus clearly expounds the ports of Hell to be Vi^ia atque peccata (re^r)
v^l certe (...) Doctrinas, sins or herefies, which is strong for the invisib^e
Church of true believers; not for the visible congregation, of which Judas and
Magus are members to Mr. Hooker, and were never built on the rock. And the
Keys are given to Bishops and Presbyters, who may not under that pretense
condemn the innocent. And Hieron. Com. Mat. 18. 18. Si Ecclesiam non audierit,
quaecunque alligaveritis] potestatem tribuit Apostolis, ut sciant qui a (...)
conde^nantur, humanam sententiam divina roborari, and quodcunque ligatum fuerit
in terra, ligari pariter and in coel^. See Hieronym. Com. ad Ephesians. 4. 11. who
expounds the body of Christ of the Church, until we all meet, all the company
of believers. And Hieronymus com. in Tit. 1. 5. Ut constituas] audiant Episcopi
qui habent constituendi Presbyteros per urbes singulas perestatem, etc. Ibid.
Idem est Presbyter qui Episcopus.
H^eron. Let the Bishops hear who have power of ordaining Elders in every City.
Nor need our Brethren suspect Hieronymus to be prelatical, his judgment is
known to be contrary thereunto. See Hieron. in Tit. 1. 5. See him for the
present purpose in Opuscul. in Prover. c. 7 p. 217. See Ruffinus Ruffin. in
Symbol. Multi enim and alii Ecclesias congregaverunt, ut Marcion, and
Valentinus, and Ebion, and Manichaeus, and caeceri omnes haeretici, sed illae
Ecclesiae non sunt sine macuia and ^uga perfidiae.
for the marks of the true Church, saying with us, That pure doctrine declares
a pure Church: and so the Churches which Marcion, Valentinus, Ebion and
Manicheus and other heretics gather, are not true Churches.

Chrysostom. in Math. 16. hom. 5. 5.
Chrysostom, If the ports of hell prevail not against the Church, far less
shall they prevail against me: therefore thou should not be troubled (Peter)
when thou hear that I shall be crucified. Then by the mind of Chrysostom,
Christ speaks here for the comfort of Peter, as a sound believer, and not as an
external visible member of a congregation, as says Mr. H. And see Chrysostom.
ibid.
here a fisherman is made Pastor and Head of the whole Church. Then it could
not have been the mind of Chrysostom, that such a headship (whatever it was, or
whether peculiar to Peter or no, is another question) was given to the people.
Chrysostom. Mat. 18.
Chrysostom expounds, tell the Church, tell the Rulers. Chrysostom. lab. 20.
homil. 85. Quemadmodu^ enim Rex praefectos mittens, ut in carcerem reos
intrudant, and ut liberent, potestatem praebet, ita Jesus Discipulos dimittens,
hac munit authoritate.
Chrysostom, As a King sending Judges, gives them power to cast guilty men in
prison, and to deliver them; so sends Christ his Disciples, and arms them with
authority. Will any dream that Chrysostom judges that Christ gave this power
to the people?

Chrysostom. in Act. c. 6. homil. 14.
Chrysostom says, the Apostles take to themselves to determine the number of
the Deacons, and to ordain them; but they give the election of the men to the
people, lest the Apostles should seem partial, and to favor men. Mr. H. says
the contrary.

Valiant Athanasius unum esse Christum, orat. page 520. tom. 1. (...), etc.
(...).
Athanasius makes the Church builded upon a Rock, to be a strong, an unshaken
promise; and that the Church is an inseparable thing, although hell it self
were moved, and these that are in hell, and the Princes of darkness should
rage: Sure this great Witness never meant any such invincible promise to an
external visible congregation, and its members Judas and Simon Magus. Peter
himself, who received the heavenly Keys, sinned (says Athanas. tom. 1. contra
omnes haereses, p. 853.
Athanasius.)

Hilarious Com. in Mat. can. 16. page 296.
Hilarious commends the Rock which breaks the ports of Hell Hilarious com. in
Mat. can. page 301. immobile severitatis Apostolelicae judicium praemisit, etc.
hi^ Apostolicae condition sententiae in coelis quoque aut soluti sunaut
ligati. Clemens ad Corinth. (...). Scriptum aliud est impletum, edit, bibit,
dilatatus est and incrassatus, and recalcit avit, hinc aemulatio, invidia,
contentio, seditio, persecutio, commotio, bellum, captivitas. Clem. p. 53.
(...). Clem. page 54, 55. (...).
and says that men are loosed or bound in Heaven, by condition of the Apostles
sentence: then does he not think it the sentence of the people. Let the learned
judge of the ancient writings of Clemens: that Epistle of his to the
Corinthians, read sometimes in the ancient Church, will have Mr. Hookers
visible converts only Church-matter, though he writ to them as the true Church,
(...): Yet he writes of a sad change of their profession, such as was in
Israel, when they made defection to Idolatry, (...). It were hard to say such a
company are all visible converts.

2. Clemens seems to deny to the people power of commanding, and to say that
the preachers ordained Bishops and Deacons, (...).

Cyrillus Alexandrinus upon these words, I will give thee the Keyes] he gifted
universally all the Apostles with power over unclean spirits: then neither the
one power nor the other gave he to the people. Cyril. Alexan. in Isa. l. 5.
page 393. and Cyrillus tom. 2, dialog de Trinitat. l. 4. page 278. Peter is so
called from his most firm and unshaken faith, in qua Ecclesia Christi ita
fundata ac firmatt ess^t, ut non laberetur and esser expugnabilis inferorum
portis, aeter^um manens: on which the Church is built, that it cannot fail, but
remains for ever, cannot be overcome by the ports of hell. Cyrillus well knew
single congregations are not invincible; and he speaks of such a saving faith,
as Magus cannot have, it came from the Father, teaching ex ineffabili
eruditione superna, etc. See what Apostolic dignity he gave to them, which he
gave not to the people. Cyrill. in Joan. l. 12. c. 56. page 699, 700. Cyrill.
on Isa. 5. c. 60 page 383.

August. tom. 10. Dom. 11 post Epiphan. sect. 2 page. 235. Tertius modus est,
quomodo totus Christus secundum Ecclesiam, id est, caput and corpus
praedicetur^ etenim caput and corpus unus Christus, non quia sine corpore non
est integer, sed quia and nobiscum integer esse dignatus est -- membra Christi
and corpus sumus omnes simul: non qui hoc loco sumus tantum, fed and per
universam terram: nee qui tantum hoc tempore, sed qui dicam ex Abel^sto usque
in finem seculi, quandiu generant and generantur hominis.

It were needless to prove a visible integral catholic Church all the world
over, not in Asia only from Augustine.

2. Or to prove a mixture of tares and wheat, of good and bad in the visible
Church; and that they are not visible converts that are members of the visible
Church.

3. How far in the communion of the Church and of Sacraments mali maculent and
contaminent bonos, see August-cont. Lib. 2. contra Epist. Parm. c. 3. non obest
palea frumen^^s.
Epist. Parmen. Mr. H. devises a way for this: Its referred to a man's free
choice, without any compulsion of any, to what congregation he shall join
himself or not: and though the doctrine and ordinances be most pure, yet he may
keep within himself the causes of his not joining, thinking such are profane,
and so there is little or nothing of Christ's presence in this Church. But the
formal cause of joining to a Church in which one should Aug. contr. Ep.
Parmenia l. 2. c. 7. the Priests should be holy that minister. Aug. resp.
Dicant mihi, cui sancto secundum salutem spirituale^ obsuerit, vel in
sacerdotibus, vel inter populum coustituto, malus aut maculatus sacerdos? ubi
erat Moses and Aaron, ibi murmuratores sacrilegi, quos Deus a facie sua semper
perdere minabatus; ubi erat Caiaphas erant and caeteri tales, ibi Zacharias,
ibi Simeon and caeteri boni.
reside, is not the holiness of members, but the soundness and purity of the
Ordinances; and if the Gospel be there, he is obliged to profess it, as he is
to confess, and not deny Christ before men. 2. If any of Israel goodwell in
another city or town, where another Priest shall teach, is it in his choice to
be taught by that Priest or not? or was there no freedom under the Old
Testament, but there is freedom now? Prove this difference from the Word.

4. The Done in that contr. P^. l. 11. c. 14. A wicked Minister can no more
convert, quam vivificare quenquam mortuus potest, than a dead man can give
life. So our Brethren, they are not fit to be edifying matter, who shall
destroy the Church.

5. August. lib. Retract. 2. c. 18. Ubicunqus autem in (...) libris commemoravi
Ecclesiam non habentem maculam a^ rugam, non sic accipiendum, quasi jam s^^,
sed qu^ praeparatur ut sis. Augustine owns no Church, that in the esteem of
Saints is without spot or wrinkle.

6. Augustine cond^ the Donatist^, Aug. contr. liter. Petil. Episc. Donatist^,
l. 1. (...) 1. they were broken off from the catholic Church, ab or bis (...)
sancta communiono; that was, sure, no congregation, for they set up
congregations of their own: but they said, With themselves only was the true
Church.

7. Petilianus said, What has righteousness to do with unrighteousness?
Augustine says, Its not righteousness taking August. contr. liter. Petil. l.
2. c. 6.
part with unrighteousness, Si Judas and Petru^ paritor sacramenta communi^.

8. Petilianus applied the Scriptures that are spoken of real August. contr.
liter. Petil. l. 11. c. 4. and 44. and 45. and 46. Non enim (c. 46.) verba ista
etia^ ad Simon. Magum pertinent, qui tame^ eundem sanctum baptismum suscepit,
non sunt haec verba zizaniorum -- Non sunt verba paleae, sed tritici, quamvis
eadem pluvia simul nutriantur.
Saints, as Psalm. 1. Blessed is the man; and Psalm. 23. The Lord is my shepherd,
he leads me, etc. to their only members of separated Churches. So do our
Brethreu. Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker. So Mr. Robinson. Augustine answers, These
words belong not to baptized Simon Magus -- They are not the words of the
tares, of the chaff, but of the wheat.

9. Petilian said, the Catholics admitted all to be just, and members of the
Church qui verba legis noverunt, that knew words of Scripture; and Satan knew
Scripture: The same Mr. H. objects to us. See Aug. Aug. contr. liter. Petil. l.
11. c. 49.


10. The question between us and the Donatists is, Where is this Body (visible,
for it were madness to think the question was touching the invisible Church,
where it is) Where the Church is? What then shall we do? shall we seek it in
our words, or in the words of her Head the Lord Jesus? See Aug. de unit.
Eccles. l. c. 1. and 2.
August. Its known Augustine acknowledges in all these Writings a Catholic
Church from Sea to Sea, to which men should join themselves as to the visible
society of Christ.

11. Our Brethren will have none to be baptized, except they be baptized into a
particular congregation. And Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 5. Ne baptismus vel extra
Ecclesiam ire credatur, vel qui extra datus fuerit, acceptetur.
Aug. condemns the Donatists, who will have it no baptism which is administered
without the Church.

12. Our Brethren will have so many conditions of the visible Church.

1. That the matter be fit, visible Saints. 2. That the form be a Church
covenant. 3. That they meet in one place, etc. Augustine Aug. de unit. Eccles.
c. 6. and 7. Quid in prophetis qua^ multa, and quam manifesta sunt testimonia
ecclesiae per omnes Gentes toto orb terrarum diffusae? Cap. 5. Quare (O
Donatistae) vos irritum facitis testamentum Dei, dicendo, nec in omnibus
Gentibus completum esse, and periisse jam de Gentibus, in quibus erat semen
Abrahae?
following the Word, says, All of Jews and Gentiles in covenant are the
visible Church.
13. This or that congregation or believer may fall off the Rock, defecit ex
omnibus Gentibus Christiana Religio, excepta part Donati, except some
following Donatus, and some in America, aut alibi. See Aug. August. de unit.
Eccles. c. 9.


14. They who (says Aug. de unit. Eccles. c. 10.
Augustine) teach, That the Church which was to take its beginning at
Jerusalem, is not that visible City, but by a figure is the whole Church that
is in heaven and earth, may say that also is spoken by a figure, It behoved
Christ to die, and to rise the third day. Then Augustine thinks the Church of
Jews and Gentiles all the world over to be one visible City, against the
Donatists and our Brethren.

Catholics (as August Aug. collat. cum Donatist. 3. dia. c. 10. p. 213.
teaches) said, that it was the mind of Cyprian, that the tares were in the
Church, not lurking, but seen: to which the Donatists durst answer nothing,
they were so moved with the authority of Cyprian.

Cyprian Cypr. Epist. 73. p. 220.
clearly says, the Lord gave first to Peter, upon whom he built his Church
(nor did he then build the Church upon the confessing Church) power to bind
and loose -- as also he says, after the Resurrection, to the Apostles, As my
Father sent me, so send I you. To Cyprian then one place in Ioh. 20. expounds
Matthew 16. Now Cyprian never thought that Christ sent the people as the Father
sent him: And Cyprian Cypr. 75. 239, 240.
soli Petro dixit, Quaecunque ligaver^s -- Quando in solos Apostolos insu^^^vit
Christus dicens, accipite Spiritum Sanctum: si eujus remiseritis p^ocata Cypr.
Magno filio, Epist. 76. p. 246.
Cyprian proves, that the Church is one, and Baptism one; What talk they then
of multiplied visible congregations, and multiplied Baptisms? And see Cypr. 3.
de unit. Eccles. p. 296, 297.
Cyprian, Et quamvis Apostolis omnibus post resurrectionem dicat, Sicut ^ifit
me pater, etc. tamen ut unitatem manifestaret, unam Cathedram (Petri)
constituit, etc. Cypr. Lapsis, Epist. 27. p. 62.
Cyprian expounding Matthew. 16. 18. And I say to thee, Thou ^^t Peter, etc. the
Church is founded upon the Bishops, and every act of the Church by these
overseers is guided; and therefore the lapsi should not have peace, but by
satisfying Church Discipline.

FINIS.

