A DISCOURSE OF THE Use of Reason IN Matters of Religion: Showing, That
CHRISTIANITY Contains nothing Repugnant to RIGHT REASON; Against ENTHUSIASTS
and DEISTS.

Written in Latin by the Reverend Dr. RVST, late Lord Bishop of Dromore in
Ireland: AND Translated into English, with Annotations upon it, By HEN.
HALLYWELL.

LONDON: Printed by Hen. Hills, Jun for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE Reverend and profoundly Learned Dr. Henry More, Fellow of
Christ's-Colledge in Cambridge.
Honored Sir,
THat I presume to entitle this Discourse, with its affixed Annotations to your
Great Name, proceeds from a real sense, that it is but your just due, who have
merited so much of the Learned World, and whose Labors and Pains to advance
all useful Knowledge have been so indefatigable; more especially in rendering
the Christian Doctrine in all its Parts such as it ought to be, that is,
Rational and Unexceptionable, bringing the Glories both of Greek and Barbarick,
and whatever other piece of Ancient Wisdom was ever esteemed, to adorn and
beautify the new Jerusalem: and partly because you were an intimate Friend of
the Reverend Author, whose Great Soul could not take up with little and
dwindling Conceits, but strove to enlarge his own Mind with noble and
important Truths, and became a Happy Instrument in promoting the same generous
Temper in others. And now, Sir, give me leave, among the other Motives which
persuaded me to this Address, to add this as none of the least, that I may
testify to the World to be what I really am,

An humble Honourer of your Virtues, HEN. HALLYWELL.

The PREFACE to the READER.
READER,
THat I may do right to that Great and Excellent Person the Author of this
Discourse I have adventured to publish, and likewise obviate all Cavils and
Mistakes which freakish Wits may make upon the Account of giving a Reason of
our Faith, it will be needful to suggest something by way of Preface; as

1. That this Discourse is principally levelled (as is intimated by the Reverend
Author himself) against Enthusiasts and Deists: The one pretending to immediate
Inspiration, and so taking the various Impulses of their own Private Spirits as
the sole Criterium to know and discern the Will of God, though they be never so
extravagant and Contrary to the common Reason of Mankind: And the other
pleading only for a Natural Religion in opposition to any Particular Mode or
Way of Divine Revelation; And hence though they profess to acknowledge a God
and Providence, yet have withal a mean and low esteem of the Scriptures and
Christianity, as if the Christian Religion were a thing that could not well be
Apologized for, nor any fair and rational Account given of it. Wherefore Theism
being so opposite to Christian Religion as Christian, and the Natural Current
of Enthusiasm falling at last into downright Atheism, it became necessary to
Assert a Modest and Discrcet use of Reason in Things of Religion, and to show
that the Christian Religion will bear the strictest and severest Trial of Right
and unprejudiced Reason.

2 ly. That our Learned Author had no Intent or Design to abet or countenance
Capricio's of such pert persons as think themselves obliged to believe and
profess nothing more then they can maintain by their own solitary Reason
applying it self to the Scriptures. Which Presumption what strange work it has
made in the World is evident from the Socinians and other Sectarists, who upon
this very Ground are really bewildred in their Speculations of Things, and
under Pretense of Reason have obtruded their own Fancies upon the World, and
vented such crude and indigested Notions as are not only inconsistent with the
clear Current of Scripture, but contrary to the sense of the best and purest
Antiquity.

Wherefore (3 ly.) according to the intention and meaning of the Author in this
Discourse, the Authority of the Primitive Church before the Times of Apostasy,
and of Reformed Churches in such Things wherein they generally agree with the
Primitive times wherein the Church was Symmetral, is to be taken in as one
solid Reason of our Faith and Belief. For the Spirit of Prophecy, which is the
Testimony of Jesus, having so clearly predicted the Times of the Apostasy of
the Church, it is manifest that the Authority and Profession of the Ancient
Church while it was Symmetral and Apostolical ought to be had in the greatest
Esteem and Veneration, and stand as a light whereby to steer ^afe from those
dangerous Rocks of Errors upon which they that have neglected this and ventured
wholly to their own Reason have split themselves. Nor is the Authority of our
own Church to be less regarded; for the being with the rest of Reformed
Christendom so plainly indigitated and pointed at by the Rising of the
Witnesses in that Divine Book of the Apocalypse, immediately upon which follows
that joyful Acclamation in Heaven, The Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ, it cannot be but a mighty Confirmation and
strengthening to any Man's Faith to see so clear a Testimony and Approbation of
that Church whereof he is a Member given by the Spirit of Prophecy, that it is
really emerged and risen into the state and condition of the Church when it was
Symmetral and Apostolical. And this will further appear to be of huge
Consequence to private men, and of but mean Capacity in the dicussing of
Things. For they being neither Philosophers, nor guiding themselves by that
Synosura of the Unapostatized Church, nor of our own Church reformed into the
Condition of the Church while it continued Symmetral, if they be pert and
confident, or follow such pert and confident Guides into what Errors may they
not run! Wherefore here such of the Populacy will find a solid and sure Rule
for their safe conduct and guidance in rendering an Account or Reason of their
Faith. These things I have hinted as well to prevent all sinister
Interpretations of the Sense of that Pious and Learned Prelate now with God, as
to free my self from all Suspicion in my Annotations of setting up Private
Reason against the Authority of the Ancient and Unapostatized Church, or our
own Church so excellently well tempered and reformed according to the Primitive
Pattern.

H. H.

1 PET. 3. 15. (...)
NOn me pudet Evangelii Christi, dixit ille magnus Apostolus, Gamaliele
Praeceptore gaudens* omni tum Judaica tum Graeca Doctrina instructissimus;
Adeoque Religione Christiana undique oppressa and despicatui habita, Judaeis
scandalo, Graecis ludibrio, nihilominus spreta ignominia, cruce contempta,
Paratus sum (inquit) Vobis qui Romae estis, apud egregios Urbis istius, non
Armorum magis quam Artium Magistrae, Philosophos and Oratores, Evangelium
praedicare. Quippe etiamsi non defuere sibimet de sua sapientia magnifice
plaudentes, ^aecitatis interea and Ignorantiae tenebris obducti, qui Doctrinam
Evangelicam stultitiae insimulant and deridendam exhibent: Veruntamen si quis,
seposito omni inordinato affectu and praejudicata Opinione, rem ut decet,
sincero and incorrupto Judicio aestimaverit, compertum habebit Religionem
Christianam Potentiam esse and sapientiam Dei, rationi apprime concinentem,
omni fide Dignissimam.

Quemadmodum vero nobis Exemplo praeivit Insignis ille Doctor Gentium, ita
pariter Apostolus Circumcisionis verbis modo*lectis hortatur, Paratisemper
sitis ad satisfactionem omni poscenti vos Rationem de ea quoe in vobis est spe:
i. e. Parati estote causam reddere cur sitis Christiani: Atque in hanc
sententiam vox (...) saepius occurrit in Actis and Scriptis Paulinis: Act. 22.
1. Phil. 1. 7. and 17. 2 Timothy 4. 16. Per (...) intelligo Doctrinam Evangelicam,
quo sensu idem Vocabulum usurpatum legimus, Act. 26. 7. In re Religionis
intervenit usus Rationis.
Ita comparata est Religio Christiana ut de ea Ratio reddi possit.
Paratum esse oportet fidei suae rationem reponere quisquis Evangelio nomen
dederit.


Ea sunt quae ex hoc loco observanda veniunt. In Religione eligenda non vacare
prorsus Rationem, and ejusmodi esse Religionem Christianam, quae nihil
contineat Rectae Rationi adversum, contra Enthusiastas and Deistas praesenti
disquisitione demonstrandum in me recipio.

Per Rationem non Intelligo Superbiae, Avaritiae, Cupidinis, Irae aut alterius
cujusl^bet pravi affectus dictamina: Haec nimirum ea est Carnis sapientia, Deo
nec minus verae Rationi inimica: Hi sunt illi (...) qui evertendi sunt, 2 Cor.
10. 4, 5. Hoc illud (...) quod in Captivitatem redigendum est in obedientiam
Christi; nimirum Ratiocinationes and discursus isti qui Carni and Cupiditatibus
nostris inserviunt. Hic est ille (...) qui non capit eaqu^ sunt spiritus Dei;
stultitia enim ipsi sunt, (...) ^ Cor. 2. 14.
Is enim est homo Animalis qui sensu and Appetitu ducitur. (...) enim (ut satis
norunt qui veterum scripta vel parum delibarunt) est ea Animae facultas quae
Corpori adaptatur. Qui vero talis est spiritui Dei and Doctrinae Evangelicae
perpetuo adversatur; and quae in^bi dicta sunt mera st^ltitia videntur, neque
ea scrie * potest, quia spiritualiter, h. e. mente humili, compositis
affectibus, sereno lumine, puro, internoque sensu discernuntur.

Haec est illa sapientia superbia and fastu tumida, apud quam Verbum Crucis pro
stultitia habetur. Obscura enim Christi Vita and probrosa Mors ridiculo semper
1 Cor. 1. 18.
erat Animo (ut videtur) sublimioribus Notionibus elato; Haec denique est illa
(...) pravis affectibus aut vana scientiae opinione inebriatorum: Quam tamen
Deus and quilibet vir sapiens summam reputat stultitiam. Hujusmodi (...) and
Ratiocinationes and Sapientia non sunt rectae Rationis foetus, sed-mentis
Cupiditatibus occaecatae fallaciae and Paralogismi.

Per rectam itaque Rationem intelligo facultatem Animae humanae insitam, qua
dignoscat rations, mutuasque affectiones rerum, unumque ex alio arguit and
concludit. Atque Rationi sic Intellectae aio Religionem Christianam non
adversari.

Duo sunt qui huc pertinent usitati loquendi modi; Videlicet aliquid posse esse
vel supra vel contra Rationem.

At vero ut quod res est dicamus, quicquid nobis vel credendum proponitur ne
quidem supra Rationem esse debet, ni verba ista in eam sententiam accipienda
sint, quod sit altius and a sensu communi remotius quam ut ab Intellectu
adinveniri possit. Equidem Articuli quidam Fidei dici possunt esse supra
Rationem quoad rei credendae modos quosdam non revelatos: Ita v. g. superat vim
Rationis nosse exact modum Resurrectionis and Glorificationis nostrae, aut
quaenam illae sint futuri se^uli Voluptates and Gaudia, aut quomodo Divinae
Hypostases sint Unus Deus; aut Divina and Humana natura sint Unus Christus: sed
de his rebus neque expressa est revelatio nec explicita requiritur fides: Et
haec obscuritas non parum con^ert ad Reverentiam conciliandam Christianae
Religioni.

At nihil est quod explicit credendum proponitur quod Rationis Captum, ita ut
de eo ne conceptus quidem formari possit, ex^edat. Nam fides consistit in
Assensu; Assensus sequitur Judicium; Judicium nu^lum esse potest de re ignota
and non intellecta. Ergo quod omnem Intelligentiam excedit, omnem etiam excedit
fidem. Et qui sibi persuadere conatur quod credat rem non Intellectam, nescit
quid credit, sed vocabulis quibusdam apt dispositis and grande quiddam
sonantibus, quibus tamen nullus in mente respondet Conceptus, sibimet misere
imponit, dumque Mysterio cuidam non Intellecto fidem adhibere somniat, meras
consectatur Verborum Umbras, quibus velis subductis, fides sua sensusque omnis
evanuit.

Religionem vero Christianam nihil continere rectae Rationi repugnans, simulque
usum intervenire Rationis in Religionis negotio sequentibus Argumentis probatum
dabo.

1. Primo, Deum quicquam credendum proponere, quod rectae Rationi contradicat,
aliquid ex his quatuor Absurdis (nec cogitanti mihi occurrit quintum)
necessario infert, aut Deum posse decipi, aut posse decipere, aut Rations and
Affectiones rerum non esse aeternas and Immutabiles, aut denique facultates
humanas, esse errori obnoxias, cum maxim claram and distinctam habent de
objectis suis perceptionem. Horum Primum and secundum repugnant Notioni and
Ideae quam de Deo mentibus nostris concepimus.

Tertium quod attinet, est quidem non Nemo qui Rations Rerum contingentes
statuit and ad Arbitrium Mutabiles, Blasphemiamque, Mendacium, Perjurium,
ipsumque adeo Divinae Majestatis odium posse subire rationem Virtutum and
cultus Deo grati. At Deus bone! quam temeraria quam detestanda Dogmata! aut
aeterno silentio obruenda aut non sine horrore nominanda. Percurre Vetera
Concilia, nullam invenies haeresin damnandam prius, aut omni magis dignam
Anathemate. Ipsius Inferni Abyssus si panderentur Viscera, nihil evomere
possunt magis abominandum, aut blasphemum magis. Enimvero sapientia,
Immutabilitate, Bonitate reliquisque quas ei attribuimus perfectionibus Deum
spoliat; Omnis Discursus Principia and Fundamenta evertit; Omnia etiam
Contradictoria probabilia reddit; Omnem in Promissis Divinis fiduciam destruit;
Omnemque spem and expectationem futurae felicitatis profligat: quas omnes
Consequentias ex ho^ Principio naturaliter oriri alias probavimus, and cuilibet
attentius consideranti facile patebit.

Quartum vero, Quod Deus nobisejusmodi insereret facultates quae tum falsae
esse possint, cum clarissime and distinctissime objecta sua per^ipiant,
adversatur Bonitati and Veracitati Divinae. Praeterea fieri non potest ut Deus
quicquam credendum revelet, nisi hoc prius jacto fundamento, facultatibus
nostris adhibendam esse fidem. Nihil enim nobis a Deo proponi potest nisi sit
conform alicui facultati: At si facultas ista cum maxim clare and distinct
percipit Objectum suum, non est a Deceptione immunis, quomodo nobis innotescet
errorem hunc non cadere in praesens id quodcunque sit negotium, praesertim si
Ratio facultatum nostrarum Princeps clare and distinct intelligat illud esse
falsum quod nobis ofsertur sub specie Divinae Revelationis? Haec enim Revelatio
accipienda est aut ab Auditu aut alio aliquo sensu externo, aut denique ab
interna Imaginatione. At number non potiori jure existimanda erit illusio si
adversetur clarae and evidenti Rationi, quam quod Ratio nostra quae in Ducem
and Directricem a Deo collata est deciperetur in maxim claro and distincto
Rerum Conceptu? Nam si abjiciamus Rationem, nulla alia facultas ductrix reliqua
est praeter sensum Externum ejusque inclinationes, and stultam levemque
Phantasiam infinitis Deceptionibus obnoxiam. Quapropter Ratione valere jussa,
annon nosmet exponimus illusioni cujuslibet spiritus circulatorii qui
praestigiis suis Divinam simulaverit Virtutem? Quamobrem, si Moses legem suam
constituit tanquam lapidem lydium quo probaretur quicunque se jactitaret
Prophetam, monens populum suum, quod si quis signa aut miracula ederet non
tamen ei auscultandum esse, si quid doceret legi isti adversum quam ipsis a Deo
tradiderat: An non nos pariter decet ad Legem Naturae and Rectae Rationis quae
stylo Adamantino mentibus nostris inscripta est tanquam ad Normam and Regulam
minime fallacem revocare omnes quicunque Divinam Authoritatem obtenderint?
(Obiter moneo sermonem esse de Ratione Incorrupta, malis affectibus libera and
spiritus sancti lumine collustrata) Hujus autem Ducis auspicio destituti, fieri
potest ut confidentes quidem, and obstinate persuasi, at nullatenus certi simus
nos unquam via recta incedere. Nec refert dixisse Rationem posse quidem
judicium far in rebus humanis, nequaquam tamen in Divinis. Etsi enim id verum
sit de Ratione malis Passionibus occaecata, and omnino locum teneat in us rebus
quae objecta sunt potius gustus and sensus interni quam Rationis; At secus se
res habet ubi solius Intellectus assensus requiritur. Quicquid enim exhibetur
explicit credendum, de eo primum formandus est conceptus: de quocunque autem
conceptum formamus, Ratio aut detegit terminorum quibus constat Harmoniam,
reique ipsius cum communi aliqua Notione consensum; atque ideo pronunciat eam
esse veram: aut deprehendit Terminos esse contradictorios and repugnantes,
remque innato alicui Principio e Diametro oppositam, atque ita judicat eam esse
falsam: Aut cernit Terminos esse partim concordes, partim Dissonos, aut nullam
omnino ad invicem Relationem habere: atque hinc affirmat rem aut probabilem aut
possibilem. Et si quod ingens Miraculum edatur ad confirmandam alteram sive
probabilitatis sive possibilitatis partem, tum demum Ratio calculum suum
adjiciet, fidem esse adhibendam. V. g. Fingamus quod jam factum est, quendam
Maria ac Terras ambientem, huic negotio intentum ut doceat atque instruat
humanum Genus in suo erga Deum atque homines officio, aeternam Beatitudinem sub
condition obedientiae pollicentem, ipso interim degente vitam inoffensam atque
innocentissimam; and simul seipsum praedicante tanquam Legislatorem a Deo
missum, and quod omnis Potestas cum in Terris tum etiam in Coelis ei delata
fit, and quod ipsius interventu omnes preces and gratiarum actiones sunt Deo
offerendae: Nihil hic habetur contradictorium, aut Naturae Principiis
repugnans. Facile tamen suspicatur Ratio subesse aliquam superbiam and Divini
Nominis and cultus affectationem. At vero si quod nude spectatum possibile
videtur, fuerit Divina Potentia consignatum, hujus Doctrinae Authore hujusmodi
miracula edente, qualia nemo hactenus vidit Mortalium, Ratio extemplo in eam
sententiam ibit, rem esse admodum credibilem: Atqui si hic homo docuisset
aliquid Rectae Rationis Dictamini adversum, si introduxisset Doctrinam impiam
and profanam, aut effiaenem vivendi licentiam, and iisdem miraculis fidem
extorquere sategisset, se a Deo missum ut hujusmo^i nobis persuaderet, Ratio
nostra suggessis^t ilico fuisse eum Impostorem and Deceptorem: quoniam nihil
Legi Naturae aut Rectae Rationi contrarium a Deo aut quoquam Divinam
Authoritatem obtinente promulgari potest. Et licet urgeri possit esse contra
Veracitatem Divinam, testimonium praebere Mendacio, and proinde quicquid
innititur Miraculorum fide (cum haec fere unica sint voluntatis Dei externa
indicia) necesse videri a Deo originem suam deducat, nihilominus quia nequeo
certo scire, number non haec fiant in tentationem, aut alium aliquem finem, mihi
quidem ignotum, infinitae tamen sapientiae consentaneum, potius diffiderem huic
Ratiocinationi, quam hoc Argumento motus, quicquam admitterem tanquam coelitus
profectum, quod Naturae Principiis evidenter adversatur.

2. Secundum Argumentum. Ita comparata est Hominis Natura, ut omnino fieri non
possit, ut rei alicui Assensum praeberet absque ductu Rationis. Quod ut clarius
pateat mutuanda sunt quaedam praesenti Instituto accommodata a magno illo
Barone insignis istius libelli de veritate Authore. Ex illius ita que sententia
quatuor sunt Facultates quibus in rerum Notitiam pervenimus: Instinctus
Naturalis, sive Facultas Notionum communium Discretrix; Sensus Internus, Sensus
Externus and Discursus.

De quibus magnum illud Effatum, pluris certe faciendum quam integra alia
Volumina de Anima ejusque Facultatibus conscripta; Quod neque per instinctum
naturalem, sensum internum, sensum externum, neque discursum innotescit,
tanquam verum proprie dictum, nullo pacto probari potest. At vero cum hae
quatuor sint facultates, and quicquid credendum proponitur harum alicui
conform esse necesse sit, dictat Ratio Instinctui Naturali, Sensui Interno,
Sensui Externo, singulis rite dispositis adhibendam esse fidem. Ipsa vero (quod
ejus est munus) praedictis facultatibus in auxilium vocatis, principiis primis
and sua luce claris subnixa, advocat discursus, conclusiones deducit. Naturali
Instinctui semper praebenda est fides: sensus cum externus tum internus
aliquando falli potest; and proinde aliquando credendus est, aliquando non
item; atque penes solam rationem est hujus discriminis judicium. Nulla enim
alia facultas reliqua est cui hoc muneris deferatur; Ergo nulli reiassentiri
potest men's humana quin facem praeferre debeat Recta Ratio, vel saltem aliqua
ejus Umbra. Ergo fieri non potest ut Religio Christiana, quae nobis credenda
proponitur, assensum cogat contra nitente Recta Ratione.

At dum respiro paulisper, Enthusiastas audio iteratis vicibus spiritum
oggerentes; and nemo fere est quin spiritum intus testante obtenderit, ne ei
minus quam reliquis Deus favere videatur. Si quaeratur unde dignoscant spiritus
testimonium, respondent, perinde ac solis splendorem, ex proprio lumine. Sed
instamus porro, Testimonium quod spiritus sibimet ipsi perhibet, estne valida
and obstinata persuasio, aut exultatio and ecstasis gaudii, aut zelus quidam
sive fervor animi, an denique Dignitatis and Excellentiae earum rerum quae
revelantur, clara and sapida persuasio? Postremum si dicatur, non abhorret a
modo dictis. Reliqua vero Capita quod attinet, infinitus pene est eorum numerus
qui se Vitrum, Butyrum, Canem, Felem, Regem, Imperatorem, Papam, Paracletum*
Messiam, ultimum maximumque Prophetam, vivorum and mortuorum Judicem, aut
denique Deum ipsum haud leviori fundamento, pertinaciter asseverarunt. Quorum
plerosque praeter modum gaudio perfusos, and Divino (ut videbatur) fervore
accensos legimus. Quae tamen omnia (tam long aberant ab afflatu Divini
Spiritus) Maniae erant and Melancholiae symptomata: neque originem suam
debebant nobiliori principio, quam sanguini and spiritibus turbatis, and quae
prae caeteris Numen aliquod ostentare videtur, atrae bili. Ea quippe, ut nos
docet Aristoteles, (...) efficit (...)

Quamobrem haud satis a nobis cautum fuerit, si subitam nimis fidem adhibeamus
persuasioni obfirmatae, aut validae imaginationi, sive exultationi sive zelo
admistae; praecipue vero quando sensus noster internus adeo sit Errori
obnoxious, aliarum facultatum suffragia prius petenda, quibus renuentibus,
saltem (...) oportet and sustinere ab assensu. Verum ne quid derogare videar
spiritui sancto, opportune hic loci monendum censeo, quam nulli sumus, quam
nihil possumus ejus open destituti, adeo ut nemo quisquam sit, qui solis naturae
viribus semet ad Christum recipit, nisi superveniat Divini Auxilii gratia. Quod
ut abunde testatum facit S. Scriptura, ita neque minus suffragatur Ratio. Illud
utique certissimum est effatum, contra sensum and experientiam frustra
argumentis contendi. Etiamsi igitur quispiam (quod de Zenone fertur) non dari
motum probare conetur, aut quantitatem, materiam, tempus extra rerum naturam
subtili disputatione eliminare sategerit, nunquam tamen e^ecerit, ut quisquam,
oculis manibusque omnem prorsus fidem deroget. Eodem igitur jure cum expertum
unicuique sit sensus suos grata admodum voluptate ab externis hujusce mundi
objectis perfundi, neque tamen rebus altioris and nobilioris Naturae perinde
affici: quantumcunque severioris Rationis monitis renitatur, animumque ab istis
tanquam infra suam dignitatem positis conetur revocare; nihilo tamen magis
illum inde dimovebit, quam Diogenem Zenonis argumenta. Quinetiam quamdiu
validus ille vegetusque externarum voluptatum gustus animum abduxerit, non
vacat susurranti intus monitori aures adhibere: vel forte os illi nullo negotio
obturare dabitur, aut in suas parts pellicere; sensu nempe sive externo sive
interno ducimur, non inerti and insipida ratione, quae de spiritualis vitae
deliciis perinde scit disserere, ac caecus de coloribus. Et sane operam omnino
lusurus est, qui id agit ut caecum instruat, quam jucunda res sit solemn
intueri, and lucis usuram capere, and variegatis inde objectis oblectari: solus
oculus hisce demonstrandis ita par est, ut Animus inde afficiatur. Nunquam
omnigenae voluptatis mancipium eo perduxeris, ut in Mathematicae
demonstrationis ratione intelligenda, majus aliquod oblectamentum subesse
existimet, quam Bacchi aut Veneris ludo. Nempe si animi sui sententiam palam
facere non detrectarent, compertum facile esset totius humani Generis Rationem,
instantis sensus Imperio subesse. Adeoque nisi Deus ita Animos nostros
affecerit, ut amaritudinem quandam in terrenis hisce voluptatibus
persentiscamus, and rerum coelestium dulcedinem praelibemus, fieri non potest,
ut vel ab istis ablactemur, vel haec admodum appetamus. Addo insuper, morigeros
nosmet praebuisse voluntati Patris nostri qui est in Coelis, sola via est
facilis and aperta, quae in Divinarum Revelationum veritatum, sensumque deducat.

Quippe res coelestes haud aliter cognoscuntur, quam gustu interno and ^apido
lumine; quale impertire solet Divina Gratia humilibus and defaecatis animis.
Quin and de via flectentes monere, lumina menti praeferre, fidem corroborare,
efficere ut Argumenta Pietatis alias ad quemlibet levissimae tentationis ventum
difflanda, penitus impressa fixaque animo maneant, haec and similia accepta
serimus eidem Sancto Spiritui. Quae omnia nobis coelitus illabi facile
agnoscimus, utpote divino isti Principio quod Dei in nobis reliquum est
consentanea. Sed si quando huic veritatis Criterio nuncium remittimus, and
Rationem nostram praepotentis phantasiae ductui and imperio subjicimus, valeat
oportet omnis Religio nisi quae sub specie Divini afflatus ab atra bile and
faeculentis sanguinis halitibus inspiretur. Adeoque perinde nobis erit quaevis
Religio: Rationis utique Judicio abdicato, quo Argumento innotescet Religionis
Christianae supra Mahumetismum aut Gentilismum praestantia? Sed ne verborum
ambiguitate laboremus, sciendum est nihil a nobis percipi praeterquam Mentis
nostrae Operationes; proinde Spiritum prout est in nobis Principium
cognoscendi, aut esse sensum internum aut rationem: Hae enim (nisi addere etiam
libet instinctum naturalem) solae sunt Facultates, quae luminis Divini radiis
collustrari possunt; Ut revertamur igitur unde sumus digressi, cum sensus
noster internus adeo lubricus sit and fallax, qui Testimonio ejus
auscultaverit, reclamantibus licet reliquis facultatibus, nae ille homo est
fide nimis incauta and temeraria.

At inquies, concedamus probari quidem hoc Argumento, nihil posse credi sine
Ratione; hinc tamen non constare rem ipsam credendam non posse rationi
adversari; quoniam Deo testanti adhibenda est fides, quamvis maxim sit rationi
contrarium quod credendum proponitur: quia fieri potest ut intellectus humanus
cum maxim videtur ratione uti, hallucinetur. Sed nefas est suspicari Deum
sapientissimum posse falli; aut veracissimus cum sit, velle fallere.

Equidem nihil potuisset dici verius; Deo enim testanti nemo est tam
incredulus, aut sui plenus, quin fidem habeat: At illud in dubium vocatur,
quomodo rem divino testimonio confirmatam dignoscamus? Number ex solis miraculis?
at iis inclaruisse comperies Pythagoram, Apollonium Tyanoeum qui Magica sua
labantem Idololatriam erexit; quem ausi sunt sui temporis homines Christo
opponere, uti constat ex Hieroclis and Philostrati libris in hunc finem
compositis. Magos utriusque Orbis in medium proferre possim, qui omnes
quamplurima operati sunt Naturae vires excedentia, non alia tamen quam Daemonum
Virtute.

Si quis itaque Divinam legationem obtenderit, tria sunt quibus Authoritatem
ejus probari oportet; Miracula, Vitae Sanctitas, and Doctrina Deo digna, humano
generi utilis and accommodata. Quae omnia si affuerint, credendus est a Deo
missus. Nulla utique via jam reliqua est, qua fallacia detegatur. At nullatenus
consonum videtur divinae veracitati and bonitati testimonium far mendacio,
aut hominem in rebus maximi momenti deceptioni exponere nulla diligentia
evitandae. Itaque non solummodo spectanda sunt miracula, sed and vita,
doctrinaque hominis cui fidem facere videntur. Proinde Servator noster
validissimo usus est Argumento adversus Pharisaeos objicientes, eum Daemonia
ejicere virtute Principis Daemonum: Quod scilicet Regnum internis dissidiis
distractum stabiliri nequit; cum itaque ipse Doctrina and operibus suis se
regno Satanae opponeret, fieri non potuit ut Satanae Virtute Daemonia ejiceret.
Itaque ut judicium feramus de Divino Testimonio, Res ipsa consideranda venit
quam attestatur; quae si quid habeat immotis Naturae Principiis adversum,
miracula haec praestigiae Daemonum, non Dei opus credendasunt. Beroeenses
laudati sunt a Spiritu Sancto, (...), tanquam magis ingenui and liberalioris
indolis, quia inquirebant in Pauli and Siloe verba, number quae ab ipsis dicta
sunt ita se haberent. Quidni and nos eadem Commendatio pertingat, si a
quocunque dictata, tanquam legem divinitus acceptam, severissimo examini
subjiciamus?

3. Tertium Argumentum haurimus e Natura Religionis, quam convenit esse
materiam Electionis and Oblectamenti. At fieri non potest ut quis semet
oblectet in eo quod Naturae suae Principiis contradicit. Revera Conclusiones
novisse, etsi nihil contineant rationi dissonum, nisi porro sciamus e quibus
fluant Principiis, parum gratum est intellectui nostro. Sic Mathematico Ingenio
volupe est, non Geometriae problemata, tanquam certissimae Veritatis efsata
memoriter tenere, sed eorum demonstrationes longa Propositionum serie deductas
comprehendisse animo. Maxim itaque divinae Bonitati consonum videtur, eousque
homini in Evangelio indulfisse, ut eorum cum Ratione Harmoniam comperire
possit, quae ^i credenda proponuntur. In eo praecipue differt genus humanum a
brutis, quod sit Religionis capax. At vero quod maxim homini proprium est and
natural, ut sit facultatibus ejus adversum, omni a Ratione abhorret. Number cui
in mentem venire potest Deum in animo habuisse intellectum humanum
non-percipiendis impedire atque implicare subtilitatibus? Number quid ideo
excellentius quia omnem excedit intelligentiam? Illene putandus est Religionis
capacissimus, qui aut superstitiosus maxim aut oscitanter credulus? Number
exuenda est natura humana, ut imbuamur Religione? Certe insedisse animo vel
leviculam hujusmodi suspicionem, Religionis ludibrium est and opprobrium. Ea
esse debet uniuscujusque de Religione sua existimatio, quod nihil absurdi,
indecori, aut rectae Rationi repugnantis continere credatur: Quantum enim redit
in Religionis dedecus, metuere sibi a Rationis Tribunali? Ea mihi semper
Religio amplectenda visa est, quae a severissima Ratione in judicium vocata,
causam obtineat. Quorsum Benignissimus Deus largitus est nobis Rationis
facultatem, si nefas sit, cum res nostra maxim agitur, eam munere suo fungi?
Aut quaenam alia facultas reliqua est cujus ductu veram Religionem
investigemus? Si Rationis parts deseramus, annon educationi, superstitioni,
aut afflatui cuidam Fanatico, omnis accepta ferenda erit Religio?

At Ratio nostra, inquies, ex quo a Deo defecimus, caligat nimium, ideoque
pares non sumus de rebus Divinis judicium ferendo.

Ergone luce Meridia^ destituti, languidiores solis radii contemptui erunt, and
tenebrae reputandae? Number cui paulo obtusior est acies, omni prorsus lumine
cassus censebitur? Aut oculi claudendi penitus, quia Aquilarum carent
perspicacitate? Verum annon Religio ea est natura quae summam postulet
diligentiam and curam, utpote quae res sit maximi momenti, in cujus
disquisitione errasse summum est infortunium? Et quem in finem datae sunt
Facultates, si nulli esse possunt adjumento, cum iis maxim est opus? Number quis
alius nostro loco judicium feret? Number alterius intellectus meam diriget
voluntatem? Number alienis oculis videbo? Aut alterius cujuspiam lumine praeeunte
ambulabo? Number affectus inordinatos argumentis non intellectis edomabo? Number ad
normam Principiorum, quae alius mente concepit, vitam meam disponam? Annon
proprio judicio, intellectu, lumine, haec omnia peragenda sunt? Number vero hoc
fieri potest sine usu Rationis? Quin potius eccujus Facultatis usus est in
delectu Religionis and Principiorum ad quorum exemplar vitam instituendam esse
judicamus, praeterquam solius Rationis? Religio res est liberae and ingenuae
indolis, nemini vim infer patitur, intellectum sola forma and pulchritudine
sua captivat. Qui secus senserit, falso ei crimen impegit, and in Religionis
locum Superstitionem suffecit.

4. Quartum Argumentum desumo ex Natura Rectae Rationis; Unde firmissime
demonstratur fieri non posse, ut quid a Deo revelatum sit ei contrarium.
Delibati enim sunt hominum Animi ex mente Divina; Estque Recta Ratio coelesti
stirpe oriunda, ad increatae sapientiae and intelligentiae imaginem efficta:
Est Radius quidam Intellectualis solis, lucis primigeniae similitudinem
referens. Divina enim sapientia nihil aliud est, quam Idearum rerum
Comprehensio, una cum earum rationibus, affectionibus, mutuisque relationibus,
sive concordiae sive repugnantiae, quae a rerum ipsarum natura immediate
emanant, sicut Relationes posito Fundamento and Termino. Atque hasce
affectiones una cum ipsarummet rerum Ideis, eodem intuitu perlustrat Divinus
Intellectus, earumque ordinem and reciprocationes discernit. Atque hoc quid
aliud est quam Ratio fixa and stabilis, rerum omnium rations nexusque immoto
oculo simul advertens? Hujus vero accurata effigies est Recta Ratio, menti
humanae insita; quae etsi res omnes earumque Rations unico actu retegere and
nosse nequeat, eos tamen successione and per vices evolvit. Harum vero Idearum
and Rationum quotquot simul intuemur, clare and distinct percipimus sive
consensum sive dissonantiam, atque ita unius ex altero sive probationem sive
refutationem instituimus. Proinde Ratio Humana vere imitatur atque exprimit
sapientiam Divinam; hoc solo Discrimine, quod quae illa eodem simplici actu
simul comprehendit, ista operosis deducit consequentiis. Deum itaque quicquam
revelare Rectae Rationi contrarium* perinde cogitatu impium est, ac Deum
mendacem fore, internisque sapientiae (...) conceptibus contradicturum. Recta
enim Ratio and Divina Sapientia idem ferunt de Rebus Judicium; and si quid
secus pronuncietur ab intellectu humano, non id fit Rationis culpa sed
Ignorantiae. Ideoque si quid sub specie Divinae Revelationis propositum videtur
Rationi contradicere, suspicandum est me non satis capere mentem ejus, ideoque
ulteriori indagini insistendum, idque credendum Deum intendisse quod Naturae
Principiis maxim consonum videbitur. Nollem tamen Intellectum Humanum nimium
sibimet arrogare, and quod Captum ejus excedit, audaci facinore continuo
damnare. Quippe si potissima pars eorum quae Divino Testimonio tradita and
consignata sunt, Deo sint digna, and facultatibus nostris consentanea, quoad
reliqua Fidem implicitam adhibere fas est Divinae Revelationi, iisque, etsi a
Ratione abhorrere videantur, nihilominus assensum praebere; saltem juxta
sententiam Spiritus Sancti, etsi quae tandem illa sit, haud dum satis capiamus.

5. Quintum atque ultimum Argumentum a Natura ipsius Christianae Religionis
depromendum duximus. Et primo quoad ejus praecepta, eorum Puritas, Sanctitas;
and tum privata, tum publica, commoditas cuilibet attentius consideranti tam
facile comprobatur, ut opus superfluum aggressurum me sentirem, si eorum cum
Ratione concordiam evincendo tempus contererem. Praesertim cum id jam abunde
satis demonstratum sit a Doctissimo nostro Hammondo, quem hac de re consulatis
velim. Hinc vero necessario sequitur Promissa and Comminationes esse etiam
oppido rationi consona; utpote quae hisce praeceptis muniendis inserviant. Sed
quoad haec tria Religionis Christianae membra, etsi long praecellant, tamen
non plane diversa sunt ab aliis quae olim obtinuerint Religionibus, praesertim
ista Sapientum and Doctorum apud Paganos Philosophorum; qui praecepta moralia
severa and sublimia admodum tradebant, and praemiorum and poenarum post hanc
vitam fidem ostentabant. Adeo ut quicquid dici potest in Priscae Pietatis and
Sapientiae patrocinium, potiori jure vindicaverit sibi Religio Christiana.
Lecta enim S. Scriptura ab ingeniis maxim profanis, and Atheis, con^essionem
expressit, praestantissima in ea continere Virtutis and Pietatis praecepta.

Ideoque potius breviter disserendum ce^eo de Christianismo sub ratione
Religionis determinatae and ab aliis discrepantis, ut hac etiam in part
compareat ejus cum Recta Ratione conformitas.

Primo vero, quid cogitari potest magis rationi accommodum, quam quod Deus
alicui Provinciam delegaret docendi atque instruendi Genus humanum in suo erga
Deum atque invicem Munere fungendo? Degeneres enim Adami Posteri valde ignari
sunt officii sui, (unde per omnia secula notantur ridiculi Superstitionis
ritus) ac proinde indigent Doctore; atque etiam pervicaciter and obstinate
dediti sunt carnis Cupiditatibus, adeoque ejusmodi postulant Legislatorem, qui
Venerationem and Timorem incutiat. Utque Legi^ator jam dictus sit illibatae
atque innocuae Vitae, ita enim and nobis exemplo est, and Doctrinae suae
Authoritatem conciliat: Ut fine semine virili Divini Spiritus Potentia in Utero
Virginis formetur, (...) enim a faece humana, and ordinario Naturae Cursu
segregatus, in majori honor habebitur: Ut intime Uniatur Naturae Divinae, sive
(...), atque ita vere and proprie Deus fiat; sic enim maxima comparatur dictis
Majestas. Nec fieri potest ut* Deus via Naturae Humanae convenientiori
voluntatem suam significet; Nequit enim nobis comparere sine corporeo velamine:
Et quodnam aptius domicilium quam caro nostra? Quidni itaque Deus uteretur
aliquo e nobis, uti Anima Corpore, tanquam Instrumento, quo interveniente
consilium suum declaret? Nihil hic habetur aut Rationi contrarium aut conceptu
difficile.. Cur enim magis vexaret Intellectum conjunctio Deitatis cum Natura
Christi, quam Humanae Animae cum Corpore? Quo enim superioris est Naturae, eo
facilius semet insinuare potuit. Caeterum quamvis Persona haec tam illustris
sit, congruum tamen videtur ^ore, eum quoad Vitam Externam humilis sortis, and
conditionis obscurae, iisdem malis and infirmitatibus, quibus nosmet ipsi,
expositum. Sic enim magis provocamur ad Dei Amorem, and gravissima mala
patienter ferenda, salutis nostrae duce innocentissimo nostri gratia tam multa
passo. Add quod Argumentum sit summae in hoc Servatore fiduciae; Ipse enim
pressionibus absolutus, novit quomodo subveniat afflictis. Porro jure
postulamus certiores nos faciat vitae aeternae and immortalis; in dubia enim
hac de re opinione haerebant Ethnici; quin and Resurrectionis Corporis sine qua
non consistit summa hominis felicitas. Et quam promptus sit Deus ad ignoscendum
peccatoribus credentibus and agentibus Poen^tentiam: Hoc enim facile in dubium
vocamus dum advertimus Peccati Malignitatem, and quam rarescit apud homines
offensae remissio, and quam proni ipsi simus in vindictam. Similiter ut fidem
stabiliat Praemiorum and Poenarum post hanc Vitam; ut illa respicientes
alliciamur ad obedientiam, ab istis vero metuentes deterreamur a peccato. Utque
his omnibus fidem faceret tum miraculis, tum morte sua; Miracula enim maximum
sunt Divinae praesentiae testimonium: Quod vero Seipsum morti tradiderit,
indicio est sincere and sine fuco nobiscum egisse. Praeterea evidentissima
Demonstratio est Divinae erga nos bonitatis, qui unigenito suo filio non
pepercit, ut nostro bono inserviret. Et validissimum Argumentum ad
crucifigendum Carnis Cupiditates, and ad subeundam mortem pro fratribus and
aliorum commodo. Porro quod hac morte sua Sacrificium fiat ob Peccata, quo Deus
se placatum agnoscit, consilium erat infinitae Sapientiae and Bonitatis quo
Animae argumenta Diffidentiae a Sanctitate and Justitia Divina petenti
opportune succurritur, Justitiam Divinam Christi Morte abunde propitiante.
Itidem Resurrectio ejus ex Mortuis admodum Rationi consentit; Omnium enim prius
actorum Certitudinem consignavit; and nostrae Resurrectionis and vitae post
mortem possibilitatem demonstravit. Quod vero suscitatus ad Dextram Dei sedeat,
and omnes Preces and Gratiarum Actiones per ipsius interventum offerendae Deo
sint, and semper apud Deum Causam nostram agat, hoc quoque Rationi consonat;
dum nimirum Deus non solum benevolum erga nos animum notum fecit, sed etiam
Fratrem nostrum ipsimet charissimum, nobis amicissimum, ad Dextram suam posuit,
per quem alacriter and cum fiducia ad Deum accedamus; Christo interea nostri
gratia Deum deprecante, ut quicquid nobis contingit boni, primam suam Originem
pure Deitatis Amori debere agnoscamus. Deinde quod omnis Potestas tum in Terris
tum etiam in Coelis illi commissa and credita sit, quodque sit Dei quasi
Vicarius, Sanctorumque and Angelorum Caput, maxim hoc cedit in nostrum
solatium, quod qui nos tantopere amet, potestate tanta potiatur. Praeterea cum
citra Controversiam ^it esse quandam Politiam and Regimen apud ipsos beatos
sanctos and Angelos, cui potius debetur Principatus, quam Jesu Christo, qui
Deus ipse est Humana Natura Vestitus? Quod vero aliquando Daemones atque
homines vocandi ^int ad tremendum Dei Tribunal, apprime convenit; hujus enim
Cogitatio timorem incutiet audacissimo Peccatori, and Judicii solennitas Deum
vindicabit ab omni Malignitatis crimine, adeo ut sua se culpa and stultitia in
miseriam lapsum ab unuiscujusque Confcientia confessionem extorserit. Quod vero
Christus Judex sedeat, nihil ^ingi potuisset accommodatius; Nam cum Deus
Verendum hoc Judicium exercere nequeat nisi sub specie visibili, quodnam huic
Instituto aptius Instrumentum esse potuit quam ea humana Natura in qua jamdudum
Domicilium suum collocaverat? Denique quod omnibus inimicis subjugatis, Regnum
Patri traderet, neque hoc a Ratione abhorret; Nam cum Integrum ejus Munus
Mediatorium huic fini destinatum sit, ut Creaturae in peccatum lapsae ad Deum
revocentur, and suprema donentur felicitate; hujus sane operis Absolutionem
sequi debet Regni sui Determinatio. Quae tamen non ita intelligenda est, quin
Jesus Christus (...) abinde semper Sanctorum atque Angelorum Princeps, and
Caput permansurus sit. Atque ita singula fere Religionis Christianae Capita
breviter perlustravimus; neque iis diutius immorari per vestram patientiam
licebit.

Quod reliquum est Verbo expediam. Ex dictis liquido constare arbitror, quam
indecorum sit and homine Christiano indignum Religionem suam haurire simul cum
Materno lacte, eamque non ingenuae Rationis Disquisitioni, sed Patriae
institutis, Educationi, Magistrorum Dictatis, and hujus ^arinae Praejudiciis
acceptam far: Adeoque non in very falsique delectu, sed praeconcepta Opinione
pertinaciter tuenda omnes animi vires nervosque intendere. Ea quippe haud fides
dicenda est aut putanda D^o grata, quae Originem suam debet inerti potius
Casui, quam Rei ipsius Evidentiae aut Argumentorum momentis; quinimo post
humilem, piam, attentamque rerum pensitationem, in errorem lapsus, potiori Jure
censendus est, si non laud, saltem Excusatione dignus, quam ipsi vel etiam
Veritati caecus istiusmodi and fortuitus assensus. Neque secus edisserit Sacra
Pagina dum jubemur (...) Denique (ut hortatur Apostolus noster) parati simus ad
respondendum cuilibet, ejus spei, quae in nobis est, Rationem petenti.

FINIS.
1 PET. III. 15. -- Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you.
IAm not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, said the Great Apostle who was bred
up at the feet of Gamaliel, and fully instructed in all the Learning both of
the Jews and Greeks. Wherefore when the Christian Religion was every where
oppressed and despised, when it was a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness to
the Greeks; yet then despising the shame, and undervaluing the Afflictions he
should meet withal, I am ready (says he) to preach the Gospel to you that are
at Rome, among the famous Philosophers and Orators of that City, renowned as
well for Arts as Arms. For although there are not wanting some, the Eyes of
whose Minds are covered with gross Ignorance and Darkness, yet glorying
mightily in the mean while of their own Wisdom who endeavor to expose and
ridicule the Doctrine of the Gospel as the greatest Piece of Folly;
nevertheless he that laying aside his Prejudices and Tumultuous Affections,
shall weigh the thing it self* in the Balance of a sincere and incorrupted
Judgment, will really find the Christian Religion to be the Power and Wisdom of
God, wholly agreeable to Reason and worthy of all belief.

As therefore the Great Doctor of the Gentiles has given us a rare Example of
our Duty; so the Apostle of the Circumcision in the Words now read, exhorts us,
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you, i. e. Be prepared to render an Account, why you are
Christians. And in this sense the word (...) often occurs in the Acts of the
Apostles, and in the Epistles of St. Paul, Act. 22. 1. Phil. 1. 7. and 17. 2 Timothy 4. 16. By [hope] I understand the Doctrine of the Gospel, in which sense
the word is used, Act. 26. 7. That Reason is to be made use of in the matter of
Religion.
That the Christian Religion i^ so framed that a ^ational Account may be given
of it.
That every Man professing Christianity ought to be ready to give a Reason of
his Faith.


These are the main Observables from this Text of Scripture. That in the choice
of Religion, Reason is not to be laid aside, and, That the Christian Religion
is such as contains in it nothing contrary to Right Reason, I shall undertake
to make good in this present Discourse against Enthu^asts and Deists.

By [Rea^on] I do not mean the Dictates of Pride, Covetousness, Lust, Anger or
any other naughty Affection; for this is that Wisdom of the Flesh which is
enmity against God, as well as against Right Reason; Romans 8. 7.
these are those (...) imaginations that are to be cast down, and this is that
(...) that thought which is to be brought into Captivity to the Obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
namely those Reasonings and Discourses which Minister to the Flesh and the
lusts thereof. This is that (...), Natural Man, who receives not the 1 Cor. 2.
14.
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are Spiritually discerned: For this is that Animal Man
which is guided only by his sensual Appetite; and (...) (as those know well
enough who are conversant in the Writings of the Ancients) signifies that
Faculty of the Soul which is adapted to the Body. And he that is such cannot be
subject to the Spirit of God, nor Obedient to the Gospel, forasmuch as the
things contained there, are mere foolishness to him; nor can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned, i. e. they are discerned by an humble
Mind, composed Affections, clear Light, and Pure, and Internal sense.

This is that Wisdom pu^ed up with Pride and Vainglory, 1 Cor. 1. 18.
unto which the preaching of the Cross is foolish^ess. For the ob^ure life and
ignominious Death of Christ was always counted ridiculous by a Mind turgid, and
swelled with higher Notions and conceits. Lastly, this is that Wisdom of this
World, and of the Princes of this World, who are intoxicated with vile
Affections, and an 1 Cor. 1. 20. and 2. 6.
Opinionative Knowledge, which God and every wise Man looks upon as
foolishness. Such Wisdom and Ratiocinations as these, are not the Offspring of
true Reason, but the Fallacies and Paralogisms of a Mind blinded with lusts.

By Right Reason therefore I understand that innate Faculty of the Soul of Man,
by which it discerns the Reasons and Mutual Affections of things, and argues,
and concludes one thing from another, And now I say that Christian Religion is
not contrary to Reason thus understood.

There are two usual Forms of Speech pertinent to this occasion, viz. that
something may either be above or contrary to Reason.

But that we may speak freely and according to the nature of the thing it self;
whatever is propounded to us as matter of belief ought not to be so much as
above Reason, unless these words be taken in this Acception, namely, That a
thing is so high and remote from common sense, that bare ^ntellect could not
light upon it. There are verily some Articles of Faith which may be said to be
above Reason, as to some Modes of the Thing to be believed that are not clearly
revealed. Thus for Example, it exceeds the strength of Reason to give an exact
Account of the manner of our Resurrection and Glorification, or to make a
perfect Description of the Joys and Pleasures of the Future life, or to show
how the three Hypostases are one God, or the Divine and Humane Nature one
Christ: But of these things as there is no express Revelation, so neither is
there an Explicit Faith required; And besides, This Obscurity is not a l^ttle
subservient for the begetting and conciliating Reverence and Esteem to the
Christian Doctrine.

But there is nothing to which an Explicit Faith is required, which so far
exceeds Reason, as that it is not able to form any Conception of it. For Faith
consists in Assent; the Assent follows the Judgment, but no Judgment can be
made of a thing that is not at all known or understood; therefore whatever
exceeds all Knowledge, must needs likewise exceed all Belief. And he that can
persuade himself that he believes a thing that he does not understand, believes
he knows not what; and miserably imposes upon himself with a company of words
prettily put together, and giving a great sound, which yet have no Conception
answering to them in the mind, and while he dreams of believing some
unintelligible Mystery, he only pursues mere shadows of words from which when
the veil is withdrawn, all Faith and Sense presently vanishes.

But that the Christian Religion contains nothing Repugnant to right Reason,
and that the use of Reason is necessary in the Affair of Religion, I shall
endeavor to prove by these following Arguments.

First, If God should propound any thing to be believed that were Contradictory
to Right Reason, one of these four Absurdities (nor can I think of a fifth)
will necessarily follow upon it; Either that God can be deceived, or may
deceive, or that the Reasons* and Affections of things are not Eternal and
Immutable; Or lastly, that our Faculties are obnoxious to Error when they have
the clearest and most distinct Perception of their proper Objects. The first
and second of these are contrary to that Notion and Idea of God which we have
implanted in our Minds.

As for the third, there is indeed a certain Person who asserts the Reasons of
things to be contingent and Arbitrarious, and that Blasphemy, Lying, Perjury,
nay, a hatred of the Divine Majesty may be reckoned into the Account of
Virtues, and become a Worship pleasing and acceptable to God. But good God!
What rash and abominable Positions do we hear! Such as are rather to be buried
in Eternal Oblivion, or not to be named without Horror and Astonishment. Search
the Ancient Councils, and you shall find no Heresy more deserving an Anathema
then this. Nay the very Jaws of Hell could not belch out any thing more
detestable and blasphemous. For this robs God of his Wisdom, Immutability,
Goodness, and all those other Perfections we attribute to him: It overthrows
the Principles and Foundations of all* Discourse; makes Contradictions become
probable; destroys all Trust and Confidence in the Divine Promises, and
banishes all Hope and Expectation of Future Happiness. That all these
Consequences do naturally flow from this Principle we have proved elsewhere,
and the same will appear very evident to any that shall attentively consider it.

The Fourth, That God should plant such Faculties in us as may then deceive us
when they most clearly and distinctly perceive their Respective Objects, is
contrary to the Divine Goodness and Veracity. Moreover, it is impossible that
God should reveal any thing as an Object of Faith, unless we first suppose,
that we must give credit to our own Faculties. For nothing can be delivered to
us from God, unless it be conformable to some Faculty or other: But and if that
Faculty may be deceived when it most clearly and distinctly per^eives its
Object, how are we assured that this Deception may not happen in the present
Case, especially when Reason, the chiefest of our Facultys, clearly and
evidently finds that to be false which is offered under the specious Pretext of
Divine Revelation? For this Revelation must be conveyed to us either by the
^ar, or some other External sense, or else by the (...): But ought we not much
rather to (...) that to be an Illusion which is contrary to the Principles of
Evident and sound Reason, then to ^ancy that our Reason which is given us of
God for a Guide, should be deceived in its clearest and most distinct
conception of things? For if we throw a way Reason, there is no other Directive
Faculty, but External sense and its Inclinations, and blind, and uncertain
Fancy which is obnoxious to innumerable Deceptions. Wherefore bidding adieu
to Reason do we not evidently expose our selves to the Illusion of every
Juggling Spirit, who by crafty Tricks shall counterfeit a Divine Power and
Assistance? If therefore Moses ordained his Law as a Touchstone to try the
Truth of a Prophet, advising his People not to hearken to any who should do
Signs and Miracles, if he taught a^y thing contrary to that Law which he
himself had delivered to them from God: Ought not we in like manner to examine
all those that pretend Divine Authority, by the Law of Nature and Right Reason,
as by an in^allible and unerring Rule? (By the way it is to be noted, that I
here speak of incorrupted Reason, freed from all evil Affections and enlightened
by the Spirit of God.) For without the help of this Guide, our Minds perhaps
may be filled with a Great Measure of Confidence and Obstinate Persuasion, but
can never attain any settled Assurance that they are in the right way. Neither
is it any thing to the Purpose, to say that Reason may indeed judge of Humane,
but not of Divine Things. For though this be true of Reason darkened with evil
Passions, and indubitable in such things as are rather Objects of Taste, and
Internal sense, than Reason, yet it is quite otherwise where the Assent of the
Understanding alone is required. For whatever is proposed as matter of Explicit
Belief, there must in the first place be a Conception formed of it; but now
whatever we can frame a Conception of, there Reason either discovers the
Harmony of the Terms of which it consists, and its Agreement with some common
Notion, and so pronounces the Thing to be true; or e^se it finds the Terms to
be contradictory and Repugnant, and that the Thing is Diametrically opposite to
some i^ate Principle, and consequently judges it to be false: Or else it
perceives the Terms to be partly agreeing and partly di^onant, or to have no
Relation at all to one another, and from hence affirms and allows the Thing to
be either Probable or Possible. And now if any Part either of the Probability
or Po^bility shall be confirmed by some Illustrious Miracle, then Reason adds
its Suffrage that it ought to be believed. As for Example; let us imagine, what
is already done, a certain Person compassing Sea and Land, and w^olly intent
upon this very Thing to teach and instruct Mankind in their Duty to God, and to
one another, promising Eternal Blessedness upon Condition of Obedience, he
himself in the mean time leading a most innocent and inoffensive life, and
withal declaring himself to be a Lawgiver sent from God, and to have all Power
both in Heaven and Earth committed into his hands, and that Prayers and Praises
are all to be offered to God through his Mediation: Here is nothing in this
that implies a Contradic^on, or is repugnant with the Principles of Nature,
though Reason may be apt to suspect some Pride and Affectation of Divine Glory
and Worship to lie underneath. But now when that which is barely looked upon as
Possible shall be effected and accomplished by Divine Power, and the Author of
this Doctrine enabled to work such stupendous Miracles as never Man before
saw, Reason will presently conclude that the Thing it self is very credible.
Yet not withstanding if this Person should have taught any thing contrary to
the Dictates of Right Reason and introduced either a Pro^ane and im^ious
Doctrine, or countenanced a licentious, and disorderly way of living, and that
he might the better persuade us to these things, should have gone about to
confirm his Divine Mission by Miracles, our Reason would immediately have
suggested, to us that he was an Impostor and Deceiver; because nothing can be
(...) by God, or by any Person commissionated by him, which is contrary to the
Law of Nature or Right Reason.

And though it may be urged, that it is contrary to the Divine Veracity to bear
Witness to a lie, and therefore whatever is grounded upon the Credit of
Miracles (since these are the only visible signs of the Divine will) must of
necessity be supposed to derive from God; yet because I cannot be assured
whether these things may not be permitted for a Trial, or for some other end
unknown to me, yet agree^ble to Divine Wisdom, I should rather d^strust this
way of Reasoning, then admit any thing from the Authority of this Argument as
Divine, which contradicted the clear Principles of Nature.

2. A Second Argument: The Nature of Man is so framed that it cannot yield
Assent to any thing without the Conduct of Reason. Which that it may more
clearly appear we shall borrow some few things hugely suitable to our present
Purpose from the Famous Lord Herbert in his Book of Truth.

According to his Opinion therefore there are four Faculties by which we come
to the Knowledge of things; Natural Instinct, or that Faculty which di^cerneth
Common Notions, Internal Sense, External Sense, and Discourse.

From whence may be collected this great Truth, more valuable then whole
Volumes written concerning the Sou^ and its Facul^es; That which (...) be
known, neither by Natural Instinct, Internal Sense, External Sense, nor by
Discourse, cannot any way be proved properly true. Now since these are
Faculties, and that whatever is propounded to be believed; must necessarily
correspond and be conformable to some one of these, Reason affirms that to each
of them being rightly d^posed, cre^t is to be given, viz. to Natural Inst^t, to
Inte^nal and Ex^nal Sense. Moreover Reason it self (according to its proper
Office) making use of the (...) of the aforesaid Faculties, and relying upon
first and self-evident Principles, summons Discourse, and deduces Conclusions.
Natural Instinct is always to be believed; but sense, as well External as
Internal, may sometimes be deceived, and therefore sometimes deserves Credit,
and at other times not; to discriminate and discern the Differences of which is
in the Power of Reason alone, there being no other Faculty to preside in this
Case. From whence it follows: First, That the Mind cannot assent to any thing
where Right Reason, or at least some shadow of it, does not give a preceding
light; And then, That Christian Religion requiring Faith, cannot force or
compel assent against the Dictates of Right Reason.

But against these Clear and Natural Sentiments the Enthusiasts importunately
urge the Spirit, and indeed every man will pretend the Testimony of the Spirit
that he may not seem to be less favored of God then others. If we demand how
they know the Testimony of the Spirit, they Answer, After the same manner as we
discern the splendour of the Sun, by its own proper light. But we insist
further; That witness which the Spirit bears to it self, is it a strong and
obstinate Persuasion, or an Ecstatical Joy, or a kind of Zeal and Fervor of
Mind; or Lastly, a clear and savoury Persuasion of the Dignity and Excellency
of those things that are revealed? If this last, it is very consentaneous and
agreeable to what we have already spoken: But as for the other particulars, it
is very well known what an Innumerable company of Men there have been, who upon
such like grounds have very pertinaciously affirmed themselves to be compounded
o^ Glass, or Butter, to be Dogs, Cats, Kings, Emperors, Popes, the Paraclete,
the Messiah, the last and greatest Prophet, the Judge of Qu^ck and Dead, nay,
even God himself. And we find most of these to have been actuated with an
Excess of Joy, and transported with a seemingly Divine Fervor. All which
Effects are so far from the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, that they are no
better then Frenzies and Symptoms of Melancholy, and derive their Original from
no higher Principle then the undue Fermentation of the Blood and Spirits, and
chiefly from that Melancholy which above all other disposes the Minds of Men to
fancy Divine Influxes and Illuminations For this (as Aristotle affirms) is wont
to produce (...)

Wherefore to be too easy and credulous in believing an obstinate Persuasion
or strong Imagination, whether there be a mixture of exultancy or zeal with it,
would argue a great want of Caution and Circumspection: But we are to note
especially, where our Internal Sense is so obnoxious to Error, That the
Suffrages of other Faculties are first to be obtained, upon whose refusal it
behooves us at least to suspend our Assent.

But that we may not seem to derogate from the Holy Spirit, we may ^itly here
suggest what mere Nothings we are, and how little it is we can do without his
help, so that there is no Man whatever that can come to Christ without the
supervenient Assistance of Divine Grace. And as this is clearly attested in the
Sacred Scripture, so it is no less Consentaneous to Reason; forasmuch as this
is a most certain Truth, that it is a great Vanity to dispute against Sense and
Experience. And though some one (as it is reported of Zeno) should go about to
prove there is no such thing as Motion, and should endeavor by subtilty of
Argumentation to banish Quantity, Matter and Time out of the Nature of Things,
yet he could never induce any sober Person wholly to distrust his Eyes and
Hands. By the same Reason, since every Man finds his Senses highly gratified
with that Pleasure flowing from External and Mundane Objects, and yet not to be
alike affected with things of a higher and nobler Nature; how much resistance
soever he may make by Virtue of the Counsels of severer Reason, and strive to
alienate his Mind from those* as things less comporting with the Dignity of his
Nature, yet he will be no more able to reclaim himself, then the Arguments of
Zeno were able to move Diogenes. Moreover, so long as that brisk and lively
relish of sensual Pleasures draws away the Mind, it will not be at leisure to
attend to the so^t Whispers of that gentle Monitor within. Or perhaps it will
easily slop its mouth, or at least allure it to its own side: For we are led by
Sense* either External or Internal, not by dry and insipid Reason, which gives
much what the same Account of the Delights of a Spiritual life, as a blind Man
would do of colors. And doubtless it would be but lost labor to teach a blind
Man how pleasant a thing it is to behold the Sun, and to enjoy the benefit of
the Light, and recreate himself with the Variety of Objects. It is only the Eye
that is sufficient to make such a Demonstration of these things as may affect
the Mind. You can never persuade a Man that is a perfect Slave to his Pleasures
that there is any greater Delight and Satisfaction in Understanding the Reason
of a Mathematical Demonstration* then there is in Wine or the Caresses of a
Mistress. For if they were not bashful in declaring the Sentiments of their own
Minds, it would soon appear that the Reason of all Mankind is subjugated to the
Imperious Dictates of present sense. And unless God so affect our Minds, as
that on the one hand they may find some allay and uneasiness in these
Terrestrial Pleasures, and on the other give them some Prelibations of the
sweetness of things Celestial, it can hardly be, that we should either be
weaned from those, or very much desirous of these. I add moreover, that to
render our selves obedient to the will of our hea^enly Father, is the only
plain and easy way to the attaining a true Knowledge and Vital Sense of Divine
Revelations.

For heavenly things are not otherwise to be known but by such an in ward
relish and affecting light as Divine Grace usually imparts to defecate and
humble Minds. And further, to admonish* them that are going astray, to
illuminate the Eyes of the Mind, to strengthen the Faith* and to fix and
impress the Arguments of Godliness upon the Soul, which otherwise would be
driven away with the least Wind of a Temptation; these and such like things we
owe to the Be^ign Influence of the Holy Spirit; All which we readily
acknowledge to descend from Heaven by that Congruity they retain with that
Divine Principle the only remain of God in us. But if we discharge this
Criterium of Truth, and subject our Reason to the Conduct and Guidance of
prevailing Phansis, we must bid adieu to all Religion but that which under
pretense of Divine Insp^ration is nothing but the Result of (...), and the
feculent steams of the Blood. Thus all Religions will be alike; For by* what
Argument shall the Excellency of Christianity appear above (...) or Gentilism,
when the use of Reason is laid aside?

But that we may not spend time in Ambiguity of Words, we must know, That
nothing is perceived by us but the Operations (...) our (...), and there^re the
Spirit as it is a Principle of Knowledge in us, is either Internal Sense or
Reason; for these are the only Faculties (unless we will add Natural Instinct)
capable of being enlightened with the Beams of Divine Light. To return therefore
from whence we have digressed; since our Internal Sense is so slippery and
fallacious, that Man that shall hearken to its Testimony against the Voice of
all his other Faculties, must be a Person of a very Imprudent and Temerarious
Belief.

But you will say, We grant indeed that it appears from this Argument that
nothing can be believed without Reason, but it does not follow from hence, that
the thing to be believed is not contrary to Reason; because we ought to credit
a Divine Attestation, though the matter attested be never so much Contrary to
Reason: For it may happen that Humane Understanding may thenErr, when it seems
most of all to make use of Reason. But it were Impious to imagine that God who
is most wise can be deceived, or being most Veracious can deceive.

It is confessed that nothing could be spoken truer; for no Man is so incredulous
or self-conceited, but he will presently give credit to Divine Attestation: But
the Question is how we shall know when a thing is confirmed by Divine
Testimony? Will it appear from Miracles alone? We shall find Pythagoras,
Apollonius Tyanoeus, who endeavored by Magic to keep up the Credi^ of
decaying and sinking Idolatry was famous for these; whose Contemporaries durst
oppose him to Christ, as may appear from the Books of Hierocles and
Philostratus written of this subject. I might likewise introduce the Magicians
of both Worlds, all which have acted diverse things exceeding the Powers of
Nature, only by Demoniacal Assistance.

If any one therefore shall pretend a Divine Commission, there are Three things
which he ought to prove his Authority by: Miracles, Holiness of Life, and a
Doctrine worthy of God, and every way useful to Mankind. If he bring all these
things, he is to be believed as sent from God. But it no way comports with
Divine Goodness and Veracity to bear witness to a Falsehood, or to expose men
in things of the Greatest moment to an Everlasting and inevitable Delusion.

Wherefore we are not only to look at Miracles, but at the Life and Doctrine of
the Person who pretends them, to gain to himself the Belief of Divine
Authority. To this purpose our Savior made use of an invincible Argument
against the Pharisees, who objected to him that he cast out Devils by the help
of the Prince of Devils, viz. That a Kingdom divided against it self is Mat.
12. 24, 25.
brought to desolation: Therefore since he both by his Doctrine, and the mighty
works that he did, set himself wholly to pull down and overthrow the Kingdom of
Satan, it could not be that he should cast out Devils by the Assistance of
Satan. Therefore to make up a Right Judgment concerning a Divine Testimony, the
matter it self which is attested ought to come into Consideration, which if it
contain any thing contrary to the settled Principles of Nature, those Miracles
are not to be looked upon as Divine, but as Diabolical Delusions. The Beroeans
were commended by the Spirit of God to be more Noble then those in
Thessalonica, i. e. of a more ingenuous and pliable Temper, in that they
searched the Act. (...). (...).
Scriptures, whether those things spoken by Paul and Silas were so. Why should
not the same Commendation belong likewise to us, if we put to a severe Scrutiny
and Trial whatever is delivered to us by any Person for a Divine Law?

3. A third Argument may be drawn from the Nature of Religion, which ought to
be matter of Choice and Delight. But now it is impossible that any one should
please himself in that which is contrary to the Principles of his very Nature.
And indeed to know Conclusions themselves, unless we likewise are ascertained
from what Principles they flow, yields but a slender Delight to the
Understanding: As the Pleasure of a Mathematical Genius results, not from
having Geometrical Problems as undoubted Axioms by Heart, but from the being
able to comprehend their Demonstrations deduced by a long Series of
Propositions. Wherefore it is most agreeable to the Divine Goodness so ^ar to
indulge and have regard to the Nature of Man under the Gospel, that he may find
the Harmony and Agreement of those things with Reason, which are propounded to
him as Objects of Faith. For here lies the Principal Difference between Mankind
and Bruits, in their being capable of Religion. And it is a thing abhorrent
from all Reason, that that which is most Natural, and the sole Propriety of
Man, should yet be contradictory to his own Faculties. Can it be imagined that
God intended to perplex Humane Intellect with inexplicable subtleties? Or is
any thing the more excellent and Venerable, because it exceeds all
Understanding? Is he to be deemed the fittest subject for Religion, who is most
Bigotical and carelessly credulous? Are we to put off Humane Nature that we may
become Religious? Surely to entertain the least suspicion of such a thing were
the very Reproach of all Religion: Such ought to be every Man's Judgment of his
Religion, that it contain nothing in it absurd, unbecoming, or Repugnant to
Right Reason; for what a shame were it for Religion to be afraid of the
Tribunal of Reason? I have always looked upon that Religion most worthy of my
choice, which comes off Victorious when called to the Bar of strictest Reason.
Wherefore should a Gracious God bestow upon us the Faculty of Reason, if we
must not suffer it to do its Office when our concern is most in Question? Or
what other Faculty is there left by who^e conduct we can search into the Truth
of Religion? If we once forsake the Guidance of Reason must not all Religion be
owing either to Education, Superstition or some Fanatical Impulse?

But you will say, our Reason since the Fall is too much darkened, and therefore
we are not competent Judges of Divine things.

But are the faint and more languishing Rays of the declining Sun therefore
contemptible, and to be reputed Darkness, because we are deprived of his
Meridian and more Exalted Light? Must he whose Eyes are somewhat dull, be
therefore accounted stark blind? Or must we quite shut our Eyes, because they
want the sharpness and Perspicacity of Eagles?

Is not Religion of such a Nature as requires our greatest Care and Diligence,
as of a thing of the highest moment, and in which to have erred were our
greatest Infelicity? And to what Purpose were our Faculties given, if they be
of no use in those things wherein we most need them? Shall another Judge for
us? Or shall the Understanding of another direct my will? Shall I fee with
other men's Eyes? Or walk only by the light that another carries before me?
Shall I mortify my irregular Affections with Arguments that I do not
understand? Or govern my life by the mea^ure of another Man's Principles? Are
not all these things to be done by a Man's own proper Judgment, Intellect and
Light? And can this be effected without the use of Reason? Nay further, is
there need of any other Faculty in the choice of Religion, and such Principles
as tend to the Regulation of Life, but only of Reason? Religion is a free and
ingenuous thing, that forces none, but Captivates the Understanding with its
own solitary Beauty and Pulchritude. And he that thinks otherwise falsely
accuses Religion and introduces Superstition into its Place.

4. A Fourth Argument I take from the Nature of Right Reason; from whence
arises a clear Demonstration, that no Divine Revelation can be contrary to it.
For the Souls of Men are derived from the Divine Mind, and Right Reason is of a
Celestial Original, framed after the Image of Uncreated Wisdom and Knowledge.
It is a certain Beam or Ray of the Intellectual Sun, bearing the Resemblance of
Primigenial light. For Divine Wisdom is nothing else but a steady Comprehension
of the Idea's of Things, together with those Reasons, A^ections, and Mutual
Relations whether of Concord or Discord, which Immediately slow from the Nature
of Things themselves, as Relations po^ito fundamento and termino. And the
Divine Intellect does intimately penetrate and behold at one view these
Affections together with the Idea's of the Things themselves and discerns their
Order and Reciprocations. Now what is this but fixed and stable Reason looking
upon the Reasons and Connections of all things at once, and as it were with an
Unmoved Eye? Whose express and accurate Resemblance is Right Reason engraven on
Humane Minds, which though it cannot know and lay open all things, and their
respective Reasons, by one single Act, yet it explicates and unfolds them
successively and in order. Moreover, we have a clear and distinct Perception of
the Consent or Discrepancy of so many of these Idea's and Reasons as we have an
Entire and Comprehensive view of, and accordingly undertake either the
Probation or Refutation of one from another. Wherefore Humane Reason does truly
imitate and express Divine Wisdom, with this only Difference, that what she
comprehends at once with one single Act, Reason deduces by many and operose
Consequences.

That God should therefore reveal any thing contrary to Right Reason, is alike
impious as to suppose him to be a Liar, and to contradict the internal
Conceptions of his own Wisdom. For Right Reason and Divine Wisdom give the same
Judgment of things, and if Humane Understanding shall at any time determine
otherwise, that must not be looked upon as the Fault of Reason, but of
Ignorance. Therefore if any thing propounded under the Plausible Name of Divine
Revelation shall seem to contradict Reason, I ought to suspect that I do not
fully conprehend the meaning of it, and therefore must insist upon a further
search, and resolve that God intended that to be believed, which should be most
consonant to the Principles of Nature. Nevertheless I would not have Humane
Understanding arrogate too much to it self, nor rashly attempt to condemn
presently that which exceeds its Capacity. For if the chiefest Part of those
things which are delivered and consigned by Divine Testimony, be worthy of God,
and Consonant to ou^ Faculties, as to other things we ought to yield an
implicit Faith to Divine Revelations, though they seem otherwise to clash with
Reason, yet to give our Assent to them, at least according to the sense of the
Spirit of God, although what that is, we cannot yet so fully understand.

5. A Fifth and last Argument shall be drawn from the Nature of the Christian
Religion it self. And first of all as to its Precepts, their Purity, sanctity
and usefulness, both as to particular Persons, and also the Public, are so
clear to every attentive and considerative Man, that it would be altogether
super^luous to go about to evince their Agreement with Reason: More especially
when the thing it self is so fully made good already by the learned Dr.
Hammond. From hence it likewise follows, That the Promises and Comminations in
Religion are extremely agreeable to Reason, forasmuch as they are a kind of
Hedge and Security for the Precepts contained in it. And though these three
Parts of Christianity do far excel, yet they are not wholly different from
other Religions that have taken place in the World, especially among the wiser
and more Philosophical Pagans, who set the Precepts of Morality at a high
Pitch, and also held the Doctrine of Rewards and Punishments after this life.
So that whatever may be said in Vindication of the Ancient Piety and Wisdom,
may with greater Reason be spoken in behalf of Christian Religion. For even the
most profane and Atheistical Wits upon reading the Holy Scriptures have
confessed that they contain in them the most excellent Precepts of Piety and
Virtue.

Therefore I shall choose rather to discourse briefly of Christianity under the
Notion of a Determi^ate Religion different from all other, that its Conformity
with Right Reason may from hence likewise be made apparent.

First, therefore, What can be thought more agreeable to Reason then that God
should entrust some certain Person with the Office of teaching and instructing
Mankind in the Discharge of their Duty to him, and to one another? For the
Degenerate Offspring of Adam are hugely ignorant of their Duty (whence so many
ridiculous Rites of Superstition have been observable throughout all Ages) and
very much need a Teacher. And besides they are obstinately and wilfully bent
upon the Lusts of the Flesh, and for this Reason want such a Lawgiver as may
Cause a Veneration and Fear in them. And that this Legislator should be a
Person of an unspotted and blameless life is very congruous, both that he may
be a Pattern and Example to us, and likewise beget a Reverence and Esteem of
his Doctrine. That he should be conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost in the
Womb of a Virgin without the concurrence of Man, is an excellent provision for
a higher Esteem and Valuation of his Person, being separated from Humane
Defilements, and the Ordinary Course of Nature. That he should be intimately
united to the Divine Nature, and so truly and properly God, adds the greater
Majesty to what he should deliver. Nor could God signify his will in a way
more agreeable to the Nature of Man; for he cannot appear to us but under some
Corporeal Veil; and what more fitting Mansion or Covering then our Flesh? Why
may not God make use of some one of us (as the Soul does of the Body) as an
Instrument by whose Intervention he may discover his Mind to us? Here is
nothing either Contrary to Reason or hard to be understood. For why should the
Conjunction of the Deity with the Nature of Christ more trouble the
Understanding then the Union of the Soul with the Body? For the higher and more
exalted Nature any thing is of, with the greater Facility may it insinuate and
derive it self. But though this Person be so illustrious, yet it seems
Reasonable that in reference to this Bodily life he should be of mean Quality
and obscure Condition, obnoxious to the same Evils and Infirmities, to which we
our selves are exposed: For so we shall have mighty Incentives to the Love of
God, and Patient bearing of Afflictions, when we see the most Innocent Captain
of our Salvation, suffer fo much upon our Account. Besides, that it is an
Argument of the greatest Trust and Confidence in our Lord and Savior, who
being himself made perfect through sufferings, knows how to succor and relieve
those that are oppressed under them. Moreover we may reasonably expect that God
should give us some greater certainty of Eternal and Immortal life, then what
was found among the Heathen, who spoke very doubtfully of it; as likewise that
we should be more fully assured of the Resurrection of the Body, without which
the Happiness of Man cannot be Complete: And how ready God is to Pardon Sinners
upon a true Faith and Repentance; for this we are apt to doubt of when we
consider the Malignity of Sin, our own proneness to Revenge, and how rare a
thing it is to find forgiveness of a fault amongst men. In like manner, that he
should establish the Belief of Rewards and Punishments after this life; that by
looking up to those we may be allured to Obedience, and out of fear of these
may be deterred from sin. And that he should gain credit to all these things
both by his Miracles, and by his Death: For Miracles are the greatest Testimony
of Divine Presence. And in that he yielded himself up to Death, it is a Great
sign of the Truth and Sincerity of his dealing with us. Besides, It is a clear
Demonstration of the Divine Goodness toward us, who spared not his own Son
that he might do us good. Nor can there be a stronger Argument to move us to
Crucify our Lusts, and to lay down our lives for the Brethren. But that our
Lord by his Death became a Sacrifice for sins, by which God declared his
Placableness, it was a design of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness to relieve and
succor the Soul under the Arguments of Despondency and Distrust, which it
fetched against it self from the Holiness and Justice of God, the Death of
Christ for that very End propitiating Divine Justice. His Resurrection from the
Dead is likewise very Consonant to Reason, being an Ample Confirmation of his
past Actions, and also a Demonstration of the Possibility of our Resurrection
and Return to Life after Death. But that after his Resurrection he was exalted
at the Right hand of God, and that all Prayers and Praises should be offered to
God by his Mediation, and that he always makes Intercession for us, this is
likewise very agreeable to Reason: For hence God not only makes known to us his
kindness and Good Will, but has placed our Brother at his Right hand, a Person
most dear to him, and most tenderly affected toward us, through whom we may
with cheerfulness and full trust make our approach to God; Christ in the mean
while deprecating God in our behalf, that we should acknowledge whatever Good
befalls us to proceed wholly and purely from the love of God. And then in that
all Power both in Heaven and Earth is committed into his hands, and that he is
Gods Vicegerent, and the Head of Saints and Angels, it is a great Comfort to
us, because it is he that so dearly loves us who is possessed of such mighty
Power. Moreover since there is without Dispute a certain Polity and Government
among the Blessed Saints and Angels, whom can we imagine to have better and
greater Right to this Principality than Jesus Christ, who is God clothed with
Humane Nature? And that both Devils and Men are sometime to be summoned before
the dreadful Tribunal of God, is very Consentaneous; for this very thought will
strike Terror into the most daring Sinner, and the Solemnity of the Judgment
will vindicate God from all Suspicion of Malignity and Injustice, because every
Man's Conscience will testify to him that his Misery proceeds from his own
wretched Folly. Nor can any thing be imagined more proper then that Christ
should be appointed Judge; for since God cannot execute this solemn Judgment
but under a visible shape, what fitter Instrument can there be for this
Purpose, then that very Nature in which long ago he has taken up his dwelling?
And lastly, it is no way discrepant from Reason, that having subdued all his
Enemies, he should deliver up the Kingdom to his Father: For his Mediatory
Office being designed to this Purpose, that lapsed Man may be recovered to the
Life of God, and invested with endless Happiness; upon the perfecting this
work, the Determination of his Kingdom ought to follow. Which yet is to be
understood after this manner, viz. That Jesus Christ, God-Man shall from
thence, and for ever continue the Prince and Head of Saints and Angels. Thus we
have briefly run through the several Heads of Christian Religion, and shall not
further trespass upon your Patience.

What remains I shall dispatch in a Word. From what has been already said it
appears clearly indecorous and unworthy of a Christian to draw in his Religion
with his Mothers Milk, and to attribute his receiving it, not to the Ingenuous
Disquisition of Reason, but to the Laws of his Country, his Education, to the
Dictates of some learned Man in whom he has an Implicit Faith, and such like
Prejudices as these. And in Conclusion, makes it his whole business
pertinaciously to defend it, not upon a due choice and difcernment between
Truth and Falsehood, but upon some preconceived and prejudicate Opinion. Whereas
that is scarce worthy the Name of Faith, nor grateful to God, which owes its
Original rather to some dull chance, then either to the Evidence of the thing
it self, or the weight of the Arguments for it. Nay certain it is, that he who
after an humble, pious, and attentive weighing of Things shall yet fall into
Error, is upon better grounds to be judged if not worthy of Praise, yet at
least of Pardon, then he that shall blindly and fortuitously assent, though to
Truth it self. To which the Holy Writings bear witness, by commanding us to
search the Scriptures; to Joh. 5. 39.
1 These. 5. 21.
prove all things; and to examine and try the Spirits: 1 John 4. 1.
And as our Apostle exhorts us, to be ready always to give an answer to every
Man that asks us a Reason of the ^ope that is in us.

The End.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the forogoing DISCOURSE.
THe Pious and Excellently learned Author of this Discourse, being himself so
Great a Master of Reason, made it his whole Business to employ his Great Parts
for the Honor and Advantage of Religion. He was a well instructed Scribe for
the Kingdom of Heaven, and as a Faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God,
brought forth out of his Treasures things New and Old. And finding Christianity
attackt and assaulted by Deists and Enthusiasts, he resolutely came in to her
Aid and Assistance, and by invincible Arguments has made Good both the use of
Reason in Matters of Religion, and that Christianity contains nothing in it
contrary to the Laws and Inscriptions of Right Reason. Upon this Foundation the
whole Discourse is settled and grounded, on which I here offer such Annotations
as may best serve to illustrate and confirm that high Sense and great Reason
our Ingenious Author has curiously and with most accurate Judgment drawn
together.

Page 3, 4. What ever is propounded to us as matter of Belief, ought not so
much as to be above Reason.] There are some who out of stupidity rather then a
due Veneration of Religion, make the choicest of its Articles so
incomprehensible as to be elevated above Reason, that is, in their sense, such
as of which Humane Intellect can have no Conception: Then which certainly
nothing can be more derogatory to that Sacred Economy, which the Eternal (...)
the Son of God has set on foot, nor give greater Ground to the bold Cavils and
Pretentions of Enthusiasts and disguised Atheists. As if there were no other
design in the Christian Religion but to amuze and puzzle Humane Understandings,
by propounding a Company of intricate and perplexed Riddles, of which we can
have no Apprehension, but must believe them merely because they are
unintelligible. For certain it is, that whatever is in its own Nature
unconceivable can be no Object of Humane Understanding, and consequently can be
no Object of Faith. And it were a vain and ridiculous Thing to tell us that God
reveals unconceivable Mysteries to us, to convince us of our Emptiness and
Nothingness: For Christian Religion makes its ultimate End to be the Perfection
of Humane Nature; Now that which is wholly and absolutely above Reason is
likewise unintelligible, and what is so, can in no sense be said to advance and
better the Faculties of Man, and perfect his Nature. It Is true, in this sense,
and in no other, we may admit a thing to be above Reason, that is (as our
excellent Author speaks) because bare Intellect could not light upon it. For
the whole Frame and Contexture of Christianity shows a Wisdom exceeding that of
Angels as well as Men, but yet now it is manifested and revealed to us, there
is nothing in it unconceivable, nor any one Article beyond the Power of a
Rational Soul to have, though not a full, yet a clear and distinct Idea of. The
very Notion of God implies Incomprehensibility in it, yet notwithstanding a
Rational Mind may have a very evident and clear Conception of his Nature. And
that which dazles our Eyes with such an amazing luster in Christianity, that
is, the Doctrine of the Trinity, was not thought either unintelligible or
irrational by the wise^ and most learned Pagans, though such is the
Profoundness of the Mystery, that Humane Understanding could never have fallen
upon any such Thing without a Divine Revelation. Therefore what the best of the
Pagans discoursed of it, was but a Communication of that Doctrine which had
been received by Tradition from the first Ages of the World, and was made known
to them by Supernatural Revelation. The same we may say of all other Mysterious
Points in the Christian Religion, that being revealed, they bear a pleasing and
agreeable Harmony with our Reasons, and do intimately correspond with something
in our own Minds.

Page 4. This Obscurity is not a little subservient to beget and conciliate
Reverence and Esteem to the Christian Doctrine.] The Christian Religion has
this in Common with all other Mysteries, that it has a Veil drawn over its
more recondite and hidden Doctrines, partly that it may not be profaned and
exposed to contempt by every common Eye; and partly to whet and sharpen the
Industry of Capacious Minds to a diligent search and inquisition after such
inestimable Treasures. For as the Initiati in the Mysterious Rites both of
Greeks and Egyptians, were first to undergo a due Purification of themselves
before they were admitted to the Presence and Fruition of the worshipped Deity;
so does Christian Religion declare its end to be the perfecting Humane Souls,
and at last conducting them by an orderly P^cation both of Body and Mind into
the Sacred Adytum to enjoy the Presence of God in the highest Heavens for
evermore. Hence Christianity as it is a Mystery, so in opposition to the
profane Rites of the Heathen worship, it is (...) a Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and (...) a Doctrine according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3. And it is
very decorous and becoming the Wisdom of God, to hide and conceal the choice
Doctrines of Christianity as precious Treasures, behind a Cloud, that they may
not be the too easy Purchase of every dissolute Person, and that Religion it
self may not be contemned and disesteemed by supposing it to have nothing
Venerable and excellent in it. But as the Spectators at the foot of the Hill
behold no greater Beauty and Comeliness in the Face of our Savior then in
other men, but when he ascended the Mount his Countenance appeared to those
that were capable, with a Brightness and Luster far surpassing that of the Sun:
Thus it is with his Doctrine; while we converse only below, and our Eyes are
filled with Dust, and our Minds swelled with the Lusts and Vanities of the
World, we see no more Excellency and Beauty to command our Veneration and love
in Christianity then in other things: But if we would ascend up to the top of
the Mount by a due Purification of our Spirits, by Mortification of our
irregular Appetites and by Assimilation of our Minds to God, we should behold
admirable Glories, and be enravished with the Pulchritude of the transfigur'd
Face of Jesus. For the Secret of the Lord is Psalm. 25. 14.
only with them that fear him.

Page 5. There is a certain Person who asserts the Reasons of Things to be
contingent and arbitrarious.] The Person intended here was Szydlovius who in a
Treatise entitled, Vindicioe Quoestionum aliquot difficilium and
controversarum in Theologia, printed at Franeker, among other things lays down
such Positions as these, Quoeritur ( inquit) An detur aliquid antecedenter
bonum ad Voluntatem Dei: Sive, An res sint ideo justoe and bonoe quia Deus eas
vult, vel, An ideo eas velit quia justoe sint? Negatur dari aliquid
antecedenter bonum ad voluntatem Dei, and Affirmatur Res ideo esse justas and
bonas, quia eas Deus vult; non contra, ideo eas velle Deum quia Justoe and
bonoe sint. And afterward he thus goes on, Objiciet quispiam: Ergo sic Deus
poterit imperare Blasphemiam, Perjurium, Mendacium, etc. quod absurdum Videtur.
Resp. Etiam in illis quoe ad cultum Dei pertinent, nullo a^o modo homines
obligantur nisi ex proecepto and per legem. Si enim Deus voluisset, tum
potuisset alium Cultum vel modum Cultus jubere sibi proestari. Itaque etiam
ista quoe ad Cultum suum pertinent, Deus liberrime proecepit, and quidem ut
potuerit aliter proecepisse: ideoque ex Hypothesi tantum Mandati Divini ista
sunt vitia. Et videtur hic proesupponi, quasi Mendacium and Blasphemia
afficiant Deum aliquo modo, quod prorsus falsum est. Certum igitur est Deum
potuisse contrarium modum cultus sibi jubere proestari. Which execrable
Positions our Author out of that tender and delicate sense he had of Truth, and
mighty Zeal for the Honor of God, did justly detest and abominate, and
therefore set himself to confute such Blasphemous Assertions as these in a
short but exceeding Compact and Rational Discourse, which since his much
lamented Death has been Published by the Title of A Discourse of Truth, and is
now reprinted with another useful Discourse of an Ingenious Person with
Annotations upon them both. To which for full satisfaction and Prosecution of
the Heads here mentioned I refer. And shall only transcribe what I find
concerning this Subject in a Philosophical Poem.

If God do all things simply at his Pleasure,
Because he will, and not because it is Good,
So that his Actions will have no set measure;
Is It possible it should be understood
What he intends? I feel that he is loved
Of my dear Soul, and know that I have born
Much for his sake; yet is it not hence proved
That I shall live, though I do sigh and mourn
To find his Face, his Creatures wish he will slight and scorn.
When I breath out my utmost Vital Breath,
And my dear Spirit to my God commend,
Yet some foul Fiend close lurking underneath
My serious, humble Soul from me may rend:
So to the lower shades down we shall wend.
Though I in Hearts simplicity expected
A Better doom; since I my steps did bend
Toward the Will of God, and had detected
Strong Hope of lasting Life, but now I am rejected.
Nor of well Being, nor Subsistency
Of our poor Souls, when they do hence depart:
Can any be assured, if liberty
We give to such odd thoughts, that thus pervert
The Laws of God, and rashly do assert
That Will rules God, but Good rules not Gods will:
What e're from Right, Love, Equity does start,
For ought we know then God may act that ill,
Only to show his Might, and his free Mind fulfill.
Page 5, 6. That God should plant such Faculties in us as may then deceive us,
when they most clearly and distinctly perceive their respective Objects, is
contrary to the Divine Goodness and Veracity.]

It Is tr^e, if God were such an Arbitrary Being whose sole Will were the Rule
and Measure of Goodness and Justice, as the forecited Author contends he is, it
is utt^rly impossible we should have any certainty of the clearest Truth, not
so much as that Three and Three make Six, because we can never be assured that
this Arbitrary Omnipotent Deity did not purposely make the Frame of our Souls
so, as that they should then be deceived when they have the clearest and most
evident Perception of things. Therefore that Acute Philosopher Descartes
committed a great oversight when he would have us doubt of the Truth of those
Things whereof we have the clearest Evidence and Demonstration; because till we
come to the Knowledge of a God we cannot be certain that our Faculties are not
false and imposturous; for we have no way to come to the knowledge of God, but
by our Faculties. And therefore this were, 1. To condemn us to an Eternal
Skepticism from which there is no possibility of ever extricating our selves.
2. It is a Ridiculous way of Argumentation to prove the Truth of God's
Existence from our Faculties of Reason and Understanding; and then to prove the
Truth of those Faculties from the Existence of God. 3. There being nothing more
Immediate to us, nor any thing whereby we can conclude more certainly a thing
to be true then by our own Faculties, if the Truth of our Faculties is to be
proved by any thing, it is evident, it is to be proved by our Faculties
themselves, but this were also a ridiculous circular Demonstration, to prove
the Truth of our Faculties, by the Truth of our Faculties. Whence it
necessarily follows that we are only to suppose our Faculties to be true, it
being Impossible for us to prove them to be so. But to be above this Pitch is
the Privilege only of the Eternal Mind, or of the (...) the only wise God, as
our Faculties if rightly cultivated suggest unto us, and the Apostle does
admonish us. That therefore was the main See Dr. More's Vol. Philosoph.
slip in Descartes that he was not content to suppose our Tom. 2. p. 161.
Faculties to be true, but he would prove them to be so, when he was destitute
of all Argument for it, but the Truth of the Faculties themselves. But some
Philosophers bring the business to a closer pinch, as they conceive, by
supposing the very Essence of Truth to be clear and distinct Perceptibility,
insomuch that not Omnipoteuce it self, much less Casualty, can bring to pass
that what is false should be clearly perceived to be. But these otherwise witty
and learned Contemplators do not consider, That Truth is a Thing antecedent to
Perceptibility, which respects the Perceptive Intellect, and is in it self
nothing else (I mean Eternal Truths) but the necessary Coherence or Incoherence
of the Terms of which the Truth it self does consist. And therefore
Perceptibility cannot be the Essence of Truth. I speak here of Truth in the
Object, not in the Subject, as our Author has distinguished in his Ingenious
Discourse of Truth; which no Intellect Perceptive or Conceptine makes, but
finds in the Intellect Exhibitive, as his Annotator has also observed: Insomuch
that the Divine Intellect it self quatenus Perceptive or Conceptive is not the
A^thor of Archetipal Truth, but quatenus Exhibitive. Moreover, though clear and
distinct Perceptibility were the very Essence of Truth, whenas indeed it is
only a Relative Mode thereof, what is this to our Perceptive Faculty, till it
come to a clear actual Perception, and what is this but a strong Cogitation
that I clearly and distinctly perceive a thing? But that many have been
mistaken when they have had such a strong Cogitation is indeed the known
Disgrace of Speculation and Philosophy. Whence it is manifest, when they say
that Omnipotence it self cannot bring to pass that what is false should be
clearly perceived to be, that the Word [ perceived] is fallaciously abused, to
a sense beyond the Capacity of the present Circumstan^es, as if it signified
[really to find] whenas it only signifies, strongly to think we clearly
perceive a Thing to be. Which many have and yet have been in a mistake; and
this by Casualty. What then cannot Omnipotence do in this kind, if it would?
But supposing our ^aculties to be true when all Moral diligence has been
employed to fit them for use (and none but a Humorist will then call into
Question their Verdict, when they clearly discern a thing to be) the Existence
of God and his Attributes being plain to us, we have a further Assurance, we
having such an Author of our Being, that he gave not our Faculties to abuse us
but to inform us faithfully of all Truth necessary and useful for us, so that
what is clear to them is really true. Which is the Assertion of this our
Learned and Pious Writer without any Cartesian Fetches and Ambages. And lastly,
we may note by way of Overplus, That clearness and distinctness of Perception
in the Intellect Perceptive or Conceptive, is not the Right notion of Truth,
but the Conformity of the Perception or Conception with the Thing conceived,
which is Truth in the Object; and that therefore in false Opinions the
Perception of the Intellect is not only obscure, but false, because it
perceives or conceives otherwise then the Thing it self is, which is the true
and universally acknowledged Notion of what is false in the conceiving of
Things.

Page 8. Our Reason would immediately have suggested to us that he was an
Impostor and Deceiver.] That God may permit an Impostor and Deceiver to work
Miracles, we have the express Testimony of Holy Scripture, and the matter of
Fact confirmed in the Egypti^ So^cerers, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. Moses tells the (...),
that if any Person should come in the Name of a Prophet, and should do a
Miracle, i^ that Prophet (...) attempt by this to seduce them to Idolatry, then
he was not to be bel^eved, because God might suffer this in Tentationem, to
prove their Faith and Belief in the true God. But on the other side if a
Prophet should come in the Name of God, and produce M^acles as the Credentials
of Divine Authority and Commission, and should exhort them only to the Worship
of the True God of Israel, than he (...) to ^e believed. For this was the Sign
or Note by which they should know a true Prophet from a false, Deuteronomy. 18. 21,
22. In like manner, We that are Christians, having the Law of Right Reason
engraven in our Souls, ought to be as Cautious and Jealous of admitting Belief,
though a Person should by Miracles seek to extort it from us, if under pretense
of Divine Revelation he would introduce any thing contrary to clear and evident
Reason. Because we may be assured that no such thing can be Authorized of God,
but that if the Miracles are true and real, they are done in Tentationem. See
Annotat. upon p. 14.

Page 10. We find most of these to have been actuated with an excess of Joy,
and transported with a seemingly Divine fervor.] How far a Natural Enthu^iasm
may Prevail upon men is evidently seen in the fresh Examples which every Age
produces; and it is observable that those Sects among us which pretend most to
Divine Inspiration, are most of all in^ected and agitated with Melancholy,
which arising from the lower Region of the Body, and ascending in
Copious-steams with the Blood and Spirits into the Brain, ferments like new
Wine, and stains the Imagination with Variety of Phantasms and Impressions. And
if this happen to a Devotional and Religious Temper whose understanding is not
strong enough to discern the Illusions of Fancy from the Dictates of the
Spirit of God, it presently begets in him a strong and vigorous Conceit that he
is Divinely acted and inspired. With which Delusion they are the more easily
imposed upon, for want of a right Understanding of the Nature of the
Prophetical Spirit, whose impulse and influence upon the Mind, though it were
strong and vigorous, being in the Heart as a burning Fire, shut up in the
Bones, which sensibly afflicted and pained till it received a Vent (as is
expressed by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 20. 9.) yet it never altered nor clouded
the Rational Faculty, but the Intellectual Light remained still free and
undisturbed, nor did ever any Prophet when acted by Divine Inspiration deliver
any Thing contrary to the fixed and Eternal Laws of Reason. Now the way to
distinguish these Enthusiastical Impostures from Divine Influxes and
Illuminations, is by comparing them with the known and infallible Dictates of
Right Reason; for no Truth delivered by Divine Revelation is ever contrary or
contradictious to the Rational Faculties of Mankind. He that would know more of
the Effects of this Natural Enthusiasm may consult that Excellent Treatise of
Dr. More, entitled Enthusiasmus Triumphatus.

Page 12. So long as that brisk and lively relish of sensual Pleasures draws
away the Mind, it will not be at leisure to attend to the soft Whispers of that
Gentle Monitor within.] There is in the Soul of Man a double Nature,
Intellectual and Animal, which the Scripture calls by the Name of Flesh and
Spirit, or the (...) and (...) (...) the inner and outer Man. And according to
this double Capacity, the Respective Objects are likewise different: The Animal
Nature or Outer Man dictates the (...) what is pleasant or profitable in the
Grossest sense, and is only that blind and irrational Appetite which results
from the Souls Union and Conjunction with the Body. With reference to this the
Apostle says, 1 John 2. 16. All that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but of the
World: i. e. These are the Gratifications of the Mundane Life or Animal Nature,
and about such things as these the Corporeal life is perpetually conversant as
with its proper Objects. But now the Intellectual Nature or Inner Man takes for
its Object the (...) what ought to be done, being ruled and guided by the
Counsels and Inspirations of Right Reason. Now because the Soul cannot attend
to two different Faculties or Capacities at the same time in their highest
actings and Invigorations, it follows that upon the Prevalency and Enlargement
of either of them, the other is sensibly dimini^hed, abated, and debilitated.
For who is there that sees not how crazed and besotted those Persons are in
their Intellectuals, who let themselves loose to the conduct of their irregular
Lusts and Appetites, and plunge their Souls without bounds or measures in
Corporeal Joys? So that were it not for their External shape, there would be
little difference between them and Bruits. And is it possible now to discern
the faint and weak glimmerings of Intellectual Light through such profound and
clammy darkness? Nay, it is very easy to conceive that the Rampancy and
Luxuriancy of the Animal Life may arise to such a height as to form an
Extraordinary and thick Cortex over the Intellectual or* Divine Principle, that
its actings should never be perceptible any more, but like the Central Fire in
an incrustated Star, be totally extinguished at the long run. Of so high a
Concernment is it to Mankind to mortify and subdue the irregular Excursions of
this Plastic or Animal Life, and (...) its (...) irrational and blind
Appetites in the Embryo or first rudimental Efformations. For the flush
eruption and blazing of the Corporeal life, is a sad Presage of the Death and
Extinction of the Diviner Faculties. And Death it self in a Physical sense is
only the Consopition, or laying asleep some Powers that others may awake in
their stead: Hence the Spirit of God affirms that those who live in pleasures,
i. e. licentiously and delicately, omitting no opportunities of gratifying that
worser* Life to which they have so tender a Regard, are dead while 1 Timothy 5. 6.
they live. To this purpose is that of Plotinus, Ennead. 1. l. 8. (...). A
vicious Person dies after that manner the Soul is capable of dying; and the
Death of the Soul is by a total Immersion and repletion of it self with
Corporeity.

Ibid. We are led by sense, either External or Internal, not by dry and insipid
Reason.] It is (...) Part of the Authors Design to prove that bare and dry
Reason is a sufficient Criterion to discern the true and ^ffecting relish of
Heavenly Things; for as there is some Principle in us which has a Vital sense
and sapid Gust of Corporeal Joys and Pleasures, so there is a Principle
likewise in the Soul of Man, which is (...), something better then Reason, and
which a Platonist would call (...) the Flower and Summity of the Mind, when by
due Purification of its self from all Corporeal Dregs and Pollutions, it arises
to such a Measure of Participation of the Divine Life, as that it perceives a
Generous Relish, and G^ateful, and affecting Pleasure in Holiness and Virtue.
For till this inward Intellectual Sense be in some Good measure awakened,
Religion it self does but very little, and weakly affect the Mind. Therefore
our Author adds, That heavenly Things are not otherwise to be known, but by
such an inward relish and affecting light as Divine Grace usually imparts to
defecate and humble Minds. And a little above he says, That to render our
selves Obedient to the Will of our heavenly Father, is the only plain and easy
way to the attaining a true knowledge and vital Sense of Divine Revelations.
Consonant to what our Savior himself expressly affirms, Joh. 7. 17. If any Man
will do the Will of God, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self, i. e. The true relish and vital sense of Religion
arises from a Conformity of Mind with the Will of God. So that though Reason
may furnish a Man with sufficient Arguments to assure him of the Truth of
Religion, yet the sapid gust and affecting sense of it flows from the
Expergefaction of the Intellectual Powers into a Divine life.

Ibid. To admonish them that are going astray, to illuminate the Eyes of the
Mind, to strengthen the Faith, and to fix and impress the Argument of Godliness
upon the Soul, these and such like Things we owe to the benign Influence of the
Holy Spirit.] It is a very great Indication of a Mal^ous Mind, or weak and
crazy Intellectuals, when Men shall load and burden their Adversaries with the
opprobrious and Invidious Term of Heresy, as denying the Aid and Assistance of
the Spirit of God to be Necessary, when they only endeavor to make the Mystery
of our Faith, the Economy of Christian Religion to appear in all its Parts
Rational, i. e. worthy and becoming of its Author the Eternal Wisdom of God. It
has been the ill Fortune of some Eminent and Inge^ous Persons of late to be
traduced for Pelagians, Socini^s and what not, for no other cause that I know
of, but because they speak sense, and care not to explicate Religion by
unintelligible Words and Phrases, quaint Allusions and odd Similitudes, but
instead of all this jingling noise, they appeal to the Common and Rational
Faculties of all Mankind. And in this they are so far from laying aside or
rendering useless the Aid of the Holy Spirit of God under the Gospel, that they
^eely acknowledge all their strength to derive from his ever-blessed Influence,
that of themselves they are nothing, but that it is he who works in them both
to will and to do; and that he is not only the beginner, but Finisher of every
good work. Although perhaps they may not think the Operation of the Spirit of
God to be by an Omnipotent Power at large, but Hypothetical, and upon certain
Terms and Conditions, like the great Formative Power in Nature, which produces
not the Lineaments and Primigenial Rudiments of the Body of a Plant or Animal
out of a Flint, but requires a pliable Ductility and Sequaciousness in the
Matter it works upon.

Page 14. Pythagoras, Apollonius Tyanaeus who endeavored by Magic Art to keep
up the Credit of sinking Idolatry, was famous for Miracles.] That Miracles may
be wrought by wicked Persons for ill ends and designs, is evident not only from
the Prediction before cited, Deuteronomy. 13. as also from the Miracles wrought by the
Egyptian Magicians to invalidate those of Moses, but likewise from the express
Prophecy of our Savior himself concerning false Prophets that should arise
and show (...) great signs and wonders, to deceive, Mat. 24. 24.
if possible, even the Elect. And the Apostles of our Lord Jesus foretelling
the coming of Antichrist, describe it to be (...), after the effica^y of Satan,
with all 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Power, and Signs, and Wonders [ or Miracles] of a Lie. And St. John speaking
of the same Person, says that (...) shall do (...) Great Wonders, and deceive
them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those Miracles Rev. 13. 13, 14.
which he has Power to do in the sight of the Beast. Now from hence we may
collect these things. 1. That true Miracles may be wrought by wicked Persons;
not that God does immediately concur by his Almighty Power, in assisting them
to do Miracles to countenance Falsehoods, and the open Violation of his Laws,
but that he may permit invisible created Spirits to exert their Energy and
Power in producing Supernatural Effects: Whence we have no Reason to think that
the Miracles, foretold to be done by Antichrist and his Followers, or by false
Prophets to be mere Juggles and Delusions of our Senses, but that some of them
may be real Miracles, but because they are wrought to confirm Idolatry, and to
establish such Doctrines as are plainly repugnant to the Rational Faculties of
Mankind, therefore we are not to heed them, but to look upon them as (...),
Miracles of Falsehood, and a Lie. And of this sort were the Miracles of
Apollonius, who though he might dazzle the Eyes of some by the Glittering
Brightness of his Counterfeit Virtues (it being for the Interest of the Devils
Kingdom that he should act that part well yet he never transcended the bounds
of the Animal life, but Origin. contr. Cel l. 6.
was an Archi-mago or Grand Magician, as Moeragenes, who wrote his life,
testifies. 2. That God never permits false Prophets to do Miracles by the
Assistance of evil Doemons, but only in the Case of such Falsehoods as are
clearly discoverable by the Light of Nature or common Dictates of Universal and
Right Reason; because if he should, it would be an Invincible Temptation: But
(as our Author speaks a little below) it no way comports with Divine Goodness
and Veracity to bear witness to a falsehood, or to expose men in things of the
greatest moment to an everlasting and inevitable Delusion. 3. That Miracles
alone are not a sufficient Confirmation of the Divinity of a Doctrine,
forasmuch as they have been wrought by Pagans, and the same is asserted by
Busbequius of some among the Turks; therefore besides Miracles, to perfect and
complete a Divine Testimony, there is required Holiness of life in the Person
that pretends a Divine Mission, and a Doctrine worthy of God, and every way
useful to Mankind. Hence our Author adds, p. 15. That to make up a right
Judgment concerning a Divine Testimony the matter it self which is attested
ought to come into consideration, which if it contain any thing contrary to the
settled Principles of Nature, those Miracles are not to be looked upon as
Divine, but as Diabolica^ Delusions. Therefore for the Writers of the Romish
Church to pretend Miracles now, and to rank them among the Essential Characters
to prove the Truth of a Church by, as Bellarmine does, when all men whose Eyes
are open, discover the greatest part of those Miracles to be the Frauds and
Impostures of cunning Priests, or if they were true, it being evident that they
are wrought by Apostate Spirits for the Confirmation of such Doctrines as are
clearly repugnant to the settled Principles of Right Reason, it is, (1.) To
hazard and call in Question the Truth of those Miracles wrought by Christ and
his Apostles for the Confirmation of Christianity. And (2.) to use the Words of
a learned Man of our own, If any strange things have been done in that Church,
they prove nothing but the Truth of Scripture, which foretold that (God's
Providence permitting it, and the Wickedness of the World deserving it) strange
Signs and Wonders should be wrought to confirm false Doctrine, that they which
love not the Truth should be given over to strong Delusions. So that now we
have Reason rather to suspect and be afraid of pretended Miracles as signs of
false Doctrine, then much to regard them as certain Arguments of Truth. Neither
is it strange that God should permit some true Wonders to be done, to delude
those who have forged so many Wonders, to deceive the World.

Page 15. Here lies the Principal Difference between Mankind and Brutes in
their being capable of Religion.] That the Essential Difference between Mankind
and Brutes does not lie solely and purely in Rationality, appears from hence,
in that Brutes are capable of Reason, though in a lower Degree. And moreover we
can frame a very Intelligible Idea of such Creatures as are capable of Reason
so as to build Cities, and to Form and Institute Commonwealths, which yet have
no Distinction of moral Good and Evil, and consequently are neither capable of
rewards nor punishments; and perhaps some such Animals may be actually existent
in some part or other of the World. But that which constitutes the true
difference between Men and Brutes is Religion, which the Satyrist took notice
of, -- Separat hoec nos Iuvenal, Sat. 15.

A grege mutorum, atque ideo venerabile soli
Sortiti ingenium divinorumque capaces.


Page 16. If we once forsake the guidance of Reason, must not all Religion be
owing either to Education, Superstition, or some Fanatical Impulse?] To him
that forsakes the Conduct of Right Reason all Religions are alike, and he may
as well be a Mahumetan or Jew as a Christian, and indeed that he has any
Religion at all, is owing chiefly to his Education, and the Laws of the Country
wherein he lives. But Religion being a matter of choice, there must be some
standing and settled Rule by which to try and judge the Truth or Falsehood, the
Congruity or Incongruity of it: And such a Rule as this God has furnished
Mankind withal, namely Right Reason, and he that having means and opportunity
to try and examine the Religion that is propounded to him as Matter of his
Choice, shall yet carelessly content himself with it, because he has been
educated and trained up in it, has his Understanding given him to no purpose,
and may justly fear as a Punishment of this his careless Oscitancy and slothful
Credulity, that Providence should permit him to swallow great and dangerous
Errors as well as Truth. For he that believes without Reason declares himself
indifferent to believe any thing right or wrong. Socrates gives this
Commendation of Cebes, that he was careful to inquire into all things, and duly
weigh them (...), and would not presently believe that which any Body said,
though otherwise he had sufficient respect unto him. I shall subjoin what an
excellent Writer speaks to this Purpose: We ought not (says he) to surrender
our belief to any thing carelessly; nor, either out of idleness and sloth, or
being overawed by the Confidence which any men assume to themselves, content
our selves with an Implicit Faith: Neglecting to search and try, and prove all
Things which demand to have no less then our Souls resigned up unto them. We
ought therefore to suspect those who would have us believe them without putting
our selves to the trouble of much search. It is a sign they mean to deceive;
for if God himself does not expect to be believed, unless there be Good witness
for that to which his Ambassadors demand Assent; why should men be so
presumptuous as to ask us to believe them blindly? Or why should we be such
Obedient Fools, as to do more for them then God would have us do for himself?
He has given us Eyes, and therefore we ought to look about-us, especially when
Men bid us wink and take any thing upon trust. He has endued us with Reason,
and therefore we ought to sift, and try, and examine that which is propounded
to us. And if any Body say, Do not try, nor examine; you are not able to
discern the Differences of things; Believe as we teach, for we cannot deceive
you: Mark that Man or Company of Men as the greatest Deceivers, who intend to
impose something upon you, which will not abide the Test.

Page 17. Religion is a free and ingenuous Thing, that forces none, but
Captivates the Understanding with its own solitary Beauty and Pulchritude.] The
Soul of Man being the Workmanship of the Eternal (...) or Wisdom of God, and
coming into the World furnished with the Seeds and Principles of all true
Wisdom and Knowledge, however its Lapse and Degeneracy have clouded and darkened
its Intellectual Faculties, yet there still remaining such a Cognation and
Harmony between it and Truth, she cannot but embrace it whenever duly and
advantageously proposed. Now Christian Religion being likewise the Genuine
Offspring of that Wisdom which has left such visible Characters and Signatures
of it self upon the whole Frame of Heaven and Earth, the Soul of Man presently
discovers all the Beautiful Emanations of it to be Congenerous and Homogeneal
to its own Intellectual Light, and as all like is attractive of its like, is
gently and willingly captivated, and sweetly drawn as with some hidden strings
to a closer and nearer union with it. And this is the Reason why Christianity
neither needs, nor uses Violence or Force to beget Belief and Entertainment in
Humane Minds, because it is made up only of such Things as intimately
Correspond with the Intellectual Frame and Furniture of the Soul. Nor indeed
(supposing Religion to contain any thing contrary to Right Reason) could Men
ever be forced to believe it: For such is the Constitution of a Rational Soul,
and such are the Essential Impresses of its Intellectual Nature, that no Man
can believe what he pleases, but is fatally bound up to such Things as are
agreeable to those Principles of which his Rational Nature is compounded. And
if it were in the Power of any Man to believe any thing though never so
contradictory and repugnant to the Natural Sentiments and Impressions of his
own Mind, he might then yield as firm an Assent to Falsehood as Truth, and
repute all the Contradictions and Absurdities in the World to be infallible
Oracles. And as he cannot arbitrariously fix his Mind to the Reception of a
Falsehood, so neither of that which is irrational; for that which is Repugnant
to Right Reason is certainly false, and all the Difference between them lies
only in the Number of Syllables.

Page 18. Right Reason and Divine Wisdom give the same Judgment of things.] The
Foundation of all Knowledge whether Divine or Humane lies in the Apprehension
of the Idea's, Natures and mutual Respects and Relations of things; Now these
not being Arbitratious, but settled, Eternally fixed and Immutable, it clearly
follows that Right Reason and Divine Wisdom give the same Judgment of Things.
Forasmuch as not only Right Reason is a Participation of the Divine
Understanding, but likewise, that it is no more in the Power of God to change
or alter the Idea's, Respects, and References of Things, then it is in his
Power to die, or destroy his own Being. Hence a Triangle with its three Angles
equal to two Right ones, and all Idea's with their Immutable Respects, and
Habitudes, appear the same in Humane Understanding as they are Represented and
Exhibited in the Divine Intellect; because our Understanding is an Abstract or
Copy of the Divine Understanding; as likewise because the contrary would
undermine and destroy the very Foundation of all Knowledge in the World.
Therefore L. 1. de leg.
it was truly asserted by Tully, Est igitur, quoniam nihil est Ratione melius,
eaque and in homine and in Deo, prima homini cum Deo Rationis Societas: Inter
quos autem Ratio, inter eosdem etiam Recta Ratio communis est. Nor do we by
this in a Stoical Arrogance make Man equal with God, as some may fondly
imagine: For the Divine Intellect (as our learned Author speaks) does
intimately penetrate and behold at one view these Affections with the Idea's of
the things themselves, and discerns their Order and Reciprocations. And this is
properly called fixed and Stable Reason; whereas Humane Understanding
explicates and unfolds things successively and in order, and this is Reason in
succession, or flowing and moveable Reason.

Page 41. As to other Things we ought to yield an Implicit Faith to Divine
Revelation, etc.] Christian Religion sufficiently obtains its end, in that all
those things which pertain to Life and Godliness to the Renovation of Men's
Minds into the faultless Image of our Lord Jesus, are plain and intelligible
even to the meanest Capacity; but in such things as are of a more Abstruse,
Profound, and Speculative Nature, it is sufficient to have an Implicit Faith,
i. e. to believe that the sense of all those Things that are delivered and
consigned by Divine Testimony, though they transcend my Capacity, whatever it
is which was intended by God, is true. For he that does not so, calls God's
Truth in Question. But to believe this or that to be the true sense of them, or
to believe the Modes of such and such Doctrines which are not plainly revealed
in the Holy Scriptures, are thus to be explicated, and all other Explications
of them utterly false, is not necessary either to Faith or Salvation. For if
God would have had under Pain of Damnation those Doctrines which are not so
plainly laid down, as that all should have the same Conceptions of them, to be
equally believed by all in this Particular and Determinate sense, it could not
consist with his Wisdom to deliver them in obscure Terms, nor with his Justice
to require of Men to know certainly the meaning of those Words which he himself
has not revealed.

Page 43. That he may be a Pattern and Example Lib. 4. c. 24.
to us.] For (as Lactantius speaks excellently well.) Quomodo poterit amputari
excusatio, etc. i. e. How can all excuse be taken away, unless he that
teaches, does the same things that he teaches, and conducts, and lends his
helping hand to him that follows? For if he should be subject to no Passion, a
Man might thus reply upon his Teacher; I would not sin, but I am overcome,
being clothed with frail and weak Flesh: This is it which is angry, which
covets, which grieves, which fears to die. Therefore I am led unwillingly, and
I sin, not because I would, but because I am forced. I am sensible likewise
that I sin, but the necessity of Humane Frailty compels, which I cannot
withstand. What shall this Teacher of Righteousness answer to these Things? How
will he refute or convince that Man who lays the blame of his sins upon his
Flesh, unless he himself be likewise clothed with Flesh and Blood, that so he
may show that Flesh it self is likewise capable of the Exercise of Virtue?

Ibid. That be should be conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost in the Womb
of a Virgin, without the concurrence of Man, is an excellent Provision for a
higher esteem and Valuation of his Person.] That Christ should be Born of a
Virgin without the Concurrence of Man, could not be looked upon as Incredible
by the Pagan World, who scarce ever had any famous Hero among them, but they
presently found out some God for his Father. And Plutarch in the Life of Numa
relates, That the Egyptians supposed it probable enough that the Spirit of the
Gods has given Loco supradicto.
Original of Generation to Women, and begotten fruit of their Bodies. And
Lactantius argues the Reasonableness of the Nativity of Jesus of the Virgin
Mary, from what was commonly believed among the Heathens concerning other
Creatures, Quod si Animalia quoedam Vento and Aura concipere solere omnibus
notum est, cur quisquam mirum putet, cum Spiritu Dei, cui est facile quicquid
velit, gravatam esse Virginem dicimus? The belief of which when facilitated,
will appear an excellent Provision for a higher esteem and valuation of the
Person of our Savior. Therefore perhaps it was not only a drunken humor in
Alexander, when he would be thought the Son of Jupiter Hammon, but to make
himself appear more August and Venerable by the Reputation of being the Son of
a God. To this purpose it is related by Huetius that among the Turks there are
certain Boys, which they call (...) believed of the common People to be
Demonstr. Evangel. P. 385.
Born of Virgins, and in great esteem, as supposed to do strange things: In the
Turkish Language they are called Nephes-Ogli, i. e. the Sons of Soul. However
these Things be, yet this is certain, that among all Nations those Persons have
been always had in the greatest esteem and Veneration who have been taken to be
the immediate Offspring of God. And this was it which put Pilate into such a
great Fear, when the Jews told him that our Savior asserted himself to be the
Son of God, Joh. 19. 8. imagining according to the Opinion of the Gentiles that
he might be the Son of Jupiter or Apollo, or some other of their Deities, and
consequently that he ought rather to be reverenced, then given up to be
Crucified.

Ibid. Adds the greater Majesty to what he should deliver.] From hence it was
that most of the Legislators among the Heathen, that they might obtain the
greater Credit and Veneration to their Laws, were wont to tell the People they
received them from some God or other. As Mynias persuaded the Egyptians that he
was taught his Laws by Mercury: Minos entitled his to Ju piter; and Zamolxis
among the Getes to the Goddess Vesta. Now albeit these were but Fictions, yet
from the Dictates of common Reason they all concluded thus much, that there was
no Law so binding, or that carried greater Majesty and Authority, then that
which had Divinity stamped upon it.

Ibid. Nor could God signify his will more agreeable to the Nature of Man.]
Admirably to (...) Purpose the forecited Lactantius discourses, where showing
how highly Reasonable it was that Christ should take upon him our Flesh, he
adds, Si vero sit Immortalis, exemplum proponere homini nullo modo potest -- i.
e. If he had been wholly Immortal, he could not have offered himself as an
Example to Mankind; for some grave Person would be very apt thus to bespeak
him; you indeed do not sin, because you are free from this Body; you covet not,
because an Immortal Being wants nothing: But I have need of many Things to
maintain this life of mine. You are not afraid of Death, because it can have no
Dominion over you. You despise Pain, because you are Impassible. But I poor
Mortal have reason to fear both, because they bring upon me such grievous
Torments as weak and infirm Flesh is not able to endure. Therefore he that is a
Teacher of (...) ought to take away this excuse from men, (...) none may
ascribe his sins rather to Necessity then his ownfault And that he may be every
way complete, nothing ought to be objected against him by him that is to be
taught: As if any one should say, you command Impossibilities, he may readily
answer, Behold I do the same things: I am clothed with Flesh, whose Property is
to sin, yet I bear about a Mortal Body without sin. I cannot for Righteousness
sake either suffer Pain or Death, because I am frail; Behold Pain and Death
has Power on me; and I overcome those things which thou fear, that I may
make thee a Conqueror over Pain and Death. I go first through those things
which thou pretendest thou can not bear; if thou can not follow me in what
I command, yet surely thou may follow me going before thee. Thus all manner
of excuse is taken away, and every Man must confess that it is his own fault
that he is Vicious, in neglecting to follow not only the Teacher of all Virtue,
but the Guide and Conductor to it.

And if any shall Object with that Impious Epicurean, and ask, Why could not
God appear, and at once take away all wickedness and sin out of Contra^ Cel. L.
4. P. 163.
the Soul, and plant Virtue there? To this Origin replies, 1. That it may well
be doubted (...) whether such a thing be naturally possible or not. 2.
Supposing it be, (...) where will be the Liberty of our will? and where that
laudable Assent to the Truth, and Aversation from Lies and Falsehood? For if we
take away Liberty and Spontaneity, we destroy the very Essence of Virtue. So
that no Course could have been taken more agreeable and suitable to the Nature
of Man, then what is made choice of in the Christian Religion.

Ibid. God cannot appear to us but under some corporeal Veil.] The Essences of
all Things and so of Spirits are invisible, and nothing can be the Object of
our Senses, but under some Corporeal Modification; therefore the Evangelical
Economy requiring not only that the Person who should come from God to
instruct the World should be intimately and Hypostatically united with the
Divine Nature, to conciliate the Greater Majesty to what he should deliver, but
likewise that he should appear to Men in some visible form and shape. Divine
Wisdom thought nothing a more sitting Mansion or Covering then a humane Body,
partly because an Angelical Body had been impassible, and then that we might
not lose that Natural encouragement and Provocation to Virtue flowing from the
Example of one made after our own likeness, who by those many endearing
Circumstances he might make use of in the Flesh, would more Powerfully
captivate and attract Humane Souls to the Love and Obedience of him. And
therefore Ignatius in his Epistle to the Ephesians does justly condemn some
Heretics in his Time, who said that our Savior Christ (...) was only a
putative Man, (...) and that he did not take unto himself a true and real Body.

Page 44. Who spoke very doubtfully of it.] When Socrates had brought as good
Arguments for the Immortality of the Soul as he could, yet Simmias thought he
had Reason to say, that to know any In (...) Platonis:
thing clearly of it in this life, was either (...) (...) Impossible, or a
thing extremely difficult. But (says he) a Man must choose the best Reasons he
can find, which are least liable to Exception; and he must venture to embark
himself in these, and Sail by them through this life, (...) i e. unless he can
be so happy as to be carried safer with less danger, in a surer, steadfast
Chariot of some Divine Word, i. e. Revelation; which is not only a clear
acknowledgment that mere natural Reason is at a loss, but a kind of
Vaticination of an indubitable certainty, and perfect security of Immortal life
to be expected from some Divine Revelation: And accordingly is now put out of
all doubt by our Lord and Savior, who has brought Life and Immortality to
light through the Gospel. Nor could that excellent Philosopher Cicero speak
with greater Confidence, for when he had weighed all things on both Parts, he
knew not what to say but this, Harum igitur Sententiarum, qu^ vera sit, Deus
aliquis viderit. i. e. Which of these Opinions is true, God only knows. Tu^ul.
Quaest. L^b. 1.


Page 46. Since God cannot execute this Solemn Judgment, but under a visible
shape.] That our Lord Jesus should appear at the End of the World in some
visible shape and form, and in that pass a Final doom upon all Refractory and
Impenitent Sinners, seems highly Rational, there being no other way whereby so
effectually and sensibly to convince Atheistical Persons of the Existence of
God and his Steady and All-comprehensive Providence in ruling all things. And
this seems to be expressed by St. Jude v. 15. 16. in reciting the Prophecy of
Enoeb, where one End of the Appearance of our Savior with his Holy Myriads is,
for the Conviction of the (...) those wicked sinners who were not contented to
act unrighteously but did (...) speak opprobrious and contemp^uous Things of
God and all Religion. Nor is this only peculiar to the Terrestrial state of
life, for it is probable that many Spirits may be tainted with the same
Atheistical conceits in the Aereal Regions, and may resolve all Things there
likewise into blind Chance and Fortune. Now when our Lord Jesus, according to
the clear Predictions of Sacred Scripture, shall think fit to put an End to the
Scene of Affairs in this lower World, and to that Purpose shall visibly descend
from Heaven with an Innumerable Company of Mighty Angels, making all those
Regions through which they pass bright before them with the glory and luster of
their Celestial Bodies, and in this Posture shall for some time face the Earth,
and after that dreadful Sentence pronounced upon wicked Men and the Apostate
Spirits of the Air, by his stupendous Power shall excite all the Principles of
Fire both in Earth and Air, to perfect a General and Universal Conf^agration of
this Terrestrial World for the Punishment of the Rebellious Crew; this will be
such an amazing and surprising Testimony and irre^ragable Proof of the
Immediate Hand of God, as must and will convince the most wretched and
deplorable notwithstanding the Courseness and Stubbornness of their Natures,
both of his Being and Providence.

Page 47. He who after an Humble, Pious, and Attentive weighing of things,
shall yet fall into Error All Error is not alike hurtful and dangerous: For an
Error may be purely and simply Involuntary, or it may be in respect of the
cause of it Voluntary. If the Cause of it be some Voluntary and avoiable Fault,
the Error is it self sinsul, and consequently in its own Nature damnable. As if
by negligence in seeking the Truth, by unwillingness to find it, by Pride, by
Obstinacy, by desiring that Religion should be true which suits best with my
Ends, by fear of Men's ill Opinion, or any other worldly Fear or Hope, I betray
myself to any Error contrary to any Divine revealed Truth, that Error may be
justly styled a sin, and Consequently to such a one of it self damnable. But if
I be guilty of none of these Faults, but be desirous to know the Truth, and
diligent in seeking it, and advise not at all with Flesh and Blood about the
choice of my Opinions, but only with God and that Reason he has given me, if I
be thus qualified, and yet through humane Infirmity fall into Error, that Error
cannot be damnable. Thus far a great and learned Man. I may add, That a sober
and serious Christian, who endeavors by all means to know the will and Mind of
God, and so soon as he can discover it, is ready sincerely to believe and
practice it, and has withal a lively sense of the Honor of God, and a hearty
Good Will to Mankind, this Person through the Goodness of God shall be kept
from falling into any dangerous and damnable Error. But now when any Man shall
carelessly neglect to use that Reason which God has given him to discriminate
between Truth and Falsehood, and shall happen to assent to Truth, not upon a due
choice and discernment between it and Falsehood, but blindly and fortuitously,
this Assent is no way commendable, and an Involuntary Error after a clear and
well qualified search is to be preferred before it.

I have now finished my Annotations upon this Excellent Discourse, in which I
have endeavored to illustrate and confirm such Things, as our Reverend Author
has but lightly touched, at least could not largely insist upon in that concise
way of a Sermon. And this I have the more readily performed, because I judged a
Discourse of this Nature by a Person of so extraordinary Piety, such clear
Intellectuals, and so every way accomplished as our Author was, could not prove
unacceptable to any of the Lovers of Truth and Ingenuity; and likewise that I
might do Honor to his Venerable Name and Memory from whom I had the Happiness
of receiving the first Rudiments of Academical Learning. This I affirm moreover
(with an Humble Deference to better and more enlightened Judgments) that such an
Explication of Religion as our Reverend and Learned Author drives at, is the
most likely way not only to silence the bold Cavils of Enthusiasts and
Atheists, but to eradicate all carnal and sensual Doctrines and Opinions, and
to bring on through the Assistance of the Mighty Spirit of God (whose presence
is never wanting to the sincerely Conscientious) that Blessed and desirable
State of the Church, the Philadelphian interval which our Lord and Savior will
all along fill with Glorious Manifestations of his Power and Providence.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Folios of the Sentences Commented on in the Annotations being most of them
not altered from what they were in the Manuscript, for prevention of confusion
in the Reader, they are to be mended thus: The first in Page 48. has p. 4, 5.
in stead of p. 26. The rest are to be thus in order as they go on in the Book,
p. 27. p. 30. p. 33. p. 34. p. 35. p. 36. p. 38. p. 39. p. 40. p. 41.


